     __________________________________________________________________

           Title: The Beatitudes: An Exposition of Matthew 5:1-12
      Creator(s): Watson, Thomas
     Print Basis: 1660
          Rights: Public Domain
   CCEL Subjects: All; Bible;
      LC Call no: BT380
     LC Subjects:

                  Doctrinal theology

                  Christology

                  Life of Christ
     __________________________________________________________________

                                 The Beatitudes

An exposition of Matthew 5:1-12

Thomas Watson
     __________________________________________________________________

   To the Reader

   Christian Reader,

   I here present you with a subject full of sweet variety. This Sermon of
   Christ on the Mount is a piece of spiritual needlework, wrought about
   with divers colours; here is both usefulness and sweetness. In this
   portion of Holy Scripture you have a breviary of religion, the Bible
   epitomised. Here is a garden of delight, set with curious knots, where
   you may pluck those flowers which will deck the hidden man of your
   heart. Here is the golden key which will open the gate of Paradise.
   Here is the conduit of the Gospel, running wine to cherish such as are
   poor in spirit and pure in heart. Here is the rich cabinet wherein the
   Pearl of Blessedness is locked up. Here is the golden pot in which is
   that manna which will feed and refocillate (revive) the soul unto
   ever-lasting life. Here is a way chalked out to the Holy of Holies.

   Reader, how happy were it if, while others take up their time and
   thoughts about secular things which perish in the using, you could mind
   eternity and be guided by this Scripture-clue which leads you to the
   Beatific Vision. If, after God has set life before you, you indulge
   your sensual appetite and still court your lusts, how inexcusable will
   be your neglect and how inexpressible your misery!

   The Lord grant that while you have an opportunity, and the wind serves
   you, you may not lie idle at anchor, and when it is too late begin to
   hoist up sails for Heaven. Oh now, Christian, let your loins be girt,
   and your lamps burning, that when the Lord Jesus, your blessed
   Bridegroom, shall knock, you may be ready to go in with Him to the
   marriage-supper, which shall be the prayer of him who is

   Yours in all true affection and devotion,

   Thomas Watson
     __________________________________________________________________

1. Introduction

   And seeing the multitudes, he went up into a mountain: and when he was
   set, his disciples came unto him. And he opened his mouth, and taught
   them.

   Matthew 5:1, 2

   The blessed evangelist St Matthew, the penman of this sacred history,
   was at first by profession a publican or gatherer of toll; and Christ,
   having called him from the custom-house, made him a gatherer of souls.
   This holy man in the first chapter sets down Christ's birth and
   genealogy. In the second, his dignity -- a star ushers in the wise men
   to him, and as a king he is presented with gold and frankincense and
   myrrh (vv 9-11). In the third chapter the evangelist records his
   baptism; in the fourth, his temptations; in the fifth, his preaching,
   which chapter is like a rich mine. Every vein has some gold in it.

   There are four things in this chapter which offer themselves to our
   view,

   1 The Preacher

   2 The Pulpit

   3 The Occasion

   4 The Sermon

   I The Preacher. Jesus Christ. The best of preachers. He went up.' He in
   whom there was a combination of virtues, a constellation of beauties.
   He whose lips were not only sweet as the honey-comb, but did drop as
   the honey-comb. His words, an oracle; his works, a miracle; his life, a
   pattern; his death, a sacrifice. He went up into a mountain and
   taught., Jesus Christ was every way ennobled and qualified for the work
   of the ministry.

   (i) Christ was an intelligent preacher. He had the Spirit without
   measure' (John 3:34) and knew how to speak a word in due season, when
   to humble, when to comfort. We cannot know all the faces of our
   hearers. Christ knew the hearts of his hearers. He understood what
   doctrine would best suit them, as the husbandman can tell what sort of
   grain is proper for such-and-such a soil.

   (ii) Christ was a powerful preacher. He spake with authority' (Matthew
   7:29). He could set men's sins before them and show them their very
   hearts. Come, see a man which told me all things that ever I did' (John
   4:29). That is the best glass, not which is most richly set with pearl,
   but which shows the truest face. Christ was a preacher to the
   conscience. He breathed as much zeal as eloquence. He often touched
   upon the heart-strings. What is said of Luther is more truly applicable
   to Christ. He spake as if he had been within a man'. He could drive the
   wedge of his doctrine in the most knotty piece. He was able with his
   two-edged sword to pierce an heart of stone. Never man spake like this
   man' (John 7:46)

   (iii) Christ was a successful preacher. He had the art of converting
   souls. Many believed on him.' (John 10:42), yea, persons of rank and
   quality. Among the chief rulers many believed' (John 12:42). He who had
   grace poured into his lips' (Psalm 45:2), could pour grace into his
   hearers' hearts. He had the key of David in his hand, and when he
   pleased did open the hearts of men, and make way both for himself and
   his doctrine to enter. If he did blow the trumpet his very enemies
   would come under his banner. Upon his summons none dare but surrender.

   (iv) Christ was a lawful preacher. As he had his unction from his
   Father, so his mission. The Father that sent me bears witness of me'
   (John 8:18). Christ, in whom were all perfections concentred, yet would
   be solemnly sealed and inaugurated into his ministerial as well as
   mediatory office. If Jesus Christ would not enter upon the work of the
   ministry without a commission, how absurdly impudent are they who
   without any warrant dare invade this holy function! There must be a
   lawful admission of men into the ministry. No man taketh this honour to
   himself, but he that is called of God, as was Aaron' (Hebrews 5:4). Our
   Lord Christ, as he gave apostles and prophets who were extraordinary
   ministers, so pastors and teachers who were initiated and made in an
   ordinary way (Ephesians 4:11); and he will have a ministry perpetuated;
   Lo I am with you alway, even unto the end of the world' (Matthew
   28:20). Sure, there is as much need of ordination now as in Christ's
   time and in the time of the apostles, there being then extraordinary
   gifts in the church which are now ceased.

   But why should not the ministry lie in common? Hath the Lord spoken
   only by Moses?' (Numbers 12:2). Why should not one preach as well as
   another? I answer -- Because God (who is the God of order) has made the
   work of the ministry a select, distinct office from any other. As in
   the body natural the members have a distinct office, the eye is to see,
   the hand to work; you may as well say, why should not the hand see as
   well as the eye? Because God has made the distinction. He has put the
   seeing faculty into the one and not the other. So here, God has made a
   distinction between the work of the ministry and other work.

   Where is this distinction? We find in Scripture a distinction between
   pastor and people. The elders (or ministers) I exhort . . . Feed the
   flock of God which is among you' (1 Peter 5:2). If anyone may preach,
   by the same rule all may, and then what will become of the apostle's
   distinction? Where will the flock of God be if all be pastors?

   God has cut out the minister his work which is proper for him and does
   not belong to any other. Give attendance to reading, to exhortation, to
   doctrine . . . give thyself wholly to them', or, as it is in the Greek,
   Be thou wholly in them' (1 Timothy 4, 13-15). This charge is peculiar
   to the minister and does not concern any other. It is not spoken to the
   tradesman that he should give himself wholly to doctrine and
   exhortation. No, let him look to his shop. It is not spoken to the
   ploughman that he should give himself wholly to preaching. No, let him
   give himself to his plough. It is the minister's charge. The apostle
   speaks to Timothy and, in him, to the rest who had the hands of the
   presbytery laid on them. And Study to shew thyself approved . . ., a
   workman that needeth not to be ashamed, rightly dividing the word of
   truth' (2 Timothy 2:15). This is spoken peculiarly to the minister.
   Everyone that can read the word aright cannot divide the word aright.
   So that the work of the ministry does not lie in common; it is a
   select, peculiar work. As none might touch the ark but the priests,
   none may touch this temple-office but such as are called to it.

   But if a man has gifts, is not this sufficient? I answer, No! As grace
   is not sufficient to make a minister, so neither are gifts. The
   Scripture puts a difference between gifting and sending. How shall they
   preach unless they be sent?' (Romans 10:15). If gifts were enough to
   constitute a minister, the apostle should have said, How shall they
   preach unless they be gifted?, but he says unless they be sent?' As in
   other callings, gifts do not make a magistrate. The attorney that
   pleads at the bar may have as good gifts as the judge that sits upon
   the bench, but he must have a commission before he sit as judge. If it
   be thus in matters civil, much more in ecclesiastical and sacred, which
   are, as Bucer says, things of the highest importance'. Those therefore
   that usurp the ministerial work without any special designation and
   appointment discover more pride than zeal. They act out of their sphere
   and are guilty of theft. They steal upon a people, and, as they come
   without a call, so they stay without a blessing. I sent them not,
   therefore they shall not profit this people at all' (Jeremiah 23:32).
   And so much for the first, the preacher.

   2. The pulpit where Christ preached. He went up into a mountain.'

   The law was first given on the mount, and here Christ expounds it on
   the mount. This mount, as is supposed by Jerome and others of the
   learned, was Mount Tabor. It was a convenient place to speak in, being
   seated above the people, and in regard of the great confluence of
   hearers.

   3 The occasion of Christ's ascending the mount: Seeing the multitude.'

   The people thronged to hear Christ, and he would not dismiss the
   congregation without a sermon, but 'seeing the multitude he went up'.
   Jesus Christ came from heaven as a factor for souls. He lay leiger here
   awhile; preaching was his business. The people could not be so desirous
   to hear as he was to preach. He who treated faint bodies with
   compassion (Matthew 15:32), much more pitied dead souls. It was his
   meat and drink, to do his Father's will (John 4:34). And seeing the
   multitude', he goes up into the mount and preaches. This he did not
   only for the consolation of his hearers, but for the imitation of his
   ministers.

   From whence observe that Christ's ministers according to Christ's
   pattern must embrace every opportunity of doing good to souls. Praying
   and preaching and studying must be our work. Preach the word; be
   instant in season, out of season' (2 Timothy 4:2). Peter, seeing the
   multitude, lets down the net and, at one draught, catches three
   thousand souls (Acts 2:41). How zealously industrious have God's
   champions been in former ages in fulfilling the work of their ministry,
   as we read of Chrysostom, Augustine, Basil the Great, Calvin, Bucer and
   others, who for the work of Christ were nigh unto death'. The reasons
   why the ministers of Christ (according to his pattern) should be
   ambitiously desirous of all opportunities for soul-service are:

   (i) Their commission: God has entrusted them as ambassadors (2
   Corinthians 5:20). Now you know an ambassador waits for a day of
   audience, and as soon as a day is granted, he faithfully and
   impartially delivers the mind of his prince. Thus Christ's ministers,
   having a commission delegated to them to negotiate for souls, should be
   glad when there is a day of audience, that they may impart the mind and
   will of Christ to his people.

   (ii) Their titles: Ministers are called God's sowers (1 Corinthians
   9:11). Therefore they must upon all occasions be scattering the blessed
   seed of the Word. The sower must go forth and sow; yea, though the seed
   fall upon stones, as usually it does, yet we must disseminate and
   scatter the seed of the Word upon stony hearts, because even of these
   stones God is able to raise up children' to himself.

   Ministers are called stars. Therefore they must shine by word and
   doctrine in the firmament of the church. Thus our Lord Christ has set
   them a pattern in the text: Seeing the multitude, he went up into the
   mountain.' Here was a light set upon an hill, the bright morning star
   shining to all that were round about. Christ calls his ministers the
   light of the world' (Matthew 5:14). Therefore they must be always
   giving forth their lustre. Their light must not go out till it be in
   the socket, or till violent death as an extinguisher put it out.

   (iii) Christ's ministers must catch at all occasions of doing good to
   others, in regard of the work which they are about, and that is saving
   of souls. What a precious thing is a soul! Christ takes, as it were, a
   pair of scales in his hands and he puts the world in one scale and the
   soul in the other, and the soul outweighs (Matthew 16:26). The soul is
   of a noble origin, of a quick operation; it is a flower of eternity;
   here, in the bud; in heaven, fully ripe and blown. The soul is one of
   the richest pieces of embroidery that ever God made, the understanding
   bespangled with light, the will invested with liberty, the affections
   like musical instruments tuned with the finger of the Holy Ghost. The
   soul is Christ's partner, the angels, familiar. Now if the souls of men
   are of so noble an extract and made capable of glory, oh how zealously
   industrious should Christ's ministers be to save these souls! If Christ
   spent his blood for souls, well may we spend our sweat. It was
   Augustine's prayer that Christ might find him at his coming either
   praying or preaching. What a sad sight is it to see precious souls as
   so many pearls and diamonds cast into the dead sea of hell!

   (iv) The ministers of Christ, 'seeing the multitude', must ascend the
   mount', because there are so many emissaries of Satan who lie at the
   catch to subvert souls. How the old serpent casts out of his mouth
   floods of water after the woman to drown her! (Revelation 12:15). What
   floods of heresy have been poured out in city and country, which have
   overflowed the banks not only of religion but civility. Ignatius calls
   error the invention of the devil', and Bernard calls it a sweet
   poison'. Men's ears, like sponges, have sucked in this poison. Never
   were the devil's commodities more vendible in England than now. A fine
   tongue can put off bad wares. The Jesuit can silver over his lies, and
   dress error in truth's coat. A weak brain is soon intoxicated. When
   flattery and subtlety meet with the simple, they easily become a prey.
   The Romish whore entices many to drink down the poison of her idolatry
   and filthiness, because it is given in a golden cup' (Revelation 17:4).
   If all who have the plague of the head should die, it would much
   increase the bill of mortality. Now if there be so many emissaries of
   Satan abroad, who labour to make proselytes to the church of Rome, how
   it concerns them whom God has put into the work of the ministry to
   bestir themselves and lay hold on all opportunities, that by their
   spiritual antidotes they may convert sinners from the error of their
   way and save their souls from death!' (James 5:20). Ministers must not
   only be pastores', but proeliatores' (fighters, warriors). In one hand
   they must hold the bread of life and feed the flock of God'; in the
   other hand, they must hold the sword of the Spirit and fight against
   those errors which carry damnation in their front.

   (v) The ministers of Christ should wait for all opportunities of
   soul-service, because the preaching of the Word meets so many adverse
   forces that hinder the progress and success of it. Never did a pilot
   meet with so many Euroclydons and crosswinds in a voyage, as the
   spiritual pilots of God's church do when they are transporting souls to
   heaven.

   Some hearers have bad memories (James 1:25). Their memories are like
   leaking vessels. All the precious wine of holy doctrine that is poured
   in runs out immediately. Ministers cannot by study find a truth so fast
   as others can lose it. If the meat does not stay in the stomach, it can
   never breed good blood. If a truth delivered does not stay in the
   memory, we can never be, as the apostle says, nourished up in the words
   of faith' (1 Timothy 4:6). How often does the devil, that fowl of the
   air, pick up the good seed that is sown! If people suffer at the hands
   of thieves, they tell everyone and make their complaint they have been
   robbed; but there is a worse thief they are not aware of! How many
   sermons has the devil stolen from them! How many truths have they been
   robbed of, which might have been so many deathbed cordials! Now if the
   Word preached slides so fast out of the memory, ministers had need the
   oftener to go up the preaching mount, that at last some truth may abide
   and be as a nail fastened by the masters of assemblies'.

   The ears of many of our hearers are stopped with earth. I mean the
   cares of the world, that the Word preached will not enter, according to
   that in the parable, Hearing they hear not' (Matthew 13:13). We read of
   Saul, his eyes were open, yet he saw no man' (Acts 9:8). A strange
   paradox! And is it not as strange that men's ears should be open, yet
   in hearing hear not?' They mind not what is said: They sit before thee
   as my people sitteth . . . but their heart goeth after their
   covetousness' (Ezekiel 33:31). Many sit and stare the minister in the
   face, yet scarce know a word he says. They are thinking of their wares
   and drugs and are often casting up accounts in the church. If a man be
   in a mill, though you speak never so loud to him, he does not hear you
   for the noise of the mill. We preach to men about matters of salvation,
   but the mill of worldly business makes such a noise that they cannot
   hear; in hearing they hear not'. It being thus, ministers who are
   called 'sons of thunder' had need often ascend the mount and lift up
   their voice like a trumpet' (Isaiah 58:1) that the deaf ear may be
   syringed and unstopped, and may hear what the Spirit saith unto the
   churches' (Revelation 2:7).

   Others, as they have earth in their ears, so they have a stone in their
   hearts. They make their hearts as an adamant stone, lest they should
   hear the law' (Zechariah 7:12). The ministers of Christ therefore must
   be frequently brandishing the sword of the Spirit and striking at men's
   sins, that, if possible, they may at last pierce the heart of stone.
   When the earth is scorched with the sun, it is so hard and crusted
   together, that a shower of rain will not soften it. There must be
   shower after shower before it will be either moist or fertile. Such an
   hardened piece is the heart of man naturally. It is so stiffened with
   the scorchings of lust, that there must be precept upon precept'
   (Isaiah 28:10). Our doctrine must distil as the dew, as the small rain
   on the tender herb, and as the showers upon the grass' (Deuteronomy
   32:2).

   (vi) Christ's ministers, according to the example of their Lord and
   Master, should take all occasions of doing good, not only in regard of
   God's glory, but their own comfort. What triumph is it, and cause of
   gladness, when a minister can say on his deathbed, Lord, I have done
   the work which thou gavest me to do', I have been trading for souls!
   When a minister comes to the mount of glory, the heavenly mount, it
   will be a great comfort to him that he has been so often upon the
   preaching mount. Certainly if the angels in heaven rejoice at the
   conversion of a sinner (Luke 15:7,10), how shall that minister rejoice
   in heaven over every soul that he has been instrumental to convert! As
   it shall add a member to Christ's body, so a jewel to a minister's
   crown. They that are wise', or as the original carries it, They that
   are teachers shall shine (not as lamps or tapers, but) as stars (Daniel
   12:3); not as planets, but as fixed stars in the firmament of glory for
   ever.,

   And though Israel be not gathered', yet shall God's ministers be
   glorious in the eyes of the Lord' (Isaiah 49:5). God will reward them
   not according to their success, but their diligence. When they are a
   'savour of death' to men, yet they are a 'sweet savour' to God. In an
   orchard the labourer that fells a tree is rewarded as well as he that
   plants a tree. The surgeon's bill is paid though the patient die.

   First, let me crave liberty to speak a word to the Elishas, my reverend
   and honoured brethren in the ministry. You are engaged in a glorious
   service. God has put great renown upon you. He has entrusted you with
   two most precious jewels, his truths and the souls of his people. Never
   was this honour conferred upon any angel to convert souls! What
   princely dignity can parallel this? The pulpit is higher than the
   throne, for a truly constituted minister represents no less than God
   himself. As though God did beseech you by us, we pray you in Christ's
   stead, be ye reconciled to God' (2 Corinthians 5:20). Give me leave to
   say as the apostle, I magnify my office' (Romans 11:13). Whatever our
   persons are, the office is sacred. The ministry is the most honourable
   employment in the world. Jesus Christ has graced this calling by his
   entering into it. Other men work in their trade; ministers work with
   God. We are labourers together with God' (1 Corinthians 3:9). O high
   honour! God and his ministers have one and the same work. They both
   negotiate about souls. Let the sons of the prophets wear this as their
   crown and diadem.

   But while I tell you of your dignity, do not forget your duty. Imitate
   this blessed pattern in the text, the Lord Jesus who, seeing the
   multitudes, went up and taught'. He took all occasions of preaching
   Sometimes he taught in the temple (Mark 14:49); sometimes in a ship
   (Mark 4:1), and here, upon the mount. His lips were a tree of life that
   fed many. How often did he neglect his food, that he might feast others
   with his doctrine! Let all the ministers of Christ tread in his steps!
   Make Christ not only your Saviour, but your example. Suffer no
   opportunities to slip wherein you may be helpful to the souls of
   others. Be not content to go to heaven yourselves, but be as the Primum
   Mobile, which draws other orbs along with it. Be such shining lamps
   that you may light others to heaven with you. I will conclude with that
   of the apostle: Therefore, my beloved brethren, be ye steadfast,
   unmoveable, always abounding in the work of the Lord, forasmuch as ye
   know that your labour is not in vain in the Lord' (1 Corinthians
   15:58).

   Secondly, let me turn myself to the flock of God. If ministers must
   take all opportunities to preach, you must take all opportunities to
   hear. If there were twice or thrice a week a certain sum of money to be
   distributed to all comers, then people would resort thither. Now think
   thus with yourselves; when the Word of God is preached, the bread of
   life is distributed, which is more precious than thousands of gold and
   silver' (Psalm 119:72). In the Word preached, heaven and salvation is
   offered to you. In this field the pearl of price is hid. How should you
   flock like doves' to the windows of the sanctuary (Isaiah 60:8)! We
   read the gate of the temple was called beautiful' (Acts 3:2). The gate
   of God's house is the beautiful gate. Lie at these posts of wisdom's
   doors' (Proverbs 8 34).

   Not only hear the Word preached, but encourage those ministers who do
   preach by liberal maintaining of them. Though I hope all who have God's
   Urim and Thummim written upon them, can say, as the apostle, I seek not
   yours, but you' (2 Corinthians 12:14), yet that scripture is still
   canonical, So hath the Lord ordained, that they which preach the gospel
   should live of the gospel' (1 Corinthians 9:14). Are not labourers in a
   vineyard maintained by their labours? says Peter Martyr. And the
   apostle puts the question, Who planteth a vineyard and eateth not the
   fruit of it? (1 Corinthians 9:7). Hypocrites love a cheap religion.
   They like a gospel that will put them to no charges. They are content
   so they may have golden bags, to have wooden priests. How many by
   saving their purses have lost their souls! Julian the Apostate robbed
   the ministers, pretending conscience. I need not tell you how vengeance
   pursued him. Is it not pity the fire on God's altar should go out for
   want of pouring on a little golden oil? David would not offer that to
   God which cost him nothing (2 Samuel 24:24).

   Encourage God's ministers by your fruitfulness under their labours.
   When ministers are upon the mount', let them not be upon the rocks.
   What cost has God laid out upon this city! Never, I believe, since the
   apostles, times was there a more learned, orthodox, powerful ministry
   than now. God's ministers are called stars (Revelation 1:20). In this
   city every morning a star appears, besides the bright constellation on
   the Lord's Day. Oh you that feed in the green pastures of ordinances,
   be fat and fertile; you that are planted in the courts of God, flourish
   in the courts of God (Psalm 92:13). How sad will it be with a people
   that shall go laden to hell with Gospel blessings! The best way to
   encourage your ministers is to let them see the travail of their souls
   in your new birth. It is a great comfort when a minister not only woos
   souls, but wins souls. He that winneth souls is wise' (Proverbs 11:30).
   This is a minister's glory. For what is our joy, or crown of rejoicing?
   Are not even ye?' (1 Thessalonians 2:19). A successful preacher wears
   two crowns, a crown of righteousness in heaven, and a crown of
   rejoicing here upon earth. Are not ye our crown?'

   Encourage your ministers by praying for them. Their work is great. It
   is a work that will take up their head and heart, and all little
   enough. It is a work fitter for angels than men. Who is sufficient for
   these things?' (2 Corinthians 2:16). Oh pray for them! Christ indeed,
   when he ascended the mount and was to preach, needed none of the
   people's prayers for him. He had a sufficient stock by him, the divine
   nature to supply him, but all his under-officers in the ministry need
   prayer. If Saint Paul, who abounded in the graces of the Spirit and
   supernatural revelations, begged prayer (1 Thessalonians 5:25), then
   surely other ministers need prayer who do not pretend to any such
   revelations.

   And pray for your ministers that God will direct them what to preach,
   that he will cut out their work for them. Go preach . . . the preaching
   that I bid thee' (Jonah 3:2). It is a great matter to preach suitable
   truths; there are acceptable words' (Ecclesiastes 12:10).

   Pray that God will go forth with their labours, or else they toil and
   catch nothing'. God's Spirit must fill the sails of our ministry. It is
   not the hand that scatters the seed which makes it spring up, but the
   dews and influences of heaven. So it is not our preaching, but the
   divine influence of the Spirit that makes grace grow in men's hearts.
   We are but pipes and organs. It is God's Spirit blowing in us that
   makes the preaching of the Word by a divine enchantment allure souls to
   Christ. Ministers are but stars to light you to Christ. The Spirit is
   the loadstone to draw you. All the good done by our ministry is due to
   the Lord's excellent and effectual working' (Bucer). Oh then pray for
   us, that God will make his work prosper in our hands. This may be one
   reason why the Word preached does not profit more, because people do
   not pray more. Perhaps you complain the tool is dull, the minister is
   dead and cold. You should have whetted and sharpened him by your
   prayer. If you would have the door of a blessing opened to you through
   our ministry, you must unlock it by the key of prayer.
     __________________________________________________________________

2. There is a blessedness in reversion

   Blessed are the poor in spirit.

   Matthew 5:3

   Having done with the occasion, I come now to the sermon itself. Blessed
   are the poor in spirit'. Christ does not begin his Sermon on the Mount
   as the Law was delivered on the mount, with commands and threatenings,
   the trumpet sounding, the fire flaming, the earth quaking, and the
   hearts of the Israelites too for fear; but our Saviour (whose lips
   dropped as the honeycomb') begins with promises and blessings. So sweet
   and ravishing was the doctrine of this heavenly Orpheus that, like
   music, it was able to charm the most savage natures, yea, to draw
   hearts of stone to him.

   To begin then with this first word, Blessed'. If there be any
   blessedness in knowledge, it must needs be in the knowledge of
   blessedness. For the illustration of this, I shall lay down two
   aphorisms or conclusions.

   [1] That there is a blessedness in reversion!

   [II] That the godly are in some sense already blessed.

   [1] That there is a blessedness in reversion: The people of God meet
   with many knotty difficulties and sinking discouragements in the way of
   religion. Their march is not only tedious but dangerous, and their
   hearts are ready to despond. It will not be amiss therefore to set the
   crown of blessedness before them to animate their courage and to
   inflame their zeal. How many scriptures bring this olive-branch in
   their mouth, the tidings of blessedness to believers! Blessed is that
   servant whom his Lord, when he cometh, shall find so doing' (Matthew
   24:46). Come, ye blessed of my Father' (Matthew 25:34). Blessedness is
   the perfection of a rational creature. It is the whetstone of a
   Christian's industry, the height of his ambition, the flower of his
   joy. Blessedness is the desire of all men. Aquinas calls it the
   ultimate end'. This is the white' every man aims to hit; to this centre
   all the lines are drawn.

   Wherein does blessedness consist? Millions of men mistake both the
   nature of blessedness and the way thither. Some of the learned have set
   down two hundred and eighty eight several opinions about blessedness,
   and all have shot wide of the mark. I shall show wherein it does not
   consist, and then wherein it does consist.

   (1) Wherein blessedness does not consist. It does not lie in the
   acquisition of worldly things. Happiness cannot by any art of chemistry
   be extracted here. Christ does not say, Blessed are the rich', or
   Blessed are the noble', yet too many idolise these things. Man, by the
   fall, has not only lost his crown, but his headpiece. How ready is he
   to terminate his happiness in externals! Which makes me call to mind
   that definition which some of the heathen philosophers give of
   blessedness, that it was to have a sufficiency of subsistence and to
   thrive well in the world. And are there not many who pass for
   Christians, that seem to be of this philosophical opinion? If they have
   but worldly accommodations, they are ready to sing a requiem to their
   souls and say with that brutish fool in the gospel, Soul, thou hast
   much goods laid up for many years, take thine ease . . .' (Luke 12:19).
   What is more shameful', says Seneca, than to equate the rational soul's
   good with that which is irrational.' Alas, the tree of blessedness does
   not grow in an earthly paradise. Has not God cursed the ground' for
   sin? (Genesis 3:17). Yet many are digging for felicity here, as if they
   would fetch a blessing out of a curse. A man may as well think to
   extract oil out of a flint, or fire out of water, as blessedness out of
   these terrestrial things.

   King Solomon arrived at more than any man. He was the most magnificent
   prince that ever held the sceptre. For his parentage: he sprang from
   the royal line, not only that line from which many kings came, but of
   which Christ himself came. Jesus Christ was of Solomon's line and race,
   so that for heraldry and nobility none could show a fairer coat of
   arms. For the situation of his palace: it was in Jerusalem, the
   princess and paragon of the earth. Jerusalem, for its renown, was
   called the city of God'. It was the most famous metropolis in the
   world. Whither the tribes go up, the tribes of the Lord' (Psalms
   122:4). For wealth: his crown was hung full of jewels. He had treasures
   of gold and of pearl and made silver to be as stones' (1 Kings 10:27).
   For worldly joy: he had the flower and quintessence of all delights --
   sumptuous fare, stately edifices, vineyards, fishponds, all sorts of
   music to enchant and ravish the senses with joy. If there were any
   rarity, it was a present for king Solomon's court. Thus did he bathe
   himself in the perfumed waters of pleasure.

   For wisdom: he was the oracle of his time. When the queen of Sheba came
   to pose him with hard questions, he gave a solution to all her doubts
   (1 Kings 10:3). He had a key of knowledge to unlock nature's dark
   cabinet, so that if wisdom had been lost, it might have been found
   here, and the whole world might have lighted their understanding at
   Solomon's lamp. He was an earthly angel, so that a carnal eye surveying
   his glory would have been ready to imagine that Solomon had entered
   into that paradise out of which Adam was once driven, or that he had
   found another as good. Never did the world cast a more smiling aspect
   upon any man; yet when he comes to give in his impartial verdict, he
   tells us that the world has vanity written upon its frontispiece, and
   all those golden delights he enjoyed were but a painted felicity, a
   glorious misery. And behold all was vanity' (Ecclesiastes 2:8).
   Blessedness is too noble and delicate a plant to dwell in nature's
   soil.

   That blessedness does not lie in externals, I shall prove by these five
   demonstrations.

   (i) Those things which are not commensurate to the desires of the soul
   can never make a man blessed; but transitory things are not
   commensurate to the desires of the soul; therefore they cannot render
   him blessed. Nothing on earth can satisfy.

   He that loveth silver shall not be satisfied with silver' (Ecclesiastes
   5:10). Riches are unsatisfying:

   Because they are not real. The world is called a fashion' (1
   Corinthians 7:31). The word in the Greek signifies a mathematical
   figure, sometimes a show or apparition. Riches are but tinned over.
   They are like alchemy, which glisters a little in our eyes, but at
   death all this alchemy will be worn off. Riches are but sugared lies,
   pleasant impostures, like a gilded cover which has not one leaf of true
   comfort bound up in it.

   Because they are not suitable. The soul is a spiritual thing; riches
   are of an earthly extract, and how can these fill a spiritual
   substance? A man may as well fill his treasure chest with grace, as his
   heart with gold. If a man were crowned with all the delights of the
   world, nay, if God should build him an house among the stars, yet the
   restless eye of his unsatisfied mind would be looking still higher. He
   would be prying beyond the heavens for some hidden rarities which he
   thinks he has not yet attained to; so unquenchable is the thirst of the
   soul till it come to bathe in the river of life and to centre upon true
   blessedness.

   (ii) That which cannot quiet the heart in a storm cannot entitle a man
   to blessedness; but earthly things accumulated cannot rock the troubled
   heart quiet; therefore they cannot make one blessed. If the spirit be
   wounded, can the creature pour wine and oil into these wounds? If God
   sets conscience to work, and it flies in a man's face, can worldly
   comforts take off this angry fury? Is there any harp to drive away the
   evil spirit'? Outward things can no more cure the agony of conscience
   than a silken stocking can cure a gouty leg. When Saul was sore
   distressed (1 Samuel 28:15), could all the jewels of his crown comfort
   him? If God be angry, whose fury is poured out like fire, and the rocks
   are thrown down by him' (Nahum 1:6), can a wedge of gold be a screen to
   keep off this fire? They shall cast their silver in the streets; their
   silver and their gold shall not be able to deliver them in the day of
   the wrath of the Lord' (Ezekiel 7:19). King Belshazzar was carousing
   and ranting it. He drank wine in the golden vessels of the temple'
   (Daniel 5:3), but when the fingers of a man's hand appeared, his
   countenance was changed' (verse 6), his wine grew sour, his feast was
   spoiled with that dish which was served in upon the wall. The things of
   the world will no more keep out trouble of spirit, than a paper sconce
   will keep out a bullet.

   (iii) That which is but for a season cannot make one blessed; but all
   things under the sun are but for a season', therefore they cannot
   enrich with blessedness. Sublunary delights are like those meats which
   we say are a while in season, and then presently grow stale and are out
   of request. The world passeth away' (1 John 2:17). Worldly delights are
   winged. They may be compared to a flock of birds in the garden, that
   stay a little while, but when you come near to them they take their
   flight and are gone. So riches make themselves wings; they fly away as
   an eagle toward heaven' (Proverbs 23:5). They are like a meteor that
   blazes, but spends and annihilates. They are like a castle made of
   snow, lying under the torrid beams of the sun. Augustine says of
   himself, that when any preferment smiled upon him, he was afraid to
   accept of it lest it should on a sudden give him the slip. Outward
   comforts are, as Plato says, like tennis balls which are bandied up and
   down from one to another. Had we the longest lease of worldly comforts,
   it would soon be run out. Riches and honour are constantly in flight;
   they pass away like a swift stream, or like a ship that is going full
   sail. While they are with us they are going away from us. They are like
   a posy of flowers which withers while you are smelling it; like ice,
   which melts away while it is in your hand. The world, says Bernard,'
   cries out, I will leave you', and be gone. It takes its salute and
   farewell together.

   (iv) Those things which do more vex than comfort cannot make a man
   blessed; but such are all things under the sun, therefore they cannot
   have blessedness affixed to them. As riches are compared to wind (Hosea
   12:1) to show their vanity, so to thorns (Matthew 13:17) to show their
   vexation. Thorns are not more apt to tear our garments, than riches to
   tear our hearts. They are thorns in the gathering, they prick with
   care; and as they pierce the head with care of getting, so they wound
   the heart with fear of losing. God will have our sweetest wine run
   dregs, yea, and taste of a musty cask too, that we may not think this
   is the wine of paradise.

   (v) Those things which (if we have nothing else) will make us cursed,
   cannot make us blessed; but the sole enjoyment of worldly things will
   make us cursed, therefore it is far from making us blessed. Riches are
   kept for the hurt of the owner' (Ecclesiastes 5:13). Riches to the
   wicked are fuel for pride: Thy heart is lifted up because of thy
   riches' (Ezekiel 28:5); and fuel for lust: when I had fed them to the
   full, they then committed adultery' (Jeremiah 5:7). Riches are a snare:
   But they that will be rich fall into temptation and a snare, and into
   many foolish and hurtful lusts which drown men in perdition' (1 Timothy
   6:9). How many have pulled down their souls to build up an estate! A
   ship may be so laden with gold that it sinks; many a man's gold has
   sunk him to hell. The rich sinner seals up money in his bag, and God
   seals up a curse with it. Woe to him that ladeth himself with thick
   clay' (Habakkuk 2:6). Augustine says that Judas for money sold his
   salvation, and the Pharisees bought their damnation; so that happiness
   is not to be fetched out of the earth. They who go to the creature for
   blessedness go to the wrong box.

   If blessedness does not consist in externals, then let us not place our
   blessedness here. This is to seek the living among the dead. As the
   angel told Mary concerning Christ, He is not here, he is risen'
   (Matthew 28:6), so I may say of blessedness, It is not here, it is
   risen; it is in a higher region. How do men thirst after the world, as
   if the pearl of blessedness hung upon an earthly crown! O, says one, if
   I had but such an estate, then I should be happy! Had I but such a
   comfort, then I should sit down satisfied! Well, God gives him that
   comfort and lets him suck out the very juice and spirits of it, but,
   alas, it falls short of his expectation. It cannot fill the hiatus and
   longing of his soul which still cries Give, give' (Proverbs 30:15);
   just like a sick man. If, says he, I had but such a meat, I could eat
   it; and when he has it, his stomach is bad, and he can hardly endure to
   taste it. God has put not only an emptiness, but bitterness into the
   creature, and it is good for us that there is no perfection here, that
   we may raise our thoughts higher to more noble and generous delights.
   Could we distil and draw out the quintessence of the creature, we
   should say as once the emperor Severus said, who grew from a mean
   estate to be head of the greatest empire in the world: I have, says he,
   run through all conditions, yet could never find full contentment.

   To such as are cut short in their allowance, whose cup does not
   overflow, but their tears be not too much troubled; remember that these
   outward comforts cannot make you blessed. You might live rich and die
   cursed. You might treasure up an estate, and God might treasure up
   wrath. Be not perplexed about those things the lack of which cannot
   make you miserable, nor the enjoyment make you blessed.

   (2) Having shown wherein blessedness does not consist, I shall next
   show wherein it does consist. Blessedness stands in the fruition of the
   chief good.

   (i)) It consists in fruition; there must not be only possession, but
   fruition. A man may possess an estate, yet not enjoy it. He may have
   the dominion of it, but not the comfort, as when he is in a lethargy or
   under the predominance of melancholy. But in true blessedness there
   must be a sensible enjoyment of that which the soul possesses.

   (ii) Blessedness lies in the fruition of the chief good. It is not
   every good that makes a man blessed, but it must be the supreme good,
   and that is God. Happy is that people whose God is the Lord' (Psalm
   144:15). God is the soul's rest (Psalm 116:7). Now that only in which
   the soul acquiesces and rests can make it blessed. The globe or circle,
   as is observed in mathematics, is of all others the most perfect
   figure, because the last point of the figure ends in that first point
   where it began. So, when the soul meets in God, whence it sprang as its
   first original, then it is completely blessed. That which makes a man
   blessed must have fixed qualifications or ingredients in it, and these
   are found nowhere but in God the chief good.

   In true blessedness there must be meliority; that which fills with
   blessedness must be such a good as is better than a man's self. If you
   would ennoble a piece of silver, it must be by putting something to it
   which is better than silver, as by putting gold or pearl to it. So that
   which ennobles the soul and enriches it with blessedness, must be by
   adding something to it which is more excellent than the soul, and that
   is God. The world is below the soul; it is but the soul's footstool;
   therefore it cannot crown it with happiness.

   Another ingredient is delectability: that which brings blessedness must
   have a delicious taste in it, such as the soul is instantly ravished
   with. There must be in it spirits of delight and quintessence of joy,
   and where can the soul suck those pure comforts which amaze it with
   wonder and crown it with delight, but in God? In God', says Augustine,
   the soul is delighted with such sweetness as even transports it.' The
   love of God is a honeycomb which drops such infinite sweetness and
   satisfaction into the soul as is unspeakable and full of glory.' (1
   Peter 1:8). A kiss from God's mouth puts the soul into a divine
   ecstasy, so that now it cries out, It is good to be here.'

   The third ingredient in blessedness is plenty; that which makes a man
   blessed must not be too scanty. It is a full draught which quenches the
   soul's thirst; and where shall we find plenty but in Deity? Thou shalt
   make them drink of the river of thy pleasures' (Psalm 36:8); not drops
   but rivers! The soul bathes itself and is laid, as it were, asteeping
   in the water of life. The river of paradise overflowed and empties its
   silver streams into the souls of the blessed.

   In true blessedness there must be variety. Plenty without variety is
   apt to nauseate. In God there is all fullness'. (Colossians 1:19). What
   can the soul want, but it may be had in the chief good? God is the good
   in all good things'. He is a sun, a shield, a portion, a fountain, a
   rock of strength, an horn of salvation. In God there is a complication
   of all excellencies. There are every moment fresh beauties and delights
   springing from God.

   To make up blessedness there must be perfection; the joy must be
   perfect, the glory perfect. Spirits of just men made perfect' (Hebrews
   12:23). Blessedness must run through the whole.' If there be the least
   defect, it destroys the nature of blessedness, as the least symptom of
   a disease takes away the wellbeing and right temperature of the body.

   True blessedness must have eternity stamped on it. Blessedness is a
   fixed thing; it admits of no change or alteration. God says of every
   child of his, I have blessed him and he shall be blessed.' As the
   sunshine of blessedness is without clouds', so it never sets. I give
   unto them eternal life' (John 10:28). And so shall we ever be with the
   Lord' (1 Thessalonians 4:17). Eternity is the highest link of
   blessedness. Thus we have seen that this diamond of blessedness is only
   to be found in the Rock of Ages. Blessed are the people whose God is
   the Lord.'

   If there is such a blessedness in reversion, be convinced of the truth
   of this; set it down as an article of your faith. We live in times
   wherein many are grown atheists. They have run through all opinions,
   and now of professors they are turned epicures; they have drunk in so
   much of the poison of error that they are quite intoxicated and fallen
   asleep, and begin to dream there is no such state of blessedness after
   this life; and this opinion is to them above the Bible. When men have
   the spiritual staggers, it sadly presages they will die. Oh, it is a
   dangerous thing to hesitate and waver about fundamentals; like
   Pythagoras, who doubted whether there was a God or no; so, whether
   there be a blessedness or no. Doubting of principles is the next way to
   the denying of principles. Let it be a maxim with every good Christian,
   there is a blessedness in reversion. There remains a rest for the
   people of God' (Hebrews 4:9).

   Revolve this truth often in your mind. There are many truths swim in
   the brain, which do not sink into the heart, and those do us no good.
   Chew the cud. Let a Christian think seriously with himself, there is a
   blessedness feasible and I am capable of enjoying it, if I do not lay
   bars in the way and block up my own happiness. Though within I see
   nothing but guilt, and without nothing but curses, yet there is a
   blessedness to be had, and to be had for me too in the use of means.

   The serious meditation of this will be a forcible argument to make the
   sinner break off his sins by repentance and sweat hard till he find the
   golden mine of blessedness. I say, it would be the break-neck of sin.
   How would a man offer violence to himself by mortification and to
   heaven by supplication, that at last he may arrive at a state of
   blessedness? What, is there a crown of blessedness to be set upon my
   head? A crown hung with the jewels of honour, delight, magnificence? a
   crown reached out by God himself? and shall I by sin hazard this? Can
   the pleasure of sin countervail the loss of blessedness? What more
   powerful motive to repentance than this? Sin will deceive me of the
   blessing! If a man knew certainly that a king would settle all his
   crown revenues on him after a term of years, would he offend that regal
   Majesty and cause him to reverse or alter his will? There is a
   blessedness promised to all that live godly. This is the promise he has
   promised us, even eternal life' (1 John 2:25). We are not excluded, but
   may come in for a child's part. Now shall we, by living in sin, provoke
   God and forfeit this blessedness? O what madness is this! Well may the
   apostle call them foolish and hurtful lusts' (1 Timothy 6:9), because
   every lust does what in it lies to cut off the entail of mercy and
   block up the way to happiness. Every sin may be compared to the flaming
   sword', which keeps the heavenly paradise that the sinner cannot enter.

   Let us so deport ourselves, that we may express to others that we do
   believe a blessedness to come, and that is by seeking an interest in
   God. For the beams of blessedness shine only from his face. It is our
   union with God, the chief good, that makes us blessed. Oh, let us never
   rest till we can say, This God is our God for ever and ever' (Psalm
   48:14). Most men think because God has blessed them with an estate,
   therefore they are blessed. Alas, God often gives these things in
   anger. God grants a thing when he is angry which he does not will to
   give when he is tranquil.' He loads his enemies with gold and silver;
   as Plutarch reports of Tarpeia, a vestal nun, who bargained with the
   enemy to betray the Capitol of Rome to them, if she might have the
   golden bracelets on their left hands, which they promised; and being
   entered into the Capitol, they threw not only their golden bracelets,
   but their bucklers too upon her, through the weight whereof she was
   pressed to death. God often lets men have the golden bracelets, the
   weight whereof sinks them into hell. Oh, let us pant after things
   heavenly, let us get our eyes fixed, and our hearts united to God, the
   supreme good. This is to pursue blessedness as in the chase.

   Let us proclaim to the world that we do believe a blessedness to come
   by living blessed lives; walk as becomes the heirs of blessedness. A
   blessed crown and a cursed life will never agree. Many tell us they are
   bound for heaven, but they steer their course a quite contrary way. The
   Devil is their pilot, and they sail hell-ward, as if a man should say
   he were going a voyage to the east, but sails quite westward. The
   drunkard will tell you he hopes for blessedness, but he sails another
   way; you must go weeping to heaven, not reeling. The unclean person
   talks of blessedness, but he is fallen into that deep ditch' (Proverbs
   23:27), where he is like sooner to find hell than heaven. A beast may
   as well be made an angel as an unclean person in his leprosy enter into
   the paradise of God. The covetous person (of whom it may be said, he is
   a worm and no man', for he is ever creeping in the earth) yet would lay
   a claim to blessedness; but can earth ascend? Shall a lump of clay be
   made a bright star in the firmament of glory? Be assured they shall
   never be blessed who bless themselves in their sins. If, says God, the
   sinner bless himself in his heart, saying, I shall have peace, though I
   walk in the imagination of my heart, to add drunkenness to thirst; the
   Lord will not spare him, but then the anger of the Lord and his
   jealousy shall smoke against that man, and the Lord shall blot out his
   name under heaven' (Deuteronomy 29:19). A man can no more extract
   blessedness out of sin than he can suck health out of poison. O let us
   lead blessed lives, and so declare plainly that we seek a country'
   (Hebrews 11:14).

   To you that have any good hope through grace that you have a title to
   blessedness, let me say as the Levites did to the people, Stand up and
   bless the Lord your God for ever and ever' (Nehemiah 9:5). What
   infinite cause have you to be thankful that the lot of free grace is
   fallen upon you! Though you had forfeited all, yet God has provided a
   haven of happiness, and he is carrying you thither upon the sea of
   Christ's blood, the gale of his Spirit blowing your sails. You are in a
   better condition through Christ, than when you had the robes of
   innocence upon you. God has raised you a step higher by your fall. How
   many has God passed by and looked upon you! Millions there are who
   shall lie under the bitter vials of God's curses, whereas he will bring
   you into his banqueting-house and pour out the flagons of wine and
   feast you eternally with the delicacies of heaven. O adore free grace;
   triumph in this love of God. Spend and be spent for the Lord. Dedicate
   yourselves to him in a way of resignation, and lay out yourselves for
   him in a way of gratulation. Never think you can do enough for that God
   who will shortly set you ashore in the land of promise.
     __________________________________________________________________

3. The godly are in some sense already blessed

   I proceed now to the second aphorism or conclusion, that the godly are
   in some sense already blessed. The saints are blessed not only when
   they are apprehended by God, but while they are travellers to glory.
   They are blessed before they are crowned. This seems a paradox to flesh
   and blood. What, reproached and maligned, yet blessed! A man that looks
   upon the children of God with a carnal eye and sees how they are
   afflicted, and like the ship in the gospel which was covered with
   waves' (Matthew 8:24), would think they were far from blessedness. St
   Paul brings a catalogue of his sufferings: Thrice was I beaten with
   rods; once I was stoned, thrice I suffered shipwreck . . .' (2
   Corinthians 11:24-26). And those Christians of the first magnitude, of
   whom the world was not worthy, had trial of cruel mockings and
   scourgings; they were sawn asunder; they were slain with the sword'
   (Hebrews 11:36, 37). What? And were all these during the time of their
   sufferings blessed? A carnal man would think, If this be to be blessed,
   God deliver him from it.

   But, however sense and reason give their vote, our Saviour Christ
   pronounces the godly man blessed; though a mourner, though a martyr,
   yet blessed. Job on the dunghill was blessed Job. The saints are
   blessed when they are cursed. Shimei cursed David. He came forth and
   cursed him' (2 Samuel 16:5). Yet when he was cursed David, he was
   blessed David. The saints, though they are bruised, yet they are
   blessed. Not only shall they be blessed, they are so. Blessed are the
   undefiled' (Psalm 19:1). Thy blessing is upon thy people' (Psalm 3:8).

   (1) How are the saints already blessed? In that they are enriched with
   heavenly blessings (Ephesians 1:3). They are partakers of the divine
   nature' (2 Peter 1:4), not by an incorporation into the divine essence,
   but by transformation into the divine likeness. This is blessedness
   begun. As the new-born babe is said to have life in it as well as he
   who is fully grown, so the saints, who are partakers of the divine
   nature, have an inchoate blessedness, though they have not arrived yet
   at perfection. Believers have the seed of God abiding in them (1 John
   3:9). And this is a seed of blessedness. The flower of glory grows out
   of the seed of grace. Grace and glory differ not in kind but degree.
   The one is the root, the other the fruit. Grace is glory in the
   dawning; glory is grace in the meridian. And in this sense that
   assertion of Augustine is true, Blessed are we in faith and in hope.,
   Grace is the first link in the chain of blessedness. Now he that has
   the first link of the chain in his hand, has the whole chain. The
   saints have the Spirit of God in them, The Holy Ghost which dwelleth in
   us' (2 Timothy 1:14). How can the blessed Spirit be in a man and he not
   blessed? A godly man's heart is a paradise, planted with the choicest
   fruit, and God himself walks in the midst of this paradise, and must
   the man not needs be blessed?

   (2) The saints are already blessed because their sins are not imputed
   to them. Blessed is the man to whom the Lord imputeth not iniquity'
   (Psalm 32:2). God's not imputing iniquity, signifies God's making of
   sin not to be. It is as if the man had never sinned. The debt book is
   cancelled in Christ's blood, and if the debtor owe never so much, yet
   if the creditor cross the book, it is as if he had never owed anything.
   God's not imputing sin signifies that God will never call for the debt,
   or, if it should be called for, it shall be hid out of sight. In those
   days the iniquity of Israel shall be sought for, and there shall be
   none; and the sins of Judah, and they shall not be found' (Jeremiah
   50:20). Now such a man who has not sin imputed to him, is blessed, and
   the reason is, because if sin be not imputed to a man, then the curse
   is taken away; and if the curse be taken away, then he must needs be
   blessed.

   (3) The saints are already blessed because they are in covenant with
   God. This is clear by comparing two scriptures: I will be their God',
   (Jeremiah 31:33), and Happy is that people whose God is the Lord'
   (Psalm 144:15). This is the crowning blessing, to have the Lord for our
   God. Impossible it is to imagine that God should be our God, and we not
   be blessed.

   This sweet word, I will be your God', implies propriety, that all that
   is in God shall be ours. His love is ours, his Spirit ours, his mercy
   ours. It implies all relations: of a father, I will be a father unto
   you' (2 Corinthians 6:18). The sons of a prince are happy. How blessed
   are the saints who are of true blood royal? It implies the relation of
   an husband: Thy Maker is thy husband' (Isaiah 54:5). The spouse, being
   contracted to her husband, is happy by having an interest in all he
   has. The saints being contracted by faith are blessed, though the
   solemnity of the marriage be kept for heaven. It implies terms of
   friendship. They who are in covenant with God are favourites of heaven.
   Abraham my friend' (Isaiah 41:8). It is counted a subject's happiness
   to be in favour with his prince, though he may live a while from court.
   How happy must he needs be who is God's favourite!

   (4) The saints are already blessed because they have a reversion of
   heaven, as, on the contrary, he who has hell in reversion is said to be
   already condemned. He that believeth not is condemned already' (John
   3:18). He is as sure to be condemned, as if he were condemned already.
   So he who has heaven in reversion may be said to be already blessed. A
   man that has the reversion of a house, after a short lease is run out,
   he looks upon it as his already. This house, says he, is mine. So a
   believer has a reversion of heaven after the lease of life is run out,
   and he can say at present, Christ is mine and glory is mine. He has a
   title to heaven, and he is a blessed man who has a title to show; nay,
   faith turns the reversion into a possession.

   (5) The saints are already blessed because they have the first-fruits
   of blessedness here. We read of the earnest of the Spirit, and the seal
   (2 Corinthians 1:22), and the first-fruits (Romans 8:23). Heaven is
   already begun in a believer. The kingdom of God is peace and joy in the
   Holy Ghost' (Romans 14:17). This kingdom is in a believer's heart (Luke
   17:21). The people of God have a prelibation and taste of blessedness
   here. As Israel tasted a bunch of grapes before they were actually
   possessed of Canaan, so the children of God have those secret incomes
   of the Spirit, those smiles of Christ's face, those kisses of his lips,
   those love-tokens that are as bunches of grapes; and they think
   themselves sometimes in heaven. Paul was let down in a basket' (Acts
   9:25). Oftentimes the Comforter is let down to the soul in an
   ordinance, and now the soul is in the suburbs of Jerusalem above. A
   Christian sees heaven by faith, and tastes it by joy; and what is this
   but blessedness?

   (6) The saints may be said in this life to be blessed, because all
   things tend to make them blessed. All things work together for good to
   them that love God' (Romans 8:28). We say to him that has everything
   falling out for the best, You are a happy man. The saints are very
   happy, for all things have a tendency to their good. Prosperity does
   them good; adversity does them good. Nay, sin turns to their good.
   Every trip makes them more watchful. Their maladies are their
   medicines. Are not they happy persons that have every wind blowing them
   to the right port?

   (7) A saint may be said to be blessed, because part of him is already
   blessed. He is blessed in his head; Christ, his head, is in glory;
   Christ and believers make one body mystical; their head is gotten into
   heaven.

   See the difference between a wicked man and a godly. Let a wicked man
   have never so many comforts, still he is cursed; let a godly man have
   never so many crosses, still he is blessed. Let a wicked man have the
   candle of God shining' on him (Job 29:3), let his way be so smooth that
   he meets with no rubs; let him have success; yet still there is a curse
   entailed upon him. You may read the sinner's inventory (Deuteronomy
   28:16, 17, 18). He is not more full of sin than he is of a curse.
   Though perhaps he blesses himself in his wickedness, yet he is heir to
   God's curse. All the curses of the Bible are his portion, and at the
   day of death this portion is sure to be paid. But a godly man in the
   midst of all his miseries is blessed. He may be under the cross, but
   not under a curse.

   It shows the privilege of a believer. He not only shall be blessed, but
   he is blessed. Blessedness is begun in him. You are blessed of the
   Lord' (Psalm 115:15). Let the condition of the righteous be never so
   sad, yet it is blessed; he is blessed in affliction. Blessed is he whom
   thou chastenest' (Psalm 94:12); blessed in poverty, poor in the world,
   rich in faith' (James 2:5); blessed in disgrace, The spirit of glory
   and of God resteth upon you' (1 Peter 4:14). This may be a cordial to
   the fainting Christian; he is blessed in life and death! Satan cannot
   supplant him of the blessing.

   How may this take away murmuring and melancholy from a child of God?
   Will you repine and be sad when you are blessed? Esau wept because he
   wanted the blessing. Bless me, even me also, O my father, and Esau
   lifted up his voice and wept' (Genesis 27:38). But shall a child of God
   be immoderately cast down when he has the blessing? Adam sinned in the
   midst of paradise. How evil it is to be blessed, and yet murmur!

   What an encouragement is this to godliness! We are all ambitious of a
   blessing, then let us espouse religion: Blessed is the man that feareth
   the Lord' (Psalm 112:1). But you will say, This way is every where
   spoken against. It is no matter, seeing this is the way to get a
   blessing. Suppose a rich man should adopt another for his heir, and
   others should reproach him, he does not care as long as he is heir to
   the estate. So, what though others may reproach you for your religion,
   as long as it entails a blessing on you; the same day you become godly,
   you become blessed.
     __________________________________________________________________

4. Blessed are the poor in spirit

   Having spoken of the general notion of blessedness, I come next to
   consider the subjects of this blessedness, and these our Saviour has
   deciphered to be the poor in spirit, the mourners, etc. But before I
   touch upon these, I shall attempt a little preface or paraphrase upon
   this sermon of the beatitudes.

   1 Observe the divinity in this sermon, which goes beyond all
   philosophy. The philosophers use to say that one contrary expels
   another; but here one contrary begets another. Poverty is wont to expel
   riches, but here poverty begets riches, for how rich are they that have
   a kingdom! Mourning is wont to expel joy, but here mourning begets joy:
   they shall be comforted'. Water is wont to quench the flame but the
   water of tears kindles the flame of joy. Persecution is wont to expel
   happiness, but here it makes happy: Blessed are they that are
   persecuted'. These are the sacred paradoxes in our Saviour's sermon.

   2 Observe how Christ's doctrine and the opinion of carnal men differ.
   They think, Blessed are the rich.' The world would count him blessed
   who could have Midas, wish, that all he touched might be turned into
   gold. But Christ says, Blessed are the poor in spirit'. The world
   thinks, Blessed are they on the pinnacle; but Christ pronounces them
   blessed who are in the valley. Christ's reckonings and the world's do
   not agree.

   3 Observe the nature of true religion. Poverty leads the van, and
   persecution brings up the rear. Every true saint (says Luther) is heir
   to the cross! Some there are who would be thought religious, displaying
   Christ's colours by a glorious profession, but to be poor in spirit'
   and persecuted', they cannot take down this bitter pill. They would
   wear Christ's jewels, but waive his cross. These are strangers to
   religion.

   4 Observe the certain connection between grace and its reward. They who
   are poor in spirit' shall have the kingdom of God'. They are as sure to
   go to heaven, as if they were in heaven already. Our Saviour would
   encourage men to religion by sweetening commands with promises. He ties
   duty and reward together. As in the body the veins carry the blood, and
   the arteries the spirits, so one part of these verses carries duty, and
   the other part carries reward. As that scholar of Apelles painted
   Helena richly drawn in costly and glorious apparel, hung all over with
   orient pearl, and precious stones; so our Lord Christ, having set down
   several qualifications of a Christian, poor in spirit', pure in heart',
   etc.' draws these heavenly virtues in their fair colours of
   blessedness, and sets the magnificent crown of reward upon them, that
   by this brilliance, he might the more set forth their unparalleled
   beauty, and entice holy love.

   5 Observe hence the concatenation of the graces: poor in spirit, meek,
   merciful, etc. Where there is one grace there is all. As they say of
   the cardinal virtues that they are strung together, so we may say of
   the graces of the spirit, they are linked and chained together. He that
   has poverty of spirit is a mourner. He that is a mourner is meek. He
   that is meek is merciful, etc. The Spirit of God plants in the heart an
   habit of all the graces. The new creature has all the parts and
   lineaments, as in the body there is a composition of all the elements
   and a mixture of all the humours. The graces of the Spirit are like a
   row of pearls which hang together upon the string of religion and serve
   to adorn Christ's bride. This I note, to show you a difference between
   a hypocrite and a true child of God. The hypocrite flatters himself
   with a pretence of grace, but in the meantime he does not have an habit
   of all the graces. He does not have poverty of spirit, nor purity of
   heart, whereas a child of God has all the graces in his heart, at least
   radically though not gradually. These things being premised, I come in
   particular to those heavenly dispositions of soul to which Christ has
   affixed blessedness. And the first is Poverty of Spirit: Blessed are
   the poor in spirit'.

   Chrysostom and Theophylact are of opinion that this was the first
   sermon that ever Christ made, therefore it may challenge our best
   attention. Blessed are the poor in spirit'. Our Lord Christ being to
   raise an high and stately fabric of blessedness, lays the foundation of
   it low, in poverty of spirit. But all poverty is not blessed. I shall
   use a fourfold distinction.

   1 I distinguish between poor in estate', and poor in spirit'. There are
   the Devil's poor, poor and wicked, whose clothes are not more torn than
   their conscience. There are some whose poverty is their sin, who
   through improvidence or excess have brought themselves to want. These
   may be poor in estate but not poor in spirit.

   2 I distinguish between 'spiritually poor' and poor in spirit'. He who
   is without grace is spiritually poor, but he is not poor in spirit; he
   does not know his own beggary. Thou knowest not that thou art poor'
   (Revelation 3:17). He is in the worst sense poor who has no sense of
   his poverty.

   3 I distinguish between poor-spirited' and poor in spirit'. They are
   said to be poor-spirited who have mean, base spirits, who act below
   themselves. As they are men; such are those misers, who having great
   estates, yet can hardly afford themselves bread; who live sneakingly,
   and are ready to wish their own throats cut, because they are forced to
   spend something in satisfying nature's demands. This Solomon calls an
   evil under the sun. There is an evil which I have seen under the sun, a
   man to whom God has given riches, so that he wanteth nothing for his
   soul of all that he desireth, yet God giveth him not power to eat
   thereof' (Ecclesiastes 6:2). Religion makes no man a niggard. Though it
   teaches prudence, yet not sordidness.

   Then there are those who act below themselves as they are Christians,
   while they sinfully comply and prostitute themselves to the humours of
   others; a base kind of metal that will take any stamp. They will for a
   piece of silver part with the jewel of a good conscience. They will be
   of the state religion. They will dance to the devil's pipe, if their
   superior commands them. These are poor-spirited but not poor in spirit.

   4 I distinguish between poor in an evangelical sense and poor in a
   popish sense. The papists give a wrong gloss upon the text. By poor in
   spirit', they understand those who, renouncing their estates, vow a
   voluntary poverty, living retiredly in their monasteries. But Christ
   never meant these. He does not pronounce them blessed who make
   themselves poor, leaving their estates and callings, but such as are
   evangelically poor.

   Well then, what are we to understand by poor in spirit'? The Greek word
   for poor' is not only taken in a strict sense for those who live upon
   alms, but in a more large sense, for those who are destitute as well of
   inward as outward comfort. Poor in spirit, then signifies those who are
   brought to the sense of their sins, and seeing no goodness in
   themselves, despair in themselves and sue wholly to the mercy of God in
   Christ. Poverty of spirit is a kind of self-annihilation. Such an
   expression I find in Calvin. The poor in spirit (says he) are they who
   see nothing in themselves, but fly to mercy for sanctuary. Such an one
   was the publican: God be merciful to me a sinner' (Luke 18:13). Of this
   temper was St Paul: That I may be found in Christ, not having mine own
   righteousness' (Philippians 3:9). These are the poor which are invited
   as guests to wisdom's banquet (Proverbs 7:3, 4).

   Here several questions may be propounded.

   (i) Why does Christ here begin with poverty of spirit? Why is this put
   in the forefront? I answer, Christ does it to show that poverty of
   spirit is the very basis and foundation of all the other graces that
   follow. You may as well expect fruit to grow without a root, as the
   other graces without this. Till a man be poor in spirit, he cannot
   mourn. Poverty of spirit is like the fire under the still, which makes
   the water drop from the eyes. When a man sees his own defects and
   deformities and looks upon himself as undone, then he mourns after
   Christ. The springs run in the valleys' (Psalm 104:10). When the heart
   becomes a valley and lies low by poverty of spirit, now the springs of
   holy mourning run there. Till a man be poor in spirit, he cannot hunger
   and thirst after righteousness'. He must first be sensible of want
   before he can hunger. Therefore Christ begins with poverty of spirit
   because this ushers in all the rest.

   (ii) The second question is, what is the difference between poverty of
   spirit and humility? These are so alike that they have been taken one
   for the other. Chrysostom, by poverty of spirit', understands humility.
   Yet I think there is some difference. They differ as the cause and the
   effect. Tertullian says, none are poor in spirit but the humble. He
   seems to make humility the cause of poverty of spirit. I rather think
   poverty of spirit is the cause of humility, for when a man sees his
   want of Christ, and how he lives on the alms of free grace, this makes
   him humble. He that is sensible of his own vacuity and indigence, hangs
   his head in humility with the violet. Humility is the sweet spice that
   grows from poverty of spirit.

   (iii) What is the difference between poverty of spirit and self-denial?
   I answer, in some things they agree, in some things they differ. In
   some things they agree; for the poor in spirit is an absolute
   self-denier. He renounces all opinion of himself. He acknowledges his
   dependence upon Christ and free grace. But in some things they differ.
   The self-denier parts with the world for Christ, the poor in spirit
   parts with himself for Christ, i.e. his own righteousness. The poor in
   spirit sees himself nothing without Christ; the self-denier will leave
   himself nothing for Christ. And thus I have shown what poverty of
   spirit is.

   The words thus opened present us with this truth: that Christians must
   be poor in spirit; or thus, poverty of spirit is the jewel which
   Christians must wear. As the best creature was made out of nothing,
   namely, light; so when a man sees himself nothing, out of this nothing
   God makes a most beautiful creature. It is God's usual method to make a
   man poor in spirit, and then fill him with the graces of the Spirit. As
   we deal with a watch, we take it first to pieces, and then set all the
   wheels and pins in order, so the Lord first takes a man all to pieces,
   shows him his undone condition, and then sets him in frame.

   The reasons are:

   1 Till we are poor in spirit we are not capable of receiving grace. He
   who is swollen with an opinion of self-excellency and self-sufficiency,
   is not fit for Christ. He is full already. If the hand be full of
   pebbles, it cannot receive gold. The glass is first emptied before you
   pour in wine. God first empties a man of himself, before he pours in
   the precious wine of his grace. None but the poor in spirit are within
   Christ's commission. The Spirit of the Lord God is upon me; he hath
   sent me to bind up the broken-hearted' (Isaiah 61:1), that is, such as
   are broken in the sense of their unworthiness.

   2. Till we are poor in spirit, Christ is never precious. Before we see
   our own wants, we never see Christ's worth. Poverty of spirit is salt
   and seasoning, the sauce which makes Christ relish sweet to the soul.
   Mercy is most welcome to the poor in spirit. He who sees himself clad
   in filthy rags (Zechariah 3:4,5), what will he give for change of
   raiment, the righteousness of Christ! What will he give to have the
   fair mitre of salvation set upon his head! When a man sees himself
   almost wounded to death, how precious will the balm of Christ's blood
   be to him! When he sees himself deep in arrears with God, and is so far
   from paying the debt that he cannot sum up the debt, how glad would he
   be of a surety! The pearl of price' is only precious to the poor in
   spirit. He that wants bread and is ready to starve, will have it
   whatever it cost. He will lay his garment to pledge; bread he must have
   or he is undone. So to him that is poor in spirit, that sees his want
   of Christ, how precious is a Saviour! Christ is Christ and grace is
   grace to him! He will do anything for the bread of life. Therefore will
   God have the soul thus qualified, to raise the price of his market, to
   enhance the value and estimate of the Lord Jesus.

   3 Till we are poor in spirit we cannot go to heaven. Theirs is the
   kingdom of heaven'. This tunes and prepares us for heaven. By nature a
   man is big with self-confidence, and the gate of heaven is so strait
   that he cannot enter. Now poverty of spirit lessens the soul; it pares
   off its superfluity, and now he is fit to enter in at the 'strait
   gate'. The great cable cannot go through the eye of the needle, but let
   it be untwisted and made into small threads, and then it may. Poverty
   of spirit untwists the great cable. It makes a man little in his own
   eyes and now an entrance shall be made unto him, richly into the
   everlasting Kingdom' (2 Peter 1:11). Through this temple of poverty, we
   must go into the temple of glory.

   It shows wherein a Christian's riches consist, namely in poverty of
   spirit. Some think if they can fill their bags with gold, then they are
   rich. But they who are poor in spirit are the rich men. They are rich
   in poverty. This poverty entitles them to a kingdom. How poor are they
   that think themselves rich! How rich are they that see themselves poor!
   I call it the jewel of poverty'. There are some paradoxes in religion
   that the world cannot understand; for a man to become a fool that he
   may be wise (1 Corinthians 3:18); to save his life by losing it
   (Matthew 16:25); and by being poor to be rich. Reason laughs at it, but
   Blessed are the poor, for theirs is the kingdom'. Then this poverty is
   to be striven for more than all riches. Under these rags is hid cloth
   of gold. Out of this carcass comes honey.

   If blessed are the poor in spirit, then by the rule of contraries,
   cursed are the proud in spirit (Proverbs 16:5). There is a generation
   of men who commit idolatry with themselves; no such idol as self! They
   admire their own parts, moralities, self-righteousness; and upon this
   stock graft the hope of their salvation. There are many too good to go
   to heaven. They have commodities enough of their own growth, and they
   scorn to live upon the borrow, or to be beholden to Christ. These
   bladders the Devil has blown up with pride, and they are swelled in
   their own conceit; but it is like the swelling of a dropsy man whose
   bigness is his disease. Thus it was with that proud justiciary: The
   Pharisee stood and prayed, God, I thank thee that I am not as other men
   are, extortioners, unjust, adulterers, or even as this publican; I fast
   twice in the week, I give tithes ...' (Luke 18:11). Here was a man
   setting up the topsail of pride; but the publican, who was poor in
   spirit, stood afar off and would not lift up so much as his eyes unto
   heaven, but smote upon his breast saying, God be merciful to me a
   sinner.' This man carried away the garland. I tell you' (says Christ)
   this man went down to his house justified rather than the other'. St
   Paul, before his conversion, thought himself in a very good condition,
   touching the law, blameless' (Philippians 3:6). He thought to have
   built a tower of his own righteousness, the top whereof should have
   reached to heaven; but, at last, God showed him there was a crack in
   the foundation, and then he gets into the rock of ages'. That I may be
   found in him' (Philippians 3:9). There is not a more dangerous
   precipice than self-righteousness. This was Laodicea's temper: Because
   thou sayest I am rich and I have need of nothing . . .' (Revelation
   3:17). She thought she wanted nothing when indeed she had nothing. How
   many does this damn! We see some ships that have escaped the rocks, yet
   are cast away upon the sands; so some who have escaped the rocks of
   gross sins, yet are cast away upon the sands of self-righteousness; and
   how hard is it to convince such men of their danger! They will not
   believe but that they may be helped out of their dungeon with these
   rotten rags. They cannot be persuaded their case is so bad as others
   would make it. Christ tells them they are blind, but they are like
   Seneca's maid, who was born blind, but she would not believe it. The
   house, says she, is dark, but I am not blind. Christ tells them they
   are naked, and offers his white robe to cover them, but they are of a
   different persuasion; and because they are blind, they cannot see
   themselves naked. How many have perished by being their own saviours! O
   that this might drive the proud sinner out of himself! A man never
   comes to himself till he comes out of himself. And no man can come out,
   till first Christ comes in.

   If poverty of spirit be so necessary, how shall I know that I am poor
   in spirit? By the blessed effects of this poverty, which are:

   1 He that is poor in spirit is weaned from himself. My soul is even as
   a weaned child' (Psalm 131:2). It is hard for a man to be weaned from
   himself. The vine catches hold of everything that is near, to stay
   itself upon. There is some bough or other a man would be catching hold
   of to rest upon. How hard is it to be brought quite off himself! The
   poor in spirit are divorced from themselves; they see they must go to
   hell without Christ. My soul is even as a weaned child'.

   2 He that is poor in spirit is a Christ-admirer. He has high thoughts
   of Christ. He sees himself naked and flies to Christ that in his
   garments he may obtain the blessing. He sees himself wounded, and as
   the wounded deer runs to the water, so he thirsts for Christ's blood,
   the water of life. Lord, says he, give me Christ or I die. Conscience
   is turned into a fiery serpent and has stung him; now all the world for
   a brazen serpent! He sees himself in a state of death; and how precious
   is one leaf of the tree of life, which is both for food and medicine!
   The poor in spirit sees all his riches lie in Christ, wisdom,
   righteousness, sanctification . . '. In every exigency he flies to this
   magazine and storehouse. He adores the all-fullness in Christ.

   They say of the oil in Rheims, though they are continually almost
   spending it, yet it never wastes. And such is Christ's blood; it can
   never be emptied. He that is poor in spirit has recourse still to this
   fountain. He sets an high value and appreciation upon Christ. He hides
   himself in Christ's wounds. He bathes himself in his blood. He wraps
   himself in his robe. He sees a spiritual dearth and famine at home, but
   he makes out to Christ. Show me the Lord (says he) and it sufficeth'.

   3 He that is poor in spirit is ever complaining of his spiritual
   estate. He is much like a poor man who is ever telling you of his
   wants; he has nothing to help himself with; he is ready to starve. So
   it is with him that is poor in spirit. He is ever complaining of his
   wants, saying, I want a broken heart, a thankful heart. He makes
   himself the most indigent creature. Though he dares not deny the work
   of grace (which were a bearing false witness again the Spirit), yet he
   mourns he has no more grace. This is the difference between an
   hypocrite and a child of God. The hypocrite is ever telling what he
   has. A child of God complains of what he lacks. The one is glad he is
   so good, the other grieves he is so bad. The poor in spirit goes from
   ordinance to ordinance for a supply of his wants; he would fain have
   his stock increased. Try by this if you are poor in spirit. While
   others complain they want children, or they want estates, do you
   complain you want grace? This is a good sign. There is that maketh
   himself poor yet hath great riches' (Proverbs 13:7). Some beggars have
   died rich. The poor in spirit, who have lain all their lives at the
   gate of mercy and have lived upon the alms of free grace, have died
   rich in faith, heirs to a kingdom.

   4 He that is poor in spirit is lowly in heart. Rich men are commonly
   proud and scornful, but the poor are submissive. The poor in spirit
   roll themselves in the dust in the sense of their unworthiness. I abhor
   myself in dust' (Job 42:6). He who is poor in spirit looks at another's
   excellencies and his own infirmities. He denies not only his sins but
   his duties. The more grace he has, the more humble he is, because he
   now sees himself a greater debtor to God. If he can do any duty, he
   acknowledges it is Christ's strength more than his own (Philippians
   4:13). As the ship gets to the haven more by the benefit of the wind
   than the sail, so when a Christian makes any swift progress, it is more
   by the wind of God's Spirit than the sail of his own endeavour. The
   poor in spirit, when he acts most like a saint, confesses himself the
   chief of sinners'. He blushes more at the defect of his graces than
   others do at the excess of their sins. He dares not say he has prayed
   or wept. He lives, yet not he, but Christ lives in him (Galatians
   2:20). He labours, yet not he, but the grace of God (1 Corinthians
   15:10).

   5 He who is poor in spirit is much in prayer. He sees how short he is
   of the standard of holiness, therefore begs for more grace; Lord, more
   faith, more conformity to Christ. A poor man is ever begging. You may
   know by this one that is poor in spirit. He is ever begging for a
   spiritual alms. He knocks at heaven-gate; he sends up sighs; he pours
   out tears; he will not away from the gate till he have his dole. God
   loves a modest boldness in prayer; such shall not be non-suited.

   6 The poor in spirit is content to take Christ upon his own terms. The
   proud sinner will article and indent with Christ. He will have Christ
   and his pleasure, Christ and his covetousness. But he that is poor in
   spirit sees himself lost without Christ, and he is willing to have him
   upon his own terms, a Prince as well as a Saviour: Jesus my Lord'
   (Philippians 3:8). A castle that has long been besieged and is ready to
   be taken will deliver up on any terms to save their lives. He whose
   heart has been a garrison for the devil, and has held out long in
   opposition against Christ, when once God has brought him to poverty of
   spirit, and he sees himself damned without Christ, let God propound
   what articles he will, he will readily subscribe to them. Lord, what
   wilt thou have me to do' (Acts 9:6). He that is poor in spirit will do
   anything that he may have Christ. He will behead his beloved sin. He
   will, with Peter, cast himself upon the water to come to Christ.

   7 He that is poor in spirit is an exalter of free grace. None so
   magnify mercy as the poor in spirit. The poor are very thankful. When
   Paul had tasted mercy, how thankfully does he adore free grace! The
   grace of our Lord was exceeding abundant' (1 Timothy 1:14). It was
   super-exuberant. He sets the crown of his salvation upon the head of
   free grace. As a man that is condemned and has a pardon sent him, how
   greatly he proclaims the goodness and clemency of his prince! So St
   Paul displays free grace in its orient colours. He interlines all his
   epistles with free grace. As a vessel that has been perfumed makes the
   wine taste of it, so St Paul, who was a vessel perfumed with mercy,
   makes all his epistles to taste of this perfume of free grace. They who
   are poor in spirit, bless God for the least crumb that falls from the
   table of free grace. Labour for poverty of spirit. Christ begins with
   this, and we must begin here if ever we be saved. Poverty of spirit is
   the foundation stone on which God lays the superstructure of glory.

   There are four things may persuade Christians to be poor in spirit.

   1 This poverty is your riches. You may have the world's riches, and yet
   be poor. You cannot have this poverty without being made rich. Poverty
   of spirit entitles you to all Christ's riches.

   2 This poverty is your nobility. God looks upon you as persons of
   honour. He that is vile in his own eyes is precious in God's eyes. The
   way to rise is to fall. God esteems the valley highest.

   3 Poverty of spirit sweetly quiets the soul. When a man is brought off
   from himself to rest on Christ, what a blessed calm is in the heart! I
   am poor but my God shall supply all my need' (Philippians 4:19). I am
   unworthy but Christ is worthy. I am indigent, Christ is infinite. Lead
   me to the rock that is higher than I' (Psalm 61:2). A man is safe upon
   a rock. When the soul goes out of itself and centres upon the rock,
   Christ, now it is firmly settled upon its basis. This is the way to
   comfort. You will be wounded in spirit till you come to be poor in
   spirit.

   4 Poverty of spirit paves a causeway for blessedness. Blessed are the
   poor in spirit.' Are you poor in spirit? You are blessed persons. Happy
   for you that ever you were born! If you ask, Wherein does this
   blessedness appear? read the next words, Theirs is the Kingdom of
   Heaven'.
     __________________________________________________________________

5. The poor in spirit are enriched with a kingdom

   Theirs is the kingdom of heaven.

   Matthew 5:3

   Here is high preferment for the saints. They shall be advanced to a
   kingdom. There are some who, aspiring after earthly greatness, talk of
   a temporal reign here, but then God's church on earth would not be
   militant but triumphant. But sure it is the saints shall reign in a
   glorious manner: Theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven.' A kingdom is held
   the acme and top of all worldly felicity, and this honour have all the
   saints'; so says our Saviour, Theirs is the kingdom of heaven.' All
   Christ's subjects are kings. By the kingdom of heaven is meant that
   state of glory which the saints shall enjoy when they shall reign with
   God and the angels for ever; sin, hell and death being fully subdued.
   For the illustration of this I shall show first wherein the saints in
   heaven are like kings.

   Kings have their insignia or regalia, their ensigns of royalty and
   majesty.

   1 Kings have their crowns. So the saints after death have their
   crown-royal. Be thou faithful unto death and I will give thee a crown
   of life' (Revelation 2:10). Believers are not only pardoned but
   crowned. The crown is an ensign of honour. A crown is not for every
   one. It will not fit every head. It is only for kings and persons of
   renown to wear (Psalm 21:3). The crown which the poor in spirit shall
   wear in heaven is an honourable crown. God himself installs them into
   their honour and sets the crown-royal upon their head. And this crown
   that the saints shall wear, which is divinely orient and illustrious,
   exceeds all other.

   (i) It is more pure. Other crowns, though they be made of pure gold,
   yet they are mixed metal; they have their troubles. A crown of gold
   cannot be made without thorns. It has so many vexations belonging to
   it, that it is apt to make the headache. Which made Cyrus say, did men
   but know what cares he sustained under the imperial crown, he thought
   they would not stoop to take it up. But the saints' crown is made
   without crosses. It is not mingled with care of keeping, or fear of
   losing. What Solomon speaks in another sense I may say of the crown of
   glory, It adds no sorrow with it' (Proverbs 10:22). This crown, like
   David's harp, drives away the evil spirit of sorrow and disquiet. There
   can be no grief in heaven any more than there can be joy in hell.

   (ii) This crown of glory does not draw envy to it. David's own son
   envied him and sought to take his crown from his head. A princely crown
   is oftentimes the mark for envy and ambition to shoot at, but the crown
   the saints shall wear is free from envy. One saint shall not envy
   another, because all are crowned, and though one crown may be larger
   than another, yet everyone shall have as big a crown as he is able to
   carry.

   (iii) This is a never-fading crown. Tertullian says that this crown is
   not made out of either roses or gems. Other crowns quickly wear away
   and tumble into the dust: Doth the crown endure to all generations?'
   (Proverbs 27:24). Henry VI was honoured with the crowns of two
   kingdoms, France and England. The first was lost through the faction of
   his nobles; the other was twice plucked from his head. The crown has
   many heirs and successors. The crown is a withering thing. Death is a
   worm that feeds in it; but the crown of glory is immarcescible, it
   fadeth not away' (1 Peter 5:4). It is not like the rose that loses its
   gloss and vernancy. This crown cannot be made to wither, but like the
   flower we call Everlasting, it keeps always fresh and splendent.
   Eternity is a jewel of the saints' crown.

   2 Kings have their Robes. The robe is a garment wherewith Kings are
   arrayed. The King of Israel and the King of Judah sat clothed in their
   robes' (2 Chronicles 18:9). The robe was of scarlet or velvet lined
   with ermine, sometimes of a purple colour, when it was called Purpura,;
   sometimes of an azure brightness. Thus the saints shall have their
   robes. I beheld a great multitude which no man could number of all
   nations and kindreds, clothed in white robes' (Revelation 7:9). The
   saints, robes signify their glory and splendour; white robes denote
   their sanctity. They have no sin to taint or defile their robes. In
   these robes they shall shine as the angels.

   3 Kings have their Sceptres in token of rule and greatness. King
   Ahasuerus held out to Esther the golden sceptre (Esther 5:2); and the
   saints in glory have their sceptre, and palms in their hands'
   (Revelation 7). It was a custom of great conquerors to have palm
   branches in their hand in token of victory. So the saints, those kings
   have palms', an emblem of victory and triumph. They are victors over
   sin and hell. They overcame by the blood of the Lamb' (Revelation
   12:11).

   4 Kings have their Thrones. When Caesar returned from conquering his
   enemies, there were granted to him four triumphs in token of honour,
   and there was set for him a chair of ivory in the senate and a throne
   in the theatre. Thus the saints in heaven returning from their
   victories over sin shall have a chair of state set them more rich than
   ivory or pearl, and a throne of glory (Revelation 3:21). (i) This shall
   be a high throne. It is seated above all the kings and princes of the
   earth. Nay, it is far above all heavens (Ephesians 4). There is the
   airy heaven, which is that space from the earth to the sphere of the
   moon; the starry heaven, the place where are the stars and those
   'superior planets', as the philosophers call them, planets of higher
   elevation, as Saturn, Jupiter, Mars etc.; the empyrean heaven, which is
   called the third heaven' (2 Corinthians 12:2). In this glorious sublime
   place shall the throne of the saints be erected. (ii) It is a safe
   throne. Other thrones are unsafe; they stand tottering. Thou hast set
   them in slippery places' (Psalm 73:18); but the saints' throne is sure.
   He that overcomes shall sit with me upon my throne' (Revelation 3:21).
   The saints shall sit with Christ. He keeps them safe, that no hand of
   violence can pull them from their throne. O ye people of God, think of
   this; though now you may be called to the bar, yet shortly you shall
   sit upon the throne.

   Having shown wherein the saints in glory are like kings, let us see
   wherein the kingdom of heaven excels other kingdoms.

   1 It excels in the Founder and Maker. Other kingdoms have men for their
   builders, but this kingdom has God for its builder (Hebrews 11:10).
   Heaven is said to be made without hands' (2 Corinthians 5:1), to show
   the excellency of it. Neither man nor angel could ever lay stone in
   this building. God erects this kingdom. Its builder and maker is God'.

   2 This kingdom excels in the riches of it. Gold does not so much
   surpass iron as this kingdom does all other riches. The gates are of
   pearl' (Revelation 21:21). And the foundations of the wall of it are
   garnished with all precious stones' (verse 19). It is enough for
   cabinets to have pearl; but were gates of pearl' ever heard of before?
   It is said that Kings shall throw down their crowns and sceptres before
   it (Revelation 4:10), as counting all their glory and riches but dust
   in comparison of it. This kingdom has deity itself to enrich it, and
   these riches are such as cannot be weighed in the balance; neither the
   heart of man can conceive, nor the tongue of angel express.

   3 This kingdom excels in the perfection of it. Other kingdoms are
   defective. They have not all provisions within themselves, nor have
   they all commodities of their own growth, but are forced to traffic
   abroad to supply their wants at home. King Solomon sent for gold to
   Ophir (2 Chronicles 8:18), but there is no defect in the kingdom of
   heaven; here are all delights and rarities to be had. He that
   overcometh shall inherit all things' (Revelation 21:7). Here is beauty,
   wisdom, glory and magnificence. Here is the Tree of Life in the midst
   of this paradise. All things are to be found here but sin and sorrow,
   the absence whereof adds to the fullness of this kingdom.

   4 It excels in security. Other kingdoms fear either foreign invasions
   or intestine divisions. Solomon's kingdom was peaceable awhile but at
   last he had an alarum given him by the enemy (1 Kings 11:11,14). But
   the kingdom of heaven is so impregnable that it fears no hostile
   assaults or inroads. The devils are said to be locked up in chains
   (Jude 6). The saints in heaven shall no more need fear them than a man
   fears that thief's robbings who is hanged up in chains. The gates of
   this celestial kingdom are not shut at all by day' (Revelation 21:25).
   We shut the gates of the city in a time of danger, but the gates of
   that kingdom always stand open to show that there is no fear of the
   approach of an enemy. The kingdom has gates for the magnificence of it,
   but the gates are not shut because of the security of it.

   5 This kingdom excels in its stability. Other kingdoms have vanity
   written upon them. They cease and are changed; though they may have a
   head of gold, yet feet of clay. I will cause the kingdom to cease'
   (Hosea 1:4). Kingdoms have their climacteric year. Where is the glory
   of Athens? the pomp of Troy? What is become of the Assyrian, Grecian,
   Persian monarchy? Those kingdoms are demolished and laid in the dust;
   but the kingdom of heaven has eternity written upon it. It is an
   everlasting kingdom' (2 Peter 1:11). Other kingdoms may be lasting but
   not everlasting. The apostle calls it a kingdom that cannot be shaken'
   (Hebrews 12:28). It is fastened upon a strong basis, the omnipotence of
   God. It runs parallel with eternity. They shall reign for ever and
   ever' (Revelation 22:5).

   I shall next clear the truth of this proposition that the saints shall
   be possessed of this kingdom.

   1 In regard of God's free grace, It is your Father's good pleasure to
   give you the kingdom' (Luke 12:32). It is not any desert in us but free
   grace in God. The papists say we merit the kingdom, but we disclaim the
   title of merit. Heaven is a donative.

   2 There is a price paid. Jesus Christ has shed his blood for it. All
   saints come to the kingdom through blood. Christ's hanging upon the
   cross was to bring us to the crown. As the kingdom of heaven is a gift
   in regard of the Father, so it is a purchase in regard of the Son.

   1 It shows us that religion is no unreasonable thing. God does not cut
   us out work and give no reward. Godliness enthrones us in a kingdom.
   When we hear of the doctrine of repentance, steeping our souls in
   brinish tears for sin; the doctrine of mortification, pulling out the
   right eye, beheading the king-sin; we are ready to think it is hard to
   take down this bitter pill, but here is that in the text may sweeten
   it. There is a kingdom behind, and that will make amends for all. This
   glorious recompense as far exceeds our thoughts as it surpasses our
   defects. No one can say without wrong to God that he is a hard master.
   God gives double pay. He bestows a kingdom upon those that fear him.
   Satan may disparage the ways of God, like those spies that raised an
   ill report of the good land (Numbers 13:32). But will Satan mend your
   wages if you serve him? He gives damnable pay; instead of a kingdom,
   chains of darkness' (Jude 6).

   2 See here the mercy and bounty of God that has prepared a kingdom for
   his people. It is a favour that we poor worms and no men' (Psalm 22:6)
   should be suffered to live. But that worms should be made kings, this
   is divine bounty. It is mercy to pardon us, but it is rich mercy to
   crown us. Behold, what manner of love' is this! Earthly princes may
   bestow great gifts and donatives on their subjects, but they keep the
   kingdom to themselves. Though Pharaoh advanced Joseph to honour and
   gave him a ring from his finger, yet he kept the kingdom to himself.
   Only in the throne will I be greater than thou' (Genesis 41:40); but
   God gives a kingdom to his people, he sets them upon the throne. How
   David admires the goodness of God in bestowing upon him a temporal
   kingdom! Then went king David in, and sat before the Lord and said, Who
   am I, O Lord God! and what is my house, that thou hast brought me
   hitherto?' (2 Samuel 7:18). He wondered that God should take him from
   the sheepfold and set him on the throne! that God should turn his
   shepherd's staff into a sceptre! O then how may the saints admire the
   riches of grace, that God should give them a kingdom above all the
   princes of the earth, nay, far above all heavens! God thinks nothing
   too good for his children. We many times think much of a tear, a
   prayer, or to sacrifice a sin for him, but he does not think much to
   bestow a kingdom upon us. How will the saints read over the lectures of
   free grace in heaven and trumpet forth the praises of that God who has
   crowned them with loving-kindness!

   3 It shows us that Christianity is no disgraceful thing. Wise men
   measure things by the end. What is the end of godliness? It brings a
   kingdom. A man's sin brings him to shame (Proverbs 13:5). What fruit
   had ye in those things whereof you are now ashamed? (Romans 6:21). But
   religion brings to honour (Proverbs 4:8). It brings a man to a throne,
   a crown, it ends in glory. It is the sinner's folly to reproach a
   saint. It is just as if Shimei had reproached David when he was going
   to be made king. It is a saint's wisdom to contemn a reproach. Say as
   David when he danced before the ark, I will yet be more vile' (2 Samuel
   6:22). If to pray and hear and serve my God be to be vile, I will yet
   be more vile'. This is my excellency, my glory. I am doing now that
   which will bring me to a kingdom. O think it no disgrace to be a
   Christian! I speak it chiefly to you who are entering upon the ways of
   God. Perhaps you may meet with such as will reproach and censure you.
   Bind their reproaches as a crown about your head. Despise their censure
   as much as their praise. Remember there is a kingdom entailed upon
   godliness. Sin draws hell after it; grace draws a crown after it.

   4 See here that which may make the people of God long for death. Then
   they shall enter upon their kingdom. Indeed the wicked may fear death.
   It will not lead them to a kingdom but a prison. Hell is the gaol where
   they must lie rotting for ever with the devil and his angels. To every
   Christless person death is the king of terror; but the godly may long
   for death. It will raise them to a kingdom. When Scipio's father had
   told him of that glory the soul should be invested with in a state of
   immortality, why then, says Scipio, do I tarry thus long upon the
   earth? Why do I not hasten to die? Believers are not perfectly happy
   till death. When Croesus asked Solon whom he thought happy, he told him
   one Tellus, a man that was dead. A Christian at death shall be
   completely installed into his honour. The anointing oil shall be poured
   on him, and the crown-royal set upon his head. The Thracians, in their
   funerals, used music. The heathens (as Theocritus' observes) had their
   funeral banquet, because of that felicity which they supposed the
   parties deceased were entered into. The saints are now heirs of the
   kingdom' (James 2:5). Does not the heir desire to be crowned?

   Truly there is enough to wean us and make us willing to be gone from
   hence. The saints eat ashes like bread'. They are here in a suffering
   condition. Our bones are scattered at the grave's mouth, as when one
   cutteth and cleaveth wood upon the earth' (Psalm 141:7). When a man
   hews and cuts a tree the chips fly up and down; here and there a chip.
   So here a saint wounded, there a saint massacred; our bones fly like
   chips up and down. For thy sake we are killed all the day long' (Romans
   8:36). But there is a kingdom a-coming; when the body is buried the
   soul is crowned. Who would not be willing to sail in a storm if he were
   sure to be crowned as soon as he came at the shore? How is it that the
   godly look so ghastly at thoughts of death, as if they were rather
   going to their execution than their coronation? Though we should be
   willing to stay here awhile to do service, yet we should with St Paul,
   desire to be dissolved and be with Christ'. The day of a believer's
   dissolution is the day of his inauguration.

   But how shall we know that this glorious kingdom shall be settled upon
   us at death?

   1 If God has set up his kingdom within us; The kingdom of God is within
   you' (Luke 17:21). By the kingdom of God there is meant the kingdom of
   grace in the heart. Grace may be compared to a kingdom. It sways the
   sceptre; it gives out laws. There is the law of love. Grace beats down
   the devil's garrisons. It brings the heart into a sweet subjection to
   Christ. Now is this kingdom of grace set up in your heart? Do you rule
   over your sins? Can you bind those kings in chains? (Psalms 149:8). Are
   you a king over your pride, passion and unbelief? Is the kingdom of God
   within you? While others aspire after earthly greatness and labour for
   a kingdom without them, do you labour for a kingdom within you?
   Certainly if the kingdom of grace be in your heart, you shall have the
   kingdom of glory. If God's kingdom enter into you, you shall enter into
   his kingdom. But let not that man ever think to reign in glory, who
   lives a slave to his lusts.

   2 If you are a believer, you will go to this blessed kingdom: Rich in
   faith, heirs of the kingdom' (James 2:5). Faith is an heroic act of the
   soul. It makes an holy adventure on God, by a promise. This is the
   crowning grace. Faith puts us into Christ, and our title to the crown
   comes in by Christ. By faith we are born of God, and so we become
   children of the blood-royal. By faith our hearts are purified (Acts
   15:9, 10), and we are made fit for a kingdom; rich in faith, heirs of
   the kingdom'. Faith paves a causeway to heaven. Believers die heirs to
   the crown.

   3 He that has a noble, kingly spirit shall go to the heavenly kingdom.
   Set your affection on things above' (Colossians 3:2). Do you live in
   the world, above the world? The eagle does not catch flies, she soars
   aloft in the air. Do you pant after glory and immortality? Do you have
   a brave majestic spirit, an heavenly ambition? Do you mind the favour
   of God, the peace of Sion, the salvation of your soul? Do you abhor
   that which is sordid and below you? Alexander would not exercise at the
   Olympic games. Can you trample upon all sublunary things? Is heaven in
   your eye, and Christ in your heart and the world under your feet? He
   who has such a kingly spirit that looks no lower than a crown, he shall
   dwell on high', and have his throne mounted far above all heavens.

   The exhortation has a double aspect.

   I It looks towards the wicked. Is there a kingdom to be had, a kingdom
   so enamelled and bespangled with glory? Oh then, do not by your folly
   make yourselves incapable of this preferment. Do not for the satisfying
   of a base lust forfeit a kingdom. Do not drink away a kingdom. Do not
   for the lap of pleasure lose the crown of life. If men, before they
   committed a sin, would but sit down and rationally consider whether the
   present gain and sweetness in sin would countervail the loss of a
   kingdom, I believe it would put them into a cold sweat, and give some
   check to their unbridled affections. Jacob took Esau by the heel. Look
   not upon the smiling face of sin, but take it by the heel'. Look at the
   end of it. It will deprive you of a kingdom, and can anything make
   amends for that loss? O, is it not madness, for the unfruitful works of
   darkness (Ephesians 5:11), to lose a kingdom? How will the devil at the
   last day reproach and laugh at men, that they should be so stupidly
   sottish as for a rattle to forgo a crown! Like those Indians who for
   pictures and glass beads will part with their gold. Surely it will much
   contribute to the vexation of the damned to think how foolishly they
   missed of a kingdom.

   2 The exhortation looks toward the godly, and it exhorts to two things.

   (i) Is there a kingdom in reversion? Then let this be a motive to duty.
   Do all the service you can for God while you live. Spend and be spent.'
   The reward is honourable. The thoughts of a kingdom should add wings to
   prayer, and fire to zeal. What honour and dignity has been done to
   Mordecai?' says King Ahasuerus (Esther 6:3). Inquire what has been done
   for God? What love have you shown to his name? What zeal for his glory?
   Where is the head of that Goliath lust you have slain for his sake?
   Methinks we should sometimes go aside into our closets and weep to
   consider how little work we have done for God. What a vast
   disproportion is there between our service and our reward! What is all
   our weeping and fasting compared to a kingdom! Oh improve all your
   interest for God. Make seasons of grace, opportunities for service.

   And that you may act more vigorously for God, know and be assured, the
   more work you do, the more glory you shall have. Every saint shall have
   a kingdom, but the more service any man does for God, the greater will
   be his kingdom. There are degrees of glory which I will prove thus:
   First, because there are degrees of torment in hell. They shall receive
   greater damnation' (Luke 20:47). They who make religion a cloak for
   their sin, shall have an hotter place in hell. Now if there be degrees
   of torment in hell, then by the rule of contraries there are degrees of
   glory in the kingdom of heaven. Again, seeing God in his free grace
   rewards men according to their works, therefore, the more service they
   do the greater shall their reward be. Behold I come quickly and my
   reward is with me, to give every man according as his work shall be'
   (Revelation 22:12). He that has done more shall receive more. He whose
   pound gained ten, was made ruler over ten cities (Luke 19:16, 17). This
   may very much excite to eminency in religion. The more the lamp of your
   grace shines, the more you shall shine in the heavenly orb. Would you
   have your crown brighter, your kingdom larger, your palm-branches more
   flourishing? Be Christians of degrees. Do much work in a little time.
   While you are laying out, God is laying up. The more glory you bring to
   God, the more glory you shall have from God.

   (ii) Walk worthy of this kingdom. That ye would walk worthy of God who
   hath called you to his kingdom' (1 Thessalonians 2:12). Live as kings.
   Let the majesty of holiness appear in your faces. Those who looked on
   Stephen, 'saw his face as it had been the face of an angel (Acts 6:15).
   A kind of angelic brightness was seen in his visage. When we shine in
   zeal, humility, gravity, this beautifies and honours us in the eyes of
   others, and makes us look as those who are heirs apparent to a crown.

   Here is comfort to the people of God in case of poverty. God has
   provided them a kingdom: Theirs is the kingdom of heaven'. A child of
   God is often so low in the world that he has not a foot of land to
   inherit. He is poor in purse as well as in spirit. But here is a
   fountain of consolation opened. The poorest saint who has lost all his
   golden fleece is heir to a kingdom, a kingdom which excels all the
   kingdoms and principalities of the world, more than pearl or diamond
   excels brass. It is peerless and endless. The hope of a kingdom, says
   Basil, should carry a Christian with courage and cheerfulness through
   all his afflictions. And it is a saying of Luther, The sea of God's
   mercy, overflowing in spiritual blessings, should drown all the
   sufferings of this life'. What though you go now in rags? You shall
   have your white robes. What though you are fed as Daniel with pulse and
   have coarser fare? You shall feast it when you come into the kingdom.
   Here you drink the water of tears, but shortly you shall drink the wine
   of paradise. Be comforted with the thoughts of a kingdom.
     __________________________________________________________________

6. Blessed are they that mourn

   Blessed are they that mourn.

   Matthew 5:4

   Here are eight steps leading to true blessedness. They may be compared
   to Jacob's Ladder, the top whereof reached to heaven. We have already
   gone over one step, and now let us proceed to the second: Blessed are
   they that mourn'. We must go through the valley of tears to paradise.
   Mourning were a sad and unpleasant subject to treat on, were it not
   that it has blessedness going before, and comfort coming after.
   Mourning is put here for repentance. It implies both sorrow, which is
   the cloud, and tears which are the rain distilling in this golden
   shower; God comes down to us.

   The words fall into two parts, first, an assertion that mourners are
   blessed persons; second, a reason, because they shall be comforted.

   1 I begin with the first, the assertion; mourners are blessed persons.
   Blessed are ye that weep now' (Luke 6:21). Though the saints' tears are
   bitter tears, yet they are blessed tears. But will all mourning entitle
   a man to blessedness? No, there is a twofold mourning which is far from
   making one blessed. There is a carnal mourning. There is a diabolical
   mourning.

   There is a carnal mourning when we lament outward losses. In Rama there
   was a voice heard, lamentation and weeping, and great mourning; Rachel
   weeping for her children . . .' (Matthew 2:18). There are abundance of
   these tears shed. We have many can mourn over a dead child, that cannot
   mourn over a crucified Saviour. Worldly sorrow hastens our funerals.
   The sorrow of the world worketh death' (2 Corinthians 7:10).

   2 There is a diabolical mourning and that is twofold: When a man mourns
   that he cannot satisfy his impure lust, this is like the devil, whose
   greatest torture is that he can be no more wicked. Thus Ammon mourned
   and was sick, till he defiled his sister Tamar (2 Samuel 13:2). Thus
   Ahab mourned for Naboth's vineyard: He laid him down upon his bed, and
   turned away his face, and would eat no bread' (1 Kings 21:4). This was
   a devilish mourning.

   Again, when men are sorry for the good which they have done. Pharaoh
   grieved that he had let the children of Israel go' (Exodus 14:5). Many
   are so devilish that they are troubled they have prayed so much and
   have heard so many sermons. They repent of their repentance; but if we
   repent of the good which is past, God will not repent of the evil which
   is to come.

   To illustrate this point of holy mourning, I shall show you what is the
   adequate object of it. There are two objects of spiritual mourning, sin
   and misery. Sin, and that twofold, our own sin; the sin of others.

   Our own sin. Sin must have tears. While we carry the fire of sin about
   us, we must carry the water of tears to quench it (Ezekiel 7:16). They
   are not blessed (says Chrysostom) who mourn for the dead, but rather
   those who mourn for sin; and indeed it is with good reason we mourn for
   sin, if we consider the guilt of sin, which binds over to wrath. Will
   not a guilty person weep, who is to be bound over to the sessions?
   Every sinner is to be tried for his life and is sure to be cast if
   mercy does not become an advocate for him.

   The pollution of sin. Sin is a plague spot, and will you not labour to
   wash away this spot with your tears? Sin makes a man worse than a toad
   or serpent. The serpent has nothing but what God has put into it.
   Poison is medicinable (capable of being used as a medicine); but the
   sinner has that which the devil has put into him. Why hath Satan filled
   thine heart to lie to the Holy Ghost?' (Acts 5:3). What a strange
   metamorphosis has sin made! The soul, which was once of an azure
   brightness, sin has made of a sable colour We have in our hearts the
   seed of the unpardonable sin. We have the seed of all those sins for
   which the damned are now tormented. And shall we not mourn? He that
   does not mourn has surely lost the use of his reason. But every
   mourning for sin is not sufficient to entitle a man to blessedness. I
   shall show what is not the right gospel-mourning for sin, and what is
   the right gospel-mourning for sin.

   What is not the right gospel-mourning for sin? There is a fivefold
   mourning which is false and spurious.

   A despairing kind of mourning. Such was Judas' mourning. He saw his
   sin, he was sorry, he made confession, he justifies Christ, he makes
   restitution (Matthew 27). Judas, who is in hell, did more than many
   nowadays. He confessed his sin. He did not plead necessity or good
   intentions, but he makes an open acknowledgement of his sin. I have
   sinned'. Judas made restitution. His conscience told him he came
   wickedly by the money. It was the price of blood', and he brought again
   the thirty pieces of silver to the chief priests' (Matthew 27:3). But
   how many are there who invade the rights and possessions of others, but
   not a word of restitution! Judas was more honest than they are. Well,
   wherein was Judas' sorrow blameworthy? It was a mourning joined with
   despair. He thought his wound broader than the plaster. He drowned
   himself in tears. His was not repentance unto life (Acts 11:18), but
   rather unto death.

   An hypocritical mourning. The heart is very deceitful. It can betray as
   well by a tear as by a kiss. Saul looks like a mourner, and as he was
   sometimes among the prophets' (1 Samuel 10:12) So he seemed to be among
   the penitents. And Saul said unto Samuel, I have sinned, for I have
   transgressed the commandment of the Lord' (1 Samuel 15:24). Saul played
   the hypocrite in his mourning, for he did not take shame to him self,
   but he did rather take honour to himself: honour me before the elders
   of my people' (verse 30). He pared and minced his sin that it might
   appear lesser, he laid his sin upon the people, because I feared the
   people' (verse 24). They would have me fly upon the spoil, and I dare
   do no other. A true mourner labours to draw out sin in its bloody
   colours, and accent it with all its killing aggravations, that he may
   be deeply humbled before the Lord. Our iniquities are increased over
   our head, and our trespass is grown up unto the heavens' (Ezra 9:6).
   The true penitent labours to make the worst of his sin. Saul labours to
   make the best of sin; like a patient that makes the best of his
   disease, lest the physician should prescribe him too sharp physic. How
   easy is it for a man to put a cheat upon his own soul, and by hypocrisy
   to sweep himself into hell!

   A forced mourning. When tears are pumped out by God's judgements, these
   are like the tears of a man that has the stone, or that lies upon the
   rack. Such was Cain's mourning. My punishment is greater than I can
   bear' (Genesis 4:13). His punishment troubled him more than his sin; to
   mourn only for fear of hell is like a thief that weeps for the penalty
   rather than the offence. The tears of the wicked are forced by the fire
   of affliction.

   An extrinsic mourning; when sorrow lies only on the outside. They
   disfigure their faces' (Matthew 6:16). The eye is tender, but the heart
   is hard. Such was Ahab's mourning. He rent his clothes and put
   sackcloth on his flesh, and went softly' (1 Kings 21:27). His clothes
   were rent, but his heart was not rent. He had sackcloth but no sorrow.
   He hung down his head like a bulrush, but his heart was like an
   adamant. There are many who may be compared to weeping marbles, they
   are both watery and flinty.

   A vain fruitless mourning. Some will shed a few tears, but are as bad
   as ever. They will cozen and be unclean. Such a kind of mourning there
   is in hell. The damned weep but they blaspheme.

   What is the right gospel-mourning? That mourning which will entitle a
   man to blessedness has these qualifications:

   It is spontaneous and free. It must come as water out of a spring, not
   as fire out of a flint. Tears for sin must be like the myrrh which
   drops from the tree freely without cutting or forcing. Mary Magdalene's
   repentance was voluntary. She stood weeping' (Luke 7). She came to
   Christ with ointment in her hand, with love in her heart, with tears in
   her eyes. God is for a freewill offering. He does not love to be put to
   distrain.

   Gospel-mourning is spiritual; that is, when we mourn for sin more than
   suffering. Pharaoh says, Take away the plague. He never thought of the
   plague of his heart. A sinner mourns because judgement follows at the
   heels of sin, but David cries out, My sin is ever before me' (Psalm
   51:3). God had threatened that the sword should ride in circuit in his
   family, but David does not say, The sword is ever before me', but My
   sin is ever before me'. The offence against God troubled him. He
   grieved more for the treason than the bloody axe. Thus the penitent
   prodigal, I have sinned against heaven, and before thee' (Luke
   15:18,21). He does not say, I am almost starved among the husks', but I
   have offended my father'. In particular, our mourning for sin, if it be
   spiritual, must be under this threefold notion:

   1 We must mourn for sin as it is an act of hostility and enmity. Sin
   not only makes us unlike God, but contrary to God: They have walked
   contrary unto me' (Leviticus 26:40). Sin affronts and resists the Holy
   Ghost (Acts 7:51). Sin is contrary to God's nature; God is holy; sin is
   an impure thing. Sin is contrary to his will. If God be of one mind,
   sin is of another. Sin does all it can to spite God. The Hebrew word
   for 'sin' signifies rebellion'. A sinner fights against God (Acts
   5:39). Now when we mourn for sin as it is a walking Antipodes' to
   heaven, this is a gospel-mourning. Nature will not bear contraries.

   2 We must mourn for sin as it is a piece of the highest ingratitude. It
   is a kicking against the breasts of mercy. God sends his Son to redeem
   us, his Spirit to comfort us. We sin against the blood of Christ, the
   grace of the Spirit and shall we not mourn? We complain of the
   unkindness of others, and shall we not lay to heart our own unkindness
   against God? Caesar took it unkindly that his son, Brutus, should stab
   him -- and thou, my son!' May not the Lord say to us, These wounds I
   have received in the house of my friend!' (Zechariah 13:6). Israel took
   their jewels and earrings and made a golden calf of them. The sinner
   takes the jewels of God's mercies and makes use of them to sin.
   Ingratitude dyes a sin in grain, hence they are called crimson sins'
   (Isaiah 1:18). Sins against gospel-love are worse in some sense than
   the sins of the devils, for they never had an offer of grace tendered
   to them. The devil sinned though constituted in innocence, I indeed
   when restored. He continued in wickedness by reprobation of God, I
   indeed when recalled by God. He was hardened by punishment, I indeed by
   (divine) gentleness. And thus both of us went against God, the one by
   not seeking to know himself, I indeed against the one who died for me.
   Behold his (the devil's) dreadful likeness, but in many things I see
   myself even more dreadful' (Anselm: Concerning the fall of the Devil.)
   Now when we mourn for sin as it has its accent of ingratitude upon it,
   this is an evangelical mourning.

   We must mourn for sin as it is a privation; it keeps good things from
   us; it hinders our communion with God. Mary wept for Christ's absence.
   They have taken away my Lord' (John 20:13). So our sins have taken away
   our Lord. They have deprived us of his sweet presence. Will not he
   grieve who has lost a rich jewel? When we mourn for sin under this
   notion, as it makes the Sun of Righteousness withdraw from our horizon;
   when we mourn not so much that peace is gone, and trading is gone, but
   God is gone, My beloved had withdrawn himself' (Canticles 5:6); this is
   an holy mourning. The mourning for the loss of God's favour is the best
   way to regain his favour. If you have lost a friend, all your weeping
   will not fetch him again, but if you have lost God's presence, your
   mourning will bring your God again.

   Gospel-mourning sends the soul to God. When the prodigal son repented,
   he went to his father. I will arise and go to my father' (Luke 15:18).
   Jacob wept and prayed (Hosea 12:4). The people of Israel wept and
   offered sacrifice (Judges 2:4,5). Gospel-mourning puts a man upon duty.
   The reason is, that in true sorrow there is a mixture of hope, and hope
   puts the soul upon the use of means. That mourning which like the
   flaming sword' keeps the soul from approaching to God, and beats it off
   from duty, is a sinful mourning. It is a sorrow hatched in hell. Such
   was Saul's grief, which drove him to the witch of Endor (1 Samuel
   28:7). Evangelical mourning is a spur to prayer. The child who weeps
   for offending his father goes to his presence and will not leave till
   his father be reconciled to him. Absalom could not be quiet till he had
   seen the king's face' (2 Samuel 14:32, 33).

   Gospel-mourning is for sin in particular. The deceitful man is occupied
   with generalities. It is with a true penitent as it is with a wounded
   man. He comes to the surgeon and shows him all his wounds. Here I was
   cut with the sword; here I was shot with a bullet. So a true penitent
   bewails all his particular sins. We have served Baalim' (Judges 10:10).
   They mourned for their idolatry. And David lays his fingers upon the
   sore and points to that very sin that troubled him (Psalm 51:4). I have
   done this evil. He means his blood-guiltiness. A wicked man will say he
   is a sinner, but a child of God says, I have done this evil. Peter wept
   for that particular sin of denying Christ. Clemens Alexandrinus says,
   he never heard a cock crow, but he fell a-weeping. There must be a
   particular repentance before we have a general pardon.

   Gospel tears must drop from the eye of faith. The father of the child
   cried out with tears, Lord, I believe' (Mark 9:24). Our disease must
   make us mourn, but when we look up to our Physician, who has made a
   plaister of his own blood, we must not mourn without hope. Believing
   tears are precious. When the clouds of sorrow have overcast the soul,
   some sunshine of faith must break forth. The soul will be swallowed up
   of sorrow, it will be drowned in tears, if faith be not the bladder to
   keep it up from sinking. Though our tears drop to the earth, our faith
   must reach heaven. After the greatest rain, faith must appear as the
   rainbow in the cloud. The tears of faith are bottled as precious wine
   (Psalm 56:8).

   Gospel-mourning is joined with self-loathing. The sinner admires
   himself. The penitent loathes himself. Ye shall loath yourselves in
   your own sight for all your evils' (Ezekiel 20:43). A true penitent is
   troubled not only for the shameful consequence of sin, but for the
   loathsome nature of sin; not only the sting of sin but the deformed
   face. How did the leper loathe himself! (Leviticus 13:45). The Hebrew
   doctors say, the leper pronounced unclean was to put a covering on his
   upper lip, both as a mourner and in token of shame. The true mourner
   cries out, O these impure eyes! this heart which is a conclave of
   wickedness! He not only leaves sin but loathes sin. He that is fallen
   in the dirt loathes himself (Hosea 14:1).

   Gospel-mourning must be purifying. Our tears must make us more holy. We
   must so weep for sin, as to weep out sin. Our tears must drown our
   sins. We must not only mourn but turn. Turn to me with weeping' (Joel
   2:12). What is it to have a watery eye and a whorish heart? It is
   foolish to say it is day, when the air is full of darkness; so to say
   you repent, when you draw dark shadows in your life. It is an excellent
   saying of Augustine, He truly bewails the sins he has committed, who
   never commits the sins he has bewailed'. True mourning is like the
   water of jealousy' (Numbers 5:12-22). It makes the thigh of sin to rot.
   Thou breakest the heads of the dragons in the waters' (Psalm 74:14).
   The heads of our sins, these dragons, are broken in the waters of true
   repentance. True tears are cleansing. They are like a flood that
   carries away all the rubbish of our sins with it. The waters of holy
   mourning are like the river Jordan wherein Naaman washed and was
   cleansed of his leprosy. It is reported that there is a river in Sicily
   where, if the blackest sheep are bathed, they become white; so, though
   our sins be as scarlet, yet by washing in this river of repentance,
   they become white as snow. Naturalists say of the serpent, before it
   goes to drink it vomits out its poison. In this be wise as serpents'.
   Before you think to drink down the sweet cordials of the promises, cast
   up the poison that lies at your heart. Do not only mourn for sin, but
   break from sin.

   Gospel-mourning must be joined with hatred of sin. What indignation!'
   (2 Corinthians 7:11). We must not only abstain from sin, but abhor sin.
   The dove hates the least feather of the hawk. A true mourner hates the
   least motion to sin. A true mourner is a sin-hater. Amnon hated Tamar
   more than ever he loved her (2 Samuel 13:15). To be a sin-hater implies
   two things: first, to look upon sin as the most deadly evil, a
   complicated evil. It looks more ghastly than death or hell. Second, to
   be implacably incensed against it. A sin-hater will never admit of any
   terms of peace. The war between him and sin is like the war between
   Rehoboam and Jeroboam. There was war between Rehoboam and Jeroboam all
   their days' (1 Kings 14:30). Anger may be reconciled. Hatred cannot.
   True mourning begins in the love of God, and ends in the hatred of sin.

   Gospel-mourning in some cases is joined with restitution. It is as well
   a sin to violate the name as the chastity of another. If we have
   eclipsed the good name of others, we are bound to ask them for
   forgiveness. If we have wronged them in their estate by unjust,
   fraudulent dealing, we must make them some compensation. Thus
   Zacchaeus, If I have taken anything from any man by false accusation, I
   restore him fourfold' (Luke 19:8), according to the law of Exodus 22:1.
   St James bids us not only look to the heart but the hand: Cleanse your
   hands, ye sinners, and purify your hearts' (James 4:8). If you have
   wronged another, cleanse your hands by restitution. Be assured, without
   restitution, no remission.

   Gospel-mourning must be a speedy mourning. We must take heed of
   adjourning our repentance, and putting it off till death. As David
   said, I will pay my vows now' (Psalm 116:18), so should a Christian
   say, I will mourn for sin now. Blessed are ye that weep now' (Luke
   6:21). As Popillius, the Roman Legate, when he was sent to Antiochus
   (Epiphanes) the king, made a circle round about the king and bade him
   make his answer before he went out of that circle, so God has encircled
   us in the compass of a little time, and charges us immediately to
   bewail our sins. Now God calleth all men everywhere to repent' (Acts
   17:30). We know not whether we may have another day granted us. Oh let
   us not put off our mourning for sin till the making of our will. Do not
   think holy mourning is only a deathbed duty. You may seek the blessing
   with tears, as Esau when it is too late. During tomorrow?, says
   Augustine. How long shall I say that I will repent tomorrow? Why not at
   this instant? Delay brings danger'. Caesar's deferring to read his
   letter before he went to the Senate-house, cost him his life. The true
   mourner makes haste to meet an angry God, as Jacob did his brother; and
   the present he sends before is the sacrifice of tears.

   Gospel-mourning for sin is constant. There are some who at a sermon
   will shed a few tears, but this land-flood is soon dried up. The
   hypocrite's sorrow is like a vein opened and presently stopped. The
   Hebrew word for eye' signifies also a fountain', to show that the eye
   must run like a fountain for sin and not cease; but it must not be like
   the Libyan fountain of the sun which the ancients speak of; in the
   morning the water is hot, at midday cold. The waters of repentance must
   not overflow with more heat in the morning, at the first hearing of the
   gospel, and at midday, in the midst of health and prosperity, grow cold
   and be ready to freeze. No, it must be a daily weeping. As Paul said, I
   die daily' (1 Corinthians 15:31), so a Christian should say, I mourn
   daily'. Therefore keep open an issue of godly sorrow, and be sure it be
   not stopped till death. Let not the apple of thine eye cease'
   (Lamentations 2:18). It is reported of holy John Bradford that scarce a
   day passed him wherein he did not shed some tears for sin. Daily
   mourning is a good antidote against backsliding. I have read of one
   that had an epilepsy, or falling sickness, and being dipped in
   seawater, was cured. The washing of our souls daily in the brinish
   waters of repentance is the best way both to prevent and cure the
   falling into relapses.

   Even God's own children must mourn after pardon; for God, in pardoning,
   does not pardon at one instant sins past and future; but as repentance
   is renewed, so pardon is renewed. Should God by one act pardon sins
   future as well as past, this would make void part of Christ's office.
   What need were there of his intercession, if sin should be pardoned
   before it be committed? There are sins in the godly of daily incursion,
   which must be mourned for. Though sin be pardoned, still it rebels;
   though it be covered, it is not cured (Romans 7:23). There is that in
   the best Christian which is contrary to God. There is that in him which
   deserves hell, and shall he not mourn? A ship that is always leaking
   must have the water continually pumped out. While the soul leaks by
   sin, we must be still pumping at the leak by repentance. Think not, O
   Christian, that your sins are washed away only by Christ's blood, but
   by water and blood. The brazen laver (Exodus 30:18) that the people of
   Israel were to wash in might be a fit emblem of this spiritual laver,
   tears and blood; and when holy mourning is thus qualified, this is that
   'sorrowing after a godly sort' (2 Corinthians 7:11), which makes a
   Christian eternally blessed.

   As we must mourn for our own sins, so we must lay to heart the sins of
   others. The poets feign that Biblis was turned into a fountain. Thus we
   should wish with Jeremiah, that our eyes were a fountain of tears, that
   we might weep day and night for the iniquity of the times. Our blessed
   Saviour mourned for the sins of the Jews: Being grieved for the
   hardness' (or brawniness) of their hearts' (Mark 3:5). And holy David,
   looking upon the sins of the wicked, his heart was turned into a
   spring, and his eyes into rivers. Rivers of tears run down mine eyes,
   because they keep not thy law' (Psalm 119:136). Lot's righteous soul
   was vexed with the unclean conversation of the wicked' (2 Peter 2:7).
   Lot took the sins of Sodom and made spears of them to pierce his own
   soul. Cyprian says that in the primitive times, when a virgin who vowed
   herself to religion had defiled her chastity, shame and grief filled
   the whole face of the congregation.

   Have not we cause to mourn for the sins of others? The whole axle-tree
   of the nation is ready to break under the weight of sin. What an
   inundation of wickedness is there amongst us? Mourn for the hypocrisy
   of the times. Jehu says Come, see my zeal for the Lord', but it was
   zeal for the throne (2 Kings 10:16). This is the hypocrisy of some.
   They entitle God to whatever they do. They make bold with God to use
   his name to their wickedness; as if a thief should pretend the king's
   warrant for his robbery. They build up Sion with blood; the heads
   thereof judge for reward; yet will they lean upon the Lord and say, Is
   not the Lord among us?' (Micah 3:10, 11). Many with a religious kiss
   smite the gospel under the fifth rib. Could not Ahab be content to kill
   and take possession, but must he usher it in with religion, and make
   fasting a preface to his murder? (1 Kings 21:12). The white devil is
   worst. A burning torch in the hand of a ghost is most affrighting. To
   hear the name of God in the mouths of scandalous hypocrites is enough
   to affright others from the profession of religion.

   Mourn for the errors and blasphemies of the nation. There is now a free
   trade of error. Toleration gives men a patent to sin. What cursed
   opinion that has been long ago buried in the church, but is now dug out
   of the grave, and by some worshipped! England is grown as wanton in her
   religion, as she is antic in her fashions. The Jesuits' Exchange is
   open, and every one almost is for an opinion of the newest cut. Did
   men's faces alter as fast as their judgements, we should not know them.

   Mourn for covenant violation. This sin is a flying roll against
   England. Breach of covenant is spiritual harlotry, and for this God may
   name us Lo-ammi', and give us a bill of divorce (Hosea 1:9).

   Mourn for the pride of the nation. Our condition is low, but our hearts
   are high. Mourn for the profaneness of the land. England is like that
   man in the gospel who had a spirit of an unclean devil' (Luke 4:33).
   Mourn for the removing of landmarks (Deuteronomy 27:17). Mourn for the
   contempt offered to magistracy, the spitting in the face of authority.
   Mourn that there are so few mourners. Surely if we mourn not for the
   sins of others, it is to be feared that we are not sensible of our own
   sins. God looks upon us as guilty of those sins in others which we do
   not lament. Our tears may help to quench God's wrath.

   The saints are members of the body mystical as well as political,
   therefore they must be sensible of the injuries of God's church. We
   wept when we remembered Sion' (Psalm 137:1). The people of Israel,
   being debarred from the place of public worship, sat by the rivers
   weeping. They laid aside all their musical instruments. We hanged our
   harps upon the willows' (verse 2). We were as far from joy as those
   willows were from fruit. How shall we sing the Lord's song in a strange
   land?' (verse 4). We were fitter to weep than to sing. The sound of
   song is not agreeable to mourning.

   When we consider the miseries of many Christians in Germany, the
   Dukedom of Savoy, and other foreign parts, who have been driven from
   their habitations because they would not desert the Protestant and
   espouse the Popish religion; when instead of a Bible, a crucifix;
   instead of prayers, mass; instead of going to church, they should go on
   pilgrimage to some saint or relic. When we consider these things, our
   eyes should run down. Mourn to see God's church a bleeding vine. Mourn
   to see Christ's spouse with garments rolled in blood'.

   Methinks I hear England's passing bell go. Let us shed some tears over
   dying England. Let us bewail our intestine divisions. England's
   divisions have been fatal. They brought in the Saxons, Danes, Normans.
   If a kingdom divided cannot stand', how do we stand but by a miracle of
   free grace? Truth is fallen and peace is fled. England's fine coat of
   peace is torn and, like Joseph's coat, dipped in blood. Peace is the
   glory of a nation. Some observe, if the top of the beech tree be taken
   off, the whole tree withers. Peace is the apex and top of all earthly
   blessings. This top being cut off, we may truly say the body of the
   whole nation begins to wither apace.

   Mourn for the oppressions of England. The people of this land have laid
   out their money only to buy mourning.

   Though we must always keep open the issue of godly sorrow, yet there
   are some seasons wherein our tears should overflow, as the water
   sometimes rises higher. There are three special seasons of
   extraordinary mourning, when it should be as it were high-water in the
   soul:

   1 When there are tokens of God's wrath breaking forth in the nation.
   England has been under God's black rod these many years. The Lord has
   drawn his sword and it is not yet put up. O that our tears may blunt
   the edge of this sword! When it is a time of treading down, now is a
   time of breaking up the fallow ground of our hearts. Therefore said I,
   look away from me, I will weep bitterly for it is a time of treading
   down' (Isaiah 22:4, 5). A day of darkness and of gloominess, a day of
   clouds . . . therefore turn ye even to me with weeping and with
   mourning' (Joel 2:2, 12). Rain follows thunder. When God thunders in a
   nation by his judgements, now the showers of tears must distil. When
   God smites upon our back, we must 'smite upon our thigh' (Jeremiah
   31:19). When God seems to stand upon the threshold of the temple'
   (Ezekiel 10:4), as if he were ready to take his wings and fly, then is
   it a time to lie weeping between the porch and the altar'. If the Lord
   seems to be packing up and carrying away his gospel, it is now high
   time to mourn, that by our tears possibly his repentings may be
   kindled' (Hosea 11:8).

   2 Before the performing solemn duties of God's worship, as fasting or
   receiving the Lord's Supper. Christian, are you about to seek God in an
   extraordinary manner? Seek him sorrowing' (Luke 2:48). Would you have
   the smiles of God's face, the kisses of his lips? Set open all the
   springs of mourning, and then God will draw nigh to you in an ordinance
   and say, Here I am' (Isaiah 58:9). When Jacob wept, then he found God
   in Bethel' (Hosea 12:4). He called the name of the place Peniel, for
   (says he) I have seen God face to face' (Genesis 32:30). Give Christ
   the wine of your tears to drink, and in the sacrament he will give you
   the wine of his blood to drink.

   3 After scandalous relapses. Though I will not say with Novatus that
   there is no mercy for sins of recidivation or relapse, yet I say there
   is no mercy without bitter mourning. Scandalous sins reflect dishonour
   upon religion (2 Samuel 12:14). Therefore now our cheeks should be
   covered with blushing, and our eyes bedewed with tears. Peter, after
   his denying Christ, wept bitterly. Christian, has God given you over to
   any enormous sin as a just reward of your pride and security? Go into
   the weeping bath'. Sins of infirmity injure the soul, but scandalous
   sins wound the gospel. Lesser sins grieve the Spirit, but greater sins
   vex the Spirit (Isaiah 63:10). And if that blessed Dove weeps, shall
   not we weep? When the air is dark then the dew falls. When we have by
   scandalous sin darkened the lustre of the gospel, now is the time for
   the dew of holy tears to fall from our eyes.

   Next to the seasons of mourning, let us consider the degree of it. The
   mourning for sin must be a very great mourning. The Greek word imports
   a great sorrow, such as is seen at the funeral of a dear friend. They
   shall look on me whom they have pierced, and they shall mourn for him,
   as one that mourneth for his only son' (Zechariah 12:10). The sorrow
   for an only child is very great. Such must be the sorrow for sin. In
   that day there shall be great mourning, as the mourning of Hadadrimmon
   in the valley of Megiddon (verse 11). In that valley Josiah, that
   famous and pious prince, was cut off by an untimely death, at whose
   funeral there was bitter lamentation. Thus bitterly must we bewail, not
   the death, but the life of our sins. Now then, to set forth the
   graduation of sorrow.

   Our mourning for sin must be so great as to exceed all other grief.
   Eli's mourning for the ark was such that it swallowed up the loss of
   his two children. Spiritual grief must preponderate over all other. We
   should mourn more for sin than for the loss of friends or estate.

   We should endeavour to have our sorrow rise up to the same height and
   proportion as our sin does. Manasseh was a great sinner and a great
   mourner. He humbled himself greatly' (2 Chronicles 33:12). Manasseh
   made the streets run with blood and he made the prison in Babylon run
   with tears. Peter wept bitterly. A true mourner labours that his
   repentance may be as eminent as his sin is transcendent.

   Having shown the nature of mourning, I shall next show what is the
   opposite to holy mourning. The opposite to mourning is hardness of
   heart', which in Scripture is called an heart of stone' (Ezekiel
   36:26). An heart of stone is far from mourning and relenting. This
   heart of stone is known by two symptoms:

   One symptom is insensibility. A stone is not sensible of anything. Lay
   weight upon it; grind it to powder; it does not feel. So it is with an
   hard heart. It is insensible of sin or wrath. The stone in the kidneys
   is felt but not the stone in the heart. Who being past feeling . . .'
   (Ephesians 4:19).

   An heart of stone is known by its inflexibility. A stone will not bend.
   That is hard which does not yield to the touch. So it is with an hard
   heart. It will not comply with God's command. It will not stoop to
   Christ's sceptre. An heart of stone will sooner break than bend by
   repentance. It is so far yielding to God that like the anvil it beats
   back the hammer. It resists the Holy Ghost' (Acts 7:51).

   Oh Christians, if you would be spiritual mourners, take heed of this
   stone of the heart. Harden not your hearts' (Hebrews 3:7,8). A stony
   heart is the worst heart. If it were brazen, it might be melted in the
   furnace of iron; it might be bowed with the hammer. But a stony heart
   is such that only the arm of God can break it and the blood of God
   soften it. Oh the misery of an hard heart! An hard heart is void of all
   grace. While the wax is hard, it will not take the impression of the
   seal. The heart, while it is hard, will not take the stamp of grace. It
   must first be made tender and melting. The plough of the Word will not
   go upon an hard heart. An hard heart is good for nothing but to make
   fuel for hellfire. After thy hardness of heart thou treasurest up
   wrath' (Romans 2:5). Hell is full of hard hearts, there is not one soft
   heart there. There is weeping there but no softness. We read of vessels
   fitted to destruction' (Romans 9:22). Impenitence fits these vessels
   for hell, and makes them like sere wood which is fit to burn. Hardness
   of heart makes a man's condition worse than all his other sins besides.
   If one be guilty of great sins, yet if he can mourn, there is hope.
   Repentance unravels sin, and makes sin not to be. But hardness of heart
   binds guilt fast upon the soul. It seals a man under wrath. It is not
   heinousness of sin, but hardness of heart that damns. This makes the
   sin against the Holy Ghost incapable of mercy, because the sinner that
   has committed it is incapable of repentance.
     __________________________________________________________________

7. Sundry sharp reproofs

   This doctrine draws up a charge against several sorts:

   1 Those that think themselves good Christians, yet have not learned
   this art of holy mourning. Luther calls mourning a rare herb'. Men have
   tears to shed for other things, but have none to spare for their sins.
   There are many murmurers, but few mourners. Most are like the stony
   ground which lacked moisture' (Luke 8:6).

   We have many cry out of hard times, but they are not sensible of hard
   hearts. Hot and dry is the worst temper of the body. Sure I am that to
   be hot in sin, and to be so dry as to have no tears, is the worst
   temper of the soul. How many are like Gideon's dry fleece, and like the
   mountains of Gilboa! There is no dew upon them. Did Christ bleed for
   sin, and can you not weep? If God's bottle be not filled with tears,
   his vial will be filled with wrath. We have many sinners in Sion, but
   few mourners in Sion. It is with most people as with a man on the top
   of a mast; the winds blow and the waves beat, and the ship is in danger
   of ship wreck, and he is fast asleep. So when the waves of sin have
   even covered men and the stormy wind of God's wrath blows, and is ready
   to blow them into hell, yet they are asleep in security.

   2 This doctrine reproves them who instead of weeping for sin, spend
   their days in mirth and jollity. Instead of mourners we have ranters.
   They take the timbrel and harp, they spend their days in wealth' (Job
   21:12, 13). They pursue the Sybarite life', says Luther. They do not
   give themselves to mourning, but follow after their enjoyments'. They
   live epicures and die atheists. St James bids us turn our laughter to
   mourning' (James 4:9). But they turn their mourning to laughter. Samson
   was brought forth to make the Philistines sport (Judges 16:25). The
   jovial sinner makes the devil sport. It is a saying of Theophylact, It
   is one of the worst sights to see a sinner go laughing to hell.' How
   unseasonable is it to take the harp and viol when God is taking the
   sword! A sword, a sword is sharpened and also furbished; should we then
   make mirth?' (Ezekiel 21:9, 10). This is a sin that enrages God. In
   that day did the Lord of hosts call to weeping and to mourning, and
   behold joy and gladness, slaying oxen and killing sheep, eating flesh
   and drinking wine; and it was revealed in mine ears by the Lord of
   hosts. Surely this iniquity shall not be purged from you till ye die,
   saith the Lord God of hosts' (Isaiah 22:12, 14). That is, this your sin
   shall not be done away by any expiatory sacrifice, but vengeance shall
   pursue you for ever.

   3 This doctrine reproves those who, instead of mourning for sin,
   rejoice in sin (Proverbs 2:14); Who take pleasure in iniquity' (2
   Thessalonians 2:12). Wicked men in this sense are worse than the damned
   in hell, for I dare say they take little pleasure in their sins. There
   are some so impudently profane, that they will make themselves and
   others merry with their sins. Sin is a soul sickness (Luke 5:31). Will
   a man make merry with his disease? Ah wretch, did Christ bleed for sin,
   and do you laugh at sin? Is that your mirth which grieves the Spirit?
   Is it a time for a man to break jests when he is upon the scaffold, and
   his head is to be stricken off?' You who laugh at sin now, the time is
   coming when God will laugh at your calamity' (Proverbs 1:26).

   4 This doctrine reproves those that cry down mourning for sin. They are
   like the Philistines who stopped the wells (Genesis 26:15). These would
   stop the wells of godly sorrow. Antinomians say this is a legal
   doctrine, but Christ here preaches it: Blessed are they that mourn.'
   And the apostles preached it, And they went out and preached that men
   should repent' (Mark 6:12). Holy ingenuity will put us upon mourning
   for sin. He that has the heart of a child cannot but weep for his
   unkindness against God. Mourning for sin is the very fruit and product
   of the Spirit of grace (Zechariah 12:10). Such as cry down repentance,
   cry down the Spirit of grace. Mourning for sin is the only way to keep
   off wrath from us. Such as with Samson would break this pillar, go
   about to pull down the vengeance of God upon the land. To all such I
   say, as Peter to Simon Magus, Repent therefore of this thy wickedness
   and pray God if perhaps the thought of thine heart may be forgiven
   thee', O sinner (Acts 8:22). Repent that you have cried down
   repentance.
     __________________________________________________________________

8. Motives to holy mourning

   Let me exhort Christians to holy mourning. I now persuade to such a
   mourning as will prepare the soul for blessedness. Oh that our hearts
   were spiritual limbecs, distilling the water of holy tears! Christ's
   doves weep. They that escape shall be like doves of the valleys, all of
   them mourning, every one for his iniquity' (Ezekiel 7:16).

   There are several divine motives to holy mourning:

   1 Tears cannot be put to a better use. If you weep for outward losses,
   you lose your tears. It is like a shower upon a rock, which does no
   good; but tears for sin are blessed tears. Blessed are they that
   mourn.' These poison our corruptions; salt-water kills the worms. The
   brinish water of repenting tears will help to kill that worm of sin
   which should gnaw the conscience.

   Gospelmourning is an evidence of grace. I will pour upon the house of
   David and the inhabitants of Jerusalem, the Spirit of grace, and they
   shall mourn . . .' (Zechariah 12:10). The Holy Ghost descended on
   Christ like a dove (Luke 3:22). The dove is a weeping creature. Where
   there is a dove-like weeping, it is a good sign the Spirit of God has
   descended there. Weeping for sin is a sign of the new birth. As soon as
   the child is born, it weeps: And behold the babe wept' (Exodus 2:6). To
   weep kindly for sin is a good sign we are born of God. Mourning shows a
   heart of flesh' (Ezekiel 36:26). A stone will not melt. When the heart
   is in a melting frame, it is a sign the heart of stone is taken away.

   3 The preciousness of tears. Tears dropping from a mournful, penitent
   eye, are like water dropping from the roses, very sweet and precious to
   God. A fountain in the garden makes it pleasant. That heart is most
   delightful to God which has a fountain of sorrow running in it. Mary
   stood at Christ's feet weeping' (Luke 7:38). Her tears were more
   fragrant and odoriferous than her ointment. The incense, when it is
   broken, smells sweetest. When the heart is broken for sin, then our
   services give forth their sweetest perfume. There is joy in heaven over
   one sinner that repenteth' (Luke 15:7). Whereupon St Bernard calls
   tears the wine of angels'. And sure, God delights much in tears, else
   he would not keep a bottle for them (Psalm 56:8). One calls tears a fat
   sacrifice', which under the law was most acceptable (Leviticus 3:3). St
   Jerome calls mourning a plank after shipwreck. Chrysostom calls tears a
   sponge to wipe off sin. Tears are powerful orators for mercy. Eusebius
   says there was an altar at Athens, on which they poured no other
   sacrifice but tears, as if the heathens thought there was no better way
   to pacify their angry gods, than by weeping. Jacob wept and had power
   over the angel' (Hosea 12:4). Tears melt the heart of God. When a
   malefactor comes weeping to the bar, this melts the judge's heart
   towards him. When a man comes weeping in prayer and smites on his
   breast, saying, God be merciful to me a sinner' (Luke 18:13), this
   melts God's heart towards him. Prayer (says Jerome) inclines God to
   shew mercy; tears compel him. God seals his pardons upon melting
   hearts. Tears, though they are silent, yet have a voice (Psalm 6:8).
   Tears wash away sin. Rain melts and washes away a ball of snow.
   Repenting tears wash away sin. That sin, says Ambrose, which cannot be
   defended by argument, may be washed away by tears.

   4 The sweetness of tears. Mourning is the way to solid joy. The
   sweetest wine is that which comes out of the winepress of the eyes',
   says Chrysostom. The soul is never more enlarged than when it can weep.
   Closet tears are better than court music. When the heart is sad,
   weeping eases it by giving vent. The soul of a Christian is most eased
   when it can vent itself by holy mourning. Chrysostom observes that
   David who was the great mourner in Israel was the sweet singer in
   Israel. My tears were my meat' (Psalm 42:3). On which place Ambrose
   gives this gloss: No meat so sweet as tears.' The tears of the
   penitent,' says Bernard, are sweeter than all worldly joy.' A Christian
   thinks himself sometimes in the suburbs of heaven when he can weep.
   When Hannah had wept, she went away and was no more sad. Sugar when it
   melts is sweetest. When a Christian melts in tears, now he has the
   sweetest joy. When the daughter of Pharaoh descended into the river,
   she found a babe there among the flags; so when we descend into the
   river of repenting tears, we find the babe Jesus there who shall wipe
   away all tears from our eyes. Well therefore might Chrysostom solemnly
   bless God for giving us this laver of tears to wash in.

   5 A mourner for sin not only does good to himself but to others. He
   helps to keep off wrath from a land. As when Abraham was going to
   strike the blow, the angel stayed his hand (Genesis 22:12), so when God
   is going to destroy a nation, the mourner stays his hand. Tears in the
   child's eye sometimes move the angry father to spare the child.
   Penitential tears melt God's heart and bind his hand. Jeremiah, who was
   a weeping prophet, was a great intercessor. God says to him, Pray not
   for this people' (Jeremiah 7:16), as if the Lord had said, Jeremiah, so
   powerful are your prayers and tears, that if you pray I cannot deny
   you. This kind of labour bears sway', as he said in Plautus.' Tears
   have a mighty influence upon God. Surely God has some mourners in the
   land, or he had destroyed us before now.

   6 Holy mourning is preventing physic. Our mourning for sin here will
   prevent mourning in hell. Hell is a place of weeping (Matthew 8:12).
   The damned mingle their drink with weeping. God is said to hold his
   bottle for our tears (Psalm 56:8). They who will not shed a bottle-full
   of tears shall hereafter shed rivers of tears. Woe to you that laugh
   now, for ye shall mourn and weep' (Luke 6:25). You have sometimes seen
   sugar lying in a damp place dissolve to water. All the sugared joys of
   the wicked dissolve at last to the water of tears. Now tears will do us
   good. Now it is seasonable weeping. It is like a shower in the spring.
   If we do not weep now it will be too late. Could we hear the language
   of the damned, they are now cursing themselves that they did not weep
   soon enough. Oh is it not better to have our hell here, than hereafter?
   Is it not better to shed repenting tears than despairing tears? He that
   weeps here is a blessed mourner. He that weeps in hell is a cursed
   mourner. The physician by bleeding the patient prevents death. By the
   opening a vein of godly sorrow, we prevent the death of our souls.

   7 There is no other way the Gospel prescribes to blessedness but this:
   Blessed are they that mourn'. This is the road that leads to the new
   Jerusalem. There may be several ways leading to a city; some go one
   way, some another; but there is but one way to heaven, and that is by
   the house of weeping (Acts 26:20). Perhaps a man may think thus, If I
   cannot mourn for sin, I will get to heaven some other way. I will go to
   church; I will give alms; I will lead a civil life. Nay, but I tell you
   there is but one way to blessedness, and that is, through the valley of
   tears. If you do not go this way, you will miss of Paradise. I tell
   you, except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish' (Luke 13:3). There
   are many lines leading to the centre, but the heavenly centre has but
   one line leading to it, and that is a tear dropping from the eye of
   faith. A man may have a disease in his body that twenty medicines will
   heal. Sin is a disease of the soul which makes it sick unto death. Now
   there is but one medicine will heal, and that is the medicine of
   repentance.

   8 Consider what need every Christian has to be conversant in holy
   mourning. A man may take physic when he has no need of it. Many go to
   the Bath when they have no need. It is rather out of curiosity than
   necessity. But O what need is there for everyone to go into the weeping
   bath! Think what a sinner you have been. You have filled God's book
   with your debts, and what need you have to fill his bottle with your
   tears! You have lived in secret sin. God enjoins you this penance,
   Mourn for sin'. But perhaps some may say, I have no need of mourning,
   for I have lived a very civil life. Go home and mourn because you are
   but civil. Many a man's civility, being rested upon, has damned him. It
   is sad for men to be without repentance, but it is worse to need no
   repentance (Luke 15:7).

   9 Tears are but finite. It is but a while that we shall weep. After a
   few showers that fall from our eyes, we shall have a perpetual
   sunshine. In heaven the bottle of tears is stopped. God shall wipe away
   all tears . . .' (Revelation 7:17). When sin shall cease, tears shall
   cease. Weeping may endure for a night, but joy cometh in the morning'
   (Psalm 30:5). In the morning of the ascension, then shall all tears be
   wiped away.

   10 The benefit of holy mourning. The best of our commodities come by
   water. Mourning makes the soul fruitful in grace. When a shower falls,
   the herbs and plants grow. I will water thee with my tears, O Heshbon!'
   (Isaiah 16:9). I may allude to it; tears water our graces and make them
   flourish. He sends his springs into the valleys' (Psalm 104:10). That
   is the reason the valleys flourish with corn, because the springs run
   there. Where the springs of sorrow run, there the heart bears a
   fruitful crop. Leah was tender-eyed; she had a watery eye and was
   fruitful. The tender-eyed Christian usually brings forth more of the
   fruits of the Spirit. A weeping eye is the water-pot to water our
   graces.

   Again, mourning fences us against the devil's temptations. Temptations
   are called fiery darts' (Ephesians 6:16), because indeed they set the
   soul on fire. Temptations enrage anger, inflame lust. Now the waters of
   holy mourning quench these fiery darts. Wet powder will not soon take
   the fire. When the heart is wetted and moistened with sorrow, it will
   not so easily take the fire of temptation. Tears are the best engines
   and waterworks to quench the devil's fire; and if there be so much
   profit and benefit in gospel-sorrow, then let every Christian wash his
   face every morning in the laver of tears.

   11 And lastly, to have a melting frame of spirit is a great sign of
   God's presence with us in an ordinance. It is a sign that the Sun of
   Righteousness has risen upon us, when our frozen hearts thaw and melt
   for sin. It is a saying of Bernard, By this you may know whether you
   have met with God in a duty, when you find yourselves in a melting and
   mourning frame'. We are apt to measure all by comfort. We think we
   never have God's presence in an ordinance, unless we have joy. Herein
   we are like Thomas. Unless (says he) I shall see in his hands the print
   of the nails, I will not believe' (John 20:25). So are we apt to say
   that, unless we have incomes of comfort, we will not believe that we
   have found God in a duty; but if our hearts can melt kindly in tears of
   love, this is a real sign that God has been with us. As Jacob said,
   Surely the Lord is in this place, and I knew it not' (Genesis 28:16).
   So, Christian, when your heart breaks for sin and dissolves into holy
   tears, God is in this duty, though you do not know it.

   Methinks all that has been said should make us spiritual mourners.
   Perhaps we have tried to mourn and cannot. But as a man that has dug so
   many fathoms deep for water and can find none, at last digs till he
   finds a spring; so though we have been digging for the water of tears
   and can find none, yet let us weigh all that has been said and set our
   hearts again to work, and perhaps at last we may say, as Isaac's
   servants said, We have found water' (Genesis 26:32). When the herbs are
   pressed, the watery juice comes out. These eleven serious motives may
   press out tears from the eye.

   But some may say, My constitution is such that I cannot weep. I may as
   well go to squeeze a rock as think to get a tear.

   I answer, but if you cannot weep for sin, can you not grieve?
   Intellectual mourning is best. There may be sorrow where there are no
   tears. The vessel may be full though it wants vent. It is not so much
   the weeping eye God respects, as the broken heart. Yet I would be loath
   to stop their tears who can weep. God stood looking on Hezekiah's
   tears: I have seen thy tears' (Isaiah 38:5). David's tears made music
   in God's ears. The Lord hath heard the voice of my weeping' (Psalm
   6:8). It is a sight fit for angels to behold, tears as pearls dropping
   from a penitent eye.
     __________________________________________________________________

9. The hindrances to mourning

   What shall we do to get our heart into this mourning frame? Do two
   things. Take heed of those things which will stop these channels of
   mourning; put yourselves upon the use of all means that will help
   forward holy mourning. Take heed of those things which will stop the
   current of tears.

   There are nine hindrances of mourning.

   1 The love of sin. The love of sin is like a stone in the pipe which
   hinders the current of water. The love of sin makes sin taste sweet and
   this sweetness in sin bewitches the heart. Jerome says it is worse to
   love sin than to commit it. A man may be overtaken with sin (Galatians
   6:1). He that has stumbled upon sin unawares will weep, but the love of
   sin hardens the heart and keeps the devil in possession. In true
   mourning there must be a grieving for sin. But how can a man grieve for
   that sin which his heart is in love with? Oh, take heed of this sweet
   poison. The love of sin freezes the soul in impenitence.

   2 Despair. Despair affronts God, undervalues Christ's blood and damns
   the soul. They said there is no hope, but we will walk after our own
   devices, and we will every one do the imagination of his evil heart'
   (Jeremiah 18:12). This is the language of despair. I had as good follow
   my sins still and be damned for something. Despair presents God to the
   soul as a judge clad in the garments of vengeance (Isaiah 59:17). The
   despair of Judas was in some sense worse than his treason. Despair
   destroys repentance, for the proper ground of repentance is mercy. The
   goodness of God leadeth thee to repentance' (Romans 2:4), but despair
   hides mercy out of sight as the cloud covered the Ark. Oh, take heed of
   this. Despair is an irrational sin; there is no ground for it. The Lord
   shews mercy to thousands. Why may you not be one of a thousand? The
   wings of God's mercy, like the wings of the Cherubim, are stretched out
   to every humble penitent. Though you have been a great sinner, yet if
   you are a weeping sinner, there is a golden sceptre of mercy held forth
   (Psalm 103:11). Despair locks up the soul in impenitence.

   3 A conceit that this mourning will make us melancholy: we shall drown
   all our joy in our tears. But this is a mistake. Lose our joy? Tell me,
   what joy can there be in a natural condition? What joy does sin afford?
   Is not sin compared to a wound and bruise? (Isaiah 1:6). David had his
   broken bones (Psalm 51:8). Is there any comfort in having the bones out
   of joint? Does not sin breed a palpitation and trembling of heart?
   (Deuteronomy 28:65, 66). Is it any joy for a man to be a
   magor-missabib' (Jeremiah 20:4), a terror to himself? Surely of the
   sinner's laughter it may be said, It is mad' (Ecclesiastes 2:2),
   whereas holy mourning is the breeder of joy. It does not eclipse but
   refines our joy and makes it better. The prodigal dated his joy from
   the time of his repentance. Then they began to be merry' (Luke 15:24).

   4 Checking the motions of the Spirit. The Spirit sets us a-mourning. It
   causes all our spring-tides. All my springs are in thee' (Psalm 87:7).
   Oft we meet with gracious motions to prayer and repentance. Now when we
   stifle these motions, which is called a quenching the Spirit (1
   Thessalonians 5:19), then we do, as it were, hinder the tide from
   coming in. When the dew falls, then the ground is wet. When the Spirit
   of God falls as dew in its influences upon the soul, then it is
   moistened with sorrow. But if the Spirit withdraw, the soul is like
   Gideon's dry fleece. A ship can as well sail without the wind, a bird
   can as well fly without wings, as we can mourn without the Spirit. Take
   heed of grieving the Spirit. Do not drive away this sweet Dove from the
   ark of your soul. The Spirit is gentle and tender'. If he be grieved,
   he may say, I will come no more', and if he once withdraw we cannot
   mourn.

   5 Presumption of mercy. Who will take pains with his heart or mourn for
   sin that thinks he may be saved at a cheaper rate? How many,
   spider-like, suck damnation out of the sweet flower of God's mercy?
   Jesus Christ, who came into the world to save sinners, is the occasion
   of many a man's perishing. Oh, says one, Christ died for me. He has
   done all. What need I pray or mourn? Many a bold sinner plucks death
   from the tree of life, and through presumption, goes to hell by that
   ladder of Christ's blood, by which others go to heaven. It is sad when
   the goodness of God, which should lead to repentance' (Romans 2:4),
   leads to presumption. O sinner, do not hope thyself into hell. Take
   heed of being damned upon a mistake. You say God is merciful, and
   therefore you go on securely in sin. But whom is mercy for? The
   presuming sinner or the mourning sinner? Let the wicked forsake his
   way, and return to the Lord, and he will have mercy upon him, (Isaiah
   55:7). No mercy without forsaking sin, and no forsaking sin without
   mourning! If a king should say to a company of rebels, Whosoever comes
   in and submits shall have mercy', such as stood out in rebellion could
   not claim the benefit of the pardon. God makes a proclamation of mercy
   to the mourner, but such as are not mourners have nothing to do with
   mercy. The mercy of God is like the ark, which none but the priests
   were to meddle with. None may touch this golden ark of mercy but such
   as are priests unto God' (Revelation 1:6), and have offered up the
   sacrifice of tears.

   6 A conceit of the smallness of sin. Is it not a little one?' (Genesis
   19:20). The devil holds the small end of the perspective-glass to
   sinners. To fancy sin less than it is, is very dangerous. An opinion of
   the littleness of sin keeps us from the use of means. Who will be
   earnest for a physician that thinks it is but a trivial disease? And
   who will seek to God with a penitent heart for mercy that thinks sin is
   but a slight thing? But to take off this wrong conceit about sin, and
   that we may look upon it with watery eyes, consider that sin cannot be
   little because it is against the Majesty of heaven. There is no treason
   small, it being against the king's person. Every sin is sinful,
   therefore damnable. A penknife or stiletto makes but a little wound,
   but either of them may kill as well as a greater weapon. There is death
   and hell in every sin (Romans 6:23). What was it for Adam to pluck an
   apple? But that lost him his crown. It is not with sin as it is with
   diseases. Some are mortal, some not mortal. The least sin without
   repentance will be a lock and bolt to shut men out of heaven.

   View sin in the red glass of Christ's sufferings. The least sin cost
   the price of blood'. Would you take a true prospect of sin? Go to
   Golgotha. Jesus Christ was fain to vail his glory and lose his joy, and
   pour out his soul an offering for the least sin. Read the greatness of
   your sin in the deepness of Christ's wounds. Let not Satan cast such a
   mist before your eyes that you cannot see sin in its right colours.
   Remember, not only do great rivers fall into the sea, but little
   brooks. Not only do great sins carry men to hell, but lesser.

   7 Procrastination; or an opinion that it is too soon as yet to tune the
   penitential string. When the lamp is almost out, the strength
   exhausted, and old age comes on, then mourning for sin will be in
   season, but it is too soon yet. That I may show how pernicious this
   opinion is, and that I may roll away this stone from the mouth of the
   well, that so the waters of repentance may be drawn forth, let me
   propose these four serious and weighty considerations:

   First, do you know what it is to be in the state of nature? And will
   you say it is too soon to get out of it? You are under the wrath of
   God' (John 3:36), and is it too soon to get from under the dropping of
   this vial? You are under the power of Satan' (Acts 26:18), and is it
   too soon to get out of the enemy's quarters?

   Second, men do not argue thus in other cases. They do not say, Is it
   too soon to be rich? They will not put off getting the world till old
   age. No, here they take the first opportunity. It is not too soon to be
   rich, and is it too soon to be good? Is not repentance a matter of the
   greatest consequence? Is it not more needful for men to lament their
   sin, than augment their estate?

   Third, God's call to mourning looks for present entertainment. Today,
   if you will hear his voice, harden not your hearts' (Hebrews 3:7, 8). A
   general besieging a garrison summons it to surrender upon such a day or
   he will storm it. Such are God's summons to repentance. Today if ye
   will hear his voice'. Sinners, when Satan has tempted you to any
   wickedness, you have not said, It is too soon, Satan', but have
   immediately embraced his temptation. You have not put the devil off,
   and will you put God off?

   Fourth, it is a foolish thing to adjourn and put off mourning for sin,
   for the longer you put off holy mourning, the harder you will find the
   work when you come to it. A bone that is out of joint is easier to set
   at first than if you let it go longer. A disease taken in time is
   sooner cured than if it be let alone till it comes to a paroxysm. You
   may easily wade over the waters when they are low; if you stay till
   they are risen, then they will be beyond your depth. O sinner, the more
   treasons you commit, the more do you incense heaven against you, and
   the harder it will be to get your pardon. The longer you spin out the
   time of your sinning, the more work you make for repentance.

   To adjourn, and put off mourning for sin is folly in respect of the
   uncertainty of life. How does the procrastinating sinner know that he
   shall live to be old? What is your life? It is but a vapour' (James
   4:14). How soon may sickness arrest you, and death strike off your
   head? May not your sun set at noon? Oh then what impudence is it to put
   off mourning for sin, and to make a long work, when death is about to
   make a short work? Caesar, deferring to read the letter sent him, was
   stabbed in the senate house.

   It is folly to put off all till the last in respect of the
   improbability of finding mercy. Though God has given you space to
   repent, he may deny you grace to repent. When God calls for mourning
   and you are deaf, when you call for mercy God may be dumb (Proverbs
   1:24, 28). Think of it seriously. God may take the latter time to judge
   you in, because you did not take the former time to repent in.

   To put off our solemn turning to God till old age, or sickness, is high
   imprudence, because these late acts of devotion are for the most part
   dissembled and spurious. Though true mourning for sin be never too
   late, yet late mourning is seldom true. That repentance is seldom
   true-hearted which is grey-headed. It is disputable whether these
   autumn-tears are not shed more out of fear of hell than love to God.
   The mariner in a storm throws his goods overboard, not but that he
   loves them, but he is afraid they will sink the ship. When men fall to
   weeping-work late and would cast their sins overboard, it is for the
   most part only for fear lest they should sink the ship and drown in
   hell. It is a great question whether the sickbed penitent does not
   mourn because he can keep his sins no longer. All which considered may
   make men take heed of running their souls upon such a desperate hazard
   as to put all their work for heaven upon the last hour.

   8 Delay in the execution of justice. Because sentence against an evil
   work is not executed speedily, therefore the heart of the sons of men
   is fully set in them to do evil' (Ecclesiastes 8:11). God forbears
   punishing, therefore men forbear repenting. He does not smite upon
   their back by correction, therefore they do not smite upon their thigh
   by humiliation (Jeremiah 31:19). The sinner thinks thus: God has spared
   me all this while; he has eked out patience into longsuffering; surely
   he will not punish. He hath said in his heart, God hath forgotten'
   (Psalm 10:11). In infinite patience God sometimes adjourns his
   judgements and puts off the sessions a while longer. He is not willing
   to punish (2 Peter 3:9). The bee, naturally gives honey, but stings
   only when it is angered. The Lord would have men make their peace with
   him (Isaiah 27:5). God is not like an hasty creditor that requires the
   debt, and will give no time for the payment. He is not only gracious,
   but waits to be gracious' (Isaiah 30:18), but God by his patience would
   bribe sinners to repentance. But, alas, how is this patience abused!
   God's longsuffering hardens. Because God stops the vial of his wrath,
   sinners stop the conduit of tears. That the patience of God may not
   (through our corruption) obstruct holy mourning, let sinners remember:

   First, God's patience has bounds set to it (Genesis 6:3). Though men
   will not set bounds to their sin, yet God sets bounds to his patience.
   There is a time when the sun of God's patience will set, and, being
   once set, it never returns any degrees backwards. The lease of patience
   will soon be run out. There is a time when God says, My Spirit shall no
   longer strive.' The angel cried, The hour of judgement is come'
   (Revelation 14:7). Perhaps at the next sin you commit God may say, Your
   hour is now come.'

   Second, to be hardened under patience makes our condition far worse.
   Incensed justice will revenge abused patience. God was patient towards
   Sodom, but when they did not repent he made the fire and brimstone
   flame about their ears. Sodom, that was once the wonder of God's
   patience, is now a standing monument of God's severity. All the plants
   and fruits were destroyed, and, as Tertullian says, that place still
   smells of fire and brimstone. Long forbearance is no forgiveness. God
   may keep off the stroke awhile, but justice is not dead, but sleeps.
   God has leaden feet but iron hands. The longer God is taking his blow,
   the sorer it will be when it comes. The longer a stone is falling, the
   heavier it will be at last. The longer God is whetting his sword, the
   sharper it cuts. Sins against patience are of a deeper dye; they are
   worse than the sins of the devils. The lapsed angels never sinned
   against God's patience. How dreadful will their condition be, who sin
   because God is patient. For every crumb of patience, God puts a drop of
   wrath into his vial. The longer God forbears a sinner, the more
   interest he is sure to pay in hell.

   9 Mirth and music. That chant to the sound of the viol, and drink wine
   in bowls' (Amos 6:5, 6). Instead of the dirge, the anthem. Many sing
   away sorrow and drown their tears in wine. The sweet waters of pleasure
   destroy the bitter waters of mourning. How many go dancing to hell,
   like those fish which swim down pleasantly into the Dead Sea! Let us
   take heed of all these hindrances to holy tears. Let our harp be turned
   into mourning and our organ into the voice of them that weep,' (Job
   30:31).
     __________________________________________________________________

10. Some helps to mourning

   Having removed the obstructions, let me in the last place propound some
   helps to holy mourning.

   1 Set David's prospect continually before you. My sin is ever before
   me' (Psalm 51:3). David, that he might be a mourner, kept his eye full
   upon sin. See what sin is, and then tell me if there be not enough in
   it to draw forth tears. I know not what name to give it bad enough. One
   calls it the devil's excrement. Sin is a complication of all evils. It
   is the spirits of mischief distilled. Sin dishonours God, it denies
   God's omniscience, it derides his patience, it distrusts his
   faithfulness. Sin tramples upon God's law, slights his love, grieves
   his Spirit. Sin wrongs us; sin shames us. Sin is a reproach to any
   people' (Proverbs 14:34). Sin has made us naked. It has plucked off our
   robe and taken our crown from us. It has spoiled us of our glory. Nay,
   it has not only made us naked, but impure. I saw thee polluted in thy
   blood' (Ezekiel 16:6). Sin has not only taken off our cloth of gold,
   but it has put upon us filthy garments' (Zechariah 3:3). God made us
   after his likeness' (Genesis 1:26), but sin has made us like the beasts
   that perish' (Psalm 49:20). We are all become brutish in our
   affections. Nor has sin made us only like the beasts, but like the
   devil (John 8:44). Sin has drawn the devil's picture upon man's heart.
   Sin stabs us. The sinner, like the gaoler, draws a sword to kill
   himself (Acts 16:27). He is bereaved of his judgement and, like the man
   in the gospel, possessed with the devils, he cuts himself with stones'
   (Mark 5:5), though he has such a stone in his heart that he does not
   feel it. Every sin is a stroke at the soul. So many sins, so many
   wounds! Every blow given to the tree helps forward the felling of the
   tree. Every sin is an hewing and chopping down the soul for hellfire.
   If then there be all this evil in sin, if this forbidden fruit has such
   a bitter core, it may make us mourn. Our hearts should be the spring,
   and our eyes the rivers.

   2 If we would be mourners, let us be orators. Beg a spirit of
   contrition. Pray to God that he will put us in mourning, that he will
   give us a melting frame of heart. Let us beg Achsah's blessing, even
   'springs of water' (Joshua 15:19). Let us pray that our hearts may be
   spiritual limbecs, dropping tears into God's bottle. Let us pray that
   we who have the poison of the serpent may have the tears of the dove.
   The Spirit of God is a spirit of mourning. Let us pray that God would
   pour out that Spirit of grace on us, whereby we may look on him whom we
   have pierced and mourn for him' (Zechariah 12:10). God must breathe in
   his Spirit before we can breathe out our sorrows. The Spirit of God is
   like the fire in a still, that sends up the dews of grace in the heart
   and causes them to drop from the eyes. It is this blessed Spirit whose
   gentle breath causes our spices to smell and our waters to flow; and if
   the spring of mourning be once set open in the heart, there can want no
   joy. As tears flow out, comfort flows in; which leads to the second
   part of the text, They shall be comforted'.
     __________________________________________________________________

11. The comforts belonging to mourners

   Having already presented to your view the dark side of the text, I
   shall now show you the light side, They shall be comforted'.

   Where observe:

   1 Mourning goes before comfort as the lancing of a wound precedes the
   cure. The Antinomian talks of comfort, but cries down mourning for sin.
   He is like a foolish patient who, having a pill prescribed him, licks
   the sugar but throws away the pill. The libertine is all for joy and
   comfort. He licks the sugar but throws away the bitter pill of
   repentance. If ever we have true comfort we must have it in God's way
   and method. Sorrow for sin ushers in joy: I will restore comforts to
   him, and to his mourners' (Isaiah 57:18). That is the true sunshine of
   joy which comes after a shower of tears. We may as well expect a crop
   without seed, as comfort without gospel-mourning.

   2 Observe that God keeps his best wine till last. First he prescribes
   mourning for sin and then sets abroach the wine of consolation. The
   devil does quite contrary. He shows the best first and keeps the worst
   till last. First, he shows the wine sparkling in the glass, then comes
   the biting of the serpent' (Proverbs 23:32). Satan sets his dainty
   dishes before men. He presents sin to them coloured with beauty,
   sweetened with pleasure, silvered with profit, and then afterwards the
   sad reckoning is brought in. He showed Judas first the silver bait, and
   then struck him with the hook. This is the reason why sin has so many
   followers, because it shows the best first. First, the golden crowns,
   then comes the lions' teeth (Revelation 9:7, 8).

   But God shows the worst first. First he prescribes a bitter portion,
   and then brings a cordial, They shall be comforted.'

   3 Observe, gospel tears are not lost; they are seeds of comfort. While
   the penitent pours out tears, God pours in joy. If you would be
   cheerful (says Chrysostom), be sad. They that sow in tears shall reap
   in joy' (Psalm 126:5). It was the end of Christ's anointing and coming
   into the world, that he might comfort them that mourn (Isaiah 61:3).
   Christ had the oil of gladness poured on him (as Chrysostom says) that
   he might pour it upon the mourner. Well then may the apostle call it a
   repentance not to be repented of' (2 Corinthians 7:10). A man's
   drunkenness is to be repented of; his uncleanness is to be repented of;
   but his repentance is never to be repented of, because it is the inlet
   to joy. Blessed are they that mourn, for they shall be comforted.' Here
   is sweet fruit from a bitter stock. Christ caused the earthen vessels
   to be filled with water, and then turned the water into wine (John
   2:9). So when the eye, that earthen vessel, has been filled with water
   brimful, then Christ will turn the water of tears into the wine of joy.
   Holy mourning, says Basil, is the seed out of which the flower of
   eternal joy grows.

   The reason why the mourner shall be comforted is:

   (i) Because mourning is made on purpose for this end. Mourning is not
   prescribed for itself but that it may lead on to something else, that
   it may lay a train for comfort. Therefore we sow in tears that we may
   reap in joy. Holy mourning is a spiritual medicine. Now a medicine is
   not prescribed for itself, but for the sake of health. So
   gospel-mourning is appointed for this very end, to bring forth joy.

   (ii) The spiritual mourner is the fittest person for comfort. When the
   heart is broken for sin, now it is fittest for joy. God pours the
   golden oil of comfort into broken vessels. The mourner's heart is
   emptied of pride and God fills the empty with his blessing. The
   mourner's tears have helped to purge out corruption, and after purging
   physic God gives a julep. The mourner is ready to faint away under the
   burden of sin, and then the bottle of strong water comes seasonably.
   The Lord would have the incestuous person (upon his deep humiliation)
   to be comforted, lest he should be swallowed up with overmuch sorrow'
   (2 Corinthians 2:7).

   This is the mourner's privilege: He shall be comforted'. The valley of
   tears brings the soul into a paradise of joy. A sinner's joy brings
   forth sorrow. The mourner's sorrow brings forth joy. Your sorrow shall
   be turned into joy' (John 16:20). The saints have a wet seedtime but a
   joyful harvest. They shall be comforted'.

   Now to illustrate this, I shall show you what the comforts are the
   mourners shall have. These comforts are of a divine infusion, and they
   are twofold, either here or hereafter.

   They are called the consolations of God' (Job 15:11); that is, great
   comforts', such as none but God can give. They exceed all other
   comforts as far as heaven exceeds earth. The root on which these
   comforts grow is the blessed Spirit. He is called the Comforter' (John
   14:26), and comfort is said to be a fruit of the Spirit' (Galatians
   5:22). Christ purchased peace, and the Spirit speaks peace.

   How does the Spirit comfort? Either mediately or immediately.

   (i) Mediately, by helping us to apply the promises to ourselves and
   draw water out of those wells of salvation'. We lie as dead children at
   the breast, till the Spirit helps us to suck the breast of a promise;
   and when the Spirit has taught faith this art, now comfort flows in. O
   how sweet is the breast-milk of a promise!

   (ii) The Spirit comforts immediately. The Spirit by a more direct act
   presents God to the soul as reconciled. It 'sheds his love abroad in
   the heart', from whence flows infinite joy (Romans 5:5). The Spirit
   secretly whispers pardon for sin, and the sight of a pardon dilates the
   heart with joy. Be of good cheer, thy sins are forgiven thee' (Matthew
   9:2).

   That I may speak more fully to this point, I shall show you the
   qualifications and excellencies of these comforts which God gives his
   mourners. These comforts are real comforts. The Spirit of God cannot
   witness to that which is untrue. There are many in this age who pretend
   to comfort, but their comforts are mere impostures. The body may as
   well swell with wind as with flesh. A man may as well be swelled with
   false as true comforts. The comforts of the saints are certain. They
   have the seal of the Spirit set to them (2 Corinthians 1:22; Ephesians
   1:13). A seal is for confirmation. When a deed is sealed, it is firm
   and unquestionable. When a Christian has the seal of the Spirit stamped
   upon his heart, now he is confirmed in the love of God.

   Wherein do these comforts of the Spirit which are unquestionably sure,
   differ from those which are false and pretended? Three ways:

   First, the comforts of God's Spirit are laid in deep conviction: And
   when he (that is, the Comforter) is come, he shall reprove (or, as the
   Greek word is, he shall convince) the world of sin' (John 16:7, 8).

   Why does conviction go before consolation? Conviction fits for comfort.
   By conviction the Spirit sweetly disposes the heart to seek after
   Christ and then to receive Christ. Once the soul is convinced of sin
   and of the hell that follows it, a Saviour is precious. When the Spirit
   has shot in the arrow of conviction, now, says a poor soul, where may I
   meet with Christ? In what ordinance may I come to enjoy Christ? Saw ye
   him whom my soul loves?' All the world for one glimpse of my Saviour!

   Again, the Spirit by conviction makes the heart willing to receive
   Christ upon his own terms. Man, by nature, would article and indent
   with Christ. He would take half Christ. He would take him for a
   Saviour, not a prince. He would accept of Christ as he has an head of
   gold' (Canticles 5:11), but not as he has the government upon his
   shoulder' (Isaiah 9:6). But when God lets loose the spirit of bondage
   and convinces a sinner of his lost, undone condition, now he is content
   to have Christ upon any terms. When Paul was struck down to the ground
   by a spirit of conviction, he cries out, Lord, what wilt thou have me
   to do?' (Acts 9:6). Let God propound what articles he will, the soul
   will subscribe to them. Now when a man is brought to Christ's terms, to
   believe and obey, then he is fit for mercy. When the Spirit of God has
   been a spirit of conviction, then He becomes a spirit of consolation.
   When the plough of the law has gone upon the heart and broken up the
   fallow ground, now God sows the seed of comfort. Those who brag of
   comfort, but were never yet convinced, nor broken, for sin, have cause
   to suspect their comfort to be a delusion of Satan. It is like a
   madman's joy, who fancies himself to be king, but it may be said of his
   laughter, it is mad' (Ecclesiastes 2:2). The seed which wanted depth of
   earth' withered (Matthew 13:5). That comfort which wants depth of
   earth', deep humiliation and conviction, will soon wither and come to
   nothing.

   The Spirit of God is a sanctifying, before a comforting Spirit. As
   God's Spirit is called the Comforter', so he is called a Spirit of
   grace' (Zechariah 12:10). Grace is the work of the Spirit. Comfort is
   the seal of the Spirit. The work of the Spirit goes before the seal.
   The graces of the Spirit are compared to water (Isaiah 44:3) and to oil
   (Isaiah 61:3). First, God pours in the water of the Spirit and then
   comes the oil of gladness. The oil (in this sense) runs above the
   water. Hereby we shall know whether our comforts are true and genuine.
   Some talk of the comforting Spirit, who never had the sanctifying
   Spirit. They boast of assurance but never had grace. These are spurious
   joys. These comforts will leave men at death. They will end in horror
   and despair. God's Spirit will never set seal to a blank. First, the
   heart must be an epistle written with the finger of the Holy Ghost, and
   then it is 'sealed with the Spirit of promise'.

   The comforts of the Spirit are humbling. Lord, says the soul, what am I
   that I should have a smile from heaven, and that thou shouldest give me
   a privy seal of thy love? The more water is poured into a bucket, the
   lower it descends. The fuller the ship is laden with sweet spices, the
   lower it sails. The more a Christian is filled with the sweet comforts
   of the Spirit, the lower he sails in humility. The fuller a tree is of
   fruit, the lower the bough hangs. The more full we are of the fruit of
   the Spirit, joy and peace' (Galatians 5:22), the more we bend in
   humility. St. Paul, a chosen vessel' (Acts 9:15), filled with the wine
   of the Spirit (2 Corinthians 1:5), did not more abound in joy, than in
   lowliness of mind. Unto me who am less than the least of all saints, is
   this grace given . . ', (Ephesians 3:8). He who was the chief of the
   apostles calls himself the least of the saints.

   Those who say they have comfort, but are proud; who have learned to
   despise others and are climbed above ordinances; their comforts are
   delusions. The devil is able, not only to transform himself into an
   angel of light' (2 Corinthians 11:14), but he can transform himself
   into the comforter. It is easy to counterfeit money, to silver over
   brass and put the king's image upon it. The devil can silver over false
   comforts and make them look as if they had the stamp of the King of
   heaven upon them. The comforts of God are humbling. Though they lift
   the heart up in thankfulness, yet they do not puff it up in pride.

   Second, the comforts God gives his mourners are unmixed. They are not
   tempered with any bitter ingredients. Worldly comforts are like wine
   that runs dregs. In the midst of laughter the heart is sad' (Proverbs
   14:13). Queen Mary Tudor once said, if she were opened, they would find
   Calais graven on her heart. And if the breast of a sinner were
   anatomised and opened, you would find a worm gnawing at his heart.
   Guilt is a wolf which feeds in the breast of his comfort. A sinner may
   have a smiling countenance, but a chiding conscience. His mirth is like
   the mirth of a man in debt, who is every hour in fear of arrest. The
   comforts of wicked men are spiced with bitterness. They are worm-wood
   wine.

   These are the men who tremble, and grow pale at every lightning flash,
   and when it thunders are half-dead with terror at the very first
   rumbling of the heavens.'

   But spiritual comforts are pure. They are not muddied with guilt, nor
   mixed with fear. They are the pure wine of the Spirit. What the mourner
   feels is joy, and nothing but joy.

   Third, the comforts God gives his mourners are sweet. Truly the light
   is sweet' (Ecclesiastes 11:7); so is the light of God's countenance.
   How sweet are those comforts which bring the Comforter along with them!
   (John 14:10). Therefore the love of God shed into the heart is said to
   be better than wine' (Canticles 1:2). Wine pleases the palate, but the
   love of God cheers the conscience. The lips, of Christ drop
   sweet-smelling myrrh' (Canticles 5:13). The comforts God gives are a
   Christian's music. They are the golden pot of manna, the nectar and
   ambrosia of a Christian. They are the saints' festival, their
   banqueting stuff. So sweet are these divine comforts, that the church
   had her fainting fits, for want of them. Stay me with flagons'
   (Canticles 2:5). In metonymy the name of an accompanying thing is
   substituted for the thing meant. The flagons' are put for the wine. By
   these flagons are meant the comforts of the Spirit. The Hebrew word
   signifies all variety of delights' to show the abundance of
   delectability and sweetness in these comforts of the Spirit. Comfort me
   with apples.' Apples are sweet in taste, fragrant in smell; so sweet
   and delicious are those apples which grow upon the tree in paradise.
   These comforts from above are so sweet that they make all other
   comforts sweet; health, estate, relations. They are like sauce which
   makes all our earthly possessions and enjoyments come off with a bitter
   relish. So sweet are these comforts of the Spirit that they do much
   abate and moderate our joy in worldly things. He who has been drinking
   spirits of wine, will not much thirst after water; and that man who has
   once tasted how sweet the Lord is' (Psalm 34:8), and has drunk the
   cordials of the Spirit, will not thirst immoderately after secular
   delights. Those who play with dogs and birds, it is a sign they have no
   children; such as are inordinate in their desire and love of the
   creature, declare plainly that they never had better comforts.

   Fourth, these comforts which God gives his mourners are holy comforts.
   They are called the comfort of the Holy Ghost' (Acts 9:31). Everything
   propagates in its own kind. The Holy Ghost can no more produce impure
   joys in the soul than the sun can produce darkness. He who has the
   comforts of the Spirit looks upon himself as a person engaged to do God
   more service. Has the Lord looked upon me with a smiling face? I can
   never pray enough. I can never love God enough. The comforts of the
   Spirit raise in the heart an holy antipathy against sin. The dove hates
   every feather that has grown upon the hawk. So there is an hatred of
   every motion and temptation to evil. He who has a principle of life in
   him opposes everything that would destroy life. He hates poison. So he
   that has the comforts of the Spirit living in him, sets himself against
   those sins which would murder his comforts. Divine comforts give the
   soul more acquaintance with God. Our fellowship is with the Father and
   with his Son, Jesus.' (1 John 1:3).

   Fifth, the comforts reserved for the mourners are filling comforts':
   The God of hope fill you with all joy . . .' (Romans 15:13). Ask . . .
   that your joy may be full' (John 16:24). When God pours in the joys of
   heaven, they fill the heart and make it run over. I am exceeding joyful
   . . .' (2 Corinthians 7:4); the Greek word is I overflow with joy', as
   a cup that is filled with wine till it runs over. Outward comforts can
   no more fill the heart than a triangle can fill a circle. Spiritual
   joys are satisfying. My soul shall be satisfied as with marrow, and I
   will praise thee with joyful lips' (Psalm 63:5). David's heart was
   full, and the joy broke out at his lips. Thou hast put gladness in my
   heart' (Psalm 4:7). Worldly joys put gladness into the face: They
   rejoice in the face' (2 Corinthians 5:12), but the Spirit of God puts
   gladness into the heart. Divine joys are heart joys (Zechariah 10:7).
   "Your heart shall rejoice' (John 16:22). A believer rejoices in God: My
   Spirit rejoiceth in God . . .' (Luke 1:47). And to show how filling
   these comforts are which are of an heavenly extraction, the Psalmist
   says they create greater joy than when wine and oil increase' (Psalm
   4:7). Wine and oil may delight but not satisfy; they have their vacuity
   and indigence. We may say as Zechariah 10:2, They comfort in vain.'
   Outward comforts sooner cloy than cheer, and sooner weary than fill.
   Xerxes offered great rewards to him that could find out a new pleasure,
   but the comforts of the Spirit are satisfactory. They recruit the
   heart. Thy comforts delight my soul' (Psalm 94:19). There is as much
   difference between heavenly comforts and earthly, as between a banquet
   that is eaten and one that is painted on the wall.

   Sixth, the comforts God gives his mourners in this life are glorious
   comforts': Joy full of glory' (1 Peter 1:8). They are glorious because
   they are a prelibation and foretaste of that joy which we shall have in
   a glorified estate. These comforts are an handsel and earnest of glory.
   They put us in heaven before our time. Ye were sealed with that Holy
   Spirit, which is the earnest of the inheritance' (Ephesians 1:13, 14).
   The earnest is part of the sum behind. So the comforts of the Spirit
   are the earnest, the cluster of grapes' at Eshcol (Numbers 13:23), the
   first-fruits of the heavenly Canaan. The joys of the Spirit are
   glorious, in opposition to other joys, which compared with these, are
   inglorious and vile. A carnal man's joy, as it is airy and flashy, so
   it is sordid. He sucks nothing but dregs. Ye rejoice in a thing of
   nought' (Amos 6:13). A carnal spirit rejoices because he can say this
   house is his, this estate is his. But a gracious spirit rejoices
   because he can say this God is his: For this God is our God for ever
   and ever' (Psalm 48:14). The ground of a Christian's joy is glorious.
   He rejoices in that he is an heir of the promise. The joy of a godly
   man is made up of that which is the angels' joy. He triumphs in the
   light of God's countenance. His joy is that which is Christ's own joy.
   He rejoices in the mystical union which is begun here and consummated
   in heaven. Thus the joy of the saints is a joy full of glory'.

   Seventh, the comforts which God gives his mourners are infinitely
   transporting and ravishing. So delightful are they and amazing, that
   they cause a jubilation which, as some of the learned say, is so great
   that it cannot be expressed. Of all things joy is the most hard to be
   deciphered. It is called joy unspeakable' (1 Peter 1:8). You may sooner
   taste honey than tell how sweet it is. The most pathetic words can no
   more set forth the comforts of the Spirit than the most curious pencil
   can draw the life and breath of a man. The angels cannot express the
   joys they feel. Some men have been so overwhelmed with the sweet
   raptures of joy that they have not been able to contain, but as Moses,
   have died with a kiss from God's mouth. Thus have we seen the glass oft
   breaking with the strength of the liquor put into it.

   Eighth, these comforts of the Spirit are powerful. They are strong
   cordials, strong consolation, as the apostle phrases it (Hebrews 6:18).
   Divine comfort strengthens for duty. The joy of the Lord is your
   strength' (Nehemiah 8:10). Joy whets and sharpens industry. A man that
   is steeled and animated with the comfort of God's Spirit, goes with
   vigour and alacrity through the exercises of religion. He believes
   firmly, he loves fervently, he is carried full sail in duty. The joy of
   the Lord is his strength'. Divine comfort supports under affliction:
   Having received the Word in much affliction, with joy' (1 Thessalonians
   1:6). The wine of the Spirit can sweeten the waters of Marah'. They who
   are possessed of these heavenly comforts can gather grapes of thorns',
   and fetch honey out of the lion's carcass'. They are 'strong
   consolations' indeed, that can stand it out against the fiery trial',
   and turn the flame into a bed of roses. How powerful is that comfort
   which can make a Christian glory in tribulations (Romans 5:3)! A
   believer is never so sad but he can rejoice. The bird of paradise can
   sing in the winter. As sorrowing, yet alway rejoicing' (2 Corinthians
   6:10). Let sickness come, the sense of pardon takes away the sense of
   pain. The inhabitant shall not say, I am sick' (Isaiah 33:24). Let
   death come, the Christian is above it. O death, where is thy sting?' (1
   Corinthians 15:55). At the end of the rod a Christian tastes honey.
   These are 'strong consolations'.

   Ninth, the comforts God's mourners have are heart-quieting comforts.
   They cause a sweet acquiescence and rest in the soul. The heart of a
   Christian is in a kind of ataxy and discomposure, like the needle in
   the compass; it shakes and trembles till the Comforter comes. Some
   creatures cannot live but in the sun. A Christian is even dead in the
   nest, unless he may have the sunlight of God's countenance. Hide not
   thy face from me, lest I be like them that go down into the pit' (Psalm
   143:7). Nothing but the breast will quiet the child. It is only the
   breast of consolation quiets the believer.

   Tenth, the comforts of the Spirit are abiding comforts. As they abound
   in us so they abide with us. He shall give you another Comforter that
   he may abide with you for ever' (John 14:16). Worldly comforts are
   always upon the wing, ready to fly. They are like a land-flood, or a
   flash of lightning. They will oftentimes pass away and glide from thy
   closest embrace'. All things here are transient, but the comforts with
   which God feeds his mourners are immortal: Who hath loved us and given
   us everlasting consolation' (2 Thessalonians 2:16). Though a Christian
   does not always have a full beam of comfort, yet he has a dawning of it
   in his soul. He always has a ground of hope and a root of joy. There is
   that within him which bears up his heart, and which he would not on any
   terms part with.

   Behold, then, the mourner's privilege, He shall be comforted'. David
   who was the great mourner of Israel, was the 'sweet singer of Israel'.
   The weeping dove shall be covered with the golden feathers of comfort.
   O how rare and superlative are these comforts!

   But the question may be asked, May not God's mourners lack these
   comforts? Spiritual mourners have a tide to these comforts, yet they
   may sometimes lack them. God is a free agent. He will have the timing
   of our comforts. He has a self-freedom to do what he will. The Holy One
   of Israel will not be limited. He reserves his prerogative to give or
   suspend comfort as he will; and if we are awhile without comfort, we
   must not quarrel with his dispensations, for as the mariner is not to
   wrangle with providence because the wind blows out of the east when he
   desires it to blow out of the west; nor is the husband-man to murmur
   when God stops the bottles of heaven in time of drought; so neither is
   any man to dispute or quarrel with God, when he stops the sweet
   influence of comfort, but he ought rather to acquiesce in his sacred
   will.

   But though the Lord might by virtue of his sovereignty withhold comfort
   from the mourner, yet there may be many pregnant causes assigned why
   mourners lack comfort in regard of God and also in regard of
   themselves.

   1 In regard of God: He sees it fit to withhold comfort that he may
   raise the value of grace. We are apt to esteem comfort above grace,
   therefore God locks up our comforts for a time, that he may enhance the
   price of grace. When farthings go better than gold the king will call
   in farthings, that the price of gold may be the more raised. God would
   have his people serve him for himself and not for comfort only. It is
   an harlot love to love the husband's money and tokens more than his
   person. Such as serve God only for comfort, do not so much serve God,
   as serve themselves of him.

   2 That God's mourners lack comfort, it is most frequency in regard of
   themselves.

   (i) Through mistake, which is twofold. They do not go to the right
   spring for comfort. They go to their tears, when they should go to
   Christ's blood. It is a kind of idolatry to make our tears the ground
   of our comfort. Mourning is not meritorious. It is the way to joy, not
   the cause. Jacob got the blessing in the garments of his elder brother.
   True comfort flows out of Christ's sides. Our tears are stained, till
   they are washed in the blood of Christ. In me peace' (John 16:33). The
   second mistake is that mourners are privileged persons, and may take
   more liberty. They may slacken the strings of duty, and let loose the
   reins to sin. Christ has indeed purchased a liberty for his people, but
   an holy liberty, not a liberty for sin, but from sin. Ye are a royal
   priesthood, a peculiar people' (1 Peter 2:9). You are not in a state of
   slavery, but royalty. What follows? Do not make Christian liberty a
   cloak for sin. As free, and not using your liberty for a cloak of
   maliciousness' (v 16). If we quench the sanctifying Spirit, God will
   quench the comforting Spirit. Sin is compared to a cloud' (Isaiah
   44:22). This cloud intercepts the light of God's countenance.

   (ii) God's mourners sometimes lack comfort through discontent and
   peevishness. David makes his disquiet the cause of his sadness. Why art
   thou cast down, O my soul? Why art thou disquieted within me?' (Psalm
   43:5). A disquieted heart, like a rough sea, is not easily calmed. It
   is hard to make a troubled spirit receive comfort. This disquiet arises
   from various causes: sometimes from outward sorrow and melancholy,
   sometimes from a kind of envy. God's people are troubled to see others
   have comfort, and they lack it; and now in a pet they refuse comfort,
   and like a forward child, put away the breast. My soul refused to be
   comforted' (Psalm 77:2). Indeed a disquieted spirit is no more fit for
   comfort, than a distracted man is fit for counsel. And whence is the
   mourner's discontent, but pride? As if God had not dealt well with him
   in stopping the influences of comfort. O Christian, your spirit must be
   more humbled and broken, before God empty out his golden oil of joy.

   (iii) The mourner is without comfort for want of applying the promises.
   He looks at sin which may humble him, but not at that Word which may
   comfort him. The mourner's eyes are so full of tears that he cannot see
   the promise. The virtue and comfort of a medicine is in the applying.
   When the promises are applied by faith, they bring comfort (Hosea 2:19;
   Isaiah 49:15, 16). Faith milks the breast of a promise. That Satan may
   hinder us of comfort, it is his policy either to keep the promise from
   us that we may not know it, or to keep us from the promise that we may
   not apply it. Never a promise in the Bible but belongs to the mourner,
   had he but the skill and dexterity of faith to lay hold on it.

   (iv) The mourner may lack comfort through too much earthly-mindedness;
   by feeding immoderately on earthly comforts we miss of heavenly
   comforts. For the iniquity of his covetousness was I wroth, and I hid
   me' (Isaiah 57:17). The earth puts out the fire. Earthiness
   extinguishes the flame of divine joy in the soul. An eclipse occurs
   when the moon, which is a dense body, comes between the sun and the
   earth. The moon is an emblem of the world (Revelation 12:1). When this
   comes between, then there is an eclipse in the light of God's face.
   Such as dig in mines say there is such a damp comes from the earth as
   puts out the light of a candle. Earthly comforts send forth such a damp
   as puts out the light of spiritual joy.

   (v) Perhaps the mourner has had comfort and lost it. Adam's rib was
   taken from him when he was asleep (Genesis 2:21). Our comforts are
   taken away when we fall asleep in security. The spouse lost her beloved
   when she lay upon the bed of sloth (Canticles 5:2, 6).

   For these reasons God's mourners may lack comfort, but that the
   spiritual mourner may not be too much dejected, I shall reach forth the
   cup of consolation' (Jeremiah 16:7), and speak a few words that may
   comfort the mourner in the want of comfort. Jesus Christ was without
   comfort, therefore no wonder if we are. Our comforts are not better
   than his. He who was the Son of God's love was without the sense of
   God's love. The mourner has a seed of comfort: Light is sown for the
   righteous' (Psalm 97:11). Light is a metaphor put for comfort, and it
   is sown. Though a child of God does not have comfort always in the
   flower, yet he has it in the seed. Though he does not feel comfort from
   God yet he takes comfort in God. A Christian may be high in grace and
   low in comfort. The high mountains are without flowers. The mines of
   gold have little or no corn growing on them. A Christian's heart may be
   a rich mine of grace, though it be barren of comfort. The mourner is
   heir to comfort, and though for a small moment God may forsake his
   people (Isaiah 54:7), yet there is a time shortly coming when the
   mourner shall have all tears wiped away, and shall be brim full of
   comfort. This joy is reserved for heaven, and this brings me to the
   second particular.

   They shall be comforted'. Though in this life some interviews and love
   tokens pass between God and the mourner, yet the great comforts are
   kept in reversion. In God's presence is fullness of joy' (Psalm 16:11).
   There is a time coming (the daystar is ready to appear) when the saints
   shall bathe themselves in the river of life, when they shall never see
   a wrinkle on God's brow more, but his face shall shine, his lips drop
   honey, his arms sweetly embrace them. The saints shall have a
   spring-tide of joy, and it shall never be low water. The saints shall
   at that day put off their mourning and exchange their sables for white
   robes. Then shall the winter be past, the rain of tears be over and
   gone (Canticles 2:11, 12). The flowers of joy shall appear, and after
   the weeping of the dove tine time of the singing of birds shall come'.
   This is the great consolation', the Jubilee of the blessed which shall
   never expire. In this life the people of God taste of joy, but in
   heaven the full vessels shall be broached. There is a river in the
   midst of the heavenly paradise which has a fountain to feed it (Psalm
   36:8, 9).

   The times we are cast into, being for the present sad and cloudy, it
   will not be amiss for the reviving the hearts of God's people, to speak
   a little of these comforts which God reserves in heaven for his
   mourners. They shall be comforted'.

   The greatness of these celestial comforts is most fitly in Scripture
   expressed by the joy of a feast. Mourning shall be turned into
   feasting, and it shall be a marriage-feast, which is usually kept with
   the greatest solemnity. Blessed are they which are called unto the
   marriage-supper of the Lamb' (Revelation 19:9). Bullinger' and Gregory
   the Great understand this supper of the Lamb to be meant of the saints,
   supping with Christ in heaven. Men after hard labour go to supper. So
   when the saints shall rest from their labours' (Revelation 14:13), they
   shall sup with Christ in glory. Now to speak something of the last
   great supper.

   (i) It will be a great supper in regard of the Founder of this feast,
   God. It is the supper of a king, therefore sumptuous and magnificent.
   The Lord is a great God, and a great King above all gods' (Psalm 95:3).
   Where should there be state and magnificence but in a king's court?

   (ii) It will be a great supper in regard of the cheer and provision.
   This exceeds all hyperboles. What blessed fruit does the tree of life
   in paradise yield! (Revelation 2:7). Christ will lead his spouse into
   the banqueting house' and feast her with those rare viands, and cause
   her to drink that spiced wine, that heavenly nectar and ambrosia
   wherewith the angelic powers are infinitely refreshed.

   First, every dish served in at this heavenly supper shall be sweet to
   our palate. There is no dish here we do not love. Christ will make such
   'savoury meat' as he is sure his spouse loves.

   Second, there shall be no want here. There is no want at a feast. The
   various fullness in Christ will prevent a scarcity, and it will be a
   fullness without surfeit, because a fresh course will continually be
   served in.

   Third, they who eat of this supper shall never hunger more'. Hunger is
   a sharp sauce. The Lamb's supper' shall not only satisfy hunger, but
   prevent it. They shall hunger no more!' (Revelation 7:16).

   (iii) It will be a great supper in regard of the company invited.
   Company adds to a feast, and is of itself sauce to sharpen and provoke
   the appetite. Saints, angels, archangels will be at this supper. Nay,
   Christ himself will be both Founder and Guest. The Scripture calls it
   an innumerable company . . .' (Hebrews 12:22); and that which makes the
   society sweeter is that there shall be perfect love at this feast. The
   motto shall be one heart and one way'. All the guests shall be linked
   together with the golden chain of charity.

   (iv) It will be a great supper in regard of the holy mirth. A feast is
   made for mirth' (Ecclesiastes 10:19). At this supper there shall be
   joy, and nothing but joy (Psalm 16:11). There is no weeping at a feast.
   O what triumph and acclamations will there be! There are two things at
   this 'supper of the Lamb, which will create joy and mirth. First, when
   the saints shall think with themselves that they are kept from a worse
   supper. The devils have a supper (such an one as it is), a black
   banquet. There are two dishes served in, weeping and gnashing of teeth.
   Every bit they eat makes their hearts ache. Who would envy them their
   dinner here, who must have such a supper? Second, it will be a matter
   of joy at the 'supper of the Lamb', that the Master of the feast bids
   all his guests welcome. The saints shall have the smiles of God's face,
   the kisses of his lips. He will lead them into the wine cellar, and
   display the banner of love over them. The saints shall be as full of
   solace as sanctity. What is a feast without mirth? Worldly mirth is
   flashy and empty. This will be infinitely delightful and ravishing.

   (v) It will be a great supper for the music. This will be a marriage
   supper, and what better music than the Bridegroom's voice, saying, My
   spouse, my undefiled, take thy fill of love'. There will be the angels'
   anthems, the saints, triumphs. The angels, those trumpeters of heaven,
   shall sound forth the excellencies of Jehovah, and the saints, those
   noble choristers, shall take down their harps from the willows', and
   join in consort with the angels, praising and blessing God. I saw them
   that had gotten the victory over the beast, having the harps of God,
   and they sing the song of Moses and the song of the Lamb, saying, Great
   and marvellous are thy works, Lord God Almighty, just and true are thy
   ways thou king of saints . . .' (Revelation 15:2, 3). O the sweet
   harmony at this feast! It shall be music without discord.

   (vi) This supper is great in regard of the place where it shall be
   celebrated, in the paradise of God' (Revelation 2:7). It is a stately
   palace. Stately: for its situation. It is of a very great height
   (Revelation 21:10): for its prospect. All sparkling beauties are there
   concentred, and the delight of the prospect is propriety! That is the
   best prospect, where a man can see furthest on his own ground: for its
   amplitude. This royal feast shall be kept in a most spacious room, a
   room infinitely greater than the whole firmament, one star whereof (if
   we may believe astronomers) is bigger than the whole earth. Though
   there be such a multitude as no man can number, of all nations,
   kindreds, people and tongues' (Revelation 7:9), yet the table is long
   enough and the room spacious enough for all the guests. Aulus Gellius
   in his thirteenth book, makes this to be one of those four things which
   are requisite to a feast--a fit place'. The empyrean heaven bespangled
   with light, arrayed with rich hangings, embroidered with glory, seated
   above all the visible orbs, is the place of the marriage-supper. This
   infinitely transcends the most profound search. I am no more able to
   express it, than I can span the firmament, or weigh the earth in a pair
   of balances.

   (vii) It will be a great supper in regard of its continuance. It has no
   end. Epicures have a short feast, and a long reckoning, but those who
   shall sit down at the heavenly banquet, shall not rise from the table.
   The cloth shall never be taken away, but they shall always be feeding
   upon those sweet junkets and delicacies which are set before them. We
   read that King Ahasuerus made a feast for his princes that lasted an
   hundred and fourscore days' (Esther 1:4). But this blessed feast
   reserved for the saints, is for ever'. At thy right hand there are
   pleasures for evermore' (Psalm 16:11).

   For your consolation, consider how this may be as Bezar stone to keep
   the hearts of God's people from fainting! They shall be comforted'.
   They shall sit with Christ upon the throne' (Revelation 3:21), and sit
   down with him at the table'. Who would not mourn for sin that are sure
   to meet with such rewards! They shall be comforted'. The
   marriage-supper will make amends for the valley of tears'. O saint of
   God, you who are now watering your plants and weeping bitterly for sin,
   at this last and great feast your water shall be turned into wine'. You
   who now mortify your corruptions, and beat down your body' by prayer
   and fasting, shall shortly sup with Christ and angels. You who refused
   to touch the forbidden tree shall feed upon the tree of life in the
   paradise of God'. You impoverished saint, who have scarce a bit of
   bread to eat, remember for your comfort, in thy father's house there is
   bread enough', and he is making ready a feast for you, where all the
   dainties of heaven are served in. O feed with delight upon the thoughts
   of this marriage-supper! After your funeral begins your festival. Long
   for suppertime. The delay is long which separates us from our
   honey-sweet joys'. Christ has paid for this supper upon the cross, and
   there is no fear of a reckoning' to be brought in. Wherefore comfort
   one another with these words'.
     __________________________________________________________________

12. Christian meekness

   Blessed are the meek, for they shall inherit the earth

   Matthew 5:5

   We are now got to the third step leading in the way to blessedness,
   Christian meekness. Blessed are the meek'. See how the Spirit of God
   adorns the hidden man of the heart, with multiplicity of graces! The
   workmanship of the Holy Ghost is not only curious, but various. It
   makes the heart meek, pure, peaceable etc. The graces therefore are
   compared to needlework, which is different and various in its flowers
   and colours (Psalm 45:14). In the words there is a duty, and that duty
   like the dove brings an olive leaf in the mouth of it, they shall
   inherit the earth'.

   The proposition I shall insist on is that meet persons are blessed
   persons. For the right understanding of this, we must know there is a
   twofold meekness. Meekness towards God, meekness towards man.

   1 Meekness towards God, which implies two things: submission to his
   will; flexibleness to his Word.

   (i) Submission to God's will: when we carry ourselves calmly, without
   swelling or murmuring, under the dispensations of providence. It is the
   Lord, let him do what seemeth him good' (1 Samuel 3:18). The
   meek-spirited Christian saith thus: Let God do what he will with me,
   let him carve out what condition he please, I will submit. God sees
   what is best for me, whether a fertile soil or a barren. Let him
   chequer his work as he please, it suffices that God has done it. It was
   an unmeek spirit in the prophet to struggle with God: I do well to be
   angry to the death' (Jonah 4:9).

   (ii) Flexibleness to God's Word: when we are willing to let the Word
   bear sway in our souls and become pliable to all its laws and maxims.
   He is spiritually meek who conforms himself to the mind of God, and
   does not quarrel with the instructions of the Word, but with the
   corruptions of his heart. Cornelius' speech to Peter savoured of a meek
   spirit: Now therefore we are all here present before God, to hear all
   things that are commanded thee of God' (Acts 10:33). How happy is it
   when the Word which comes with majesty is received with meekness!
   (James 1:21).

   2 Meekness towards man. Basil the Great calls this the indelible
   character of a gracious soul. Blessed are the meek'. To illustrate
   this, I shall show what this meekness is. Meekness is a grace whereby
   we are enabled by the Spirit of God to moderate our passion. It is a
   grace. The philosopher calls it a virtue, but the apostle calls it a
   grace, and therefore reckons it among the fruits of the Spirit'
   (Galatians 5:23). It is of a divine extract and original. By it we are
   enabled to moderate our passion. By nature the heart is like a troubled
   sea, casting forth the foam of anger and wrath. Now meekness calms the
   passions. It sits as moderator in the soul, quieting and giving check
   to its distempered motions. As the moon serves to temper and allay the
   heat of the sun, so Christian meekness allays the heat of passion.
   Meekness of spirit not only fits us for communion with God, but for
   civil converse with men; and thus among all the graces it holds first
   place. Meekness has a divine beauty and sweetness in it. It brings
   credit to religion; it wins upon all. This meekness consists in three
   things: the bearing of injuries, the forgiving of injuries, the
   recompensing good for evil.

   First, meekness consists in the bearing of injuries. I may say of this
   grace, it is not easily provoked'. A meek spirit, like wet tinder, will
   not easily take fire. They that seek my hurt spake mischievous things,
   but I, as a deaf man, heard not' (Psalm 38:12, 13). Meekness is the
   bridle of anger'. The passions are fiery and headstrong; meekness gives
   check to them. Meekness bridles the mouth', it ties the tongue to its
   good behaviour. Meekness observes that motto, Bear and forbear. There
   are four things opposite to meekness.

   (i) Meekness is opposed to hastiness of spirit. Be not hasty in thy
   spirit to be angry, for anger rests in the bosom of fools'
   (Ecclesiastes 7:9). When the heart boils in passion, and anger (as
   Seneca says) sparkles forth in the eye, this is far from meekness.
   Anger rests in the bosom of fools'. Anger may be in a wise man, but it
   rests in a fool. The angry man is like flax or gunpowder. No sooner do
   you touch him but he is all on fire. Saint Basil calls anger
   drunkenness, and Jerome says there are more drunken with passion than
   with wine. Seneca calls anger a short fit of madness'. Sometimes it
   suspends the use of reason. In the best things we are cool enough. In
   religion we are all ice, in contention all fire. How unbecoming is rash
   anger! How it disguises and disfigures! Homer says of Agamemnon that
   when he moderated his passion, he resembled the gods. He was like
   Jupiter in feature, like Pallas in wisdom, but when he was in his fury,
   he was a very tiger. Nothing of Jupiter appeared in him. As Plato
   counselled the great revellers and drinkers of his time, that they
   should view themselves in a glass when they were in their drunken
   humour, and they would appear loathsome to themselves, so let a man
   disguised with passion view himself in the glass, and sure he would
   ever after be out of love with himself. The face swells with anger, the
   veins become black with blood'. Let not the sun go down upon your
   wrath, neither give place to the devil' (Ephesians 4:26, 27). Oh, says
   one, he has wronged me and I will never give place to him; but better
   give place to him than to the devil. An hasty spirit is not a meek
   spirit. Not but that we may in some cases be angry. There is an holy
   anger. That anger is without sin which is against sin. Meekness and
   zeal may stand together. In matters of religion, a Christian must be
   clothed with the spirit of Elias, and be full of the fury of the Lord'
   (Jeremiah 6:11). Christ was meek (Matt. 11:29), yet zealous (John 2:14,
   15). The zeal of God's house ate him up.

   (ii) Meekness is opposed to malice. Malice is the devil's picture (John
   8:44). Malice is mental murder (1 John 3:15). It unfits for duty. How
   can such a man pray? I have read of two men that lived in malice, who
   being asked how they could say the Lord's prayer, one answered, he
   thanked God there were many good prayers besides. The other answered,
   when he said the Lord's prayer he left out those words, as we forgive
   them that trespass against us'. But Augustine brings in God replying,
   Because thou dost not say my prayer, I will not hear thine'. Were it
   not a sad judgement if all that a man ate should turn to poison! To a
   malicious man all the holy ordinances of God turn to poison. The table
   of the Lord, is a snare; he eats and drinks his own damnation'. A
   malicious spirit is not a meek spirit.

   (iii) Meekness is opposed to revenge. Malice is the scum of anger, and
   revenge is malice boiling over. Malice is a vermin which lives on
   blood. Revenge is Satan's nectar and ambrosia. This is the savoury meat
   which the malicious man dresses for the devil. The Scripture forbids
   revenge: Dearly beloved, avenge not yourselves' (Romans 12:19). This is
   to take God's office out of his hand, who is called the God of
   recompenses' (Jeremiah 51:56) and the God of vengeance' (Psalm 94:1).
   This I urge against those who challenge one another to duels. Indeed,
   spiritual duels are lawful. It is good to fight with the devil. Resist
   the devil' (James 4:7). It is good to duel with a man's self, the
   regenerate part against the carnal. Blessed is he that seeks a revenge
   upon his lusts. Yea, what revenge!' (2 Corinthians 7:11). But other
   duels are unlawful. Avenge not yourselves'. The Turks, though a
   barbarous people, in ancient times burnt such as went to duel, applying
   hot coals of fire to their sides. They who were in heat of revenge were
   punished suitably with fire.

   Some may object. But if I am thus meek and tame in bearing of injuries
   and incivilities, I shall lose my credit. It will be a strain to my
   reputation. I answer: To pass by an injury without revenge is no
   eclipse to a man's credit. Solomon tells us it is the glory of a man to
   pass over a transgression' (Proverbs 19:11). It is more honour to bury
   an injury than revenge it; and to slight it than to write it down. The
   weakest creatures soonest turn head, and sting upon every touch. The
   lion, a more majestic creature, is not easily provoked. The bramble
   tears. The oak and cedar are more peaceable. Passion imports weakness.
   A noble spirit overlooks an injury.

   Again, suppose a man's credit should suffer an impair with those whose
   censure is not to be valued. Yet think which is worse, shame or sin?
   Will you sin against God to save your credit? Surely it is little
   wisdom for a man to venture his blood that he may fetch back his
   reputation, and to run into hell to be counted valorous.

   Not but that a man may stand up in defence of himself when his life is
   endangered. Some of the Anabaptists hold it unlawful to take up the
   sword upon any occasion (though when they get the power, I would be
   loath to trust them, their river water often turning to blood), but
   without question a man may take up the sword for self-preservation,
   else he comes under the breach of the sixth commandment. He is guilty
   of self-murder. In taking up the sword he does not so much seek
   another's death, as the safeguard of his own life. His intention is not
   to do hurt, but to prevent it. Self-defence is consistent with
   Christian meekness. The law of nature and religion justify it. That God
   who bids us put up our sword' (Matthew 26:52) yet will allow us a
   buckler, in our own defence, and he that will have us innocent as
   doves' not to offend others, will have us wise as serpents' in
   preserving ourselves.

   Though revenge may be contrary to meekness, yet not but that a
   magistrate may revenge the quarrels of others. Indeed, it is not
   revenge in him, but doing justice. The magistrate is God's lieutenant
   on earth. God has put the sword in his hand, and he is not to bear the
   sword in vain'. He must be for the punishment of evildoers' (1 Peter
   2:14). Though a private person must not render to any man evil for evil
   (Romans 12:17), yet a magistrate may; the evil of punishment for the
   evil of offence. This rendering of evil is good. Private men must put
   their sword into the sheath', but the magistrate sins if he does not
   draw it out. As his sword must not surfeit through cruelty, so neither
   must it rust through partiality. Too much lenity in a magistrate is not
   meekness, but injustice. For him to indulge offences, and say with a
   gentle reproof as Eli, Why do you such things? Nay, my sons, for it is
   no good report that I hear' (1 Samuel 2:23, 24), this is but to shave
   the head that deserves to be cut off. Such a magistrate makes himself
   guilty.

   (iv) Meekness is opposed to evil-speaking. Let all evil-speaking be put
   away' (Ephesians 4:31). Our words should be mild, like the waters of
   Shiloah which run softly. It is too usual for passionate spirits to
   break out into opprobrious language. The tongues of many are fired, and
   it is the devil lights the match. Therefore they are said in Scripture
   to be 'set on fire of hell' (James 3:6). Men have learned of the old
   serpent, to spit their venom one at another in disgraceful revilings.
   Whosoever shall say, Thou fool, shall be in danger of hellfire'
   (Matthew 5:22). Under that word fool', all vilifying terms are by our
   Saviour forbidden. Let us take heed of this. It is hateful to God. God
   is not in this fire, but in the still small voice (1 Kings 19:12).

   Some may say, But did not the apostle Paul call the Galatians fools?
   (Galatians 3:1). I answer, Paul had an infallible spirit, which we do
   not have. Besides, when Paul uttered those words, it was not by way of
   reproach, but reproof. It was not to defame the Galatians but to
   reclaim them; not to vilify them but to humble them. Paul was grieved
   to see them so soon fall into a relapse. Well might he say foolish
   Galatians' in an holy zeal, because they had suffered so much in the
   cause of religion, and now made a defection and fell off. Have ye
   suffered so many things in vain?' (verse 4). But though Paul, guided by
   the Spirit of God, did give this epithet to the Galatians, it is no
   warrant for us when any have wronged us to use disgraceful terms.
   Meekness does not vent itself in scurrility. It does not retaliate by
   railing. Yet Michael the archangel, when contending with the devil he
   disputed about the body of Moses, durst not bring against him a railing
   accusation, but said, The Lord rebuke thee' (Jude 9). Some understand
   by Michael, Christ, but more truly it is meant of one of the chief of
   the angels. The contest or dispute between the archangel and the devil
   was about the body of Moses. Some divines say that when God disposed of
   Moses' body, he employed the archangel to inter him so secretly that
   his burying place might not be known. It is likely if his dead body had
   been found, the Israelites might have been ready in a preposterous zeal
   to have adored it. The devil opposes the archangel and contends about
   the dead body, but the archangel durst not', or, as some read it, he
   could not endure to bring a railing accusation'. It seems the devil
   provoked him with evil language, and would fain have extorted passion
   from him, but the archangel was mild, and said only, The Lord rebuke
   thee'. The angel would not so much as rail against the devil. We may
   learn meekness of the archangel: Not rendering railing for railing' (1
   Peter 3:9).

   Not but that a Christian ought prudentially to clear himself from
   slanders. When the apostle Paul was charged to be mad he vindicated
   himself. I am not mad, most noble Festus' (Acts 26:25). Though a
   Christian's retorts must not be vulnerating, they may be vindicating.
   Though he may not scandalise another, yet he may apologise for himself.
   There must be Christian prudence, as well as Christian meekness. It is
   not mildness but weakness to part with our integrity (Job 27:6). To be
   silent when we are slanderously traduced, is to make ourselves appear
   guilty. We must so affect meekness as not to lose the honour of
   innocence. It is lawful to be our own defenders. The fault lies only in
   this, when we retort injuries with reproachful terms, which is to pay a
   man back in the devil's coin.

   The second branch of meekness is in forgiving of injuries. And when ye
   stand praying, forgive' (Mark 11:25); as if Christ had said, It is to
   little purpose to pray, unless you forgive. A meek spirit is a
   forgiving spirit. This is an Herculean work. Nothing more crosses the
   stream of corrupt nature. Men forget kindnesses, but remember injuries.
   I once heard of a woman that lived in malice, and being requested by
   some of her neighbours when she lay on her deathbed, to forgive, she
   answered, I cannot forgive though I go to hell'. This is cutting
   against the grain. Some can rather sacrifice their lives than their
   lusts, but forgive we must, and forgive as God forgives. Forgiveness
   must be:

   (i) Really. God does not make a show of forgiveness and keep our sins
   by him. He blots out' our debts (Isaiah 43:25). God passes an act of
   oblivion (Jeremiah 31:34). He forgives and forgets. So the meek spirit
   not only makes a show of forgiving his neighbour, but he does it from
   the heart (Matthew 18:27).

   (ii) Fully. God forgives all our sins. He does not for fourscore write
   down fifty', but he gives a general release. Who forgiveth all thy
   iniquities' (Psalm 103:3). Thus a meek-spirited Christian forgives all
   injuries. False hearts pass by some offences, but retain others. This
   is but half forgiving. Is this meekness? Would you have God deal so
   with you? Would you have him forgive your trespasses, as you forgive
   others?

   (iii) God forgives often. We are often peccant! We run every day afresh
   upon the score, but God often forgives. Therefore he is said to
   multiply pardon' (Isaiah 55:7). So a meek spirit reiterates and sends
   one pardon after another. Peter asks the question, Lord, how oft shall
   my brother sin against me, and I forgive him? till seven times?'
   (Matthew 18:21) Christ answers him, I say not unto thee, Until seven
   times, but until seventy times seven' (verse 22).

   Some may object that such an affront has been offered that flesh and
   blood cannot put up? I answer: Flesh and blood cannot inherit the
   Kingdom of God' (1 Corinthians 15:50). Christians must walk antipodes
   to themselves, and with the sword of the Spirit fight against the lusts
   of the flesh (Galatians 5:24).

   Again, you may say: But if I forgive one injury I shall invite more. I
   answer: It argues a devilish nature to be the worse for kindness; but
   suppose we should meet with such monsters, yet it is our duty to be
   ready to forgive (Colossians 3:13). Shall we cease from doing good
   because others will not cease from being evil? If the more you forgive
   injuries, the more injuries you meet with, this will make your grace
   shine the more. Another's vice will be a greater demonstration of your
   virtue. Often forgiving will add the more to the weight of his sin, and
   the weight of your glory. If any shall say to me, I strive to excel in
   other graces, but as for this grace of meekness, the bearing and
   forgiving of injuries, I cannot arrive at it; I desire in this to be
   excused. What do you talk of other graces? Where there is one grace,
   there is all. If meekness be wanting, it is but a counterfeit chain of
   grace. Your faith is a fable: your repentance is a lie; your humility
   is hypocrisy.

   And whereas you say you cannot forgive, think of your sin. Your
   neighbour is not so bad in offending you as you are in not forgiving
   him. Your neighbour, in offending you, but trespasses against a man,
   but you, refusing to forgive him, trespass against God. Think also of
   your danger. You who are implacable, and though you may smother the
   fire of your rage, yet will not extinguish it, know that if you die
   this night, you die in an unpardoned condition. If you will not believe
   me, believe Christ. If you do not forgive, neither will your Father
   which is in heaven forgive your trespasses' (Mark 11:26). He who lives
   without meekness, dies without mercy.

   The third branch of meekness is in recompensing good for evil. This is
   an higher degree than the other. Love your enemies, do good to them
   that hate you, pray for them which despitefully use you' (Matthew
   5:44). If thine enemy hunger, feed him' (Romans 12:20). Not rendering
   evil for evil, but contrariwise blessing' (1 Peter 3:9). This threefold
   cord of Scripture should not easily be broken. To render evil for evil
   is brutish: to render evil for good is devilish; to render good for
   evil is Christian. The heathens thought it lawful to wrong none unless
   first provoked with an injury, but the sunlight of Scripture shines
   brighter than the lamp of reason. Love your enemies.' When grace comes
   into the heart, it works a strange alteration. When a scion is
   engrafted into the stock, it partakes of the nature and sap of the tree
   and brings forth the same fruit. Take a crab, engraft it into a pippin,
   it brings forth the same fruit as the pippin. So he who was once of a
   sour crabby disposition, given to revenge, when he once partakes of the
   sap of the heavenly olive, he bears generous fruits. He is full of love
   to his enemies. Grace allays the passion and melts the heart into
   compassion. As the sun draws up many thick noxious vapours from the
   earth and sea, and returns them in sweet showers, so a gracious heart
   returns all the unkindness and discourtesies of his enemies with the
   sweet influences and distillations of love. Thus David, They rewarded
   me evil for good; but as for me, when they were sick, my clothing was
   sackcloth, I humbled my soul with fasting . . .' (Psalm 35:12, 13).
   Some would have rejoiced; he wept. Some would have put on scarlet;
   David put on sackcloth. This is the rarity or rather miracle of
   meekness. It retorts good for evil. Thus we have seen the nature of
   meekness.

   Meekness shows us the badge of a true saint. He is of a meek, candid
   spirit. He is not easily provoked'. He takes everything in the best
   sense and conquers malice with mildness. I would to God all who profess
   themselves saints were bespangled with this grace. We are known to
   belong to Christ when we wear his livery. He is a saint whose spirit is
   made so meek that he can smother prejudices and bury unkindnesses. A
   passion of tears better becomes a Christian than a passion of anger.
   Every saint is Christ's spouse (Canticles 4:8). It becomes Christ's
   spouse to be meek. If any injury be offered to the spouse, she leaves
   it to her husband to revenge. It is unseemly for Christ's spouse to
   strike.

   Let me beseech all Christians to labour to be eminent in this
   superlative grace of meekness. Seek meekness' (Zephaniah 2:3). Seeking
   implies we have lost it. Therefore, we must make an hue and cry after
   it to find it. Put on therefore as the elect of God, meekness'
   (Colossians 3:12). Put it on as a garment, never to be left off.
   Meekness is a necessary ingredient in everything. It is necessary in
   instruction: In meekness instructing . . .' (2 Timothy 2:25). Meekness
   conquers the opposers of truth. Meekness melts the heart. Soft words'
   are softening. Meekness is necessary in hearing the Word. Receive with
   meekness the engrafted Word' (James 1:21). He who come to the Word with
   either passion or prejudice gets no good, but hurt. He turns wine into
   poison, and stabs himself with the sword of the Spirit. Meekness is
   needful in reproof. If a man be overtaken with a fault, restore such an
   one with the spirit of meekness' (Galatians 6:1). The Greek word is put
   him in joint again'. If a bone be out of joint, the surgeon must not
   use a rough hand that may chance break another bone. But he must come
   gently to work, and afterwards bind it up softly. So if a brother be
   through inadvertence overtaken, we must not come to him in a fury of
   passion, but with a spirit of meekness labour to restore him. I shall
   lay down several motives or arguments to meeken the spirits of men.

   Let me propound examples of meekness

   (i) The example of Jesus Christ. Thy king cometh unto thee meek'
   (Matthew 21:5). Christ was the sampler and pattern of meekness. When he
   was reviled, he reviled not again' (1 Peter 2:23). His enemies' words
   were more bitter than the gall they gave him, but Christ's words were
   smoother than oil. He prayed and wept for his enemies. He calls us to
   learn of him: Learn of me, for I am meek' (Matthew 11:29). Christ does
   not bid us (says Augustine) learn of him to work miracles, to open the
   eyes of the blind, to raise the dead, but he would have us learn of him
   to be meek. If we do not imitate his life, we cannot be saved by his
   death.

   (ii) Let us set before our eyes the examples of some of the saints who
   have shined in this grace. Moses was a man of unparalleled meekness.
   Now the man Moses was very meek, above all the men which were upon the
   face of the earth' (Numbers 12:3). How many injuries did he put up?
   When the people of Israel murmured against him, instead of falling into
   a rage, he falls to prayer for them (Exodus 15:24, 25). The text says,
   they murmured at the waters of Marah. Sure the waters were not so
   bitter as the spirits of the people, but they could not provoke him to
   passion, but to petition. Another time when they wanted water, they
   fell a chiding with Moses. Wherefore is this that thou hast brought us
   up out of Egypt, to kill us and our children with thirst?' (Exodus
   17:3). As if they had said, If we die we will lay our death to your
   charge. Would not this exasperate? Surely it would have required the
   meekness of an angel to bear this, but behold Moses, meekness. He did
   not give them an unbecoming word! Though they were in a storm, he was
   in a calm. They chide, but he prays. Oh that as the spirit of Elijah
   rested upon Elisha, so may some of the spirit of Moses, this meek man
   (or rather earthly angel), rest upon us! Another eminent pattern of
   meekness was David. When Shimei cursed David, and Abishai, one of
   David's lifeguard, would have beheaded Shimei. No, says king David, Let
   him alone, and let him curse' (2 Samuel 16:11). And when Saul had
   wronged and abused David and it was in David's power to have taken Saul
   napping, and have killed him (1 Samuel 26:7, 12), yet he would not
   touch Saul, but called God to be umpire (verse 23). Here was a mirror
   of meekness.

   (iii) The examples of heathens. Though their meekness could not
   properly be called grace, because it did not grow upon the right stock
   of faith, yet it was very beautiful in its kind. When one reviled
   Pericles and followed him home to his gate at night, railing upon him,
   he answered not a word, but commanded one of his servants to light a
   torch, and bring the railer home to his own house. Frederick, Duke of
   Saxony, when he was angry, would shut himself up in his closet and let
   none come near him, till he had mastered his passion. Plutarch reports
   of the Pythagoreans, if they chanced to fall out in the day, they would
   embrace and be friends ere sunset. Cicero, in one of his Orations,
   reports of Pompey the Great that he was a man of a meek disposition. He
   admitted all to come to him so freely, and heard the complaints of them
   that were wronged so mildly, that he excelled all the princes before
   him. He was of that sweet temper that it was hard to say whether his
   enemies more feared his valour, or his subjects loved his meekness.
   Julius Caesar not only forgave Brutus and Cassius, his enemies, but
   advanced them. He thought himself most honoured by acts of clemency and
   meekness. Did the spring-head of nature rise so high, and shall not
   grace rise higher? Shall we debase faith below reason? Let us write
   according to these fair copies.

   2 Meekness is a great ornament to a Christian. The ornament of a meek
   spirit' (1 Peter 3:4). How amiable is a saint in God's eye when adorned
   with this jewel! What the psalmist says of praise (Psalm 33:1), the
   same may I say of meekness. It is comely for the righteous'. No garment
   is more becoming to a Christian than meekness. Therefore we are bid to
   put on this garment. Put on therefore as the elect of God, meekness'
   (Colossians 3:12) A meek spirit brings credit to religion and silences
   malice. It is the varnish that puts lustre upon holiness, and sets off
   the gospel with a better gloss.

   3 This is the way to be like God. God is meek towards them that provoke
   him. How many black mouths are opened daily against the Majesty of
   heaven? How do men tear his Name! vex his Spirit! crucify his Son
   afresh! They walk up and down the earth as so many devils covered with
   flesh, yet the Lord is meek, not willing that any should perish' (2
   Peter 3:9). How easily could God crush sinners, and kick them into
   hell! But he moderates his anger. Though he be full of majesty, yet
   full of meekness. In him is mixed princely greatness and fatherly
   mildness. As he has his sceptre of royalty, so his throne of grace. Oh
   how should this make us fall in love with meekness! Hereby we bear a
   kind of likeness to God. It is not profession makes us like God, but
   imitation. Where meekness is wanting, we are not like men. Where it is
   present, we are like God.

   4 Meekness argues a noble and excellent spirit. A meek man is a
   valorous man. He gets a victory over himself. Passion arises from
   imbecility and weakness. Therefore we may observe old men and children
   are more choleric than others. Strength of passion argues weakness of
   judgement, but the meek man who is able to conquer his fury, is the
   most puissant and victorious. He that is slow to anger is better than
   the mighty; and he that ruleth his spirit than he that taketh a city'
   (Proverbs 16:32). To yield to one's passion is easy. It is swimming
   along with the tide of corrupt nature, but to turn against nature, to
   resist passion, to overcome evil with good', this is like a Christian.
   This is that spiritual chivalry and fortitude of mind that deserves the
   trophies of victory and the garland of praise.

   5 Meekness is the best way to conquer and melt the heart of an enemy.
   When Saul lay at David's mercy and David only cut off the skirt of his
   robe, how was Saul's heart affected with David's meekness? Is this thy
   voice, my son David? And Saul lift up his voice and wept, and he said
   to David, Thou art more righteous than I, for thou hast rewarded me
   good, whereas I have rewarded thee evil; forasmuch as when the Lord had
   delivered me into thine hand, thou killedst me not; wherefore the Lord
   reward thee good . . .' (1 Samuel 24:16, 17). This heaping of coals'
   melts and thaws the heart of others. It is the greatest victory to
   overcome an enemy without striking a blow. The fire will go where the
   wedge cannot. Mildness prevails more than fierceness. Passion makes an
   enemy of a friend. Meekness makes a friend of an enemy. The meek
   Christian shall have letters testimonial even from his adversary. It is
   reported of Philip, king of Macedon, that when it was told him Nicanor
   openly railed against his Majesty, the king instead of putting him to
   death (as his council advised), sent Nicanor a rich present, which so
   overcame the man's heart, that he went up and down to recant what he
   had said against the king, and highly extolled the king's clemency.
   Roughness hardens men's hearts; meekness causes them to relent (2 Kings
   6:22). When the king of Israel feasted the captives he had taken in
   war, they were more conquered by his meekness than by his sword. The
   bands of Syria came no more into the land of Israel' (2 Kings 6:22)

   6 Consider the great promise in the text. The meek shall inherit the
   earth'. This argument perhaps will prevail with those who desire to
   have earthly possessions. Some may object, If I forbear and forgive, I
   shall lose my right at last and be turned out of all? No! God has here
   entered into bond, The meek shall inherit the earth'. The unmeek man is
   in a sad condition. There is no place remains for him but hell, for he
   has no promise made to him either of earth or heaven. It is the meek
   shall inherit the earth'.

   How do the meek inherit the earth when they are strangers in the earth?
   (Hebrews 11:37).

   The meek are said to inherit the earth, not that the earth is their
   chief inheritance, or that they have always the greatest share there,
   but:

   (i) They are the inheritors of the earth because, though they have not
   always the greatest part of the earth, yet they have the best right to
   it. The word inherit', says Ambrose, denotes the saints, title to the
   earth'. The saints' title is best, being members of Christ', who is
   Lord of all. Adam not only lost his title to heaven when he fell, but
   to the earth too; and till we are incorporated into Christ, we do not
   fully recover our title. I do not deny that the wicked have a civil
   right to the earth which the laws of the land give them, but not a
   sacred right. Only the meek Christian has a Scripture-title to his
   land. We count that the best title which is held in capite. The saints
   hold their right to the earth in capite, in their head, Christ, who is
   the prince of the kings of the earth (Revelation 1:5). In this sense,
   he who has but a foot of land inherits more than he who has a thousand
   acres, because he has a better and more juridical right to it.

   (ii) The meek Christian is said to inherit the earth, because he
   inherits the blessing of the earth. The wicked man has the earth, but
   not as a fruit of God's favour. He has it as a dog has poisoned bread.
   It does him more hurt than good. A wicked man lives in the earth as one
   that lives in an infectious air. He is infected by his mercies. The fat
   of the earth will but make him fry and blaze the more in hell. So that
   a wicked man may be said not to have what he has, because he has not
   the blessing; but the meek saint enjoys the earth as a pledge of God's
   love. The curse and poison is taken out of the earth: The meek shall
   inherit the earth and shall delight themselves in the abundance of
   peace' (Psalm 37:11), on which words Augustine gives this gloss: Wicked
   men (says he) may delight themselves in the abundance of cattle and
   riches, but the meek man delights himself in the abundance of peace.
   What he has he possesses with inward serenity and quietness.

   When it is said the meek shall inherit the earth, it does not intimate
   that they shall not inherit more than the earth. They shall inherit
   heaven too. If they should only inherit the earth, then (says
   Chrysostom) how could it be said, Blessed are the meek'? The meek have
   the earth only for their sojourning-house: they have heaven for their
   mansion-house. He will beautify the meek with salvation' (Psalm 149:4).
   The meek beautify religion, and God will beautify them with salvation.
   Salvation is the port we all desire to sail to. It is the harvest and
   vintage of souls. The meek are they which shall reap this harvest. The
   meek shall wear the embroidered robe of salvation. The meek are lords
   of the earth and heirs of salvation' (Hebrews 1:14).

   7 Consider the mischief of an unmeek spirit. There is nothing makes
   such room for the devil to come into the heart and take possession, as
   wrath and anger. Let not the sun go down upon your wrath, neither give
   place to the devil' (Ephesians 4:26, 27). When men let forth passion,
   they let in Satan. The wrathful man has the devil for his bedfellow.
   Passion hinders peace. The meek Christian has sweet quiet and harmony
   in his soul, but passion puts the soul into a disorder. It not only
   clouds reason, but disturbs conscience. He does not possess himself
   whom passion possesses. It is no wonder if they have no peace of
   conscience who make so little conscience of peace. Wrathfulness grieves
   the Spirit of God (Ephesians 4:30, 31), and if the Spirit be grieved,
   he will be gone. We do not care to stay in smoky houses. The Spirit of
   God does not love to be in that heart which is so full of the vapours
   and fumes of distempered passion.

   8 Another argument to cool the intemperate heat of our cursed hearts,
   is to consider that all the injuries and unkind usages we meet with
   from the world, do not fall out by chance, but are disposed of by the
   all-wise God for our good. Many are like the foolish cur that snarls at
   the stone, never looking to the hand that threw it; or like the horse,
   who being spurred by the rider, bites the snaffle. If we looked higher
   than instruments our hearts would grow meek and calm. David looked
   beyond Shimei's rage: Let him curse, for the Lord hath bidden him' (2
   Samuel 16:11). What wisdom were it for Christians to see the hand of
   God in all the barbarisms and incivilities of men! Job eyed God in his
   affliction, and that meekened his spirit. The Lord hath taken away,
   blessed be the name of the Lord, Job 1:21). He does not say, The
   Chaldeans have taken away, but The Lord hath taken away'. What made
   Christ so meek in his sufferings? He did not look at Judas or Pilate,
   but at his Father. The cup which my Father hath given me' (John 18:11).
   When wicked men revile and injure us, they are but God's executioners.
   Who is angry with the executioner?

   And as God has an hand in all the affronts and discourtesies we receive
   from men (for they but hand them over to us), so God will do us good by
   all if we belong to him. It may be' (says David) that the Lord will
   look upon mine affliction, and requite me good for his cursing' (2
   Samuel 16:12). Usually, when the Lord intends us some signal mercy, he
   fits us for it by some eminent trial. As Moses' hand was first leprous
   before it wrought salvation (Exodus 4:6), so God may let his people be
   belepered with the cursings and revilings of men before he shower down
   some blessings upon them. It may be the Lord will requite me good for
   his cursing this day.'

   9 Want of meekness evidences want of grace. True grace inflames love
   and moderates anger. Grace is like the file which smoothes the rough
   iron. It files off the ruggedness of a man's spirit. Grace says to the
   heart as Christ did to the angry sea, Peace, be still' (Mark 4:39). So
   where there is grace in the heart, it stills the raging of passion and
   makes a calm. He who is in a perpetual frenzy, letting loose the reins
   to wrath and malice, never yet felt the sweet efficacy of grace. It is
   one of the sins of the heathen to be implacable' (Romans 1:31). A
   revengeful cankered heart is not only heathenish, but devilish. If ye
   have bitter envying and strife in your hearts, this wisdom descendeth
   not from above, but is devilish' (James 3:14, 15). The old serpent
   spits forth the poison of malice and revenge.

   10 If all that has been said will not serve to master this
   bedlam-humour of wrath and anger, let me tell you, you are the persons
   whom God steaks of who hate to be reformed. You are rebels against the
   Word. Read and tremble: Now go, write it before them in a table, and
   note it in a book, that it may be for the time to come for ever and
   ever; that this is a rebellious people, children that will not hear the
   law of the Lord' (Isaiah 30:8, 9). If nothing yet said will charm down
   the wrathful devil, let me tell you, God hath charged every man not to
   meddle or have any league of friendship with you. Make no friendship
   with an angry man, and with a furious man thou shalt not go' (Proverbs
   22:24). What a monster is he among men, that every one is warned to
   beware of, and not to come near, as one who is unfit for humane
   society! Make no league, says God, with t h a t m a n. If you take him
   into your society, you take a snake into your bosom. With a furious man
   thou shalt not go'. Will you walk with the devil? The furious man is
   possessed with a wrathful devil.

   Oh that all this might help to meeken and sweeten Christians, spirits!

   But some will say, It is my nature to be passionate! I answer:

   (i) This is sinful arguing. It is secretly to lay our sin upon God. We
   learned this from Adam. The woman whom thou gavest to be with me, she
   gave me of the tree, and I did eat' (Genesis 3:12); rather than Adam
   would confess his sin, he would father it upon God. The woman thou
   gavest me'. As if he had said, If you had not given this woman to me, I
   had not eaten. So, says one, It is my nature; this is the froward,
   peevish nature God has given me. Oh no! you charge God falsely. God did
   not give you such a nature. He made man upright' (Ecclesiastes 7:29).
   God made you straight; you made yourself crooked. All your affections
   at first, your joy, love, anger were set in order as the stars in their
   right orb, but you misplaced them and made them move eccentric. At
   first the affections like several musical instruments well tuned, made
   a sweet consort, but sin was the jarring string that brought all out of
   tune. Vain man, do not plead that it is your nature to be angry; thank
   yourself for it. Nature's spring was pure till sin poisoned the spring.

   (ii) Is it your nature to be fierce and angry? This is so far from
   being an excuse, that it makes it so much the worse. It is the nature
   of a toad to poison that makes it the more hateful. If a man were
   indicted for stealing, and he should say to the judge, Spare me; it is
   my nature to steal', were this any excuse? The judge would say, You
   deserve the rather to die'. Sinner, get a new nature. Flesh and blood
   cannot enter into the kingdom of God'.

   What shall I do to be possessed of this excellent grace of meekness?

   1 Often look upon the meekness of Christ. The scholar that would write
   well has his eye often upon the copy.

   2 Pray earnestly that God will meeken your spirit. God is called the
   God of all grace' (1 Peter 5:10). He has all the graces in his gift.
   Sue to him for this grace of meekness. If one were patron of all the
   livings in the land, men would sue to him for a living. God is patron
   of all the graces. Let us sue to him. Mercy comes in at the door of
   prayer. I will yet for this be enquired of by the house of Israel to do
   it for them' (Ezekiel 36:26, 37). Meekness is the commodity we want.
   Let us send prayer as our factor over to heaven to procure it for us;
   and pray in faith. When faith sets prayer on work, prayer sets God on
   work. All divine blessings come streaming to us through this golden
   channel of prayer.
     __________________________________________________________________

13. The nature of spiritual hunger

   Blessed are they which do hunger and thirst after righteousness

   Matthew 5:6

   We are now come to the fourth step of blessedness: Blessed are they
   that hunger'. The words fall into two parts: a duty implied; a promise
   annexed.

   A duty implied: Blessed are they that hunger'. Spiritual hunger is a
   blessed hunger.

   What is meant by hunger? Hunger is put for desire (Isaiah 26:9).
   Spiritual hunger is the rational appetite whereby the soul pants after
   that which it apprehends most suitable and proportional to itself.

   Whence is this hunger? Hunger is from the sense of want. He who
   spiritually hungers, has a real sense of his own indigence. He wants
   righteousness.

   What is meant by righteousness? There is a twofold righteousness: of
   imputation; of implantation.

   A righteousness of imputation, namely, Christ's righteousness. He shall
   be called the Lord our righteousness' (Jeremiah 23:6). This is as truly
   ours to justify, as it is Christ's to bestow. By virtue of this
   righteousness God looks upon us as if we had never sinned (Numbers
   23:21). This is a perfect righteousness. Ye are complete in him'
   (Colossians 2:10). This does not only cover but adorn. He who has this
   righteousness is equal to the most illustrious saints. The weakest
   believer is justified as much as the strongest. This is a Christian's
   triumph. When he is defiled in himself, he is undefiled in his Head. In
   this blessed righteousness we shine brighter than the angels. This
   righteousness is worth hungering after.

   A righteousness of implantation: that is, inherent righteousness,
   namely, the graces of the Spirit, holiness of heart and life, which
   Cajetan calls universal righteousness'. This a pious soul hungers
   after. This is a blessed hunger. Bodily hunger cannot make a man so
   miserable as spiritual hunger makes him blessed. This evidences life. A
   dead man cannot hunger. Hunger proceeds from life. The first thing the
   child does when it is born, is to hunger after the breast. Spiritual
   hunger follows upon the new birth (1 Peter 2:2). Saint Bernard in one
   of his Soliloquies comforts himself with this, that sure he had the
   truth of grace in him, because he had in his heart a strong desire
   after God. It is happy when, though we have not what we should, we
   desire what we have not. The appetite is as well from God as the food.

   1 See here at what a low price God sets heavenly things. It is but
   hungering and thirsting. Ho, every one that thirsteth, come ye to the
   waters, buy without money' (Isaiah 55:1). We are not bid to bring any
   merits as the Papists would do, nor to bring a sum of money to purchase
   righteousness. Rich men would be loath to do that. All that is required
   is to bring an appetite. Christ hath fulfilled all righteousness'. We
   are only to hunger and thirst after righteousness'. This is equal and
   reasonable. God does not require rivers of oil, but sighs and tears.
   The invitation of the gospel is free. If a friend invites guests to his
   table, he does not expect they should bring money to pay for their
   dinner, only come with an appetite. So, says God, It is not penance,
   pilgrimage, self-righteousness I require. Only bring a stomach: hunger
   and thirst after righteousness'. God might have set Christ and
   salvation at an higher price, but he has much beaten down the price.
   Now as this shows the sweetness of God's nature he is not a hard master
   so it shows us the inexcusableness of those who perish under the
   gospel. What apology can any man make at the day of judgement, when God
   shall ask that question, Friend, why did you not embrace Christ? I set
   Christ and grace at a low rate. If you had but hungered after
   righteousness, you might have had it, but you slighted Christ. You had
   such low thoughts of righteousness that you would not hunger after it.
   How do you think to escape who have neglected 'so great salvation'? The
   easier the terms of the gospel are, the sorer punishment shall they be
   thought worthy of who unworthy refuse such an offer.

   2 It shows us a true character of a godly man. He hungers and thirsts
   after spiritual things (Isaiah 26:9; Psalm 73:25). A true saint is
   carried upon the wing of desire. It is the very temper and constitution
   of a gracious soul to thirst after God (Psalm 42:2). In the word
   preached, how he is big with desire! These are some of the partings of
   his soul: Lord, thou hast led me into thy courts. O that I may have thy
   sweet presence, that thy glory may fill the temple! This is thy limping
   house; wilt thou draw some sacred lineaments of grace upon my soul that
   I may be more assimilated and changed into the likeness of my dear
   Saviour. In prayer, how is the soul filled with passionate longings
   after Christ! Prayer is expressed by groans unutterable' (Romans 8:26).
   The heart sends up whole volleys of sighs to heaven; Lord, one beam of
   thy love! one drop of thy blood!

   It reproves such as have none of this spiritual hunger. They have no
   winged desires. The edge of their affections is blunted. Honey is not
   sweet to them that are sick of a fever and have their tongues
   embittered with choler.' So those who are soul-sick and in the gall of
   bitterness', find no sweetness in God or religion. Sin tastes sweeter
   to them; they have no spiritual hunger. That men do not have this
   hunger after righteousness' appears by these seven demonstrations:

   1 They never felt any emptiness. They are full of their own
   righteousness (Romans 10:3). Now the full stomach loathes the
   honeycomb'. This was Laodicea's disease. She was full and had no
   stomach either to Christ's gold or eye-salve (Revelation 3:17). When
   men are filled with pride, this flatulent distemper hinders holy
   longings. As when the stomach is full of wind it spoils the appetite.
   None so empty of grace as he that thinks he is full. He has most need
   of righteousness that least wants it.

   2 That men do not hunger after righteousness appears because they can
   make a shift well enough to be without it. If they have oil in the
   cruse, the world coming in, they are well content. Grace is a commodity
   that is least missed. You shall hear men complain they lack health,
   they lack trading, but never complain they lack righteousness. If men
   lose a meal or two they think themselves half undone, but they can stay
   away from ordinances which are the conduits of grace. Do they hunger
   after righteousness who are satisfied without it? Nay, who desire to be
   excused from feeding upon the gospel banquet (Luke 14:18). Sure he has
   no appetite, who entreats to be excused from eating.

   3 It is a sign they have none of this spiritual hunger, who desire
   rather sleep than food. They are more drowsy than hungry. Some there
   are who come to the Word that they may get a nap, to whom I may say as
   Christ did to Peter, Couldest thou not watch one hour?' (Mark 14:37).
   It is strange to see a man asleep at his meat. Others there are who
   have a deep sleep' fallen upon them. They are asleep in security and
   they hate a soul-awakening ministry. While they sleep, their damnation
   slumbereth not' (2 Peter 2:3).

   4 It appears that men have no spiritual hunger because they refuse
   their food. Christ and grace are offered, nay, pressed upon them, but
   they put away salvation from them as the froward child puts away the
   breast (Psalm 81:11; Acts 13:46). Such are your fanatics and
   enthusiasts who put away the blessed ordinances and pretend to
   revelations. That is a strange revelation that tells a man he may live
   without food. These prefer husks before manna. They live upon airy
   notions, being fed by the prince of the air'.

   5 It is a sign they have none of this spiritual hunger who delight more
   in the garnishing of the dish than in food. These are they who look
   more after elegance and notion in preaching than solid matter. It
   argues either a wanton palate or a surfeited stomach to feed on salads
   and fancy dishes, neglecting wholesome food. If any man consent not to
   wholesome words, he is proud, knowing nothing . . .' (1 Timothy 6:3,
   4). The plainest truth has its beauty. They have no spiritual hunger
   that desire only to feast their fancy. Of such the prophet speaks: Thou
   art to them as a very lovely song of one that hath a pleasant voice,
   and can play well on an instrument' (Ezekiel 33:32). If a man were
   invited to a feast, and there being music at the feast, he should so
   listen to the music that he did not mind his meat, you would say, Sure
   he is not hungry. So when men are for jingling words and like rather
   gallantry of speech than spirituality of matter, it is a sign they have
   surfeited stomachs and itching ears'.

   6 They evidence little hunger after righteousness that prefer other
   things before it, namely, their profits and recreations. If a boy when
   he should be at dinner is playing in the street, it is a sign that he
   has no appetite to his meat. Were he hungry he would not prefer his
   play before his food. So when men prefer vain things which cannot
   profit' before the blood of Christ and the grace of the Spirit, it is a
   sign they have no palate or stomach to heavenly things.

   7 It is a sign men have no spiritual hunger when they are more for
   disputes in religion than practice. Robert of Gaul thought he saw in
   his dream a great feast, and some were biting on hard stones. When men
   feed only on hard questions and controversies (1 Timothy 6:3, 4) (like
   some of the schoolmen's utrums' and distinctions), as whether one may
   partake with him that does not have the work of grace in his heart,
   whether one ought not to separate from a church in case of
   mal-administration, what is to be thought of paedobaptism, etc. When
   these niceties and criticisms in religion take men's heads, neglecting
   faith and holiness, these pick bones and do not feed on the meat.
   Sceptics in religion have hot brains but cold hearts. Did men hunger
   and thirst after righteousness they would propound to themselves such
   questions as these, How shall we do to be saved? How shall we make our
   calling and election sure? How shall we mortify our corruptions? But
   such as ravel out their time in frothy and litigious disputes, I call
   heaven to witness, they are strangers to this text. They do not hunger
   and thirst after righteousness'.

   The Word reproves them who, instead of hungering and thirsting after
   righteousness, thirst after riches. This is the thirst of covetous men.
   They desire mammon not manna. They pant after the dust of the earth'
   (Amos 2:7). This is the disease most are afflicted with, an immoderate
   appetite after the world, but these things will no more satiate than
   drink will quench the thirst of a man with the dropsy. Covetousness is
   idolatry (Colossians 3:5). Too many Protestants set up the idol of gold
   in the temple of their hearts. This sin of covetousness is the most
   hard to root out. Commonly, when other sins leave men, this sin abides.
   Wantonness is the sin of youth; worldliness the sin of old age.

   The Word reproves them who hunger and thirst after unrighteousness.
   Here I shall indict three sorts of persons:

   1 It reproves such as thirst after other men's lands and possessions.
   This the Scripture calls a mighty sin' (Amos 5:12). Thus Ahab thirsted
   after Naboth's vineyard. This is an hungry age wherein we live. We have
   a great deal of this hungering and thirsting, which has made so many
   state-thieves. Men have fleeced others to feather themselves. What a
   brave challenge did Samuel make; Behold, here I am, witness against me
   before the Lord, and before his anointed: Whose ox have I taken? Or
   whose ass have I taken? Or whom have I defrauded? Of whose hand have I
   received any bribe? ...' (1 Samuel 12:3). Few that have been in power
   that can say thus, Whose ox have we taken? Whose house have we
   plundered? Whose estate have we sequestered? Nay, whose ox have they
   not taken? Goods unjustly gotten seldom go to the third heir'. Read the
   plunderer's curse: Woe to thee that spoilest, and thou wast not
   spoiled; when thou shalt cease to spoil, thou shalt be spoiled' (Isaiah
   33:1). Ahab paid dear for the vineyard when the devil carried away his
   soul and the dogs licked his blood' (1 Kings 21:19). He that lives on
   rapine dies a fool. He that getteth riches, and not by right, at his
   end shall be a fool' (Jeremiah 17:11).

   2 It reproves such as hunger and thirst after revenge. This is a
   devilish thirst. Though it were more Christian and safe to smother an
   injury, yet our nature is prone to this disease of revenge. We have the
   sting of the bee, not the honey. Malice having broken the bars of
   reason grows savage and carries its remedy in the scabbard. Heathens
   who have stopped the vein of revengeful passion when it has begun to
   vent, will rise up against Christians. I have read of Phocion who,
   being wrongfully condemned to die, desired that his son might not
   remember the injuries which the Athenians had done to him, nor revenge
   his blood.

   3 It reproves such as hunger and thirst to satisfy their impure lusts.
   Sinners are said to sin with greediness' (Ephesians 4:19). So Amnon was
   sick till he had defiled Tamar's chastity (2 Samuel 13). Never does an
   hungry man come with more eagerness to his food than a wicked man does
   to his sin. And when Satan sees men have such an appetite, commonly he
   will provide a dish they love. He will set the forbidden tree' before
   them. They that thirst to commit sin shall thirst as Dives did in hell
   and not have a drop of water to cool their tongue.

   Let us put ourselves upon a trial whether we hunger and thirst after
   righteousness. I shall give you five signs by which you may judge of
   this hunger.

   1 Hunger is a painful thing. Esau, when he was returning from hunting,
   was almost dead with hunger (Genesis 25:32). Hungry and thirsty, their
   soul fainted in them' (Psalm 107:5). So a man that hungers after
   righteousness is in anguish of soul and ready to faint away for it. He
   finds a want of Christ and grace. He is distressed and in pain till he
   has his spiritual hunger stilled and allayed.

   2 Hunger is satisfied with nothing but food. Bring an hungry man
   flowers, music; tell him pleasant stories; nothing will content him but
   food. Shall I die for thirst?' says Samson (Judges 15:18). So a man
   that hungers and thirsts after righteousness says, Give me Christ or I
   die. Lord, what wilt thou give me seeing I go Christless? What though I
   have parts, wealth, honour and esteem in the world? All is nothing
   without Christ. Shew me the Lord and it will suffice me. Let me have
   Christ to clothe me, Christ to feed me, Christ to intercede for me.
   While the soul is Christless, it is restless. Nothing but the
   water-springs of Christ's blood can quench its thirst.

   3 Hunger wrestles with difficulties and makes an adventure for food. We
   say hunger breaks through stone walls (cf. Genesis 42:1, 2). The soul
   that spiritually hungers is resolved; Christ it must have; grace it
   must have. And to use Basil's expression, the hungry soul is almost
   distracted till it enjoys the thing it hungers after.

   4 An hungry man falls to his meat with an appetite. You need not make
   an oration to an hungry man and persuade him to eat. So he who hungers
   after righteousness feeds eagerly on an ordinance. Thy words were
   found, and I did eat them' (Jeremiah 15:16). In the sacrament he feeds
   with appetite upon the body and blood of the Lord. God loves to see us
   feed hungrily on the bread of life.

   5 An hungry man tastes sweetness in his meat. So he that hungers after
   righteousness relishes a sweetness in heavenly things. Christ is to him
   all marrow, yea the quintessence of delights. If so be ye have tasted
   that the Lord is gracious' (1 Peter 2:3). He that spiritually hungers
   tastes the promises sweet, nay tastes a reproof sweet. To the hungry
   soul every bitter thing is sweet' (Proverbs 27:7). A bitter reproof is
   sweet. He can feed upon the myrrh of the gospel as well as the honey.
   By these notes of trial we may judge of ourselves whether we hunger and
   thirst after righteousness.

   The words may serve to comfort the hearts of those who hunger and
   thirst after righteousness; I doubt not but it is the grief of many a
   good heart that he cannot be more holy, that he cannot serve God
   better. Blessed are they that hunger'. Though you do not have so much
   righteousness as you would, yet you are blessed because you hunger
   after it. Desire is the best discovery of a Christian. Actions may be
   counterfeit. A man may do a good action for a bad end. So did Jehu.
   Actions may be compulsory. A man may be forced to do that which is
   good, but not to will that which is good. Therefore we are to cherish
   good desires and to bless God for them. Oftentimes a child of God has
   nothing to show for himself but desires. Thy servants, who desire to
   fear thy name' (Nehemiah 1:11). These hungerings after righteousness
   proceed from love. A man does not desire that which he does not love.
   If you did not love Christ, you could not hunger after him.

   But some may say, If my hunger were right then I could take comfort in
   it, but I fear it is counterfeit. Hypocrites have their desires.

   In reply, that I may the better settle a doubting Christian I shall
   show the difference between true and false desires, spiritual hunger
   and carnal.

   1 The hypocrite does not desire grace for itself. He desires grace only
   as a bridge to lead him over to heaven. He does not so much search
   after grace as glory. He does not so much desire the way of
   righteousness as the crown of righteousness. His desire is not to be
   made like Christ, but to reign with Christ. This was Balaam's desire.
   Let me die the death of the righteous' (Numbers 23:10). Such desires as
   these are found among the damned. This is the hypocrite's hunger. But a
   child of God desires grace for itself and Christ for himself. To a
   believer not only is heaven precious but Christ is precious (1 Peter
   2:7).

   2 The hypocrite's desire is conditional. He would have heaven and his
   sins too, heaven and his pride, heaven and his covetousness. The young
   man in the gospel would have had heaven, provided he might keep his
   earthly possessions. Many a man would have Christ, but there is some
   sin he must not be uncivil to, but gratify. This is the hypocrites'
   hunger; but true desire is absolute. Give me, says the soul, Christ on
   any terms. Let God propound what articles he will, I will subscribe to
   them. Would he have me deny myself? Would he have me mortify sin? I am
   content to do anything so I may have Christ. Hypocrites would have
   Christ, but they are loath to part with a lust for him. They are like a
   man that would have a lease, but is loath to pay down the fine.

   3 Hypocrites' desires are but desires. They are lazy and sluggish. When
   one excited Lipsius to the study of virtue, says he, My mind is to it'.
   The desire of the slothful killeth him, for his hands refuse to labour'
   (Proverbs 21:25). Many stand as the waggoner in the fable crying, Help,
   Hercules', when his wain stuck in the mud, when he should rather have
   put his shoulder to the wheel. Men would be saved but they will take no
   pains. Does he desire water that will not let down the bucket into the
   well? But true desire is quickened into endeavour. With my soul have I
   desired thee in the night; yea, with my spirit within me will I seek
   thee early' (Isaiah 26:9). The violent, take heaven by force (Matthew
   11:12). The lovesick spouse, though she was wounded, and her vail taken
   away, yet she follows after Christ (Canticles 5:7). Desire is the
   weight of the soul which sets it a going; as the eagle which desires
   her prey makes haste to it. Where the slain are, there is she' (Job
   39:30). The eagle has sharpness of sight to discover her prey, and
   swiftness of wing to fly to it. So the soul that hungers after
   righteousness is carried swiftly to it in the use of all holy
   ordinances.

   4 The hypocrite's desires are cheap. He would have spiritual things,
   but will be at no charges for them. He cares not how much money he
   parts with for his lusts; he has money to spend upon a drunken
   companion; but he has no money to part with for the maintaining of
   God's ordinances. Hypocrites cry up religion, but cry down maintenance
   of ministers. But true desires are costly. David would not offer
   burnt-offerings without cost (1 Chronicles 21:24). An hungry man will
   give anything for food; as it fell out in the siege of Samaria (2 Kings
   6:25). That man never hungered after Christ who thinks much of parting
   with a little silver for the Pearl of price'.

   5 Hypocrites' desires are flashy and transient. They are quickly gone,
   like the wind that does not stay long in one corner. Or like an hot fit
   which is soon over. While the hypocrite is under legal terror, or in
   affliction, he has some good desires, but the hot fit is soon over. His
   goodness, like a fiery comet, soon spends and evaporates; but true
   desire is constant. It is observable that the Greek word in the text is
   in the participle: Blessed are they that are hungering.' Though they
   have righteousness, yet they are still hungering after more. Hypocrites
   desire it like the motion of a watch which is quickly down. The desire
   of a godly man is like the beating of the pulse which lasts as long as
   life. My soul breaketh for the longing that it hath to thy judgements'
   (Psalm 119:20). And that we might not think this pang of desire would
   soon be over he adds, at all times'. David's desire after God was not
   an high colour in a fit, but the constant complexion of his soul. In
   the temple the fire was not to go out by night. The fire shall ever be
   burning upon the altar' (Leviticus 6:13). There was, says Cyril, a
   mystery in it, to show that we must be ever burning in holy affections
   and desires.

   6 Hypocrites' desires are unseasonable. They are not well-timed. They
   put off their hungering after righteousness till it be too late. They
   are like the foolish virgins that came knocking when the door was shut
   (Matthew 25:11). In time of health and prosperity the stream of the
   affections ran another way. It was sin the hypocrite desired, not
   righteousness. When he is to die and can keep his sins no longer, now
   he would have grace as a passport to carry him to heaven (Luke 13:25).
   This is the hypocrite's fault. His faith is too early and his desires
   are too late. His faith began to bud in the morning of his infancy; he
   believed ever since he could remember, but his desires after Christ
   begin not to put forth till the evening of old age. He sends forth his
   desires when his last breath is going forth; as if a man should desire
   a pardon after the sentence is passed. These bed-rid desires are
   suspicious; but true desires are timely and seasonable. A gracious
   heart 'seeks first the Kingdom of God' (Matthew 6:33). David's thirst
   after God was early (Psalm 63:1). The wise virgins got their oil
   betimes before the bridegroom came. Thus we see the difference between
   a true and false hunger. They who can find this true hunger are blessed
   and may take comfort in it.

   But some may object: My hunger after righteousness is so weak, that I
   fear it is not true.

   I answer: Though the pulse beats but weak it shows there is life. And
   that weak desires should not be discouraged, there is a promise made to
   them. A bruised reed he will not break' (Matthew 12:20). A reed is a
   weak thing, but especially when it is bruised, yet this bruised reed'
   shall not be broken, but like Aaron's dry rod, bud and blossom'. In
   case of weakness look to Christ your High Priest. He is merciful,
   therefore will bear with your infirmities; he is mighty, therefore will
   help them.

   Further, if your desires after righteousness seem to be weak and
   languid, yet a Christian may sometimes take a measure of his spiritual
   estate as well by the judgement as by the affections. What is that you
   esteem most in your judgement? Is it Christ and grace? This is good
   evidence for heaven. It was a sign that Paul bore entire love to Christ
   because he esteemed this Pearl above all. He counted other things but
   dung, that he might win Christ' (Philippians 3:8).

   But, says a child of God, that which much eclipses my comfort is, I
   have not that hunger which I once had. Time was when I did hunger after
   a Sabbath because then the manna fell. I called the Sabbath a delight'.
   I remember the time when I hungered after the body and blood of the
   Lord. I came to a sacrament as an hungry man to a feast, but now it is
   otherwise with me. I do not have those hungerings as formerly.

   I answer: It is indeed an ill sign for a man to lose his stomach, but,
   though it be a sign of the decay of grace to lose the spiritual
   appetite, yet it is a sign of the truth of grace to bewail the loss. It
   is sad to lose our first love, but it is happy when we mourn for the
   loss of our first love.

   If you do not have that appetite after heavenly things as formerly, yet
   do not be discouraged, for in the use of means you may recover your
   appetite. The ordinances are for the recovering of the appetite when it
   is lost. In other cases feeding takes away the stomach, but here,
   feeding on an ordinance begets a stomach.

   The text exhorts us all to labour after this spiritual hunger.
   Novarinus says, It is too small a thing merely to wish for
   righteousness; but we must hunger for it on account of a vast longing
   making itself felt.' Hunger less after the world and more after
   righteousness. Say concerning spiritual things, Lord, evermore give us
   this bread. Feed me with this angels' food'. That manna is most to be
   hungered after which will not only preserve life but prevent death
   (John 6:50). That is most desirable which is most durable. Riches are
   not for ever (Proverbs 27:24) but righteousness is for ever (Proverbs
   8:18). The beauty of holiness, never fades (Psalm 110:3). The robe of
   righteousness' (Isaiah 61:10) never waxes old! Oh hunger after that
   righteousness which delivereth from death' (Proverbs 10:12). This is
   the righteousness which God himself is in love with. He loveth him that
   followeth after righteousness' (Proverbs 15:9). All men are ambitious
   of the king's favour. Alas, what is a prince's smile but a transient
   beatitude? This sunshine of his royal countenance soon masks itself
   with a cloud of displeasure, but those who are endued with
   righteousness are God's favourites, and how sweet is his smile! Thy
   loving-kindness is better than life' (Psalm 63:3).

   To persuade men to hunger after this righteousness, consider two
   things.

   1 Unless we hunger after righteousness we cannot obtain it. God will
   never throw away his blessings upon them that do not desire them. A
   king may say to a rebel, Do but desire a pardon and you shall have it;
   but if through pride and stubbornness he disdains to sue out his
   pardon, he deserves justly to die. God has set spiritual blessings at a
   low rate. Do but hunger and you shall have righteousness; but if we
   refuse to come up to these terms there is no righteousness to be had
   for us. God will stop the current of his mercy and set open the sluice
   of his indignation.

   2 If we do not thirst here we shall thirst when it is too late. If we
   do not thirst as David did My soul thirsteth for God' (Psalm 42:2) we
   shall thirst as Dives did for a drop of water (Luke 16:24). They who do
   not thirst for righteousness shall be in perpetual hunger and thirst.
   They shall thirst for mercy, but no mercy to be had. Heat increases
   thirst. When men shall burn in hell and be scorched with the flames of
   God's wrath, this heat will increase their thirst for mercy but there
   will be nothing to allay their thirst. O is it not better to thirst for
   righteousness while it is to be had, than to thirst for mercy when
   there is none to be had? Sinners, the time is shortly coming when the
   drawbridge of mercy will be quite pulled up.

   I shall next briefly describe some helps to spiritual hunger.

   1 Avoid those things which will hinder your appetite: As windy things'.
   When the stomach is full of wind a man has little appetite to his food.
   So when one is filled with a windy opinion of his own righteousness, he
   will not hunger after Christ's righteousness. He who, being puffed up
   with pride, thinks he has grace enough already will not hunger after
   more. These windy vapours spoil the stomach. Sweet things' destroy the
   appetite. So by feeding immoderately upon the sweet luscious delights
   of the world, we lose our appetite to Christ and grace. You never knew
   a man surfeit himself upon the world, and at the same time be 'sick of
   love' to Christ. While Israel fed with delight upon garlic and onions,
   they never hungered after manna. The soul cannot be carried to two
   extremes at once. As the eye cannot look intent on heaven and earth at
   once, so a man cannot at the same instant hunger excessively after the
   world, and after righteousness! The earth puts out the fire. The love
   of earthly things will quench the desire of spiritual. Love not the
   world' (1 John 2:15). The sin is not in the having, but in the loving.

   2 Do all that may provoke spiritual appetite. There are two things that
   provoke appetite. Exercise: a man by walking and stirring gets a
   stomach to his meat. So by the exercise of holy duties the spiritual
   appetite is increased. Exercise thyself unto godliness' (1 Timothy
   4:7). Many have left off closet prayer. They hear the Word but seldom,
   and for want of exercise they have lost their stomach to religion.
   Sauce: sauce whets and sharpens the appetite. There is a twofold sauce
   provokes holy appetite: first, the bitter herbs' of repentance. He that
   tastes gall and vinegar in sin hungers after the body and blood of the
   Lord. Second, affliction. God often gives us this sauce to sharpen our
   hunger after grace. Reuben found mandrakes in the field' (Genesis
   30:14). The mandrakes are an herb of a very strong savour, and among
   other virtues they have, they are chiefly medicinal for those who have
   weak and bad stomachs. Afflictions may be compared to these mandrakes,
   which sharpen men's desires after that spiritual food which in time of
   prosperity they began to loathe and nauseate. Penury is the sauce which
   cures the surfeit of plenty. In sickness people hunger more after
   righteousness than in health. The full soul loathes the honeycomb'
   (Proverbs 27:7). Christians, when full fed, despise the rich cordials
   of the gospel. I wish we did not slight those truths now which would
   taste sweet in a prison. How precarious was a leaf of the Bible in
   Queen Mary's days! The wise God sees it good sometimes to give us the
   sharp sauce of affliction, to make us feed more hungrily upon the bread
   of life. And so much for the first part of the text, Blessed are they
   that hunger.
     __________________________________________________________________

14. Spiritual hunger shall be satisfied

   They shall be filled.

   Matthew 5:6

   I proceed now to the second part of the text. A promise annexed. They
   shall be filled'. A Christian fighting with sin is not like one that
   beats the air' (1 Corinthians 9:26), and his hungering after
   righteousness is not like one that sucks in only air, Blessed are they
   that hunger, for they shall be filled.'

   Those that hunger after righteousness shall be filled. God never bids
   us seek him in vain' (Isaiah 45:19). Here is an honeycomb dropping into
   the mouths of the hungry, they shall be filled'. He hath filled the
   hungry with good things' (Luke 1:53). He satisfieth the longing soul'
   (Psalm 107:9). God will not let us lose our longing. Here is the
   excellency of righteousness above all things. A man may hunger after
   the world and not be filled. The world is fading, not filling. Cast
   three worlds into the heart, yet the heart is not full. But
   righteousness is a filling thing; nay, it so fills that it satisfies. A
   man may be filled and not satisfied. A sinner may take his fill of sin,
   but that is a sad filling. It is far from satisfaction. The backslider
   in heart shall be filled with his own ways' (Proverbs 14:14). He shall
   have his belly full of sin; he shall have enough of it, but this is not
   a filling to satisfaction. This is such a filling that the damned in
   hell have. They shall be full of the fury of the Lord. But he that
   hungers after righteousness shall be satisfyingly filled. My people
   shall be satisfied with my goodness' (Jeremiah 31:14). My soul shall be
   satisfied as with marrow' (Psalm 63:5). Joseph first opened the mouth
   of the sacks, and then filled them with corn and put money in them
   (Genesis 42:25). So God first opens the mouth of the soul with desire
   and then fills it with good things (Psalm 81:10). For the illustration
   of this, consider these three things: that God can fill the hungry
   soul; why he fills the hungry soul; how he fills the hungry soul.

   1 That God can fill the hungry soul. He is called a fountain. With thee
   is the fountain of life' (Psalm 36:9). The cistern may be empty and
   cannot fill us. Creatures are often broken cisterns' (Jeremiah 2:13).
   But the fountain is filling. God is a fountain. If we bring the vessels
   of our desires to this fountain, he is able to fill them. The fullness
   in God is an infinite fullness. Though he fill us and the angels which
   have larger capacities to receive, yet he has never the less himself.
   As the sun, though it shines, has never the less light. I perceive that
   virtue is gone out of me' (Luke 8:46). Though God lets virtue go out of
   him, yet he has never the less. The fullness of the creature is
   limited. It arises just to such a degree and proportion; but God's
   fullness is infinite; as it has its resplendence, so its redundancy.'
   It knows neither bounds nor bottom.

   It is a constant fullness. The fullness of the creature is a mutable
   fullness; it ebbs and changes. I could, says one, have helped you, but
   now my estate is low. The blossoms of the fig-tree are soon blown off.
   Creatures cannot do that for us which once they could. But God is a
   constant fullness. Thou art the same' (Psalm 102:27). God can never be
   exhausted. His fullness is overflowing and ever-flowing. Then surely it
   is good to draw nigh to God' (Psalm 73:28). It is good bringing our
   vessels to this spring-head. It is a never-failing goodness.

   2 Why God fills the hungry soul. The reasons are:

   (i) God will fill the hungry soul out of his tender compassion. He
   knows that else the spirit would fail before him and the soul which he
   has made' (Isaiah 57:16). If the hungry man be not satisfied with food
   he dies. God has more bowels than to suffer an hungry soul to be
   famished. When the multitude had nothing to eat, Christ was moved with
   compassion and he wrought a miracle for their supply (Matthew 15:32).
   Much more will he compassionate such as hunger and thirst after
   righteousness. When a poor sinner sees himself almost starved in his
   sins (as the prodigal among his husks) and begins to hunger after
   Christ, saying, there is bread enough and to spare in my Father's
   house', God will then out of his infinite compassions bring forth the
   fatted calf and refresh his soul with the delicacies and provisions of
   the gospel. Oh the melting of God's bowels to an hungry sinner! Mine
   heart is turned within me, my repentings are kindled' (Hosea 11:8) We
   cannot see a poor creature at the door ready to perish with hunger, but
   our bowels begin to relent and we afford him some relief. And will the
   Father of mercies let a poor soul that hungers after the blessings of
   the gospel go away without an alms of free grace? No, he will not; he
   cannot. Let the hungry sinner think thus, Though I am full of wants,
   yet my God is full of bowels.

   (ii) God will fill the hungry that he may fulfil his Word. Blessed are
   ye that hunger now: for ye shall be filled' (Psalm 107:9; Jeremiah
   31:14; Luke 6:21). I will pour water upon him that is thirsty, I will
   pour my Spirit upon thy seed . . .' (Isaiah 44:3). Has the Lord spoken
   and shall it not come to pass? Promises are obligatory. If God has
   passed a promise, he cannot go back. You who hunger after righteousness
   have God engaged for you. He has (to speak with reverence) pawned his
   truth for you. As his compassions fail not' (Lamentations 3:22), so he
   will not suffer his faithfulness to fail' (Psalm 89:33). If the hungry
   soul should not be filled, the promise would not be fulfilled.

   (iii) God will fill the hungry soul because he himself has excited and
   stirred up this hunger. He plants holy desires in us, and will not he
   satisfy those desires which he himself has wrought in us? As in the
   case of prayer, when God prepares the heart to pray, he prepares his
   ear to hear (Psalm 10:17); so in the case of spiritual hunger, when God
   prepares the heart to hunger, he will prepare his hand to fill. It is
   not rational to imagine that God should deny to satisfy that hunger
   which he himself has caused. Nature does nothing in vain. Should the
   Lord inflame the desire after righteousness and not fill it, he might
   seem to do something in vain.

   (iv) God will fill the hungry because of those sweet relations he
   stands unto them; they are his children. We cannot deny our children
   when they are hungry. We will rather spare it from our own selves (Luke
   11:13). When he that is born of God shall come and say, Father, I
   hunger, give me Christ; Father, I thirst, refresh me with the living
   streams of thy Spirit, can God deny? Does God hear the raven when it
   cries, and will he not hear the righteous when they cry? When the earth
   opens its mouth and thirsts God satisfies it (Psalm 65:9, 10). Does the
   Lord satisfy the thirsty earth with showers and will he not satisfy the
   thirsty soul with grace?

   (v) God will satisfy the hungry because the hungry soul is most
   thankful for mercy. When the restless desire has been drawn out after
   God, and God fills it, how thankful is a Christian! The Lord loves to
   bestow his mercy where he may have most praise. We delight to give to
   them that are thankful. Musicians love to play where there is the best
   sound. God loves to bestow his mercies where he may hear of them again.
   The hungry soul sets the crown of praise upon the head of free grace.
   Whoso offereth praise glorifies me' (Psalm 50:23).

   3 How God fills the hungry soul. There is threefold filling: with
   grace; with peace; with bliss.

   (i) God fills the hungry soul with grace. Grace is filling because
   suitable to the soul. Stephen was full of the Holy Ghost' (Acts 7:55).
   This fullness of grace is in respect of parts, not of degrees. There is
   something of every grace, though not perfection in any grace.

   (ii) God fills the hungry soul with peace. The God of hope fill you
   with all joy and peace' (Romans 15:13). This flows from Christ. Israel
   had honey out of the rock. This honey of peace comes out of the rock,
   Christ. That in me ye might have peace' (John 16:33). So filling is
   this peace that it sets the soul a-longing after heaven. This cluster
   of grapes quickens the appetite and pursuit after the full crop.

   (iii) God fills the hungry soul with bliss. Glory is a filling thing.
   When I awake I shall be satisfied with thy image' (Psalm 17:15). When a
   Christian awakes out of the sleep of death then he shall be satisfied,
   having the glorious beams of God's image shining upon him. Then shall
   the soul be filled brimful. The glory of heaven is so sweet that the
   soul shall still thirst, yet so infinite that it shall be filled. They
   who drink of thee, O Christ, being refreshed with sweet torrents, shall
   not continue to thirst yet they shall thirst'.

   What an encouragement is this to hunger after righteousness! Such shall
   be filled. God charges us to fill the hungry (Isaiah 58:10). He blames
   those who do not fill the hungry (Isaiah 32:6). And do we think he will
   be slack in that which he blames us for not doing? Oh come with
   hungerings after Christ and be assured of satisfaction. God keeps open
   house for hungry sinners. He invites his guests and bids them come
   without money (Isaiah 55:1, 2). God's nature inclines him and his
   promise obliges him to fill the hungry. Consider, why did Christ
   receive the Spirit without measure,? (John 3:34). It was not for
   himself. He was infinitely full before. But he was filled with the holy
   unction for this end, that he might distil his grace upon the hungry
   soul. Are you ignorant? Christ was filled with wisdom that he might
   teach you. Are you polluted? Christ was filled with grace that he might
   cleanse you. Shall not the soul then come to Christ who was filled on
   purpose to fill the hungry? We love to knock at a rich man's door. In
   our Father's house there is bread enough. Come with desire and you
   shall go away with comfort. You shall have the virtues of Christ's
   blood, the influences of his Spirit, the communications of his love

   There are two objections made against this.

   The carnal man's objection. I have (says he) hungered after
   righteousness, yet am not filled.

   You say you hunger and are not satisfied? Perhaps God is not satisfied
   with your hunger. You have opened your mouth wide' (Psalm 81:10), but
   have not opened your ear' (Psalm 49:4). When God has called you to
   family prayer and mortification of sin, you have, like the deaf adder',
   stopped your ear against God (Zechariah 7:11). No wonder then that you
   have not that comfortable filling as you desire. Though you have opened
   your mouth you have stopped your ear. The child that will not hear his
   parent, is made to do penance by fasting.

   Perhaps you thirst as much after a temptation as after righteousness.
   At a sacrament you seem to be inflamed with desire after Christ, but
   the next temptation that comes either to drunkenness or lasciviousness,
   you fall in and close with the temptation. Satan but beckons to you and
   you come. You open faster to the tempter than to Christ; and do you
   wonder you are not filled with the fat things of God's house?

   Perhaps you hunger more after the world than after righteousness. The
   young man in the gospel would have Christ, but the world lay nearer his
   heart than Christ. Hypocrites pant more after the dust of the earth
   (Amos 2:7) than the water of life'. Israel had no manna while their
   dough lasted. Such as feed immoderately upon the dough of earthly
   things, must not think to be filled with manna from heaven. If your
   money be your God, never look to receive another God in the sacrament.

   The godly man's objection. I have had unfeigned desires after God, but
   am not filled.

   You may have a filling of grace, though not of comfort. If God does not
   fill you with gladness, yet with goodness (Psalm 107:9). Look into your
   heart and see the distillations of the Spirit. The dew may fall though
   the honeycomb does not drop.

   Wait a while and you shall be filled. The gospel is a spiritual
   banquet. It feasts the soul with grace and comfort. None eat of this
   banquet but such as wait at the table. In this mountain shall the Lord
   of hosts make unto all people a feast of fat things, a feast of wines
   on the lees well refined. And it shall be said in that day, Lo, this is
   our God, we have waited for him; we will be glad and rejoice in his
   salvation' (Isaiah 25:6,9). Spiritual mercies are not only worth
   desiring, but worth waiting for.

   If God should not fill his people to satisfaction here, yet they shall
   be filled in heaven. The vessels of their desires shall be filled as
   those water pots (John 2:7) up to the brim'.
     __________________________________________________________________

15. A discourse of mercifulness

   Blessed are the merciful, for they shall obtain mercy.

   Matthew 5:7

   These verses, like the stairs of Solomon's temple, cause our ascent to
   the holy of holies. We are now mounting up a step higher. Blessed are
   the merciful . . '. There was never more need to preach of mercifulness
   than in these unmerciful times wherein we live. It is reported in the
   life of Chrysostom that he preached much on this subject of
   mercifulness, and for his much pressing Christians to mercy, he was
   called of many, the alms-preacher, or the preacher for mercy'. Our
   times need many Chrysostoms.

   Blessed are the merciful'. Mercy stands both in the van and rear of the
   text. In the beginning of the text it stands as a duty. In the end of
   the text it stands as a reward. The Hebrew word for godly' signifies
   merciful': the more godly, the more merciful. The doctrine I shall
   gather out of the words, which will comprehend and bring in the whole,
   is this:

   That the merciful man is a blessed man; as there is a curse hangs over
   the head of the unmerciful man. Let Satan stand at his right hand; when
   he shall be judged let him be condemned, and let his prayer become sin;
   let his children be fatherless and his wife a widow; let his children
   be continually vagabonds and beg; let the extortioner catch all that he
   hath, and let strangers spoil his labour; let there be none to extend
   mercy to him. Let his posterity be cut off, and in the generation
   following let their name be blotted out. Let the iniquity of his
   fathers be remembered with the Lord, and let not the sin of his mother
   be blotted out' (Psalm 109:69). Why, what is this crime? Because he
   remembered not to show mercy' (verse 16). See what a long vial full of
   the plagues of God is poured out upon the unmerciful man! So by the
   rule of contraries, the blessings of the Almighty crown and encompass
   the merciful man. The merciful man is a blessed man' (2 Samuel 22:26;
   Psalm 37:26; Psalm 41:1). For the illustrating this I shall show,
   first, what is meant by mercifulness; second, the several kinds of
   mercy.

   1 What is meant by mercifulness? I answer, it is a melting disposition
   whereby we lay to heart the miseries of others and are ready on all
   occasions to be instrumental for their good.

   How do mercy and love differ?

   In some things they agree, in some things they differ, like waters that
   may have two different spring-heads, but meet in the stream. Love and
   mercy differ thus: love is more extensive. The diocese that love walks
   and visits in is larger. Mercy properly respects them that are
   miserable. Love is of a larger consideration. Love is like a friend
   that visits them that are well. Mercy is like a physician that visits
   only them that are sick. Again, love acts more out of affection. Mercy
   acts out of a principle of conscience. Mercy lends its help to another.
   Love gives its heart to another. Thus they differ, but love and mercy
   agree in this, they are both ready to do good offices. Both of them
   have soundings of bowels, and healing under their wings.

   Whence does mercy spring?

   Its spring-head rises higher than nature. Mercy taken in its full
   latitude proceeds from a work of grace in the heart. Naturally we are
   far enough from mercy. The sinner is a bramble, not a fig tree yielding
   sweet fruit. It is the character and sign of a natural man to be
   unmerciful' (Romans 1:31). A wicked man, like Jehoram, has his bowels
   fallen out' (2 Chronicles 21:19). Therefore he is compared to an
   adamant (Zechariah 7:12) because his heart does not melt in mercy.
   Before conversion the sinner is compared to a wolf for his savageness,
   to a lion for his fierceness (Isaiah 11:6), to a bee for his sting
   (Psalm 118:12), to an adder for his poison (Psalm 140:3). By nature we
   do not send forth oil, but poison; not the oil of mercifulness, but the
   poison of maliciousness.

   Besides that inbred unmercifulness which is in us, there is something
   infused too by Satan. The prince of the air works in men' (Ephesians
   2:2). He is a fierce spirit, therefore called the Red Dragon'
   (Revelation 12:3). And if he possesses men no wonder if they are
   implacable and without mercy. What mercy can be expected from hell? So
   that, if the heart be tuned into mercifulness, it is from the change
   that grace has made (Colossians 3:12). When the sun shines the ice
   melts. When the Sun of righteousness once shines with beams of grace
   upon the soul, then it melts in mercy and tenderness. You must first be
   a new man before a merciful man. You cannot help a member of Christ
   till you yourself are a member.

   2 The several kinds of mercy, or how many ways a man may be said to be
   merciful. Mercy is a fountain that runs in five streams. We must be
   merciful to the souls, names, estates, offences, wants of others.

   We must be merciful to the souls of others. This is a spiritual alms.
   Indeed soul-mercy is the chief of mercies. The soul is the most
   precious thing; it is a vessel of honour; it is a bud of eternity; it
   is a sparkle lighted by the breath of God; it is a rich diamond set in
   a ring of clay. The soul has the blood of God to redeem it, the image
   of God to beautify it. It being therefore of so high a descent, sprung
   from the Ancient of days, that mercy which is shown to the soul must
   needs be the greatest. This soul-mercy to others stands in four things.

   1 In pitying them. If I weep, says Augustine, for that body from which
   the soul is departed, how should I weep for that soul from which God is
   departed? Had we seen that man in the gospel cutting himself with
   stones and fetching blood of himself it would have moved our pity (Mark
   5:5). To see a sinner stabbing himself and having his hands imbrued in
   his own blood should cause relenting in our bowels. Our eye should
   affect our heart. God was angry with Edom because he cast off all pity
   (Amos 1:11).

   2 Soul-mercy is in advising and exhorting sinners. Tell them in what a
   sad condition they are, even in the gall of bitterness'. Show them
   their danger. They tread upon the banks of the bottomless pit. If death
   gives them a jog they tumble in. And we must dip our words in honey;
   use all the mildness we can: In meekness instructing those . . .' (2
   Timothy 2:25). Fire melts; ointment mollifies. Words of love may melt
   hard hearts into repentance. This is soul-mercy. God made a law that
   whosoever saw his enemy's ass lying under a burden, he should help him'
   (Exodus 23:5). On which words, says Chrysostom, we will help a beast
   that is fallen under a burden; and shall we not extend relief to those
   who are fallen under a worse burden of sin?

   3 Soul-mercy is in reproving refractory sinners. There is a cruel mercy
   when we see men go on in sin and we let them alone, and there is a
   merciful cruelty when we are sharp against men's sins and will not let
   them go to hell quietly. Thou shalt not hate thy brother in thine
   heart; thou shalt in any wise rebuke thy neighbour and not suffer sin
   upon him' (Leviticus 19:17). Fond pity is no better than cruelty.
   Rebuke them sharply', cuttingly (Titus 1:13). The surgeon cuts and
   lances the flesh, but it is in order to a cure. They are healing
   wounds. So by cutting reproof when we lance men's consciences and let
   out the blood of sin, we exercise spiritual surgery. This is showing
   mercy. Others save with fear, pulling them out of the fire' (Jude 23).
   If a man were in the fire, though you did hurt him a little in pulling
   him out, he would be thankful and take it as a kindness. Some men, when
   we tell them of sin say, O this is bitterness'. No, it is showing
   mercy. If a man's house were on fire, and another should see it and not
   tell him of it for fear of waking him, were not this cruelty? When we
   see others 'sleeping the sleep of death' and the fire of God's wrath
   ready to burn about their ears, and we are silent, is not this to be
   accessory to their death?

   4 Soul-mercy is in praying for others. This is like physic used in a
   desperate case and often it recovers the sick patient. The effectual
   fervent prayer of a righteous man avails much' (James 5:16). As it
   cures the sick body, so also the sin-sick soul. There is a story of one
   who gave his soul to the devil, who was saved through the prayers of
   Luther. When Eutychus fell down from an high loft and was taken up
   dead, Paul fell on him', that is, he effectually prayed over him and he
   prayed him alive (Acts 20:9-12). By sin the soul is fallen from an high
   loft, namely, a state of innocence. Now fervent prayer oftentimes
   fetcheth life in such a dead soul.

   See what a blessed work the work of the ministry is! The preaching of
   the Word is nothing but showing mercy to souls. This is a mighty and
   glorious engine in the hand of the Lord of hosts for the beating down
   of the devil's strongholds. The ministry of the Word not only brings
   light with it, but eye-salve, anointing the eyes to see that light. It
   is a sin-killing and soul-quickening ordinance. It is the power of God
   to salvation'. What enemies are they to their own souls that oppugn the
   ministry! They say, the people that live under the line', curse the sun
   and are glad when the sun sets because of its burning heat. Foolish
   sinners curse the sun-rising of the ministry and are offended at the
   light of it because it comes near their sins and scorches their
   consciences, though in the end it saves their souls.

   It reproves them that have no mercy to souls: evil magistrates; evil
   ministers.

   Evil magistrates who either take away the key of knowledge' (Luke
   11:52), or give a toleration to wickedness, suffering men to sin by a
   licence. The meaning of toleration is this, that if men will themselves
   to hell none shall stop them. Is not nature enough poisoned? Do not men
   sin fast enough, but must have such political engines as serve them up
   higher in wickedness? Must they have such favourable gales from the
   breath of great ones as serve to carry them full sail to the devil?
   This is far from soul-mercy. What an heavy reckoning will these
   'statists' have in the day of the Lord!

   Evil ministers are such as have no bowels to the souls of their people.
   They do not pity them or pray for them. They seek not them but theirs.
   They preach not for love but lucre. Their care is more for tithes than
   souls. How can they be called spiritual fathers, who are without
   bowels? These are mercenaries, not ministers.

   Such men feed not the souls of their people with solid truths. When
   Christ sent out his apostles, he gave them their text, and told them
   what they must preach, Preach, saying the kingdom of heaven is at hand'
   (Matthew 10:7). Upon which place, says Luther, the ministers of Christ
   must preach things that pertain to the kingdom of God' -- pardon of
   sin, sanctification, living by faith not otherwise, at the bidding of
   the church. They are unmerciful to souls who, instead of breaking the
   bread of life, fill their people's heads with airy speculations and
   notions; who rather tickle the fancy than touch the conscience and give
   precious souls rather music than food.

   Some there are who darken knowledge with words, and preach as if they
   were speaking in an unknown tongue'. Some ministers love to soar aloft
   like the eagle and fly above their people's capacities, endeavouring
   rather to be admired than understood. They are like some crabbed
   authors which cannot be read without a comment. Indeed God calls his
   ministers ambassadors' (2 Corinthians 5:20), but they must not be like
   those outlandish ambassadors that cannot be understood without an
   interpreter. It is unmercifulness to souls to preach so as not to be
   understood. Ministers should be stars to give light, not clouds to
   obscure the truth. Saint Paul was learned, yet plain. Clearness and
   perspicuity is the grace of speech. It is cruelty to souls when we go
   about to make easy things hard. This many are guilty of in our age, who
   go into the pulpit only to tie knots, and think it their glory to amuse
   the people. This savours more of pride than mercifulness.

   Such there are, too, as see others going on in sin but do not tell them
   of it. When men declare their sin as Sodom, it is the minister's duty
   to lift up his voice like a trumpet and show the house of Jacob their
   sin' (Isaiah 58:1). Zeal in the ministry is as proper as fire on the
   altar. He who lets another sin and holds his peace is a man-slayer.
   That sentinel deserves death who sees the enemy approaching, and gives
   not warning (Ezekiel 3:20).

   Some ministers poison souls with error. How dangerous is the leprosy of
   the head! A frenzy is worse than a fever. What shall we say to such
   ministers as give poison to their people in a golden cup? Are not these
   unmerciful? Others there are (unworthy the name of ministers),
   itineraries, the devil's journeymen, who ride up and down, and with
   Satan compass the earth to devour souls. It would pity one's heart to
   see poor unstable creatures misled by rude and illiterate men, who diet
   the people with blasphemy and nonsense, and make them fitter for bedlam
   than the New Jerusalem. All these are unmerciful to souls.

   Let me beseech all that fear God to show soul-mercy. Strengthen the
   weak; reduce the wandering; raise up them that are fallen. He which
   converteth the sinner from the error of his way shall save a soul from
   death' (James 5:20).

   We must be merciful to the names of others. A good name is one of the
   greatest blessings upon earth. No chain of pearl so adorns as this. It
   being so, we ought to be very tender of names. They are to be accounted
   in an high degree unmerciful, who make no conscience of taking away the
   good names of their brethren. Their throats are open sepulchres to bury
   the fame and renown of men (Romans 3:13). It is a great cruelty to
   murder a man in his name. The keepers of the walls took away my vail
   from me' (Canticles 5:7). Some expositors interpret it of her honour
   and fame which covered her as a beautiful vail. The ground of this
   unmercifulness to names is

   1 Pride. Pride is such a thing as cannot endure to be out-shined. It
   loves not to see itself exceeded in parts and eminency; therefore it
   will behead another in his good name that he may appear something
   lower. The proud man will be pulling down of others in their
   reputation, and so by their eclipse he thinks he shall shine the
   brighter. The breath of a proud man causes a blast or mildew upon fame.

   2 Envy (1 Peter 2:1). An envious man maligns the dignity of another,
   therefore seeks to mischief him in his name. Religion teaches us to
   rejoice in the esteem and fame of others. I thank my God for you all,
   that your faith is spoken of throughout the whole world'; it is
   divulged with fame' (Romans 1:8). A good report is a credit to religion
   (Hebrews 11:2). If persons professing godliness do not have a good
   name, religion will not have a very good name, but envy consulting with
   the devil lays a train and fetches fire from hell to blow up the good
   name of another.

   In how many ways may we be unmerciful to the names of others?

   Divers ways. First, by mis-reporting them, a sin forbidden. Thou shalt
   not raise a false report' (Exodus 23:1). Eminency is commonly blasted
   by slander. Their tongues are as arrows shot out' (Psalm 64:3). The
   tongue of a slanderer shoots out words to wound the fame of another and
   make it bleed to death. The saints of God in all ages have met with
   unmerciful men who have fathered things upon them that they have not
   been guilty of. Surius, the Jesuit, reported of Luther that he learned
   his divinity of the Devil and that he died drunk; but Melanchthon, who
   wrote his life, affirms that he died in a most pious holy manner and
   made a most excellent prayer before his death. It was David's
   complaint, They laid to my charge things which I knew not' (Psalm
   35:11). The Greek word for devil, signifies slanderer (1 Timothy 3:11).
   Not slanderers' -- in the Greek it is not devils'. Some think that it
   is no great maker to defame and traduce another, but know, this is to
   act the part of a devil. O how many unmerciful men are there, who
   indeed pass for Christians, but play the devil in venting their lies
   and calumnies! Wicked men in Scripture are called dogs' (Psalm 22:16).
   Slanderers are not like those dogs which licked Lazarus, sores to heal
   them, but like the dogs which ate Jezebel. They rend and tear the
   precious names of men. Valentinian the Emperor decreed that he who was
   openly convicted of this crime of slander should die for it. And Pope
   Gregory decreed that such a person should be excommunicate, and not
   have the communion given him. I think it was a just decree.

   Second, we are unmerciful to the names of others when we receive a
   slander, and then report what we hear. Thou shalt not go up and down as
   a talebearer among thy people' (Leviticus 19:16). A good man is one
   that doeth not evil to his neighbour, nor taketh up a reproach against
   his neighbour' (Psalm 15:3). We must not only not raise a false report,
   but not take it up. To divulge a report before we speak with the party
   and know the truth of it is unmercifulness and cannot acquit itself of
   sin. The same word in the Hebrew, to raise a slander', signifies to
   receive it (Exodus 23:1). The receiver is even as bad as the thief. It
   is well if none of us have (in this sense) received stolen goods. When
   others have stolen away the good names of their brethren, have not we
   received these stolen goods? There would not be so many to broach false
   rumours, but that they see this liquor pleases other men's taste.

   Third, we deal unmercifully with the names of others when we diminish
   from their just worth and dignity; when we make more of their
   infirmities and less of their virtues. Speak not evil one of another'
   (James 4:11). I have read a story of one, Idor, an abbot, that he was
   never heard to speak evil of any man. Augustine could not endure that
   any should eclipse and lessen the fame of others, therefore he wrote
   those two verses upon his table:

   Whoever loves another's name to blast,

   This table's not for him; so let him fast.

   Wicked men are still paring off the credit of their neighbours, and
   they make thick parings. They pare off all that is good. Nothing is
   left but the core, something that may tend to their disparagement.
   Unmerciful men know how to boil a quart to a pint. They have a devilish
   art so to extenuate and lessen the merit of others, that it is even
   boiled away to nothing. Some, though they have not the power of
   creation, yet they have the power of annihilation. They can sooner
   annihilate the good which is in others than imitate it.

   Fourth, we are unmerciful to the names of others when we know them to
   be calumniated yet do not vindicate them. A man may sometimes as well
   wrong another by silence as slander. He who is merciful to his brother
   is an advocate to plead in his behalf when he is injuriously traduced.
   When the apostles, who were filled with the wine of the Spirit, were
   charged with drunkenness, Peter vindicated them openly (Acts 2:15). A
   merciful man will take the dead fly out of the box of ointment.

   Fifth, they are in an high degree unmerciful to the names of others who
   bear false witness against, them (Psalm 27:12). Put not thy hand with
   the wicked to be a false witness' (Exodus 23:1). Putting the hand, is
   taking an oath falsely, as when a man puts his hand upon the book and
   swears to a lie. So Tostatus expounds it. This false-witness' is a
   two-edged sword. The party forsworn wounds another's name and his own
   soul. A false witness is compared to a maul or hammer (Proverbs 25:18).
   It is true in this sense, because he is hardened in impudence he
   blushes at nothing and in unmercifulness. There is no softness in a
   maul or hammer, nor is there any relenting or bowels to be found in a
   false witness. In all these ways men are unmerciful to the names of
   others.

   Let me persuade all Christians, as they make conscience of religion, so
   to show mercy to the names of others. Be very chary and tender of men's
   good name.

   Consider what a sin it is to defame any man. Laying aside all envies
   and evil speakings' (Titus 3:2; 1 Peter 2:1). Envy and evil speaking
   are put together: laying aside', putting away', as a man would put away
   a thing from him with indignation; as Paul shook off the viper (Acts
   28:5).

   Consider also the injuriousness of it. You, who take away the good name
   of another, wound him in that which is most dear to him. Better take
   away a man's life than his name. By eclipsing his name you bury him
   alive. It is an irreparable injury; something will remain. A wound in
   the name is like a flaw in a diamond or a stain in azure, which will
   never die out. No physician can heal the wounds of the tongue.

   God will require it at men's hands. If idle words must be accountable
   for, shall not reproachful slanders? God will make inquisition one day
   as well for names as for blood. Let all this persuade to caution and
   circumspection. You would be loath to steal the goods of others. A
   man's name is of more worth, and he that takes away the good name of
   another sins more than if he had taken the corn out of his field or the
   wares out of his shop.

   Especially take heed of wounding the names of the godly. God has set a
   crown of honour on their head, and will you take it off? Wherefore then
   were ye not afraid to speak against my servant Moses?' (Numbers 12:8).
   To defame the saints is no less than the defaming God himself, they
   having his picture drawn upon them and being members of Christ. Oh
   think how ill Christ will take this at your hand another day! It was
   under the old law a sin to defame a virgin, and what is it to
   calumniate Christ's spouse? Are the names of the saints written in
   heaven, and will you blot them out upon earth? Be merciful to the names
   of others.

   Be merciful to the estates of others. If a man be your debtor and
   providence has frowned upon him that he has not wherewithal to pay, do
   not crush him when he is sinking, but remit something of the rigour of
   the law. Blessed are the merciful'. The wicked are compared to beasts
   of prey that live upon rapine and spoil. They do not care what mischief
   they do. He lieth in wait secretly as a lion in his den; he doth catch
   the poor when he draweth him into his net' (Psalm 10:9). Chrysostom
   says the drawing into the net is when the rich draw the poor into
   bonds, and in case of non-payment at the day, the bond being forfeited,
   seize upon all they have. It is not justice but cruelty, when others
   lie at our mercy, to be like that hardhearted creditor in the gospel
   who took his debtor by the throat saying, Pay me what thou owest'
   (Matthew 18:28). God made a law, No man shall take the nether or the
   upper millstone to pledge, for he taketh a man's life to pledge'
   (Deuteronomy 24:6). If a man had lent another money, he must not take
   both his millstones for a pawn. He must show mercy and leave the man
   something to get a livelihood with. We should in this imitate God who
   in the midst of anger remembers mercy. God does not take the extremity
   of the law upon us, but when we have not to pay, if we confess the
   debt, he freely forgives (Proverbs 28:13; Matthew 18:27).

   Not but that we may justly seek what is our own, but if others be
   brought low and submit, we ought in conscience to remit something of
   the debt. Blessed are the merciful.'

   We must be merciful to the offences of others. Be ready to show mercy
   to them which have injured you. Thus Stephen the proto-martyr, He
   kneeled down and cried with a loud voice, Lord, lay not this sin to
   their charge' (Acts 7:60). When he prayed for himself he stood, but
   when he came to pray for his enemies, he kneeled down, to show, says
   Bernard, his earnestness in prayer and how greatly he desired that God
   would forgive them. This is a rare kind of mercy. It is a man's glory
   to pass over a transgression' (Proverbs 19:11). Mercy in forgiving
   injuries, as it is the touchstone, so the crown of Christianity. Bishop
   Cranmer was of a merciful disposition. If any who had wronged him came
   to desire a courtesy from him, he would do all that lay in his power
   for him, insomuch that it grew to a proverb: Do Cranmer an injury and
   he will be your friend as long as he lives. To overcome evil with
   good', and answer malice with mercy is truly heroic and renders
   religion glorious in the eyes of all. But I leave this and proceed.

   We must be merciful to the wants of others. This the text chiefly
   intends. A good man does not, like the snake, twist within himself. His
   motion is direct, not circular. He is ever merciful and lendeth (Psalm
   37:26). This merciful charity to the wants of others stands in three
   things.

   1 A judicious consideration. Blessed is he that considereth the poor'
   (Psalm 41:1); and you must consider four things.

   (i) It might have been your own case. You yourselves might have stood
   in need of another's charity and then how welcome and refreshing would
   those streams have been to you!

   (ii) Consider how sad a condition poverty is. Though Chrysostom calls
   poverty the highway to heaven, yet he that keeps this road will go
   weeping thither. Consider the poor; behold their tears, their sighs,
   their dying groans. Look upon the deep furrows made in their faces, and
   consider if there be not reason why you should scatter your seed of
   mercy in these furrows. For a cloak he has a tattered vesture, for a
   couch a stone.' The poor man feeds upon sorrow; he drinks tears' (Psalm
   80:5). Like Jacob, in a windy night he has the clouds for his canopy
   and a stone for his pillow.

   Nay further, consider that oftentimes poverty becomes not only a cross
   but a snare. It exposes to much evil, which made Agur pray, Give me not
   poverty' (Proverbs 30:8). Want puts men upon indirect courses. The poor
   will venture their souls for money, which is like throwing diamonds at
   pear-trees. If the rich would wisely consider this, their alms might
   prevent much sin.

   Consider why the wise God has suffered an inequality in the world. It
   is for this very reason, because he would have mercy exercised. If all
   were rich, there were no need of alms, nor could the merciful man have
   been so well known. If he that travelled to Jericho had not been
   wounded and left half dead, the good Samaritan who poured oil and wine
   into his wounds had not been known.

   Had ilium stood, who'd known of Hector's name'?

   Consider how quickly the balance of providence may turn. We ourselves
   may be brought to poverty and then it will be no small comfort to us
   that we relieved others while we were in a capacity to do it. Give a
   portion to seven and also to eight, for thou knowest not what evil
   shall be upon the earth' (Ecclesiastes 11:2). We cannot promise
   ourselves always halcyon days. God knows how soon many of us may change
   our pasture. The cup which now runs over with wine may be filled with
   the waters of Marah. I went out full and the Lord hath brought me home
   again empty' (Ruth 1:21). How many have we seen like Bajazet and
   Belisarius invested with great lordships and possessions who have on a
   sudden brought their manor to a morsel?

   Suddenly he becomes Irus, he who was formerly a Croesus for wealth.'

   So that it is wisdom (in this sense) to consider the wants of others.
   Remember how soon the scene may alter. We may be put in the poor's
   dress and, if adversity come, it will be no trouble of mind to us to
   think that while we had an estate we laid it out upon Christ's indigent
   members. This is the first thing in mercifulness, a judicious
   consideration

   2 A tender commiseration. If thou draw out thy soul to the hungry'
   (Isaiah 58:10). Bounty begins in pity. The Hebrew word for mercy'
   signifies bowels'. Christ first had compassion on the multitude'. Then
   he wrought a miracle to feed them (Matthew 15:32). Charity which lacks
   compassion is brutish. The brute creatures can relieve us in many ways,
   but cannot pity us. It is a kind of cruelty (says Quintilian) to feed
   one in want and not to sympathise with him. True religion begets
   tenderness. As it melts the heart in tears of contrition towards God,
   so in bowels of compassion towards others. My bowels shall sound as an
   harp' (Isaiah 16:11). Likewise, when our bowels of pity sound, then our
   alms make sweet music in the ears of God.

   3 Mercifulness consists in a liberal contribution. If there be a poor
   man within thy gates, thou shalt open thy hand wide unto him'
   (Deuteronomy 15:7, 8). The Hebrew word to disperse' (Psalm 112:9)
   signifies a largeness of bounty'. It must be like water that overflows
   the banks. Not a meagre dispersing of a mere trifle'. If God has
   enriched men with estates and made his candle (as Job says) to shine
   upon their tabernacle', they must not encircle and engross all to
   themselves but be as the moon which, having received its light from the
   sun, lets it shine to the world. The ancients, as Basil and Lorinus
   observe, made oil to be the emblem of charity. The golden oil of mercy
   must, like Aaron's oil, run down upon the poor which are the lower
   skirts of the garment. This liberal disbursement to the wants and
   necessities of others God commands and grace compels.

   God Commands. There is an express statute law, If thy brother be waxen
   poor and fallen in decay with thee, then thou shalt relieve him'
   (Leviticus 25:35). The Hebrew word is Thou shalt strengthen him'; put
   under him a silver crutch when he is falling. It is worth our
   observation what great care God took of the poor, besides what was
   given them privately. God made many laws for the public and visible
   relief of the poor. The seventh year thou shalt let the land rest and
   lie still, that the poor of the people may eat' (Exodus 23:11). God's
   intention in his law was that the poor should be liberally provided
   for. They might freely eat of any thing which grew of itself this
   seventh year, whether of herbs, vines or olive trees. If it be asked
   how the poor could live only on these fruits, there being (as it is
   probable) no corn growing then, for answer Cajetan is of opinion that
   they lived by selling these fruits and, so converting them into money,
   lived upon the price of the fruits.

   There is another law made: And when ye reap the harvest of your land,
   thou shalt not wholly reap the corners of thy field, neither shalt thou
   gather the gleanings of thy harvest' (Leviticus 19:9). See how God
   indulged the poor. Some corners of the field were for the poor's sake
   to be left uncut, and when the owners reaped they must not go too near
   the earth with their sickle. The Vulgate Latin reads it, Thou shalt not
   shear to the very ground'. Something like an after-crop must be left.
   The shorter ears of corn and such as lay bending to the ground, were to
   be reserved for the poor, says Tostatus.

   And God made another law in favour of the poor. At the end of three
   years thou shalt bring forth the tithe of thy increase the same year,
   and thou shalt lay it up in thy gates: and the Levite and the
   fatherless and the widow which are within thy gates shall come and
   shall eat and be satisfied' (Deuteronomy 14:28, 29). The Hebrews write
   that every third year, besides the first tithe given to Levi which was
   called the perpetual tithe (Numbers 18:21), the Jews set apart another
   tithe of their increase for the use of the widows and orphans, and that
   was called the tithe of the poor'. Besides, at the Jews, solemn
   festivals, the poor were to have a share (Deuteronomy 16:11).

   And as relieving the necessitous was commanded under the law, so it
   stands in force under the gospel. Charge them that are rich in this
   world that they do good, that they be rich in good works ...' (1
   Timothy 6:17, 18). It is not only a counsel but a charge, and
   non-attendance to it runs men into a gospel-praemunire. Thus we have
   seen the mind of God in this particular of charity. Let all good
   Christians comment upon it in their practice. What benefit is there of
   gold while it is embowelled and locked up in the mine? And what is it
   the better to have a great estate if it be so hoarded and cloistered up
   as never to see the light?

   As God commands, so grace compels to works of mercy and beneficence.
   The love of Christ constraineth' (2 Corinthians 5:14). Grace comes with
   majesty upon the heart. Grace does not lie as a sleepy habit in the
   soul but will put forth itself in vigorous and glorious actings. Grace
   can no more be concealed than fire. Like new wine it will have vent.
   Grace does not lie in the heart as a stone in the earth, but as seed in
   the earth. It will spring up into good works.

   This doctrine may serve to justify the Church of England against the
   calumny of malevolent men. Julian upbraided the Christians that they
   were Solifidians, and the Church of Rome lays upon us this aspersion,
   that we are against good works. Indeed we plead not for the merit of
   them but we are for the use of them. Let ours also learn to maintain
   good works for necessary uses' (Titus 3:14). We preach that they are
   needful both as they are enforced by the precept and as they are
   needful for the general good of men. We read that the angels had wings,
   and hands under their wings (Ezekiel 1:8). It may be emblematic of this
   truth. Christians must not only have the wings of faith to fly, but
   hands under their wings to work the works of mercy. This is a faithful
   saying, and these things I will that thou affirm constantly, that they
   which have believed in God might be careful to maintain good works'
   (Titus 3:8). The lamp of faith must be filled with the oil of charity.
   Faith alone justifies but justifying faith is not alone. You may as
   well separate weight from lead or heat from fire as works from faith.
   Good works, though they are not the causes of salvation, yet they are
   evidences. Though they are not the foundation yet they are the
   superstructure. Faith must not be built upon works, but works must be
   built upon faith. Ye are married to another that we should bring forth
   fruit unto God' (Romans 7:4). Faith is the grace which marries Christ
   and good works are the children which faith bears. For the vindication
   of the doctrine of our Church, and in honour of good works, I shall lay
   down four aphorisms.

   1 Works are distinct from faith. It is vain to imagine that works are
   included in faith as the diamond is enclosed in the ring. No, they are
   distinct, as the sap in the vine is different from the clusters that
   grow upon it.

   2 Works are the touchstone of faith. Show me thy faith by thy works'
   (James 2:18). Works are faith's letters of credence to show. If, says
   Saint Bernard, you see a man full of good works, then by the rule of
   charity you are not to doubt of his faith. We judge the health of the
   body by the pulse where the blood stirs and operates. O Christian,
   judge of the health of your faith by the pulse of mercy and
   charitableness. It is with faith as with a deed in law. To make a deed
   valid, there are three things requisite the writing, the seal, the
   witnesses. So for the trial and confirmation of faith there must be
   these three things the writing, the Word of God; the seal, the Spirit
   of God; the witnesses, good works. Bring your faith to this Scripture
   touchstone. Faith justifies works; works testify faith.

   3 Works honour faith. These fruits adorn the trees of righteousness'.
   Let the liberality of your hand (says Clemens Alexandrinus) be the
   ornament of your faith, and wear it as an holy bracelet about your
   wrists. I was eyes to the blind and feet was I to the lame. I put on
   righteousness and it clothed me. My judgement was as a robe and a
   diadem' (Job 29:14-15). While Job was the poor's benefactor and
   advocate, this was the ensign of his honour; it clothed him as a robe
   and crowned him as a diadem. This is that which takes off the odium and
   obloquy and makes others speak well of religion when they see good
   works as handmaids waiting upon this queen.

   4 Good works are in some sense more excellent than faith; in two
   respects:

   Because they are of a more noble diffusive nature. Though faith be more
   needful for ourselves, yet good works are more beneficial to others.
   Faith is a receptive grace. It is all for self-interest. It moves
   within its own sphere. Works are for the good of others, and it is a
   more blessed thing to give, than to receive.

   Good works are more visible and conspicuous than faith. Faith is a more
   occult grace. It may lie hidden in the heart and not be seen, but when
   works are joined with it, now it shines forth in its native beauty.
   Though a garden be never so decked with flowers, yet they are not seen
   till the light comes. So the heart of a Christian may be enriched with
   faith, but it is like a flower in the night. It is not seen till works
   come. When this light shines before men, then faith appears in its
   orient colours.

   If this be the effigy of a good man, that he is of a merciful
   disposition, then it sharply reproves those that are far from this
   temper. Their hearts are like the scales of the Leviathan, 'shut up
   together as with a close seal' (Job 41:15). They move only within their
   own circle, but do not indulge the necessities of others. They have a
   flourishing estate, but like the man in the gospel, they have a
   withered hand and cannot stretch it out to good uses. They have all as
   for themselves, not for Christ. These are akin to the churl Nabal.
   Shall I take my bread and my water and give it unto men, whom I know
   not whence they be?' (1 Samuel 25:11). It was said of the emperor
   Pertinax, that he had a large empire but a narrow scanty heart.

   There was a temple at Athens which was called the Temple of Mercy. It
   was dedicated to charitable uses; and it was the greatest reproach to
   upbraid one with this, that he had never been in the Temple of Mercy.
   It is the greatest disgrace to a Christian to be unmerciful. Covetous
   men, while they enrich themselves, debase themselves, setting up a
   monopoly and committing idolatry with Mammon, thus making themselves
   lower than their angels, as God made them lower than his angels. In the
   time of pestilence, it is sad to have your houses shut up, but it is
   worse to have your hearts shut up. How miserable is it to have a sea of
   sin and not a drop of mercy! Covetous hearts, like the Leviathan, are
   firm as a stone' (Job 41:24). One may as well extract oil out of a
   flint, as the golden oil of charity out of their flinty hearts. The
   philosopher says that the coldness of the heart is a presage of death.
   When men's affections to works of mercy are frozen, this coldness of
   heart is ominous and sadly portends that they are dead in sin. We read
   in the law that the shellfish was accounted unclean. This might
   probably be one reason, because the meat of it was enclosed in the
   shell and it was hard to come by. They are to be reckoned among the
   unclean who enclose all their estate within the shell of their own
   cabinet and will not let others be the better for it. How many have
   lost their souls by being so saving!

   There are some who perhaps will give the poor good words and that is
   all. If a brother or sister be naked and destitute of food and one of
   you say to them, Depart in peace, be ye warmed and filled;
   notwithstanding ye give them not those things which are needful to the
   body, what doth it profit?' (James 2:15). Good words are but a cold
   kind of charity. The poor cannot live as the chameleon upon this air.'
   Let your words be as smooth as oil, they will not heal the wounded. Let
   them drop as the honeycomb, they will not feed the hungry. Though I
   speak with the tongues of angels and have not charity, I am but as a
   tinkling cymbal' (1 Corinthians 13:1). It is better to be charitable as
   a saint than eloquent as an angel. Such as are cruel to the poor, let
   me tell you, you unchristian yourselves. Unmercifulness is the sin of
   the heathen (Romans 1:31). While you put off the bowels of mercy you
   put off the badge of Christianity. Saint Ambrose says that when we do
   not relieve one whom we see ready to perish with hunger, we are guilty
   of his death. If this rule hold true there are more guilty of the
   breach of the sixth commandment than we are aware of. St James speaks a
   sad word: For he shall have judgement without mercy that hath showed no
   mercy' (James 2:13). How do they think to find mercy from Christ, who
   never showed mercy to Christ in his members? Dives denied Lazarus a
   crumb of bread and Dives was denied a drop of water. At the last day
   behold the sinner's indictment, I was an hungered and ye gave me no
   meat; I was thirsty and ye gave me no drink' (Matthew 25:42). Christ
   does not say, Ye took away my meat', but Ye gave me none; ye did not
   feed my members'. Then follows the sentence, Depart from me, ye
   cursed'. When Christ's poor come to your doors and you bid them depart
   from you, the time may come when you shall knock at heaven's gate, and
   Christ will say, Go from my door, Depart from me, ye cursed'.

   In short, covetousness is a foolish sin. God gave the rich man in the
   gospel that appellation, Thou fool' (Luke 12:20). The covetous man does
   not enjoy what he possesses. He embitters his own life. He discruciates
   himself with care either how to get or how to increase or how to secure
   an estate. And what is the issue and result? Often as a just reward of
   sordid penuriousness, God blasts and withers him in his outward estate.
   That saying of Gregory Nazianzen is to be seriously weighed: God many
   times lets the thief take away and the moth consume that which is
   injuriously and unmercifully withheld from the poor.

   Before I leave this matter, I am sorry that any who pass for honest men
   should be brought into the indictment. I mean, sorry that any who
   profess Christianity should be impeached as guilty of this sin of
   covetousness and unmercifulness. Sure I am that God's elect put on
   bowels of mercies' (Colossians 3:12); but I tell you that devout misers
   are the reproach of Christianity. They are wens and spots in the face
   of religion. I remember Aelian in his History reports that in India
   there is a griffin having four feet and wings, his bill like the
   eagle's. It is hard whether to rank him among the beasts or the fowl.
   So I may say of penurious votaries, they have the wings of profession
   by which they seem to fly to heaven, but the feet of beasts, walking on
   earth and even licking the dust. It is hard where to rank these,
   whether among the godly or the wicked. Oh take heed that, seeing your
   religion will not destroy your covetousness, at last your covetousness
   does not destroy your religion. The fabulist tells a story of the
   hedgehog that came to the cony-burrows in stormy weather and desired
   harbour, promising that he would be a quiet guest, but when once he had
   gotten entertainment, he set up his prickles and never left till he had
   thrust the poor conies out of their burrows. So covetousness, though it
   has many fair pleas to insinuate and wind itself into the heart, yet as
   soon as you have let it in, this thorn will never leave pricking till
   it has choked all good beginnings and thrust all religion out of your
   hearts.

   I proceed next to the exhortation to beseech all Christians to put on
   bowels of mercies'. Be ready to indulge the miseries and necessities of
   others. Saint Ambrose calls charity the sum of Christianity, and the
   apostle makes it the very definition of religion. Pure religion and
   undefiled before God and the Father is this, to visit the fatherless
   and the widows in their affliction' (James 1:27). The Hebrew word for
   poor' signifies one that is empty' or drawn dry'. So the poor are
   exhausted of their strength, beauty, substance; like ponds they are
   dried up. Therefore let them be filled again with the silver streams of
   charity. The poor are as it were in the grave. The comfort of their
   life is buried. Oh Christians, help with your merciful hands to raise
   them out of the sepulchre. God 'sendeth his springs into the valleys'
   (Psalm 104:10). Let the springs of your liberality run among the
   valleys of poverty. Your sweetest and most benign influence should fall
   upon the lower grounds. What is all your seeming devotion without
   bounty and mercifulness? I have known many, says Basil, pray and fast,
   but relieve not such as are in distress. They are for a zeal that will
   put them to no charges. What are they the better (says he) for all
   their seeming virtue? We read that the incense was to be laid upon the
   fire (Leviticus 16:13). The flame of devotion must be perfumed with the
   incense of charity. Aaron was to have a bell and a pomegranate. The
   pomegranate, as some of the learned observe, was a symbol of good
   works. They lack the pomegranate (says Gregory Nazianzen) who have no
   good works. The wise men not only bowed the knee to Christ, but
   presented him with gold, myrrh and frankincense (Matthew 2:11).
   Pretences of zeal are insufficient. We must not only worship Christ but
   bestow something upon his members. This is to present Christ with gold
   and frankincense. Isaac would not bless Jacob by the voice, but he
   feels and handles him, and supposing them to be Esau's hands, he
   blessed him. God will not bless men by their voice, their loud prayers,
   their devout discourses, but if he feel Esau's hands, if their hands
   have wrought good works, then he blesses them.

   Let me exhort you therefore to deeds of mercy. Let your fingers drop
   with the myrrh of liberality. Sow your golden seed. In this sense it is
   lawful to put out your money to use when you lay it out for good uses.
   Remember that excellent saying of Augustine, Give those things to the
   poor which you cannot keep that you may receive those things which you
   cannot lose. There are many occasions of exercising your mercifulness.
   The poor goes to the wall.' Hear the orphans' cry; pity the widows'
   tears. Some there are who want employment. It would do well to set
   their wheel a-going. Others who are past employment: be as eyes to the
   blind and feet to the lame. In some cases whole families are sinking if
   some merciful hand does not help to shore them up. Before I press
   arguments to liberality and munificence, there are three objections lie
   in the way which I shall endeavour to remove:

   1 We may give and so in time come ourselves to want.

   Let Basil answer this. Wells (says he), which have their water drawn,
   spring ever more freely. The liberal soul shall be made fat ' (Proverbs
   11:25). Luther speaks of a monastery in Austria which was very rich
   while it gave annually to the poor, but when it left off giving the
   monastery began to decay. There is nothing lost by doing our duty. An
   estate may be imparted, yet not impaired. The flowers yield honey to
   the bee yet do not hurt their own fruit. When the candle of prosperity
   shines upon us we may light our neighbour that is in the dark and have
   never the less light ourselves. Whatever is disbursed to pious uses,
   God brings it in some other way. As the loaves in breaking multiplied
   or as the widow's oil increased by pouring out (1 Kings 17:10).

   2 I cannot do so much as others -- erect churches, build hospitals,
   augment libraries, maintain scholars at the university.

   If you cannot do so much, yet do something. Let there be much goodwill
   though there be not much wealth to go with it. The widow's two mites
   cast into the treasury were accepted (Luke 21:14). God (as Chrysostom
   observes) looked not at the smallest of her gift, but at the largeness
   of her heart. In the law, he that could not bring a lamb for an
   offering, if he brought but two turtledoves, it sufficed. We read that
   the people brought gold and silver, and goats, hair, to the building of
   the tabernacle' (Exodus 35:22-24); on which place (says Origen), I
   desire, Lord, to bring something to the building of thy temple, if not
   gold to make the mercy-seat on, if not silk to make the curtains on,
   yet a little goats' hair, that I may not be found in the number of
   those that have brought nothing to thy temple'.

   3 But I do not have anything to bestow upon the necessities of others.

   Have you anything to bestow upon your lusts? Have you money to feed
   your pride, your Epicurism? And can you find nothing to relieve the
   poor members of Christ?

   Admit this excuse to be real, that you do not have such an estate; yet
   you may do something wherein you may express your mercy to the poor.
   You may sympathise with them, pray for them, speak a word of comfort to
   them. Speak ye comfortably to Jerusalem' (Isaiah 40:2). If you can give
   them no gold, you may speak a word in season which may be as apples of
   gold in pictures of silver'. Nay more, you may be helpful to the poor
   in stirring up others who have estates to relieve them. As it is with
   the wind, if a man be hungry the wind will not fill him, but it can
   blow the sails of the mill and make it grind corn for the use of man.
   So though you do not have an estate yourself to help him who is in
   want, yet you may stir up others to help him. You may blow the sails of
   their affections, causing them to show mercy, and so you may help your
   brother by a proxy.

   Having answered these objections let me now pursue the exhortation to
   mercifulness. I shall lay down several arguments which I desire may be
   weighed in the balance of reason and conscience.

   1 To be diffusively good is the great end of our creation. Created in
   Christ Jesus unto good works' (Ephesians 2:10). Every creature answers
   the end of its creation. The star shines, the bird sings, the plant
   bears; the end of life is service. He that does not answer his end in
   respect of usefulness, cannot enjoy his end in respect of happiness.
   Many, says Seneca, have been long in the world, but have not lived.
   They have done no good: a useless weight of earth'. A useless person
   serves for nothing but to cumber the ground'. And because he is barren
   in figs he shall be fruitful in curses (Hebrews 6:8).

   2 By mercifulness we resemble God who is a God of mercy. He is said to
   delight in mercy' (Micah 7:18). His tender mercies are over all his
   works, (Psalm 145:9). He requires good for evil, like the clouds which
   receive ill vapours from us but return them to us again in sweet
   showers. There is not a creature lives but tastes of the mercies of
   God. Every bird, says Ambrose, in its kind sings hymns of praise to God
   for his bounty, but men and angels in a more particular manner taste
   the cream and quintessence of God's mercies.

   What temporal mercies have you received! Every time you draw your
   breath you suck in mercy. Every bit of bread you eat, the hand of mercy
   carves it to you. You never drink but in a golden cup of mercy.

   What spiritual mercies has God enriched some of you with! Pardoning,
   adopting, saving mercy! The picture of God's mercy can never be drawn
   to the full. You cannot take the breadth of his mercy, for it is
   infinite, nor the height of it, for it reacheth above the clouds', nor
   the length of it, for it is from everlasting to everlasting' (Psalm
   103:17). The works of mercy are the glory of the Godhead. Moses prays,
   Lord, show me thy glory' (Exodus 33:18). Says God, I will make all my
   goodness to pass before thee' (verse 19). God accounts himself most
   glorious in the shining robes of his mercy. Now by works of mercy we
   resemble the God of mercy. We are bid to draw our lines according to
   this copy. Be ye merciful, as your Father also is merciful' (Luke
   6:36).

   3 Alms are a sacrifice. To do good and to communicate, forget not, for
   with such sacrifices God is well pleased' (Hebrews 13:16). When you are
   distributing to the poor, it is as if you were praying, as if you were
   worshipping God. There are two sorts of sacrifices; expiatory the
   sacrifice of Christ's blood; and gratulatory the sacrifice of alms.
   This (says holy Greenham) is more acceptable to God than any other
   sacrifice. The angel said to Cornelius, Thy alms are come up for a
   memorial before God' (Acts 10:4). The backs of the poor are the altar
   on which this sacrifice is to be offered.

   4 We ourselves live upon alms. Other creatures liberally contribute to
   our necessities. The sun does not have its light for itself but for us;
   it enriches us with its golden beams. The earth brings us a fruitful
   crop, and to show how joyful a mother she is in bringing forth, the
   psalmist says The valleys are covered over with corn, they shout for
   joy, they also sing' (Psalm 65:13). One creature gives us wool, another
   oil, another silk. We are fain to go a-begging to the creation. Shall
   every creature be for the good of man and man only be for himself? How
   absurd and irrational is this!

   5 We are to extend our liberality by virtue of a membership: That thou
   hide not thyself from thine own flesh' (Isaiah 50:7). The poor are of
   the same clay'. The members by a law of equity and sympathy contribute
   one to another. The eye conveys light to the body, the heart blood, the
   head spirits. That is a dead member in the body which does not
   communicate to the rest. Thus it is in the body politic. Let no man
   think it is too far below him to mind the wants and necessities of
   others. It is pity but that hand should be cut off which disdains to
   pluck a thorn out of the foot. It is spoken in the honour of that
   renowned princess, the Empress of Theodosius the Great, that she
   herself visited the sick and prepared relief for them with her own
   imperial hands.

   6 We are not lords of an estate, but stewards, and how soon may we hear
   the word, Give an account of thy stewardship, for thou mayest be no
   longer steward!' (Luke 16:2). An estate is a talent to trade with. It
   is as dangerous to hide our talent as to spend it (Matthew 25:25, 30).
   If the covetous man keeps his gold too long, it will begin to rust, and
   the rust of it will witness against him (James 5:3).

   7 The examples of others who have been renowned for acts of mercy and
   munificence.

   Our Lord Christ is a great example of charity, he was not more full of
   merit than bounty. Trajan the Emperor rent off a piece of his own robe
   to wrap his soldiers' wounds. Christ did more. He rent his flesh; He
   made a medicine of his body and blood to heal us. By his stripes we are
   healed' (Isaiah 53:5). Here was a pattern of charity without a
   parallel.

   The Jews are noted in this kind. It is a rabbinical observation that
   those who live devoutly among the Jews distribute a tenth part of their
   estate among the poor, and they give so freely (says Philo the Jew) as
   if by giving they hope to receive some great gratuity. Now if the Jews
   are so devoted to works of mercy, who live without priest, without
   temple, without Messiah, shall not we much more profess our faith in
   the blessed Messiah!

   Let me tell you of heathens. I have read of Titus Vespasian, he was so
   inured to works of mercy that remembering he had given nothing that
   day, cried out, I have lost a day'. It is reported of some of the Turks
   that they have servants whom they employ on purpose to enquire what
   poor they have and they send relief to them. And the Turks have a
   saying in their Alcoran, that if men knew what a blessed thing it were
   to distribute alms, rather than spare, they would give some of their
   own flesh to relieve the poor. And shall not a Christian's creed be
   better than a Turk's Alcoran?

   Let all this persuade to works of mercy. Believe me, it is a royal deed
   to succour the fallen.'

   When poor indigent creatures like Moses are laid in the ark of
   bulrushes weeping and ready to sink in the waters of affliction, be as
   temporal saviours to them and draw them out of the waters with a golden
   cord. Let the breasts of your mercy nurse the poor. Be like the trees
   of the sanctuary both for food and medicine (Ezekiel 47:12). When
   distressed and even starved souls are fainting, let your costly
   ingredients revive and fetch spirits in them. Let others see the coats
   and garments which you have made for the poor (Acts 9:39).

   8 The sin of unmercifulness. The unmerciful man is an unthankful man,
   and what can be said worse? You to whom the Lord has given an estate,
   your cup runs over, but you have a miserly heart and will not part with
   anything for good uses; it is death to you to relieve them that are
   dying. Know that you are in the highest degree ungrateful; you are not
   fit for human society. The Scripture has put these two together
   unthankful, without natural affection' (2 Timothy 3:2, 3). God may
   repent that ever he gave such men estates, and may say as Hosea 2:9:
   Therefore will I return and take away my corn and my wine in the season
   thereof and will recover my wool and my flax.'

   The unmerciful man lacks love to Christ. All men would be thought to
   love Christ and would be very angry with them that should question
   their love; but do they love Christ who let the members of Christ
   starve? No, these love their money more than Christ, and come under
   that fearful Anathema' (1 Corinthians 16:22).

   9 Lastly, I shall use but one argument more to persuade to works of
   mercy, and that is the reward which follows alms-deeds. Giving of alms
   is a glorious work, and let me assure you it is not unfruitful work.
   Whatsoever is disbursed to the poor is given to Christ. Inasmuch as you
   have done it to one of the least of these my brethren, ye have done it
   unto me' (Matthew 25:40). The poor man's hand is Christ's treasury, and
   there is nothing lost that is put there. Whatsoever you give by
   stretching forth your hand on earth is as it were given in heaven'. The
   text says, the merciful shall obtain mercy'. In the Greek it is, they
   shall be bemercied'. What is it we need most? Is it not mercy?
   Pardoning and saving mercy? What is it we desire on our deathbed? Is it
   not mercy? You that show mercy shall find mercy. You that pour in the
   oil of compassion to others, God will pour in the golden oil of
   salvation unto you (Matthew 7:2). The Shunammite woman showed mercy to
   the prophet and she received kindness from him another way (2 Kings
   4:8-37). She welcomed him to her house, and he restored her dead child
   to life. They that sow mercy shall reap in kind; they shall obtain
   mercy'. Such is the sweetness and mercifulness of God's nature, that he
   will not suffer any man to be a loser. No kindness shown to him shall
   be unregarded or unrewarded. God will be in no man's debt. For a cup of
   cold water he shall have a draught of Christ's warm blood to refresh
   his soul. For God is not unrighteous to forget your work and labour of
   love, which you have shown toward his name, in that ye have ministered
   to the saints . . .' (Hebrews 6:10). God's mercy is a tender mercy, a
   pure mercy, a rich mercy. Mercy shall follow and overtake the merciful
   man. He shall be rewarded in this life and in the life to come.

   The merciful man shall be rewarded in this life. He shall be blessed --

   In his person: Blessed is he that considers the poor' (Psalm 41:1). Let
   him go whither he will, a blessing goes along with him. He is in favour
   with God. God casts a smiling aspect upon him.

   Blessed in his name: He shall be had in everlasting remembrance' (Psalm
   112:6). When the niggard's name shall rot, the name of a merciful man
   shall be embalmed with honour, and give forth its scent as the wine of
   Lebanon.

   Blessed in his estate: He shall abound in all things'. The liberal soul
   shall be made fat' (Proverbs 2:25). He shall have the fat of the earth
   and the dew of heaven. He shall not only have the venison, but the
   blessing.

   Blessed in his posterity: He is ever merciful and lendeth; and his seed
   is blessed' (Psalm 37:26). He shall not only leave an estate behind,
   but a blessing behind to his children, and God will see that the entail
   of that blessing shall not be cut off.

   Blessed in his negotiations: For this thing the Lord thy God shall
   bless thee in all thy works, and in all that thou puttest thine hand
   unto' (Deuteronomy 15:10). The merciful man shall be blessed in his
   building, planting, journeying. Whatever he is about, a blessing shall
   empty itself upon him. Wherever he treads there shall be a rose'. He
   shall be a prosperous man. The honeycomb of a blessing shall be still
   dropping upon him.

   Blessed with long life: The Lord will preserve him and keep him alive'
   (Psalm 41:2). He has helped to keep others alive, and God will keep him
   alive. Is there anything then lost by mercifulness? It spins out the
   silver thread of life. Many are taken away the sooner for their
   unmercifulness. Because their hearts are straitened, their lives are
   shortened.

   Again, the merciful man shall be rewarded in the life to come.
   Aristotle joins these two together, liberality and utility. God will
   reward the merciful man hereafter, though not for his works, yet
   according to his works. I saw the dead, small and great, stand before
   God, and the books were opened, and the dead were judged out of those
   things which were written in the books, according to their works'
   (Revelation 20:12). As God has a bottle to put our tears in, so he has
   a book to write our alms in. As God will put a veil over his people's
   sins, so he will in free grace set a crown upon their works. The way to
   lay up is to lay out. Other parts of our estate are left behind
   (Ecclesiastes 2:18), but that which is given to Christ's poor is
   hoarded up in heaven. That is a blessed kind of giving which though it
   makes the purse lighter, it makes the crown heavier.

   You that are mercifully inclined, remember whatever alms you
   distribute:

   You shall have good security. He that gives to the poor lends to the
   Lord; and that which he hath given will he pay him again' (Ecclesiastes
   11:1; Luke 6:38; Proverbs 19:17). There is God's counter-band to save
   you harmless, which is better security than any public faith. Yet here
   is our unbelief and atheism; we will not take God's bond. We commonly
   put our deeds of mercy among our desperate debts.

   You shall be paid with over-plus. For a wedge of gold which you have
   parted with you shall have a weight of glory. For a cup of cold water
   you shall have rivers of pleasure, which run at God's right hand for
   evermore. The interest comes to infinitely more than the principal.
   Pliny writes of a country in Africa where the people for every bushel
   of seed they sow receive an hundred and fifty-fold increase. For every
   penny you drop into Christ's treasury, you shall receive above a
   thousand-fold increase. Your after-crop of glory will be so great that,
   though you are still reaping, you will never be able to inn the whole
   harvest. Let all this persuade rich men to honour the Lord with their
   substance

   Before I conclude this subject, let me lay down some rules briefly
   concerning works of mercy.

   1 Charity must be free. Thou shalt give, and thy heart must not be
   grieved . ..' (Deuteronomy 15:10). That is, you must not be troubled at
   parting with your money. He that gives grievingly, gives grudgingly. It
   is not a gift, but a tax. Charity must flow like spring-water. The
   heart must be the spring, the hand the pipe, the poor the cistern. God
   loves a cheerful giver. Do not be like the crab which has all the
   ver-juice squeezed and pressed out. You must not give to the poor as if
   you were delivering your purse on the highway. Charity without alacrity
   is rather a fine than an offering. It is rather doing of penance than
   giving of alms. Charity must be like the myrrh which drops from the
   tree without cutting or forcing.

   2 We must give that which is our own (Isaiah 58:7). To deal bread to
   the hungry, it must be thy bread'. The word for alms, in the Syriac
   signifies justice', to show that alms must be of that which is justly
   gotten. The Scripture puts them together, To do justice, to love
   mercy.' (Micah 6:8). We must not make a sacrifice out of robbery', a
   sacrifice of sacrilege. For I the Lord love judgement, I hate robbery
   for burnt offering' (Isaiah 61:8). He that shall build an almshouse or
   hospital with goods ill-gotten displays the ensign of his pride and
   sets up the monument of his shame.

   3 Do all in Christ and for Christ.

   Do all in Christ. Labour that your persons may be in Christ. We are
   accepted in him' (Ephesians 1:6). Origen, Chrysostom, and Peter Martyr
   affirm that the best works not springing from faith are lost. The
   Pelagians thought to have posed Augustine with that question, Whether
   it was sin in the heathen to clothe the naked? Augustine answered
   rightly: The doing of good is not in itself simply evil, but proceeding
   from infidelity it becomes evil'. To them that are unbelieving is
   nothing pure' (Titus 1:15). That fruit is most sweet and genuine which
   is brought forth in the vine (John 15:4). Out of Christ all our
   alms-deeds are but the fruit of the wild olive. They are not good works
   but dead works.

   Do all for Christ, namely, for his sake, that you may testify your love
   to him. Love mellows and ripens our alms-deeds. It makes them a
   precious perfume to God. As Mary did out of love bring her ointments
   and sweet spices to anoint Christ's dead body, so out of love to Christ
   bring your ointments and anoint his living body, viz., saints and
   members.

   4 Works of mercy are to be done in humility. Away with ostentation! The
   worm breeds in the fairest fruit, the moth in the finest cloth. Pride
   will be creeping into our best things. Beware of this dead fly in the
   box of ointment. When Moses' face shone, he put a veil over it. So
   while your light shines before men and they see your good works, cover
   yourselves with the veil of humility. As the silkworm, while she weaves
   her curious works, hides herself within the silk and is not seen, so we
   should hide ourselves from pride and vainglory.

   It was the sin of the Pharisees while they were distributing alms that
   they blew the trumpet (Matthew 6:2). They did not give their alms, but
   sold them for applause. A proud man casts his bread upon the waters',
   as a fisherman casts his angle upon the waters. He angles for
   vainglory. I have read of one Cosmus Medices, a rich citizen of
   Florence, that he confessed to a near friend of his, he built so many
   magnificent structures, and spent so much on scholars and libraries,
   not for any love to learning but to raise up to himself trophies of
   fame and renown. An humble soul denies himself, yes, even annihilates
   himself. He thinks how little it is he can do for God, and if he could
   do more, it were but a due debt. Therefore he looks upon all his works
   as if he had done nothing. The saints are brought in at the last day as
   disowning their works of charity. Lord, when saw we thee an hungered
   and fed thee . . .?' (Matthew 25:37). A good Christian not only empties
   his hand of alms, but empties his heart of pride. While he raises the
   poor out of the dust, he lays himself in the dust. Works of mercy must
   be like the cassia which is a sweet spice, but grows low.

   5 Dispose your alms prudentially. It is said of the merciful man, He
   orders his affairs with discretion' (Psalm 112:5). There is a great
   deal of wisdom in distinguishing between those that have sinned
   themselves into poverty, and those who by the hand of God are brought
   into poverty. Discretion in the distribution of alms consists of two
   things: in finding out a fit object; in taking a fit season.

   The finding out a fit object comes under a double notion. Give to those
   who are in most need. Raise the hedge where it is lowest. Feed the lamp
   which is going out. Give to those who may probably be more serviceable.
   Though we bestow cost and dressing upon a weak plant, yet not upon a
   dead plant. Breed up such as may help to build the house of Israel
   (Ruth 4:11), that may be pillars in church and state, not caterpillars
   making your charity to blush.

   Discretion in giving alms is in taking the fit season. Give to
   charitable uses in time of health and prosperity. Distribute your
   silver and gold to the poor before the silver cord be loosed or the
   golden bowl be broken' (Ecclesiastes 12:6). He who gives quickly gives
   double'. Make your hands your executors; not as some who reserve all
   they give till the term of life is ready to expire, and truly what is
   then bestowed is not given away, but taken away by death. It is not
   charity, but necessity. Oh do not so marry yourselves to money that you
   are resolved nothing shall part you but death. Be not like the medlar
   which is never good till it be rotten. A covetous man may be compared
   to a Christmas-box. He receives money, but parts with none till death
   breaks this box in pieces. Then the silver and the gold come tumbling
   out. Give in time of health. These are the alms which God takes notice
   of, and (as Calvin says) puts in his book of accounts.

   6 Give thankfully. They should be more thankful that give an alms than
   they that receive it. We should (says Nazianzen) give a thank-offering
   to God that we are in the number of givers and not receivers. Bless God
   for a willing mind. To have not only an estate, but an heart, is matter
   of gratulation.
     __________________________________________________________________

16. A description of heart-purity

   Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God.

   Matthew 5:8

   The holy God, who is of purer eyes than to behold iniquity' calls here
   for heart-purity, and to such as are adorned with this jewel, he
   promises a glorious and beatifical vision of himself: they shall see
   God'. Two things are to be explained the nature of purity; the subject
   of purity.

   1 The nature of purity. Purity is a sacred refined thing. It stands
   diametrically opposed to whatsoever defiles. We must distinguish the
   various kinds of purity. First, there is a primitive purity which is in
   God originally and essentially as light is in the sun. Holiness is the
   glory of the Godhead: Glorious in holiness' (Exodus 15:11). God is the
   pattern and prototype of all holiness. Second, there is a created
   purity. Thus holiness is in the angels and was once in Adam. Adam's
   heart did not have the least spot or tincture of impurity. We call that
   wine pure which has no sophistication; and that gold pure which has no
   dross mingled with it. Such was Adam's holiness. It was like the wine
   which comes from the grape, having no mixture. But this is not to be
   found on earth. We must go to heaven for it.

   Third, there is an evangelical purity; whence grace is mingled with
   some sin, like gold in the ore, like air in the twilight, like wine
   that has a dash in it, like fine cloth with a coarse list, like
   Nebuchadnezzar's image, part of silver, and part of clay (Daniel 2:35).
   This mixture God calls purity in a gospel-sense; as a face may be said
   to be fair which has some freckles in it. Where there is a study of
   purity and a loathing ourselves for our impurity, this is to be pure in
   heart'.

   Some by pure in heart, understand chastity, others sincerity (Psalm
   32:2). But I suppose purity here is to be taken in a larger sense for
   the several kinds and degrees of holiness. They are said to be pure who
   are consecrated persons, having the oil of graces poured upon them.
   This purity is much mistaken.

   Civility is not purity. A man may be clothed with moral virtues
   justice, prudence, temperance yet go to hell.

   Profession is not purity. A man may have a name to live and yet be dead
   (Revelation 3:1). He may be swept by civility and garnished by
   profession, yet the devil may dwell in the house. The blazing comet is
   no star. The hypocrite's tongue may be silver, yet his heart stone.
   Purity consists in two things; rectitude of mind, a prizing holiness in
   the judgement (Psalm 119:30); conformity of will, an embracing of
   holiness in the affections (Psalm 119:97). A pure soul is cast into the
   mould of holiness. Holiness is a blood that runs in his veins.

   2 The subject of purity: the heart: pure in heart'. Purity of heart
   does not exclude purity of life, no more than the pureness of the
   fountain excludes the pureness of the stream. But it is called purity
   of heart, because this is the main thing in religion, and there can be
   no purity of life without it. A Christian's great care should be to
   keep the heart pure, as one would especially preserve the spring from
   being poisoned. In a duel, a man will chiefly guard and fence his
   heart, so a wise Christian should above all things keep his heart pure.
   Take heed that the love of sin does not get in there, lest it prove
   mortal.

   Christians should above all things breathe after heart purity: Holding
   the mystery of the faith in a pure conscience' (1 Timothy 3:9).
   Justification causes our happiness, sanctification evidences it.

   1 The reasons for purity are: (i) Purity is a thing called for in
   Scripture: Be ye holy for I am holy' (1 Peter 1:16). It is not only the
   minister bids you be holy, but God himself calls for it. What should
   the Holy God do with unholy servants?

   (ii) Because of that filthy and cursed condition we are in before
   purity be wrought in us. We are a lump of clay and sin mingled
   together. Sin not only blinds us, but defiles us. It is called
   filthiness (James 1:21). And to show how befilthying a thing it is, it
   is compared to a plague-sore (1 Kings 8:38), to spots (Deuteronomy
   32:5), to a vomit (2 Peter 2:22), to the infants tumbling in blood'
   (Ezekiel 16:6), and to a menstruous cloth' (Isaiah 30:22), which (as
   Jerome says) was the most defiling thing under the law. All the legal
   warnings which God appointed were but to put men in mind of their
   loathsomeness before they were washed in the blood of Christ. If all
   the evils in the world were put together and their quintessence
   strained out, they could not make a thing so black and polluted as sin
   does. A sinner is a devil in man's shape. When Moses' rod was turned
   into a serpent, he fled from it. Would God open men's eyes and show
   them their deformities and damnable spots, they would be afraid and fly
   from themselves as serpents! This shows what need we have of purity.
   When grace comes it washes off this hellish filth. Of Ethiopians it
   makes us Israelites. It turns ravens into swans. It makes them who are
   as black as hell to become white as snow.

   (iii) Because none but the pure in heart are interested in the covenant
   of grace. Covenanted persons have the sprinkling with clean water'
   (Ezekiel 36:25). Now, till we are thus sprinkled, we have nothing to do
   with the new covenant and by consequence with the new Jerusalem. If a
   will be made only to such persons as are so qualified, none can come in
   for a part, but such as have those qualifications. So, God has made a
   will and covenant that he will be our God, and will settle heaven upon
   us by entail, but with this clause or proviso in the will, that we be
   purified persons, having the clean water sprinkled, upon us. Now till
   then, we have nothing to do with God or mercy.

   (iv) Purity is the end of our election. He has chosen us that we should
   be holy' (Ephesians 1:4). Not for holiness, but to holiness. Whom he
   did foreknow, he also did predestinate to be conformed to the image of
   his Son' (Romans 8:29). God predestinates us to Christ's image, which
   image consists in righteousness and true holiness' (Ephesians 4:24). So
   that till you are holy, you cannot show any sign of election upon you,
   but rather the devil's brand-mark.

   (v) Purity is the end of our redemption. If we could have gone to
   heaven in our sins, Christ needed not have died. Why did he shed his
   blood but to redeem us from a vain conversation'? (1 Peter:18, 19);
   and, who gave himself for us that he might redeem us from all iniquity,
   and purify unto himself a peculiar people' (Titus 2:14). Christ shed
   his blood to wash off our filth. The cross was both an altar and a
   laver. Jesus died not only to save us from wrath (1 Thessalonians
   1:10), but to save us from sin (Matthew 1:21). Out of his side came
   water which signifies our cleansing, as well as blood which signifies
   our justifying (1 John 5:6). The truth is, it were to make the body of
   Christ monstrous, if the head should be pure and not the members.

   2 Why purity must be chiefly in the heart.

   (i) Because if the heart be not pure, we differ nothing from a
   Pharisaic purity. The Pharisees' holiness consisted chiefly in
   externals. Theirs was an outside purity. They never minded the inside
   of the heart. Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! For ye
   make clean the outside of the cup and of the platter, but within they
   are full of extortion', and Ye are like unto whited sepulchres, which
   indeed appear beautiful outward, but are within full of dead men's
   bones' (Matthew 23:25, 27). The Pharisees were good only on the
   surface. They were whited over, not white. They were like a rotten post
   laid in vermilion colour, like a fair chimney-piece gilded without, but
   within nothing but soot. Of such hypocrites Salvian complains, who had
   Christ in their mouths but to no purpose. We must go further. Be pure
   in heart', like the king's daughter all glorious within' (Psalm 45:13);
   else ours is but a Pharisaic purity; and Christ says, Except your
   righteousness shall exceed the righteousness of the scribes and
   Pharisees, ye shall in no case enter into the kingdom of heaven'
   (Matthew 5:20).

   (ii) The heart must especially be kept pure, because the heart is the
   chief seat or place of God's residence. God dwells in the heart. He
   takes up the heart for his own lodging (Isaiah 57:15; Ephesians 3:17),
   therefore it must be pure and holy. A king's palace must be kept from
   defilement, especially his presence-chamber. How holy ought that to be!
   If the body be the temple of the Holy Ghost (1 Corinthians 6:19), the
   heart is the holy of holies! Oh take heed of defiling the room where
   God is to come. Let that room be washed with holy tears.

   (iii) The heart must especially be pure, because it is the heart that
   sanctifies all we do. If the heart be holy, all is holy -- our
   affections holy, our duties holy. The altar sanctifieth the gift'
   (Matthew 23:19). The heart is the altar that sanctifies the offering.
   The Romans kept their springs from being poisoned. The heart is the
   spring of all our actions; let us keep this spring from poison. Be pure
   in heart'.

   See here what is the beauty that sets off a soul in God's eye, namely,
   purity of heart. You who are never so beautiful are but a spiritual
   leper till you are pure in heart. God is in love with the pure heart
   for he sees his own picture drawn there. Holiness is a beam of God; it
   is the angels' glory. They are pure virgin-spirits. Take away purity
   from an angel and he is no more an angel but a devil. You who are pure
   in heart have the angels' glory shining in you. You have the embroidery
   and workmanship of the Holy Ghost upon you. The pure heart is God's
   paradise where he delights to walk. It is his lesser heaven. The dove
   delights in the purest air. The Holy Ghost who descended in the
   likeness of a dove delights in the purest soul. God says of the pure in
   heart as of Zion, This is my rest for ever, here will I dwell' (Psalm
   132:14). God loves the fairest complexion. The pure in heart is
   Christ's bride, decked and bespangled with the jewels of holiness. Thou
   hast ravished my heart with one of thine eyes' (Canticles 4:9). Thine
   eyes, that is, thy graces; these as a chain of pearl have drawn mine
   heart to thee. Of all hearts God loves the pure heart best. You who
   dress yourself by the glass of the Word and adorn the hidden man of thy
   heart' (1 Peter 3:4), are most precious in God's eyes, though you may
   be blear-eyed as Leah, lame as Barzillai,' yet being pure in heart, you
   are the mirror of beauty and may say Yet shall I be glorious in the
   eyes of the Lord' (Isaiah 49:5). How may this raise the esteem of
   purity! This is a beauty that never fades and which makes God himself
   fall in love with us.

   If we must be pure in heart then we must not rest in outward purity.
   Civility is not sufficient. A swine may be washed, yet a swine still.
   Civility does but wash a man, grace changes him. Civility, like a star
   may shine in the eyes of the world, but it differs as much from purity
   as the crystal from the diamond. Civility is but strewing flowers on a
   dead corpse. A man may be wonderfully moralised, yet but a tame devil.
   How many have made civility their saviour! Morality may damn as well as
   vice. A vessel may be sunk with gold, as well as with dung.

   Observe two things:

   1 The civil person, though he will not commit gross sins, yet he is not
   sensible of heart sins. He does not discern the law in his members'
   (Romans 7:23). He is not troubled for unbelief, hardness of heart,
   vanity of thoughts. He abhors gaol-sins, not gospel-sins.

   2 The civil person has an aching tooth at religion. His heart rises
   against holiness. The snake is of a fine colour, but has a deadly
   sting. The civil man is fair to look to, but has a secret antipathy
   against the ways of God. He hates grace as much as vice. Zeal is as
   odious to him as uncleanness. So that civility is not to be rested in.
   The heart must be pure. God would have Aaron wash the inwards of the
   sacrifice (Leviticus 9:14). Civility does but wash the outside; the
   inwards must be washed. Blessed are the pure in heart'.

   Let us put ourselves on trial whether we are pure-hearted or no. Here I
   shall do two things to show the signs, first, of an impure heart;
   second, of a pure heart.

   1 An ignorant heart is an impure heart. To be ignorant of sin or Christ
   argues impurity of heart. Nahash the Ammonite would enter into covenant
   with the men of Jabesh-Gilead so he might thrust out their right eyes
   (1 Samuel 11:2). Satan leaves men their left eye. In worldly knowledge
   they are quick-sighted enough but the right eye of spiritual knowledge
   is quite put out (2 Corinthians 4:4). Ignorance is Satan's stronghold
   (Acts 26:18). The devils are bound in chains of darkness (Jude 6). So
   are all ignorant persons. Impossible it is that an ignorant heart
   should be good. It is knowledge makes the heart good. That the soul be
   without knowledge is not good' (Proverbs 19:2). For any to say that,
   though their mind be ignorant yet their heart is good, they may as well
   say that, though they are blind yet their eyes are good. In the law,
   when the plague of leprosy was in a man's head the priest was to
   pronounce him unclean. This is the case of an ignorant man. The leprosy
   is in his head, he is unclean'. That heart cannot be very pure which is
   a dungeon. Grace cannot reign where ignorance reigns. An ignorant man
   can have no love to God. He cannot love that which he does not know'.
   He can have no faith. Knowledge must usher in faith (Psalm 9:10). He
   cannot worship God aright (John 4:22). Though he may worship the true
   God, yet in a wrong manner. Ignorance is the root of sin. Blindness
   leads to lasciviousness (Ephesians 4:18, 19; Proverbs 7:23). Ignorance
   is the mother of pride (Revelation 3:17). It is the cause of error (2
   Timothy 3:7), and, which is worse, an affected ignorance. It is one
   thing to be ignorant; it is another thing to be unwilling to know'.
   Many are in love with ignorance. They hug their disease (Job 21:14; 2
   Peter 3:5). Ignorant minds are impure. There is no going to heaven in
   the dark.

   2 That heart is impure which sees no need of purity. I am rich and have
   need of nothing' (Revelation 3:17). Not to be sensible of a disease is
   worse than the disease. You shall hear a sick man say, I am well, I ail
   nothing'. There are some who need no repentance' (Luke 15:7). Some
   sinners are too well to be cured. Heart purity is as great a wonder to
   the natural man as the new birth was to Nicodemus (John 3:4). It is sad
   to think how many go on confidently and are ready to bless themselves,
   never suspecting their condition till it be too late.

   3 He has an impure heart who regards iniquity in his heart. If I regard
   iniquity in my heart, the Lord will not hear me' (Psalm 66:18). In the
   original it is If I look upon sin', that is, with a lustful look.
   Sin-regarding is inconsistent with heart-purity.

   What is it to regard iniquity,?

   (i) When we indulge in sin. When sin not only lives in us, but when we
   live in sin. Some will leave all their sins but one. Jacob would let
   all his sons go but Benjamin. Satan can hold a man by one sin. The
   fowler holds the bird fast enough by a wing or a claw. Others hide
   their sins like one that shuts up his shop-windows but follows his
   trade within doors. Many deal with their sins as Moses, mother dealt
   with her son. She hid him in the ark of bulrushes, as if she had left
   him quite, but her eye was still upon him and in conclusion she became
   his nurse (Exodus 2:9). So, many seem to leave their sins, but they
   only hide them from the eye of others. Their heart still goes after
   them and at last they nurse and give breast to their sins.

   (ii) To regard iniquity is to delight in iniquity. A child of God,
   though he sins, yet he does not take a complacency in sin. What I hate,
   that do I' (Romans 7:15). But impure souls make a recreation of sin.
   They had pleasure in unrighteousness' (2 Thessalonians 2:12). Never did
   one feed with more delight on a dish he loves than a wicked man does
   upon the forbidden fruit. This delight shows that the will is in the
   sin. And the will is the rule and measure of the deed'.

   (iii) To regard iniquity is to lay in provision for sin. Make not
   provision for the flesh' (Romans 13:14). Sinners are caterers for their
   lusts. It is a metaphor taken from such as make provision for a family,
   or victual a garrison. The Greek word here signifies a projecting and
   forecasting in the mind how to bring a thing about. This is to make
   provision for the flesh when one studies to satisfy the flesh and lay
   in fuel for lust. Thus Amnon made provision for the flesh (2 Samuel
   13:5). He fains himself sick, and his sister, Tamar, must be his nurse.
   She must cook and dress his meat for him. By which means he defiled the
   breasts of her virginity. It is sad when men's care is not to discharge
   conscience, but to satisfy lust.

   (iv) To regard iniquity is to give it respect and entertainment, as Lot
   showed respect to the angels. He bowed himself with his face toward the
   ground and said, Behold now, my lords, turn in, I pray you . . .'
   (Genesis 19:2). When the Spirit of God comes He is repulsed and
   grieved, but when temptation comes, the sinner bows to it, sets open
   the gates, and says Turn in, my lord'. This is to regard iniquity.

   (v) He is said to regard sin that does not regard the threatenings of
   God against sin. We read of 'seven thunders uttering their voices'
   (Revelation 10:3). How many thunders in Scripture utter their voice
   against sin! God shall wound the hairy scalp of such an one as goeth on
   still in his trespasses' (Psalm 68:21). Here is a thundering scripture,
   but sinners fear not this thunder. Let a minister come as a Boanerges,
   clothed with the spirit of Elijah, and denounce all the curses of God
   against men's sins, they regard it not. They can laugh at the shaking
   of a spear (Job 41:29). This is to regard iniquity, and argues an
   impure heart.

   4 An unbelieving heart is an impure heart. The Scripture calls it
   expressly an evil heart of unbelief' (Hebrews 3:12). An unbelieving
   heart is evil in the highest degree. It is full of the poison of hell.
   Unbelief is the foul medley of all sins, the root and receptacle of
   sin.

   (i) Unbelief is a God-affronting sin. It puts the lie upon God. It
   calls in question his power (Psalm 78:19), mercy and truth. He that
   believeth not hath made God a liar' (1 John 5:10). And can a greater
   affront be cast upon the God of glory? It makes us trust to second
   causes, which is setting the creature in the room of God. Asa in his
   disease sought not to the Lord, but to the physicians' (2 Chronicles
   16:12). He relied more on the physician than upon God. Saul seeks to
   the witch of Endor. O high affront, to lean upon the reed and neglect
   the Rock of Ages!

   (ii) Unbelief hardens the heart. These two sins are linked together. He
   upbraided them with their unbelief and hardness of heart' (Mark 16:14).
   Unbelief breeds the stone of the heart. He that believes not God's
   threatenings will never fear him. He that believes not God's promises
   will never love him. What is said of the Leviathan is true of the
   unbeliever. His heart is as firm as a stone' (Job 41:24). Unbelief
   first pollutes the heart and then hardens it.

   (iii) Unbelief breeds hypocrisy. Atheists do not believe that God is a
   jealous God and will call them to account. Therefore it is they put on
   a mask of religion and are saints in jest, that they may play the devil
   in earnest (2 Timothy 3:4, 5). They pretend God, but Self is the idol
   they worship. Like barge-men they look one way and row another. The
   unbeliever is the greatest hypocrite.

   (iv) Unbelief causes the fear of men. Fear is proof of a baseborn
   soul'. Fear is a debasing thing. It unmans a man. It makes him afraid
   to be good. The fearful man studies rather compliance than conscience.
   The fear of man bringeth a snare' (Proverbs 29:25). What made Abraham
   equivocate, David feign himself mad, Peter deny Christ? Was it not
   their fear? And whence does fear spring, but from unbelief? Therefore
   the Scripture joins them together. The fearful and unbelieving'
   (Revelation 21:8).

   (v) Unbelief is the root of apostasy: an evil heart of unbelief in
   departing from the living God' (Hebrews 3:12). What is the reason those
   who seemed once zealous now despise prophesying and leave off prayer in
   their families? Is it not their unbelief? They believed not that God
   is, and that he is a rewarder of them that diligently seek him (Hebrews
   11:6). Infidelity is the cause of apostasy. In the Greek, apistia'
   (unbelief) leads to apostasia' (apostasy). And if infidelity be the
   breeder and fomenter of so much sin, then the unbelieving heart must
   needs be an impure heart.

   5 A covetous heart is an impure heart. The earth is the most impure
   element. The purity of the heart lies in the spirituality of it, and
   what more opposite to spiritualness than earthiness? Covetousness is
   the root of all evil' (1 Timothy 6:10). To what cost thou not drive
   mortal hearts, thou accursed lust for gold?'

   (i) Covetousness is the root of discontent. Why do any repine at their
   condition, but because they think they do not have enough? The Greek
   word for covetousness signifies an immoderate desire of getting.
   Covetousness is a dry dropsy, and because the thirst is not satisfied,
   therefore the heart frets through discontent and impatience.

   (ii) Covetousness is the root of theft. Achan's covetous humour made
   him steal that wedge of gold which served to cleave asunder his soul
   from God (Joshua 7:21).

   (iii) Covetousness is the root of treason. It made Judas betray Christ.
   What will ye give me and I will deliver him unto you?' (Matthew 26:15).
   Absalom's covetousness made him attempt to pluck the crown from his
   father's head. He that is a Demas will soon prove a Judas. Men shall be
   covetous' (2 Timothy 3:2), and it follows in the next verse, traitors'.
   Where covetousness is in the premises, treason will be in the
   conclusion.

   (iv) Covetousness is the root of murder. Why did Ahab stone Naboth to
   death but to possess his vineyard? (1 Kings 21:13). Covetousness has
   made many swim to the crown in blood. And can the heart be pure, when
   the hands are full of blood'? (Isaiah 1:15).

   (v) Covetousness is the root of perjury. Men shall be covetous, and it
   follows, trucebreakers' (2 Timothy 3:2, 3). For love of money will take
   a false oath and break a just oath. He that lives a Midas, will die a
   perjurer.

   (vi) Covetousness is the root of necromancy. Why do persons indent with
   the devil, but for money? They study the black art for yellow gold.
   Alexander the Sixth pawned his soul to the devil for a popedom.

   (vii) It is the root of fraud and cezenage in dealings. Such as would
   be over-rich, will overreach. It is the covetous hand that holds false
   weights (Amos 8:5).

   (viii) Covetousness is the root of bribery and injustice. It makes the
   courts of judicature, great places of robbery', as Augustine speaks. At
   Athens causes were bought and sold for money.

   (ix) It is the cause of uncleanness. The Scripture mentions the hire of
   a whore' (Deuteronomy 23:18). For money both conscience and chastity
   are set to sale.

   (x) Covetousness is the root of idolatry: Covetousness which is
   idolatry' (Colossians 3:5). The covetous person bows down to the image
   of gold. His money is his god, for he puts his trust in it. Money is
   his creator. When he has abundance of wealth, then he thinks he is
   made. It is his redeemer. If he be in any strait or trouble, he flies
   to his money and that must redeem him. It is his comforter. When he is
   sad he counts over his money and with this golden harp he drives away
   the evil spirit. When you see a covetous man, you may say, There goes
   an idolater.

   (xi) Covetousness is the cause of unprofitableness under the means. In
   the parable the thorns choked the seed (Matthew 13:7). This is the
   reason the Word preached does no more good. The seed often falls among
   thorns. Thousands of sermons lie buried in earthly hearts.

   (xii) Covetousness is the root of penuriousness and baseness. It
   hinders hospitality. A covetous man has a withered hand. He cannot
   reach it out to clothe or feed such as are in want. The covetous person
   is so sordid that if his estate may flourish he is content to let his
   name lie dead and buried. What a cursed sin is avarice! And can he be
   pure in heart that has such a root of bitterness' growing in him? We
   may as well say the wine is pure which runs dregs or the body is pure
   which is full of plague-spots.

   6 Those hearts are impure which are haters of purity' (Micah 3:2),
   which hate knowledge' (Proverbs 1:29). Some things in nature have an
   antipathy; the serpent will not come near the boughs of the wild ash.
   There is an antipathy in a carnal heart against holiness; and when
   hatred is boiled up to malice, it is dangerous. Thus Julian maliciously
   opposed holiness. Making war against the Persians, and receiving a
   mortal wound through his armour, he threw up an handful of his blood
   into the air in indignation saying, Thou Galilean, hast thou overcome
   me?'

   7 He that decries purity has an impure heart. There shall come in the
   last days scoffers' (Luke 16:14; 2 Peter 3:3). There are some that make
   a jeer of religion. These are (say they) your holy brethren!' It is a
   sign of an Ishmael spirit to scoff at holiness. Are we not commanded to
   be perfect as God is? (Matthew 5:48). One would wonder that those who
   dare open their mouths in derision against holiness, the earth does not
   open her mouth to swallow them up as it did Korah and Dathan. These are
   devils covered over with flesh. They have damnation written on their
   foreheads. Lucian who in the time of the Emperor Trajan had professed
   religion, afterwards became so profane as to make a mock at the
   Christians and by his jeers and taunts went about to rend religion. At
   last he himself was rent asunder and devoured by dogs. When the scab of
   the leper appeared, he was to be shut out of the camp (Leviticus 13:8,
   46). Those who flout at religion, if God give them not repentance, are
   sure to be shut out of the camp of heaven.

   I shall next show you the signs of a pure heart.

   1 A sincere heart is a pure heart: In whose spirit there is no guile'
   (Psalm 32:2). There are four characters of a sincere-hearted Christian.

   (i) A sincere heart serves God with the whole heart.

   First, he serves God with the heart. The hypocrite does but make a show
   of obedience. Thou art near in their mouth and far from their reins'
   (Jeremiah 12:2). There may be a fair complexion when the lungs and
   vitals are rotten. The hypocrite is fair to look on. He has a devout
   eye but a hollow heart. But he who is sincere, his inside is his best
   side. In the law God would have the inwards' offered up (Leviticus
   4:11). A good Christian gives God the inwards'. When he prays his heart
   prays. Hannah prayed in her heart' (1 Samuel 1:13). In his thanksgiving
   the heart is the chief instrument of praise (Psalm 111:1). Then is the
   sweetest music when we make melody in our hearts to the Lord'
   (Ephesians 5:19).

   Secondly, the sincere Christian serves God with the whole heart' (Psalm
   119:2). Hypocrites have a double heart (Psalm 12:2). An heart for God
   and an heart for sin. Their heart is divided' (Hosea 10:2). God loves a
   broken heart, but not a divided heart. An upright heart is a whole
   heart. The full stream and torrent of the affections runs out after
   God. A sincere heart follows God fully' (Numbers 14:24).

   (ii) A sincere heart is willing to come under a trial. Search me, O
   God, and try me' (Psalm 139:23). That metal is to be suspected which
   men are afraid to bring to the touchstone. A sound heart likes the
   touchstone of the Word. It is for a searching ministry. Hypocrites fly
   from the light of truth; they fly from that light which would discover
   sin. They hate that physic of the Word which, meeting with their ill
   humours, begins to make them sick and trouble their conscience. A
   gracious soul loves that preaching best which makes an heart-anatomy.

   Thirdly, a man of sincere heart dares not act in the least against his
   conscience. He is the most magnanimous, yet the most pusillanimous. He
   is bold in suffering (Proverbs 28:1) but fearful of sin (Genesis 39:9).
   He dares not get an estate by sinful shifts, or rise upon the ruins of
   another. Jacob got his father's blessing by fraud, but that is not the
   way to get God's blessing.

   Fourthly, a sincere heart is a suspicious heart. The hypocrite suspects
   others and has charitable thoughts of himself. The sincere Christian
   has charitable thoughts of others and suspects himself. He calls
   himself often to account: O my soul, have you any evidences for heaven?
   Are they not to seek when they should be to show? Is there no flaw in
   your evidences? You may mistake common for saving grace. Weeds in the
   cornfields look like flowers. The foolish virgins' lamps looked as if
   they had oil in them. O my soul, is it not so with you? The man of
   sincere soul, being ever jealous, plays the critic upon himself and so
   traverses things in the court of conscience as if he were presently to
   be cited to God's bar. This is to be pure in heart.

   2 A pure heart breathes after purity. If God should stretch out the
   golden sceptre and say to him, Ask, and it shall be given thee, to half
   the kingdom', he would say, Lord, a pure heart!' Let my heart have this
   inscription, Holiness to the Lord'. Let my heart be thy temple and do
   thou dwell in it. Lord, what should I do in heaven with this unholy
   heart? What converse could I have with God or angels? A gracious soul
   is so in love with purity that he prizes a pure heart above all
   blessings.

   (i) Above riches; he knows he may be clothed in purple and fine linen,
   and yet go to hell. He is content to be poor, so long as he may be
   pure. He knows heart-purity is a special certificate of God's love. The
   pure in heart' shall see God.

   (ii) Above gifts: gifts do not at all set us off in God's eye. A pure
   heart is the jewel. O woman, great is thy faith!' (Matthew 15:28). It
   was not her rhetorical language Christ was taken with, but her faith.
   Hypocrites have had rare gifts. Saul had the spirit of prophecy. Judas
   no doubt could make an elegant oration. Hypocrites have come into God's
   church loaded with the Egyptian gold of human learning. There may be
   illumination without sanctification. A small diamond is better than a
   great deal of brass. A little grace excels the most flourishing parts.
   Now if the out-goings of your soul are after holiness, you desire
   rather a pure heart than an eloquent tongue. You have the oil of the
   Spirit poured on you and you shall be crowned with a sight of God.

   3 A pure heart abhors all sin. A man may forbear and forsake sin, yet
   not have a pure heart.

   (i) He may forbear sin as one may hold his breath while he dives under
   water, and then take breath again. And a man may forbear sin for want
   of occasion. The gunpowder makes no noise till the fire be put to it.
   The clock stands still till the weights are put on. Let a temptation
   come, which is like the hanging on of the weights, and the heart goes
   as fast in sin as ever.

   (ii) He may forbear sin for fear of the penalty. A man forbears a dish
   he loves for fear it should bring his disease upon him of the stone or
   gout. There is conflict in a sinner between the passions of desire and
   fear. Desire spurs him on to sin, but fear as a curb and bit checks
   him. Nor is it the crookedness of the serpent he fears, but the sting
   of the serpent.

   (iii) He may forbear sin out of a design. He has a plot in hand and his
   sin might spoil his plot. Some rich heir would fly out in excess, but
   he carries it fair to prevent a cutting off the entail. How good was
   Joash while Jehoiada the priest lived! Prudence as well as conscience
   may restrain from sin.

   Again, a man may forsake sin yet not have a pure heart. It is a great
   matter, I confess, to forsake sin. So dear is sin to men that they will
   part with the fruit of their body for the sin of their souls. Sin is
   the Delilah that bewitches, and it is much to see men divorced from it.
   This is some fruit of the ministry to civilise, but there may be a
   forsaking of sin, yet no heart purity. Sin may be forsaken upon wrong
   principles.

   From morality: moral arguments may suppress sin. I have read of a
   debauched heathen who, hearing Socrates ' read an ethical lecture of
   virtue and vice (though he came with a purpose to deride Socrates, yet)
   he went away changed and no more followed his former exorbitancies.
   Cato, Seneca, Aristides, seeing beauty in virtue, led unblameable
   lives.

   From policy: a man may forsake sin, not out of respect to God's glory,
   but his own credit. Vice will waste his estate, eclipse the honour of
   his family, therefore out of policy he will divorce his sin.

   From necessity. Perhaps he can now follow the trade of sin no longer.
   The adulterer is grown old, the drunkard poor. His heart is toward sin,
   but either his purse fails him or his strength; as a man that loves
   hunting, but his prison-fetters will not suffer him to follow the
   sport. This man, who is necessitated to put a stop to sin, does not so
   much forsake sin as sin forsakes him.

   But he is pure in God's eye who abhors sin. I hate every false way'
   (Psalm 119:104). This is excellent indeed, because now the love of sin
   is crucified. A hypocrite may leave sin, yet love it; as the serpent
   casts her coat, yet keeps her sting. But when a man can say he abhors
   sin, now is sin killed in the root. A pure heart abstains from sin, as
   a man does from a dish that he has an antipathy against. This is a sign
   of a new nature, when a man hates what he once loved; and because he
   hates sin therefore he fights against it with the 'sword of the
   Spirit', as a man that hates a serpent seeks the destruction of it.

   4 A pure heart avoids the appearance of evil. Abstain from all show of
   evil' (1 Thessalonians 5:22). A pure heart avoids that which may be
   interpreted as evil. He that is loyal to his prince not only forbears
   to have his hand in treason, but he takes heed of that which has a show
   of treason. A gracious heart is shy of that which looks like sin. When
   Joseph's mistress took hold of him and said, Lie with me', he left his
   garment in her hand and fled from her (Genesis 39:12). He avoided the
   appearance of evil. He would not be seen in her company. Thus a pure
   heart avoids whatever may have the suspicion of sin:

   (i) In regard of himself, and that two ways. First, because the
   appearance of evil is oftentimes an occasion of evil. Effeminate
   dalliance is an appearance of evil, and many times occasions evil. Had
   Joseph been familiar with his mistress in a wanton sporting manner, he
   might in time have been drawn to commit folly with her. Some out of
   novelty and curiosity have gone to hear mass, and afterwards have lent
   the idol not only their ear but their knee. In our times are there not
   many who have gone with itching ears into sectarian company and have
   come home with the plague in their head? When Dinah would be gadding,
   she lost her chastity (Genesis 34:2). A pure heart foreseeing the
   danger avoids the appearance of evil. It is dangerous to go near a
   hornets' nest. The men who went near the furnace were burned (Daniel
   3:22). Second, because the appearance of evil may eclipse his good
   name. A good name is a precious ointment. It is better than fine gold'
   (Proverbs 22:1). It commends us to God and angels, which riches cannot
   do. Now a godly man avoids the appearance of evil, lest he wound his
   good name. What comfort can there be of life, when the name lies
   buried?

   (ii) A pure heart avoids the suspicion of sin out of reverence and
   respect to the holiness of God. God hates the very appearance of evil.
   God abhors hypocrites because they have no more than the appearance of
   good, and he is angry with his children if they have so much as the
   appearance of evil. A gracious heart knows God is a jealous God and
   cannot endure that his people should border upon sin. Therefore he
   keeps aloof off and will not come near the smell of infection.

   (iii) A pure heart avoids the show of sin in regard of the godly. The
   appearance of evil may scandalise a weak brother. A gracious heart is
   not only fearful lest he should defile his own conscience, but lest he
   should offend his brother's conscience. Were it only a thing
   indifferent, yet if it be an appearance of evil and may grieve another,
   we are to forbear (1 Corinthians 10:25-28). For when we sin against the
   brethren and wound their weak conscience, we sin against Christ' (1
   Corinthians 8:12). The weak Christian is a member of Christ. Therefore
   the sinning against a member is a sinning against Christ.

   (iv) A pure heart avoids the very appearance of evil in regard of the
   wicked. The apostle would have us walk wisely towards them that are
   without' (1 Thessalonians 4:12). The wicked watch for our halting. How
   glad would they be of anything to reproach religion? Professors are
   placed as stars in the highest orb of the church, and if there be but
   the appearance of any eccentric, or irregular motion, the wicked would
   presently open their mouths with a fresh cry against religion. Now to a
   godly heart the fame and honour of the gospel is so dear that he had
   rather die than impeach or eclipse it. By this then let us try
   ourselves whether we are pure in heart. Do we avoid the least
   apparition of sin? Alas, how many run themselves into the occasions of
   sin! They tempt the devil to tempt them. Some go to masques and
   comedies, the very fuel and temptation to lust. Others frequent
   erroneous meetings, and truly God often in just judgement leaves them
   to the acts of sin, that do not avoid the appearance of sin. They were
   mingled among the heathen and learned their works' (Psalm 106:35). Pure
   hearts fly the occasion. John would not endure the company of Cerinthus
   in the bath, as Nicephorus notes. Polycarp would have no conference
   with Marcion the heretic, but called him the devil's firstborn'. Basil
   says that the Christians in his time avoided the meetings of sectaries
   as the very schools of error'. Oh, avoid the appearance of evil. The
   apostle bids us to follow those things which are of good report'
   (Philippians 4:8).

   5 A pure heart performs holy duties in an holy manner. This holy
   manner, or due order, consists in three things:

   (i) Preparing the heart before a duty. An unholy heart does not care
   how it rushes upon an ordinance. It comes without preparation and goes
   away without profit. The pure heart is a prepared heart. It dresses
   itself, before it comes to a duty, by examination and ejaculation. When
   the earth is prepared, then it is fit to receive the seed. When the
   instrument is prepared and tuned it is fit for music.

   (ii) Watching the heart in a duty. An holy heart labours to be affected
   and wrought upon. His heart burns within him. There was no sacrifice
   without fire. A pure saint labours to have his heart broken in a duty
   (Psalm 51:17). The incense, when it was broken, cast the sweetest
   savour. Impure souls care not in what a dead or perfunctory manner they
   serve God (Ezekiel 33:31). They pray more out of fashion than out of
   faith. They are no more affected with an ordinance than the tombs of
   the church. God complains of offering up the blind (Malachi 1:8). And
   is it not as bad to offer up the dead? O Christian, say to yourself,
   How can this deadness of heart stand with pureness of heart? Do not
   dead things putrefy?

   (iii) Outward reverence. Purity of heart will express itself by the
   reverend gesture of the body, the lifting up of the eye and hand, the
   uncovering the head, the bending the knee. Constantine the Emperor bore
   great reverence to the Word. When God gave the law, the mount was on
   fire and trembled' (Exodus 19:18). The reason was that the people might
   prostrate themselves more reverently before the Lord. The ark wherein
   the law was put was carried upon bars that the Levites might not touch
   it (Exodus 25:11, 14). To show what reverence God would have about holy
   things: sitting in prayer (unless in case of weakness) and having the
   hat half on in prayer, is a very indecent, irreverent practice. Let
   such as are guilty reform it. We must not only offer up our souls, but
   our bodies (Romans 12:1). The Lord takes notice what posture and
   gesture we use in his worship. If a man were to deliver a petition to
   the king, would he deliver it with his hat half on? The careless
   irreverence of some would make us think they did not much regard
   whether God heard them or no. We are run from one extreme to another,
   from superstition to unmannerliness. Let Christians think of the
   dreadful majesty of God who is present. How dreadful is this place!
   This is none other but the house of God and this is the gate of heaven'
   (Genesis 28:17). The blessed angels cover their faces crying, Holy,
   holy holy' (Isaiah 6:3). An holy heart will have an holy gesture.

   6 A pure heart will have a pure life. Let us cleanse ourselves from all
   filthiness of the flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of
   God'. (2 Corinthians 7:1). Where there is a good conscience there will
   be a good conversation. Some bless God they have good hearts, but their
   lives are evil. There is a generation that are pure in their own eyes
   and yet is not washed from their filthiness' (Proverbs 30:12). If the
   stream be corrupt we may suspect the spring-head to be impure. Aaron
   was called the saint of the Lord (Psalm 106:16). He had not only an
   holy heart, but there was a golden plate on his forehead on which was
   written Holiness to the Lord'. Purity must not only be woven into the
   heart but engraver upon the life. Grace is most beautiful when it
   shines abroad with its golden beams. The clock has not only its motion
   within, but the finger moves without upon the dial. Pureness of heart
   shows itself upon the dial of the conversation.

   (i) A pure soul talks of God (Psalm 37:30). His heart is seen in his
   tongue. The Latins call the roof of the mouth Caelum (heaven). He that
   is pure in heart, his mouth is full of heaven.

   (ii) He walks with God (Genesis 6:9). He is still doing angel's work,
   praising God, serving God. He lives as Christ did upon earth. Holy
   duties are the Jacob's ladder by which he is still ascending to heaven.
   Purity of heart and life are in Scripture made twins. I will put my
   Spirit within you' (Ezekiel 36:27); there is purity of heart. And cause
   you to walk in my statutes'; there is purity of life. Shall we account
   them pure whose conversation is not in heaven (Philippians 3:20), but
   rather in hell? Shall I count them pure with the wicked balances and
   with the bag of deceitful weights?' (Micah 6:11). How justly may others
   reproach religion when they see it kicked down with our unholy feet! A
   pure heart has a golden frontispiece. Grace like new wine will have
   vent; it can be no more concealed than lost. The saints are called
   jewels' (Malachi 3:17), because of that shining lustre they cast in the
   eyes of others.

   7 A pure heart is so in love with purity that nothing can draw him off
   from it.

   (i) Let others reproach purity, he loves it. As David, when he danced
   before the ark, and Michal scoffed, if (says he) this be to be vile, I
   will yet be more vile' (2 Samuel 6:22). So says a pure heart: If to
   follow after holiness be to be vile, I will yet be more vile. Let water
   be sprinkled upon the fire, it burns the more. The more others deride
   holiness, the more a gracious soul burns in love and zeal to it. If a
   man had an inheritance befallen him, would he be laughed out of it?
   What is a Christian the worse for another's reproach? A blind man's
   disparaging a diamond does not make it sparkle the less.

   (ii) Let others persecute holiness, a pure heart will pursue it.
   Holiness is the queen every gracious soul is espoused to and he will
   rather die than be divorced. Paul would be holy, though bonds and
   persecutions did abide him' (Acts 20:23). The way of religion is often
   thorny and bloody, but a gracious heart prefers inward purity before
   outward peace. I have heard of one who, having a jewel he much prized,
   the king sent for his jewel. Tell the king (says he) I honour his
   Majesty, but I will rather lose my life than part with my jewel. He who
   is enriched with the jewel of holiness will rather die than part with
   this jewel. When his honour and riches will do him no good, his
   holiness will stand him instead. Ye have your fruit unto holiness, and
   the end everlasting life'.

   Let me persuade Christians to heart purity. The harlot wipes her mouth'
   (Proverbs 30:20). But that is not enough. Wash thine heart, O
   Jerusalem' (Jeremiah 4:14). And here I shall lay down some arguments or
   motives to persuade to heart purity.

   1 The necessity of heart-purity. It is necessary:

   (i) In respect of ourselves. Till the heart be pure, all our holy
   things are polluted. They are 'splendid sins'. To the unclean all
   things are unclean (Titus 1:15). Their offering is unclean. Under the
   law, if a man who was unclean by a dead body, carried a piece of holy
   flesh in his skirt, the holy flesh could not cleanse him, but he
   polluted that. (Haggai 2:12,13). He who had the leprosy, whatever he
   touched was unclean. If he had touched the altar or sacrifice, the
   altar had not cleansed him, but he had defiled the altar. A foul hand
   defiles the purest water. An impure heart defiles prayers, sacraments.
   He drops poison upon all. A pure stream running through muddy ground is
   polluted. The holiest ordinances are stained, running through an impure
   heart. A sinner's works are called dead works' (Hebrews 6:1). And those
   works which are dead cannot please God. A dead wife cannot please her
   husband.

   (ii) Heart purity is necessary in respect of God. God is holy. Purity
   is the chief robe wherewith God himself is clothed. Thou art of purer
   eyes than to behold evil' (Habakkuk 1:13). And will this holy God
   endure to have an impure heart come near him? Will a man lay a viper in
   his bosom? The holy God and the sinner cannot dwell together. None can
   dwell together but friends, but there is no friendship between God and
   the sinner, both of them being of a contrary judgement and disposition.
   An impure heart is more odious to God than a serpent. God gave the
   serpent its venom, but Satan fills the heart with sin. Why hath Satan
   filled thine heart?' (Acts 5:3). The Lord abhors a sinner. He will not
   come near him, having his plague-sores running. My soul loathed them'
   (Zechariah 11:8).

   (iii) Heart purity is necessary in regard of angels. They are pure
   creatures. The Cherubims, which typified the angels, were made of fine
   gold to denote the purity of their essence. No unholy thought enters
   into the angels, therefore there must be purity of heart that there may
   be some resemblance between us and them. What should unholy hearts do
   among those pure angelic spirits?

   (iv) In regard of the saints glorified. They are pure, being refined
   from all lees and dregs of sin. Their title is 'spirits of just men
   made perfect' (Hebrews 12:23). Now what should profane spirits do among
   'spirits made perfect'? I tell you, if you who wallow in your sins
   could come near God and angels and spirits of men made perfect, and
   have a sight of their lustre, you would soon wish yourselves out of
   their company. As a man that is dirty and in his rags, if he should
   stand before the king and his nobles and see them glistering in their
   cloth of gold and sparkling with their jewels, he would be ashamed of
   himself, and wish himself out of their presence.

   (v) There must be heart purity in regard of heaven. Heaven is a pure
   place. It is an inheritance undefiled' (1 Peter 1:4). No unclean beasts
   come into the heavenly ark. There shall not enter into it anything that
   defileth' (Revelation 21:27). The Lord will not put the new wine of
   glory into a musty impure heart, all which considered shows the
   necessity of heart purity.

   2 It is the will of God that we should be pure in heart. This is the
   will of God, your sanctification' (1 Thessalonians 4:3). Are you low in
   the world? Perhaps it is not the will of God that you should be rich,
   but it is the will of God that you should be holy. This is the will of
   God, your sanctification' (1 Thessalonians 4:3). Let God have his will
   by being holy, and you shall have your will by being happy. God's will
   must either be fulfilled by us or upon us.

   3 Purity of heart is the characteristic note of God's people. God is
   good to Israel, even to such as are of a clean heart' (Psalm 73:1).
   Heart-purity denominates us the Israel of God'. It is not profession
   which makes us the Israel of God. It makes us of Israel indeed, but all
   are not Israel, which are of Israel' (Romans 9:6). Purity of heart is
   the jewel which is hung only upon the elect. As chastity distinguishes
   a virtuous woman from an harlot, so the true saint is distinguished
   from the hypocrite by his heart-purity. This is like the nobleman's
   star or garter, which is a peculiar ensign of honour, differing him
   from the vulgar. When the bright star of purity shines in a Christian's
   heart, it distinguishes him from a formal professor.

   4 Purity of heart makes us like God. It was Adam's unhappiness once,
   that he aspired to be like God in omniscience; but we must endeavour to
   be like God in sanctity. God's image consists in holiness. To those who
   do not have this image and superscription upon them, he will say I know
   you not'. God delights in no heart but where he may see his own face
   and likeness. You cannot see your face in a glass when it is dusty.
   God's face cannot be seen in a dusty impure soul. A pure heart (like a
   clean glass) gives forth some idea and representation of God. There is
   little comfort in being like God in other things besides purity. Are we
   like God in that we have a being? So have stones. Are we like him in
   that we have motion? So have stars. Are we like him in that we have
   life? So have trees and birds. Are we like him in that we have
   knowledge? So have devils. There is no likeness to God will prove
   comfortable and blissful, but our being like him in purity. God loves
   the pure in heart. Love is founded upon likeness.

   5 The excellency of the heart lies in the purity of it. Purity was the
   glory of the soul in innocence. The purer a thing is, the better. The
   purer the air is, and the more free from noxious vapours, the better it
   is. The spirits of water distilled are most precious. The purer the
   gold is, the more valuable. The purer the wine is when it is taken off
   from the lees and dregs, the more excellent it is. The more the soul is
   clarified by grace and taken off from the lees and dregs of sin, the
   more precious account God makes of it. The purer the heart is, the more
   spiritual it is, and the more spiritual the more fit to entertain him
   who is a Spirit.

   6 God is good to the pure in heart. God is good to Israel, even to such
   as are of a clean heart' (Psalm 73:1). We all desire that God should be
   good to us. It is the sick man's prayer, The Lord be good to me'. God
   is good to such as are of a clean heart.

   But how is God good to them? Two ways --

   (i) To them that are pure, all things are sanctified. To the pure all
   things are pure' (Titus 1:15). Estate is sanctified, relations are
   sanctified, as the temple sanctified the gold and the altar sanctified
   the offering. To the unclean nothing is clean. Their table is a snare;
   their temple-devotion is sin. There is a curse entailed upon a wicked
   man (Deuteronomy 28:15-20), but holiness removes the curse and cuts off
   the entail. To the pure all things are pure'.

   (ii) The pure-hearted have all things work for their good (Romans
   8:28). Mercies and afflictions shall turn to their good. The most
   poisonful drug shall be medicinable. The most cross providence shall
   carry on the design of their salvation. Who then would not be pure in
   heart? God is good to such as are of a clean heart'.

   7 Heart purity makes way for heaven. The pure in heart 'shall see God'.
   Happiness is nothing but the quintessence of holiness. Purity of heart
   is heaven begun in a man. Holiness is called in Scripture the anointing
   of God' (1 John 2:27). Solomon was first anointed with the holy oil,
   and then he was made king (1 Kings 1:39). The people of God are first
   anointed with the oil of the Spirit and made pure in heart, and then
   the crown of glory is set upon their head. And is not purity to be
   highly valued? It lays a train for glory. Purity of heart' and 'seeing
   of God' are linked together.

   8 Note the examples of those who have been eminent for heart-purity.
   The Lord Jesus was a pattern of purity. Which of you convinceth me of
   sin?' (John 8:46). In this we are to imitate Christ. We are not to
   imitate him in raising the dead or in working miracles, but in being
   holy (1 Peter 1:16). Besides this golden pattern of Christ, we are to
   write after the fair copy of those saints who have been of a dove-like
   purity. David was so pure in heart, that he was a man after God's
   heart'. Abraham was so purified by faith that he was one of God's
   cabinet-counsel (Genesis 18:17). Moses was so holy that God spake with
   him face to face. What were the rest of the patriarchs but so many
   plants of renown flourishing in holiness? The fathers in the primitive
   church were exemplary for purity. Gregory Nazianzen, Basil, Augustine,
   they were so inlaid and adorned with purity that envy itself could not
   tax them. Therefore, as Caesar wished he had such soldiers as were in
   the time of Alexander the Great, so we may wish we had such saints as
   were in the primitive times, so just were they in their dealings, so
   decent in their attire, so true in their promises, so devout in their
   religion, so unblameable in their lives that they were living sermons,
   walking Bibles, real pictures of Christ, and helped to keep up the
   credit of godliness in the world.

   9 Heart-purity is the only jewel you can carry out of the world. Have
   you a child you delight in, or an estate? You can carry nothing out of
   the world' (1 Timothy 6:7). Purity of heart is the only commodity that
   can be with comfort transported. This is that will stay longest with
   you. Usually we love those things which last longest. We prize a
   diamond or piece of gold above the most beautiful flower, because
   fading. Heart-purity has perpetuity. It will go with us beyond the
   grave.

   But how shall we attain to heart-purity?

   1 Often look into the Word of God. Now ye are clean through the word'
   (John 15:3). Thy word is very pure' (Psalm 119:140). God's Word is
   pure, not only for the matter of it, but the effect, because it makes
   us pure. Sanctify them through thy truth; thy word is truth' (John
   17:17). By looking into this pure crystal we are changed into the image
   of it. The Word is both a glass to show us the spots of our souls and a
   laver to wash them away. The Word breathes nothing but purity; it
   irradiates the mind; it consecrates the heart.

   2 Go to the bath. There are two baths Christians should wash in.

   (i) The bath of tears. Go into this bath. Peter had sullied and defiled
   himself with sin and he washed himself with penitential tears. Mary
   Magdalene, who was an impure sinner, 'stood at Jesus' feet weeping'
   (Luke 7:38). Mary's tears washed her heart as well as Christ's feet. Oh
   sinners, let your eyes be a fountain of tears! Weep for those sins
   which are so many as have passed all arithmetic. This water of
   contrition is healing and purifying.

   (ii) The bath of Christ's blood. This is that fountain opened for sin
   and uncleanness' (Zechariah 13:1). A soul steeped in the brinish tears
   of repentance and bathed in the blood of Christ is made pure. This is
   that 'spiritual washing'. All the legal washings and purifications were
   but types and emblems representing Christ's blood. This blood lays the
   soul a-whitening.

   3 Get faith. It is a soul-cleansing grace. Having purified their hearts
   by faith' (Acts 15:9). The woman in the gospel that but touched the hem
   of Christ's garment was healed. A touch of faith heals. If I believe
   Christ and all his merits are mine, how can I sin against him? We do
   not willingly injure those friends who, we believe, love us. Nothing
   can have a greater force and efficacy upon the heart to make it pure
   than faith. Faith will remove mountains, the mountains of pride, lust,
   envy. Faith and the love of sin are inconsistent.

   4 Breathe after the Spirit. He is called the Holy Spirit (Ephesians
   1:13). It purgeth the heart as lightning purgeth the air. That we may
   see what a purifying virtue the Spirit has, it is compared:

   (i) To fire (Acts 2:3). Fire is of a purifying nature. It refines and
   cleans metals. It separates the dross from the gold. The Spirit of God
   in the heart refines and sanctifies it. It burns up the dross of sin.

   (ii) The Spirit is compared to wind. There came a sound from heaven as
   of a mighty rushing wind, and they were all filled with the Holy Ghost'
   (Acts 2:24). The wind purifies the air. When the air by reason of foggy
   vapours is unwholesome, the wind is a fan to winnow and purify it. Thus
   when the vapours of sin arise in the heart, vapours of pride and
   covetousness, earthly vapours, the Spirit of God arises and blows upon
   the soul and so purges away these impure vapours. The spouse in the
   Canticles prays for a gale of the Spirit, that she might be made pure
   (4:16).

   (iii) The Spirit is compared to water. He that believeth on me, out of
   his belly shall flow rivers of living water; but this spake he of the
   Spirit' (John 7:38, 39). The Spirit is like water, not only to make the
   soul fruitful, for it causes the desert to blossom as the rose (Isaiah
   32:15; 35:1), but the Spirit is like water to purify. Whereas, before,
   the heart of a sinner was unclean and whatever he touched had a
   tincture of impurity (Numbers 19:22), when once the Spirit comes into
   the heart, it does with its continual showers wash off the filthiness
   of it, making it pure and fit for the God of spirits to dwell in.

   5 Take heed of familiar converse and intercourse with the wicked. One
   vain mind makes another. One hard heart makes another. The stone in the
   body is not infectious, but the stone in the heart is. One profane
   spirit poisons another. Beware of the society of the wicked.

   Some may object: But what hurt is in this? Did not Jesus converse with
   sinners? (Luke 5:29).

   (i) There was a necessity for that. If Jesus had not come among
   sinners, how could any have been saved? He went among sinners, not to
   join with them in their sins. He was not a companion of sinners but a
   physician of sinners.

   (ii) Though Christ did converse with sinners, he could not be polluted
   with their sin. His divine nature was a sufficient antidote to preserve
   him from infection. Christ could be no more defiled with their sin than
   the sun is defiled by shining on a dunghill. Sin could no more stick on
   Christ than a burr on a glass of crystal. The soil of his heart was so
   pure that no viper of sin could breed there. But the case is altered
   with us. We have a stock of corruption within and the least thing will
   increase this stock. Therefore it is dangerous mingling ourselves among
   the wicked. If we would be pure in heart let us shun their society. He
   that would preserve his garment clean avoids the dirt. The wicked are
   as the mire (Isaiah 57:20). The fresh waters running among the salt
   taste brackish.

   6 If you would be pure, walk with them that are pure. As the communion
   of the saints is in our Creed, so it should be in our company. He that
   walketh with the wise shall be wise' (Proverbs 13:20), and he that
   walketh with the pure shall be pure. The saints are like a bed of
   spices. By intermixing ourselves with them we shall partake of their
   savouriness. Association begets assimilation. Sometimes God blesses
   good society to the conversion of others.

   7 Wait at the posts of wisdom's doors. Reverence the word preached. The
   Word of God sucked in by faith (Hebrews 4:2) transforms the heart into
   the likeness of it (Romans 6:17). The word is an holy seed (James
   1:18), which being cast into the heart makes it partake of the divine
   nature (2 Peter 1:4).

   8 Pray for heart purity. Job propounds the question, Who can bring a
   clean thing out of an unclean?' (Job 14:4; 15:14). God can do it. Out
   of an impure heart he can produce grace. Pray that prayer of David,
   Create in me a clean heart, O God' (Psalm 51:10). Most men pray more
   for full purses than pure hearts. We should pray for heart-purity
   fervently. It is a matter we are most nearly concerned in. Without
   holiness no man shall see the Lord' (Hebrews 12:14). Our prayer must be
   with sighs and groans (Romans 8:23-26). There must not only be
   elocution but affection. Jacob wrestled in prayer (Genesis 32:24).
   Hannah poured out her soul (1 Samuel 1:15). We often pray so coldly
   (our petitions even freezing between our lips), as if we would teach
   God to deny. We pray as if we cared not whether God heard us or no. Oh
   Christian, be earnest with God for a pure heart. Lay your heart before
   the Lord and say, Lord, Thou who hast given me a heart, give me a pure
   heart. My heart is good for nothing as it is. It defiles everything it
   touches. Lord, I am not fit to live with this heart, for I cannot
   honour thee; nor to die with it, for I cannot see thee. Oh purge me
   with hyssop. Let Christ's blood be sprinkled upon me. Let the Holy
   Ghost descend upon me. Create in me a clean heart, O God'. Thou who
   biddest me give thee my heart, Lord, make my heart pure and thou shalt
   have it.
     __________________________________________________________________

17. The blessed privilege of seeing God explained

   They shall see God.

   Matthew 5:8

   These words are linked to the former and they are a great incentive to
   heart-purity. The pure heart shall see the pure God. There is a double
   sight which the saints have of God.

   1 In this life; that is, spiritually by the eye of faith. Faith sees
   God's glorious attributes in the glass of his Word. Faith beholds him
   showing forth himself through the lattice of his ordinances. Thus Moses
   saw him who was invisible (Hebrews 11:27). Believers see God's glory as
   it were veiled over. They behold his back parts' (Exodus 33:23).

   2 In the life to come; and this glorious sight is meant in the text,
   They shall see God.' A pleasant prospect! This divines call the
   beatifical vision'. At that day the veil will be pulled off, and God
   will show himself in all his glory to the soul, as a king on a day of
   coronation shows himself in all his royalty and magnificence. This
   sight of God will be the heaven of heaven. We shall indeed have a sight
   of angels and that will be sweet, but the quintessence of happiness and
   the diamond in the ring will be this, We shall see God'. If the sun be
   absent it is night for all the stars. The angels are called 'stars'
   (Job 38:7). But it would be night in heaven if the Sun of Righteousness
   did not shine there. It is the king's presence makes the court. Absalom
   counted himself half-alive unless he might see the king's face (2
   Samuel 14:32). Blessed are the pure in heart for they shall see God'.
   This sight of God in glory is, first, partly mental and intellectual.
   We shall see him with the eyes of our mind. If there be not an
   intellectual sight of God, how do the 'spirits of just men made
   perfect, see him? But second, it is partly corporeal; not that we can
   with bodily eyes behold the bright essence of God. Indeed the
   Anthromorphites and Vorstians erroneously held that God had a visible
   shape and figure. As man was made in God's image so they thought that
   God was made in man's image; but God is a Spirit (John 4:24), and being
   a Spirit is invisible (1 Timothy 1:17). He cannot be beheld by bodily
   eyes. Whom no man hath seen nor can see' (1 Timothy 6:16). A sight of
   his glory would overwhelm us. This wine is too strong for our weak
   heads.

   But when I say our seeing of God in heaven is corporeal, my meaning is
   that we shall with bodily eyes behold Jesus Christ, through whom the
   glory of God, his wisdom, holiness, and mercy, shall shine forth to the
   soul. Put a back of steel to the glass and you may see a face in it. So
   the human nature of Christ is as it were a back of steel through which
   we may see the glory of God (2 Corinthians 4:6). In this sense that
   scripture is to be understood, With these eyes shall I see God' (Job
   19:26, 27).

   Now concerning this blessed sight of God, it is so sublime and sweet
   that I can but draw a dark shadow of it. We shall better understand it
   when we come to heaven. Only at present I shall lay down these nine
   aphorisms or maxims.

   1 Our sight of God in heaven shall be a transparent sight. Here we see
   him through a glass darkly' (1 Corinthians 13:12). But through Christ
   we shall behold God in a very illustrious manner. God will unveil
   himself and show forth his glory so far as the soul is capable to
   receive. If Adam had not sinned yet it is probable he should never have
   had such a clear sight of God as the saints in glory shall have. We
   shall see him as he is' (1 John 3:2). Now we see him as he is not. He
   is not mutable, not mortal. There we shall see him as he is' in a very
   transparent manner. Then shall I know even as also I am known' (1
   Corinthians 13:12), that is, clearly'. Does not God know us clearly and
   fully? Then shall the saints know him (according to their capacity) as
   they are known. As their love to God, so their sight of God shall be
   perfect.

   2 This sight of God will be a transcendent sight. It will surpass in
   glory. Such glittering beams shall sparkle forth from the Lord Jesus as
   shall infinitely amaze and delight the eyes of the beholders. Imagine
   what a blessed sight it will be to see Christ wearing the robe of our
   human nature and to see that nature sitting in glory above the angels.
   If God be so beautiful here in his ordinances, Word, prayer,
   sacraments; if there be such excellency in him when we see him by the
   eye of faith through the prospective glass of a promise, O what will it
   be when we shall see him face to face'! When Christ was transfigured on
   the mount he was full of glory (Matthew 17:2). If his transfiguration
   were so glorious, what will his inauguration be? What a glorious time
   will it be when (as it was said of Mordecai) we shall see him in the
   presence of his Father, arrayed in royal apparel, and with a great
   crown of gold upon his head' (Esther 8:15). There will be glory beyond
   hyperbole. If the sun were ten thousand times brighter than it is, it
   could not so much as shadow out this glory. In the heavenly horizon we
   behold beauty in its first magnitude and highest elevation. There we
   shall 'see the king in his glory' (Isaiah 33:17). All lights are but
   eclipses compared with that glorious vision. Apelles' pencil would
   blot, angels, tongues would but disparage it.

   3 This sight of God will be a transforming sight. We shall be like him'
   (1 John 3:2). The saints shall be changed into glory. As when the light
   springs into a dark room, the room may be said to be changed from what
   it was; the saints shall so see God as to be changed into his image
   (Psalm 17:15). Here God's people are blackened and sullied with
   infirmities, but in heaven they shall be as the dove covered with
   silver wings. They shall have some rays and beams of God's glory
   shining in them. As a man that rolls himself in the snow is of a
   snow-like whiteness; as the crystal, by having the sun shine on it,
   sparkles and looks like the sun; so the saints by beholding the
   brightness of God's glory shall have a tincture of that glory upon
   them. Not that they shall partake of God's very essence, for as the
   iron in the fire becomes fire, yet remains iron still, so the saints by
   beholding the lustre of God's majesty shall be glorious creatures but
   yet creatures still.

   4 This sight of God will be a joyful sight: Thou shalt make me glad
   with the light of thy countenance' (Acts 2:28). After a sharp winter,
   how pleasant will it be to see the Sun of Righteousness displaying
   himself in all his glory! Does faith breed joy? In whom, though now ye
   see him not, yet believing, ye rejoice with joy unspeakable' (1 Peter
   1:8). If the joy of faith be such, what will the joy of vision be? The
   sight of Christ will amaze the eye with wonder and ravish the heart
   with joy. If the face of a friend whom we entirely love so affects us
   and drives away sorrow, O how cheering will the sight of God be to the
   saints in heaven! Then indeed it may be said, Your heart shall rejoice'
   (John 16:22). And there are two things which will make the saints'
   vision of God in heaven joyful.

   (i) Through Jesus Christ the dread and terror of the divine essence
   shall be taken away. Majesty shall appear in God to preserve reverence,
   but withal majesty clothed with beauty and tempered with sweetness to
   excite joy in the saints. We shall see God as a friend, not as guilty
   Adam did, who was afraid, and hid himself (Genesis 3:10), but as Queen
   Esther looked upon King Ahasuerus holding forth the golden sceptre
   (Esther 5:2). Surely this sight of God will not be formidable but
   comfortable!

   (ii) The saints shall not only have vision but fruition. They shall so
   see God as to enjoy him. Aquinas and Scotus dispute the case whether
   the formalis ratio', the very formality and essence of blessedness, be
   an act of the understanding or the will. Aquinas says that happiness
   consists in the intellectual part, the bare seeing of God'. Scotus says
   that happiness is an act of the will, the enjoying of God. But
   certainly true blessedness comprehends both. It lies partly in the
   understanding, by seeing the glory of God richly displayed, and partly
   in the will, by a sweet delicious taste of it and acquiescence of the
   soul in it. We shall so see God as to love him, and so love him as to
   be filled with him. The seeing of God implies fruition. Enter thou into
   the joy of thy Lord' (Matthew 25:21) not only behold it but enter into
   it. In thy light we shall see light' (Psalm 36:9); there is vision. At
   thy right hand there are pleasures for evermore' (Psalm 16:11); there
   is fruition. So great is the joy which flows from the sight of God as
   will make the saints break forth into triumphant praises and
   hallelujahs.

   5 This sight of God will be a satisfying sight. Cast three worlds into
   the heart and they will not fill it, but the sight of God satisfies. I
   shall be satisfied when I awake with thy likeness' (Psalm 17:15).
   Solomon says The eye is not satisfied with seeing' (Ecclesiastes 1:8).
   But there the eye will be satisfied with seeing. God and nothing but
   God can satisfy. The saints shall have their heads so full of knowledge
   and their hearts so full of joy that they shall find no want.

   6 It will be an unweariable sight. Let a man see the rarest sight that
   is, he will soon be cloyed. When he comes into a garden and sees
   delicious walks, fair arbours, pleasant flowers, within a little while
   he grows weary; but it is not so in heaven. There is no surfeit. We
   shall never be weary of seeing God, for the divine essence being
   infinite, there shall be every moment new and fresh delights springing
   forth from God into the glorified soul. The soul shall not so desire
   God but it shall still be full. Nor shall it be so full but it shall
   still desire. So sweet will God be that the more the saints behold God
   the more they will be ravished with desire and delight.

   7 It will be a beneficial sight. It will tend to the bettering and
   advantaging of the soul. Some colours, while they delight the eyes,
   hurt them. But this intuition and vision of God shall better the soul
   and tend to its infinite happiness. Eve's looking upon the tree of
   knowledge prejudiced her sight. She afterwards grew blind upon it, but
   the saints can receive no detriment from the inspection of glory. This
   sight will be beneficial. The soul will never be in its perfection till
   it comes to see God. This will be the crowning blessing.

   8 This sight of God shall be perpetuated. Here we see objects awhile,
   and then our eyes grow dim and we need spectacles, but the saints shall
   always behold God. As there shall be no cloud upon God's face, so the
   saints shall have no mote in their eye. Their sight shall never grow
   dim, but they shall be to all eternity looking on God, that beautiful
   and beatifical object. O what a soul-ravishing sight will this be! God
   must make us able to bear it. We can no more endure a sight of glory
   than a sight of wrath. But the saints after this life shall have their
   capacities enlarged, and they shall be qualified and made fit to
   receive the penetrating beams of glory.

   9 It will be a speedy sight. There are some who deny that the soul is
   immediately after death admitted to the sight of God, but I shall make
   good this assertion that the saints shall have an immediate transition
   and passage from death to glory. As soon as death has closed their eyes
   they shall see God. If the soul be not presently after death translated
   to the beatifical vision, then what becomes of the soul in that
   juncture of time till the resurrection?

   Does the soul go into torment? That cannot be, for the soul of a
   believer is a member of Christ's body mystical, and if this soul should
   go to hell a member of Christ might be for a time damned. But that is
   impossible.

   Does the soul sleep in the body as some drowsily imagine? How then
   shall we make good sense of that scripture We are willing rather to be
   absent from the body and to be present with the Lord (2 Corinthians
   5:8)? If the soul at death be absent from the body then it cannot sleep
   in the body.

   Does the soul die? So the Lucianists held that the soul was mortal and
   died with the body, but as Scaliger observes, it is impossible that the
   soul being of a spiritual uncompounded nature should be subject to
   corruptibility. Such as say the soul dies, I would demand of them
   wherein the soul of a man differs at death from the soul of a brute? By
   all which it appears that the soul of a believer after death goes
   immediately to God. This day shalt thou be with me in paradise' (Luke
   23:43). That word with me, shows clearly that the thief on the cross
   was translated to heaven. For there Christ was (Ephesians 4:10). And
   the word this day, shows that the thief on the cross had an immediate
   passage from the cross to paradise, so that the souls of believers have
   a speedy vision of God after death. It is but winking, and they shall
   see God.

   See the misery of an impure sinner. He shall not be admitted to the
   sight of God. The pure in hearts only shall see God. Such as live in
   sin, whose souls are dyed black with the filth of hell, they shall
   never come where God is. They shall have an affrighting vision of God,
   but not a beatifical vision. They shall see the flaming sword and the
   burning lake, but not the mercy-seat. God in Scripture is sometimes
   called a consuming fire', sometimes the Father of lights'. The wicked
   shall feel the fire but not see the light. Impure souls shall be
   covered with shame and darkness as with a mantle, and shall never see
   the king's face. They who would not see God in his ordinances shall not
   see him in his glory.

   Is there such a blessed privilege after this life? Then let me persuade
   all who hear me this day:

   1 To get into Christ. We cannot come to God but by Christ. Moses when
   he was in the rock saw God (Exodus 33:32). In this blessed rock,
   Christ, we shall see God.

   2 To be purified persons. It is only the pure in heart who shall see
   God. It is only a clear eye can behold a bright transparent object.
   Those only who have their hearts cleansed from sin can have this
   blessed sight of God. Sin is such a cloud as, if it be not removed,
   will for ever hinder us from seeing the Sun of Righteousness.
   Christian, have you upon your heart holiness to the Lord'? Then you
   shall see God. There are many, says Augustine, could be content to go
   to heaven, but they are loath to take the way that leads thither. They
   would have the glorious vision but neglect the gracious union.

   There are several sorts of eyes which shall never see God the ignorant
   eye, the unchaste eye, the scornful eye, the malicious eye, the
   covetous eye. If you would see God when you die, you must be purified
   persons while you live; We shall see him as he is; and every man that
   hath this hope in him, purifieth himself' (1 John 3:2, 3).

   Let me turn myself to the pure in heart.

   1 Stand amazed at this privilege, that you who are worms crept out of
   the dust should be admitted to the blessed sight of God to all
   eternity. It was Moses, prayer, I beseech thee, show me thy glory'
   (Exodus 33:18). The saints shall behold God's glory. The pure in heart
   shall have the same blessedness that God himself has. For what is the
   blessedness of God but the contemplating his own infinite beauty!

   2 Begin your sight of God here. Let the eye of your faith be still upon
   God. Moses by faith 'saw him who is invisible' (Hebrews 11:27). Often
   look upon him with believing eyes, whom you hope to see with glorified
   eyes. Mine eyes are ever towards the Lord' (Psalm 25:15). While others
   are looking towards the earth as if they would fetch all their comforts
   thence, let us look up to heaven. There is the best prospect. The sight
   of God by faith would let in much joy to the soul. Though now ye see
   him not, yet believing, ye rejoice with joy unspeakable' (1 Peter 1:8).

   3 Let this be as cordial-water to revive the pure in heart. Be
   comforted with this, you shall shortly see God. The godly have many
   sights here that they would not see. They see a body of death; they see
   the sword unsheathed; they see rebellion wearing the mask of religion;
   they see the white devil. These sights occasion sorrow; but there is a
   blessed sight a-coming, They shall see God.' And in him are all
   sparkling beauties and ravishing joys to be found.

   4 Be not discouraged at sufferings. All the hurt that affliction and
   death can do is to give you a sight of God. As one said to his
   fellow-martyr, One half hour in glory will make us forget our pain'.
   The sun arising, all the dark shadows of the night fly away. When the
   pleasant beams of God's countenance shall begin to shine upon the soul
   in heaven, then sorrows and sufferings shall be no more. The dark
   shadows of the night, shall fly away. The thoughts of this beatifical
   vision should carry a Christian full sail with joy through the waters
   of affliction. This made Job so willing to embrace death: I know that
   my redeemer liveth, and though worms destroy this body, yet in my flesh
   shall I see God' (Job 19:25, 26).
     __________________________________________________________________

18. Concerning peaceableness

   Blessed are the peacemakers.

   Matthew 5:9

   This is the seventh step of the golden ladder which leads to
   blessedness. The name of peace is sweet, and the work of peace is a
   blessed work. Blessed are the peacemakers'.

   Observe the connection. The Scripture links these two together,
   pureness of heart and peaceableness of spirit. The wisdom from above is
   first pure, then peaceable' (James 3:17). Follow peace and holiness'
   (Hebrews 12:14). And here Christ joins them together pure in heart, and
   peacemakers', as if there could be no purity where there is not a study
   of peace. That religion is suspicious which is full of faction and
   discord.

   In the words there are three parts:

   1. A duty implied, viz. Peaceable-mindedness.

   2. A duty expressed to be peacemakers.

   3. A title of honour bestowed They shall be called the children of
   God'.

   1 The duty implied, peaceable-mindedness'. For before men can make
   peace among others, they must be of peaceable spirits themselves.
   Before they can be promoters of peace, they must be lovers of peace.

   Christians must be peaceable-minded. This peaceableness of spirit is
   the beauty of a saint. It is a jewel of great price: The ornament of a
   quiet spirit which is in the sight of God of great price' (1 Peter
   3:4). The saints are Christ's sheep (John 10:27). The sheep is a
   peaceable creature. They are Christ's doves (Canticles 2:14), therefore
   they must be without gall. It becomes not Christians to be Ishmaels but
   Solomons. Though they must be lions for courage, yet lambs for
   peaceableness. God was not in the earthquake, nor in the fire, but in
   the 'still small voice' (1 Kings 19:12). God is not in the rough fiery
   spirit but in the peaceable spirit.

   There is a fourfold peace that we must study and cherish.

   (i) An Oeconomical peace, peace in families. It is called the bond of
   peace' (Ephesians 4:3). Without this all drops in pieces. Peace is a
   girdle that ties together members in a family. It is a golden clasp
   that knits them together that they do not fall in pieces. We should
   endeavour that our houses should be houses of peace'. It is not
   fairness of rooms makes a house pleasant, but peaceableness of
   dispositions. There can be no comfortableness in our dwellings till
   peace be entertained as an inmate into our houses.

   (ii) There is a parochial peace, when there is a sweet harmony, a
   tuning and chiming together of affections in a parish; when all draw
   one way and, as the apostle says, are perfectly joined together in the
   same mind' (1 Corinthians 1:10). One jarring string brings all the
   music out of tune. One bad member in a parish endangers the whole. Be
   at peace among yourselves' (1 Thessalonians 5:13). It is little comfort
   to have our houses joined together if our hearts be asunder. A
   geometrical union will do little good without a moral union.

   (iii) There is a political peace, peace in city and country. This is
   the fairest flower of a prince's crown. Peace is the best blessing of a
   nation. It is well with bees when there is a noise; but it is best with
   Christians when (as in the building of the Temple) there is no noise of
   hammer heard. Peace brings plenty along with it. How many miles would
   some go on pilgrimage to purchase this peace! Therefore the Greeks made
   peace to be the nurse of Pluto, the god of wealth. Political plants
   thrive best in the sunshine of peace. He maketh peace in thy borders,
   and filleth thee with the finest of the wheat' (Psalm 147:14). Peace
   makes all things flourish'.

   The ancients made the harp the emblem of peace. How sweet would the
   sounding of this harp be after the roaring of the cannon! All should
   study to promote this political peace. The godly man when he dies
   enters into peace' (Isaiah 57:2). But while he lives peace must enter
   into him.

   (iv) There is an ecclesiastical peace, a church-peace, when there is
   unity and verity in the church of God. Never does religion flourish
   more than when her children spread themselves as olive-plants round
   about her table. Unity in faith and discipline is a mercy we cannot
   prize enough. This is that which God has promised (Jeremiah 32:39) and
   which we should pursue (Zechariah 8:18-23). Saint Ambrose says of
   Theodosius the Emperor, that when he lay sick he took more care for the
   Church's peace than for his own recovery.

   The reasons why we should be peaceable-minded are two:

   First, we are called to peace (1 Corinthians 7:15). God never called
   any man to division. That is a reason why we should not be given to
   strife, because we have no call for it. But God has called us to peace.

   Second, it is the nature of grace to change the heart and make it
   peaceable. By nature we are of a fierce cruel disposition. When God
   cursed the ground for man's sake, the curse was that it should bring
   forth thorns and thistles' (Genesis 3:18). The heart of man naturally
   lies under this curse. It brings forth nothing but the thistles of
   strife and contention. But when grace comes into the heart it makes it
   peaceable. It infuses a sweet, loving disposition. It smooths and
   polishes the most knotty piece. It files off the ruggedness in men's
   spirits. Grace turns the vulture into a dove, the briar into a myrtle
   tree (Isaiah 55:13), the lion-like fierceness into a lamb-like
   gentleness. The wolf also shall dwell with the lamb and the leopard
   shall lie down with the kid . . .' (Isaiah 11:6-9). It is spoken of the
   power which the gospel shall have upon men's hearts; it shall make such
   a metamorphosis that those who before were full of rage and antipathy
   shall now be made peaceable and gentle The leopard shall lie down with
   the kid'.

   It shows us the character of a true saint. He is given to peace. He is
   the keeper of the peace. He is a son of peace'.

   Caution: Not but that a man may be of a peaceable spirit, yet seek to
   recover that which is his due. If peace has been otherwise sought and
   cannot be attained, a man may go to law and yet be a peaceable man. It
   is with going to law as it is with going to war, when the rights of a
   nation are invaded (as 2 Chronicles 20:2, 3), and peace can be
   purchased by no other means than war; here it is lawful to beat the
   ploughshare into a sword. So when there is no other way of recovering
   one's right but by going to law, a man may commence a suit in law yet
   be of a peaceable spirit. Going to law (in this case) is not so much
   striving with another as contending for a man's own. It is not to do
   another wrong, but to do himself right. It is a desire rather of equity
   than victory. I say as the apostle, the law is good if a man use it
   lawfully' (1 Timothy 1:8).

   You may ask, Is all peace to be sought; how far is peace lawful? I
   answer, Peace with men must have this double limitation:

   1 The peace a godly man seeks is not to have a league of amity with
   sinners. Though we are to be at peace with their persons, yet we are to
   have war with their sins. We are to have peace with their persons as
   they are made in God's image, but to have war with their sins as they
   have made themselves in the devil's image. David was for peace (Psalm
   120:7), but he would not sit on the ale-bench with sinners (Psalm 26:4,
   5). Grace teaches good nature. We are to be civil to the worst, but not
   twist into a cord of friendship. That were to be brethren in iniquity'.
   Have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness' (Ephesians
   5:11). Jehoshaphat (though a good man) was blamed for this: Shouldest
   thou help the ungodly and love them that hate the Lord?' (2 Chronicles
   19:2). The fault was not that he entertained civil peace with Ahab, but
   that he had a league of friendship and was assistant to Ahab when he
   went contrary to God. Therefore was wrath upon Jehoshaphat from before
   the Lord' (verse 2). We must not so far have peace with others as to
   endanger ourselves. If a man has the plague, we will be helpful to him
   and send him our best recipes, but we are careful not to have too much
   of his company or suck in his infectious breath. So we may be peaceable
   towards all, nay helpful. Pray for them, counsel them, relieve them,
   but let us take heed of too much familiarity, lest we suck in their
   infection. In short we must so make peace with men that we do not break
   our peace with conscience. Follow peace and holiness' (Hebrews 12:14).
   We must not purchase peace with the loss of holiness.

   2 We must not so seek peace with others as to wrong truth. Buy the
   truth and sell it not' (Proverbs 23:23). Peace must not be bought with
   the sale of truth. Truth is the ground of faith, the rule of manners.
   Truth is the most orient gem of the churches' crown. Truth is a
   deposit, or charge that God has entrusted us with. We trust God with
   our souls. He trusts us with his truths. We must not let any of God's
   truths fall to the ground. Luther says, It is better that the heavens
   fall than that one crumb of truth perish. The least filings of this
   gold are precious. We must not so seek the flower of peace as to lose
   the pearl of truth.

   Some say, let us unite, but we ought not to unite with error. What
   communion has light with darkness?' (2 Corinthians 6:14). There are
   many would have peace with the destroying of truth; peace with
   Arminian, Socinian, Antiscripturist. This is a peace of the devil's
   making. Cursed be that peace which makes war with the Prince of peace.
   Though we must be peaceable, yet we are bid to contend for the faith'
   (Jude 3). We must not be so in love with the golden crown of peace as
   to pluck off the jewels of truth. Rather let peace go than truth. The
   martyrs would rather lose their lives than let go the truth.

   If Christians must be peaceable-minded, what shall we say to those who
   are given to strife and contention? To those who, like flax or
   gunpowder, if they be but touched, are all on fire? How far is this
   from the spirit of the gospel! It is made the note of the wicked. They
   are like the troubled sea' (Isaiah 57:20). There is no rest or
   quietness in their spirits, but they are continually casting forth the
   foam of passion and fury. We may with Strigelius wish even to die to be
   freed from the bitter strifes which are among us. There are too many
   like the salamander who live in the fire of broils and contentions. If
   ye have bitter envying and strife, this wisdom descends not from above,
   but is devilish' (James 3:14, 15). The lustful man is brutish; the
   wrathful man is devilish. Everyone is afraid to dwell in an house which
   is haunted with evil spirits, yet how little afraid are men of their
   own hearts, which are haunted with the evil spirit of wrath and
   implacableness.

   And then, which is much to be laid to heart, there are the divisions of
   God's people. God's own tribes go to war. In Tertullian's time it was
   said, See how the Christians love one another. But now it may be said,
   See how the Christians snarl one at another, They are comparable to
   ferocious bears'. Wicked men agree together, when those who pretend to
   be led by higher principles are full of animosities and heart-burnings.
   Was it not sad to see Herod and Pilate uniting, and to see Paul and
   Barnabas falling out? (Acts 15:39). When the disciples called for fire
   from heaven, Ye know not (saith Christ) what manner of spirit ye are
   of' (Luke 9:55). As if the Lord had said, This fire you call for is not
   zeal, but is the wildfire of your own passions. This spirit of yours
   does not suit with the Master you serve, the Prince of peace, nor with
   the work I am sending you about, which is an embassage of peace. It is
   Satan who kindles the fire of contention in men's hearts and then
   stands and warms himself at the fire. When boisterous winds are up, we
   are accustomed to talk of conjurors. Sure I am, when men's spirits
   begin to bluster and storm, the devil has conjured up these winds.
   Discords and animosities among Christians bring their godliness much
   into question, for the wisdom which is from above is peaceable, gentle,
   and easy to be entreated' (James 3:17).

   Be of a peaceable disposition. If it be possible, as much as lieth in
   you, live peaceably with all men' (Romans 12:18). The curtains of the
   tabernacle were to be looped together (Exodus 26:3, 4). So should the
   hearts of Christians be looped together in peace and unity. That I may
   persuade to peaceablemindedness, let me speak both to reason and
   conscience.

   1 A peaceable spirit seems to be agreeable to the natural frame and
   constitution. Man by nature seems to be a peaceable creature, fitter to
   handle the plough than the sword. Other creatures are naturally armed
   with some kind of weapon wherewith they are able to revenge themselves.
   The lion has his paw, the boar his tusk, the bee his sting. Only man
   has none of these weapons. He comes naked and unarmed into the world as
   if God would have him a peaceable creature. White-robed peace is
   becoming to men, fierce anger is fitting for wild beasts.' Man has his
   reason given him that he should live amiably and peaceably.

   2 A peaceable spirit is honourable. It is an honour for a man to cease
   from strife' (Proverbs 20:3). We think it a brave thing to give way to
   strife and let loose the reins to our passions. Oh no, it is an honour
   to cease from strife'. Noble spirits are such lovers of peace that they
   need not be bound to the peace. It is the bramble that rends and tears
   whatever is near it. The cedar and fig-tree, those more noble plants,
   grow pleasantly and peaceably. Peaceableness is the ensign and ornament
   of a noble mind.

   3 To be of a peaceable spirit is highly prudential. The wisdom from
   above is peaceable' (James 3:17). A wise man will not meddle with
   strife. It is like putting one's finger into a hornets, nest; or to use
   Solomon's similitude, The beginning of strife is as when one letteth
   out water' (Proverbs 17:14). To set out the folly of strife, it is as
   letting out of water in two respects:

   (i) When water begins to be let out there is no end of it. So there is
   no end of strife when once begun.

   (ii) The letting out of water is dangerous. If a man should break down
   a bank and let in an arm of the sea, the water might overflow his
   fields and drown him in the flood. So is he that intermeddles with
   strife. He may mischief himself and open such a sluice as may engulf
   and swallow him up. True wisdom espouses peace. A prudent man will keep
   off from the briars as much as he can.

   4 To be of a peaceable spirit brings peace along with it. A contentious
   person vexes himself and eclipses his own comfort. He is like the bird
   that beats itself against the cage. He troubles his own flesh'
   (Proverbs 11:17). He is just like one that pares off the sweet of the
   apple and eats nothing but the core. So a quarrelsome man pares off all
   the comfort of his life and feeds only upon the bitter core of
   disquiet. He is a self-tormentor. The wicked are compared to a troubled
   sea' (Isaiah 57:20). And it follows there is no peace to the wicked'
   (verse 21). The Septuagint renders it There is no joy to the wicked'.
   Froward spirits do not enjoy what they possess, but peaceableness of
   spirit brings the sweet music of peace along with it. It makes a calm
   and harmony in the soul. Therefore the psalmist says, it is not only
   good, but pleasant, to live together in unity (Psalm 133:1).

   5 A peaceable disposition is a Godlike disposition.

   God the Father is called the God of peace' (Hebrews 13:20). Mercy and
   peace are about his throne. He signs the articles of peace and sends
   the ambassadors of peace to publish them (2 Corinthians 5:20).

   God the Son is called the Prince of peace' (Isaiah 9:6). His name is
   Emmanuel, God with us, a name of peace. His office is to be a mediator
   of peace (1 Timothy 2:5). He came into the world with a song of peace;
   the angels sang it: Peace on earth' (Luke 2:14). He went out of the
   world with a legacy of peace: Peace I leave with you, my peace I give
   unto you' (John 14:27).

   God the Holy Ghost is a Spirit of peace. He is the Comforter. He seals
   up peace (2 Corinthians 1:22). This blessed dove brings the
   olive-branch of peace in his mouth. Now a peaceable disposition
   evidences something of God in a man. Therefore God loves to dwell
   there. In Salem is God's tabernacle' (Psalm 76:2). Salem signifies
   peace'. God dwells in a peaceable spirit.

   6 Christ's earnest prayer was for peace. He prayed that his people
   might be one (John 17:11, 21, 23), that they might be of one mind and
   heart. And observe the argument Christ uses in prayer [it is good to
   use arguments in prayer. They are as the feathers to the arrow, which

   make it fly swifter, and pierce deeper. Affections in prayer are as the
   fire in the gun; arguments in prayer are as the bullet]. The argument
   Christ urges to his Father is that they may be one, even as we are one'
   (verse 22). There was never any discord between the Father and Christ.
   Though God parted with Christ out of his bosom, yet not out of his
   heart. There was ever dearness and oneness between them. Now Christ
   prays that, as he and his Father were one, so his people might be all
   one in peace and concord. Did Christ pray so earnestly for peace, and
   shall not we endeavour what in us lies to fulfil Christ's prayer? How
   do we think Christ will hear our prayer if we cross his?

   7 Christ not only prayed for peace, but bled for it. Having made peace
   through the blood of his cross' (Colossians 1:20). Peace of all kinds!
   He died not only to make peace between God and man, but between man and
   man. Christ suffered on the cross that he might cement Christians
   together with his blood. As he prayed for peace, so he paid for peace.
   Christ was himself bound to bring us into the bond of peace'.

   8 Strife and contention hinder the growth of grace. Can good seed grow
   in a ground where there is nothing but thorns and briars to be seen?
   The thorns choked the seed' (Matthew 13:7). When the heart is, as it
   were, stuck with thorns and is ever tearing and rending, can the seed
   of grace ever grow there? Historians report of the Isle of Patmos that
   the natural soil of it is such that nothing will grow upon that earth.
   A froward heart is like the Isle of Patmos. Nothing of grace will grow
   there till God changes the soil and makes it peaceable. How can faith
   grow in an unpeaceable heart? For faith works by love'. Impossible it
   is that he should bring forth the sweet fruits of the Spirit who is in
   the gall of bitterness'. If a man has received poison into his body,
   the most excellent food will not nourish till he takes some antidote to
   expel that poison. Many come to the ordinances with seeming zeal, but
   being poisoned with wrath and animosity they receive no spiritual
   nourishment. Christ's body mystical edifieth itself in love' (Ephesians
   4:16). There may be praying and hearing, but no spiritual concoction,
   no edifying of the body of Christ without love and peace.

   9 Peaceableness among Christians is a powerful loadstone to draw the
   world to receive Christ. Not only gifts and miracles and preaching may
   persuade men to embrace the truth of the gospel, but peace and unity
   among the professors of it. When as there is one God and one faith, so
   there is one heart among Christians, this is as cummin seed, which
   makes the doves flock to the windows. The temple was adorned with
   goodly stones' (Luke 21:5). This makes Christ's spiritual temple look
   beautiful, and the stones of it appear goodly, when they are cemented
   together in peace and unity.

   10 Unpeaceableness of spirit is to make Christians turn heathens. It is
   the sin of the heathens to be implacable' (Romans 1:31). They cannot be
   pacified. Their hearts are like adamant. No oil can supple them; no
   fire can melt them. It is a heathenish thing to be so fierce and
   violent, as if with Romulus men had sucked the milk of wolves.

   11 To add yet more weight to the exhortation, it is the mind of Christ
   that we should live in peace. Have peace one with another' (Mark 9:50).
   Shall we not be at peace for Christ's sake? If we ought to lay down our
   life for Christ's sake, shall we not lay down our strife for his sake?

   To conclude: If we will neither be under counsels nor commands, but
   still feed the peccant humour, nourishing in ourselves a spirit of
   dissension and unpeaceableness, Jesus Christ will never come near us.
   The people of God are said to be his house: Whose house are we . . .'
   (Hebrews 3:6). When the hearts of Christians are a spiritual house,
   adorned with the furniture of peace, then they are fit for the Prince
   of peace to inhabit. But when this pleasant furniture is wanting and
   instead of it nothing but strife and debate, Christ will not own it for
   his house, nor will he grace it with his presence. Who will dwell in an
   house which is smoky and all on fire?

   How shall we attain to peaceableness?

   1 Take heed of those things which will hinder it. There are several
   impediments of peace which we must beware of, and they are either
   outward or inward.

   (i) Outward: as whisperers (Romans 1:29). There are some who will be
   buzzing things in our ears purposely to exasperate and provoke. Among
   these we may rank talebearers (Leviticus 19:16). The talebearer carries
   reports up and down. The devil sends his letters by this post. The
   talebearer is an incendiary. He blows the coals of contention. Do you
   hear (says he) what such an one says of you? Will you put up with such
   a wrong? Will you suffer yourself to be so abused? Thus does he, by
   throwing in his fireballs, foment differences and set men together by
   the ears. We are commanded indeed to provoke one another to love
   (Hebrews 10:24), but nowhere to provoke to anger. We should stop our
   ears to such persons as are known to come on the devil's errand.

   2 Take heed of inward lets to peace; for example:

   (i) Self-love: Men shall be lovers of themselves' (2 Timothy 3:2). And
   it follows they shall be fierce' (verse 3). The setting up of this idol
   of self has caused so many lawsuits, plunders, massacres in the world.
   All seek their own' (Philippians 2:21). Nay, it were well if they would
   seek but their own. Self-love angles away the estates of others either
   by force or fraud. Self-love sets up monopolies and enclosures. It is a
   bird of prey which lives upon rapine. Self-love cuts asunder the bond
   of peace. Lay aside self. The heathens could say We are not born for
   ourselves alone'.

   (ii) Pride: He that is of a proud heart stirreth up strife' (Proverbs
   28:25). Pride and contention, like Hippocrates' twins, are both born at
   once. A proud man thinks himself better than others and will contend
   for superiority. Diotrephes, who loveth to have the pre-eminence' (3
   John 9). A proud man would have all strike sail to him. Because
   Mordecai would not give Haman the cap and knee, he gets a bloody
   warrant signed for the death of all the Jews (Esther 3:9). What made
   all the strife between Pompey and Caesar but pride? Their spirits were
   too high to yield one to another. When this wind of pride gets into a
   man's heart, it causes sad earthquakes of division. The poets feign
   that when Pandora's box was broken open it filled the world with
   diseases. When Adam's pride had broken the box of original
   righteousness it has ever since filled the world with debates and
   dissensions. Let us shake off this viper of pride. Humility solders
   Christians together in peace.

   (iii) Envy; envy stirreth up strife. The apostle has linked them
   together. Envy, strife' (1 Timothy 6:4). Envy cannot endure a superior.
   This made the plebeian faction so strong among the Romans; they envied
   their superiors. An envious man seeing another to have a fuller crop, a
   better trade, is ready to pick a quarrel with him. Who can stand before
   envy?' (Proverbs 27:4). Envy is a vermin that lives on blood. Take heed
   of it. Peace will not dwell with this inmate.

   (iv) Credulity. The simple believeth every word' (Proverbs 14:15). A
   credulous man is akin to a fool. He believes all that is told him and
   this often creates differences. As it is a sin to be a talebearer, so
   it is a folly to be a tale-believer. A wise man will not take a report
   at the first bound, but will sift and examine it before he gives credit
   to it.

   2 Let us labour for those things which will maintain and cherish peace.

   (i) As faith; faith and peace keep house together. Faith believes the
   Word of God. The Word says, Live in peace' (2 Corinthians 13:11). And
   as soon as faith sees the king of heaven's warrant, it obeys. Faith
   persuades the soul that God is at peace, and it is impossible to
   believe this and live in variance. Nourish faith. Faith knits us to God
   in love and to our brethren in peace.

   (ii) Christian communion. There should not be too much strangeness
   among Christians. The primitive saints had their agapai' that is,
   love-feasts. The apostle exhorting to peace brings this as an
   expedient: Be ye kind one to another' (Ephesians 4:32).

   (iii) Do not look upon the failings of others, but upon their graces.
   There is no perfection here. We read of the 'spots of God's children'
   (Deuteronomy 32:5). The most golden Christians are some grains too
   light. Oh, let us not so quarrel with the infirmities of others as to
   pass by their virtues. If in some things they fail, in other things
   they excel. It is the manner of the world to look more upon the sun in
   an eclipse than when it shines in its full lustre.

   (iv) Pray to God that he will send down the Spirit of peace into our
   hearts. We should not as vultures prey one upon another, but pray one
   for another. Pray that God will quench the fire of contention and
   kindle the fire of compassion in our hearts one to another. So much for
   the first thing in the text implied, that Christians should be
   peaceable-minded. I proceed to the second thing expressed, that they
   should be peacemakers.

   All good Christians ought to be peacemakers; they should not only be
   peaceable themselves, but make others to be at peace. As in the body
   when a joint is out we set it again, so it should be in the body
   politic. When a garment is rent we sew it together again. When others
   are rent asunder in their affections we should with a spirit of
   meekness sew them together again. Had we this excellent skill we might
   glue and unite dissenting spirits. I confess it is often a thankless
   office to go about to reconcile differences (Acts 7:27). Handle a briar
   never so gently, it will go near to scratch. He that goes to interpose
   between two fencers many times receives the blow. But this duty, though
   it may lack success as from men, yet it shall not want a blessing from
   God. Blessed are the peacemakers.' O how happy were England if it had
   more peacemakers! Abraham was a peacemaker (Genesis 13:8). Moses was a
   peacemaker (Exodus 2:13), and that ever-to-be-honoured emperor
   Constantine, when he called the bishops together at that first Council
   of Nicaea to end church controversies, they having instead of that
   prepared bitter invectives and accusations one against another,
   Constantine took their papers and rent them, gravely exhorting them to
   peace and unanimity.

   It sharply reproves them that are so far from being peacemakers that
   they are peace-breakers. If blessed are the peacemakers', then cursed
   are the peace-breakers. If peacemakers are the children of God, then
   peace-breakers are the children of the devil. Heretics destroy the
   truth of the church by error, and schismatics destroy the peace of it
   by division. The apostle sets a brand upon such. Mark those which cause
   divisions and avoid them' (Romans 16:17). Have no more to do with them
   than with witches or murderers. The devil was the first peace-breaker.
   He divided man from God. He, like Phaeton, set all on fire. There are
   too many make-bates in England whose sweetest music is in discord, who
   never unite but to divide. As it was said of one of the Arian emperors,
   he procured unity to prevent peace. How many in our days may be
   compared to Samson's foxtails, which were tied together only to set the
   Philistines' corn on fire! (Judges 15:4, 5). Sectaries unite to set the
   church's peace on fire. These are the persons God's soul hates, Sowers
   of discord among brethren' (Proverbs 6:19). These are the children of a
   curse: Cursed be he that smiteth his neighbour secretly' (Deuteronomy
   27:24), that is, who backbites and so sets one friend against another.
   If there be a devil in man's shape, it is the incendiary.

   The text exhorts to two things:

   1 Let us take up a bitter lamentation for the divisions of England. The
   wild beast has broken down the hedge of our peace. We are like a house
   falling to ruin, if the Lord does not mercifully under-prop and shore
   us up. None of the sons of England comfort her, but rather rake in her
   bowels. Will not an ingenuous child grieve to see his mother rent and
   torn in pieces? It is reported of Cato that from the time the civil
   wars began in Rome between Caesar and Pompey, he was never seen to
   laugh or shave his beard or cut his hair. That our hearts may be sadly
   affected with these our church and state divisions let us consider the
   mischief of divisions.

   (i) They are a prognostic of much evil to a nation. Here that rule in
   philosophy holds true, All division tends to destruction'. When the
   veil of the temple was rent in pieces, it was a sad omen and forerunner
   of the destruction of the temple. The rending the veil of the church's
   peace betokens the ruin of it. Josephus observes that the city of
   Jerusalem when it was besieged by Titus Vespasian had three great
   factions in it, which destroyed more than the enemy and was the
   occasion of the taking it. How fatal intestine divisions have been to
   this land! Camden and other learned writers relate how our discerptions
   and mutinies have been the scaling ladder by which the Romans and the
   Normans have formerly gotten into the nation. How is the bond of peace
   broken! We have so many schisms in the body and are run into so many
   particular churches that God may justly un-church us, as he did Asia.

   (ii) It may afflict us to see the garment of the church's peace rent,
   because divisions bring an opprobrium and scandal upon religion. These
   make the ways of God evil spoken of, as if religion were the fomenter
   of strife and sedition. Julian, in his invective against the
   Christians, said that they lived together as tigers rending and
   devouring one an other. And shall we make good Julian's words? It is
   unseemly to see Christ's doves fighting; to see his lily become a
   bramble. Alexander Severus, seeing two Christians contending, commanded
   them that they should not take the name of Christians any longer upon
   them, for (says he) you dishonour your Master Christ. Let men either
   lay down their contentions, or lay off the coat of their profession.

   (iii) Divisions obstruct the progress of piety. The gospel seldom
   thrives where the apple of strife grows. The building of God's
   spiritual temple is hindered by the confusion of tongues. Division eats
   as a worm and destroys the peaceable fruits of righteousness' (Hebrews
   12:11). In the Church of Corinth, when they began to divide into
   parties, one was for Paul, another for Apollos; there were but few for
   Christ. Confident I am that England's divisions have made many turn
   atheists.

   2 Let us labour to heal differences and be repairers of breaches:
   Blessed are the peacemakers.' Jesus Christ was a great peacemaker. He
   took a long journey from heaven to earth to make peace. Peace and unity
   is a great means for the corroborating and strengthening the church of
   God. The saints are compared to living stones, built up for a spiritual
   house (1 Peter 2:5). You know the stones in an arch or fabric help to
   preserve and bear up one another. If the stones be loosened and drop
   out, all the fabric falls in pieces. When the Christians in the
   primitive church were of one heart (Acts 4:32) what a supporting was
   this! How did they counsel, comfort, build up one another in their holy
   faith! We see while the members of the body are united, so long they do
   administer help and nourishment one to another; but if they be divided
   and broken off, they are no way useful, but the body languishes.
   Therefore let us endeavour to be peacemakers. The church's unity tends
   much to her stability. Peace makes the church of God on earth in some
   measure like the church in heaven. The cherubims (representing the
   angels) are set out with their faces looking one upon another' to show
   their peace and unity. There are no jarrings or discords among the
   heavenly spirits. One angel is not of an opinion differing from
   another. Though they have different orders, they are not of different
   spirits. They are seraphims, therefore burn, not in heat of contention,
   but love. The angels serve God not only with pure hearts, but united
   hearts. By an harmonious peace we might resemble the church triumphant.

   He that sows peace shall reap peace. To the counsellors of peace is
   joy' (Proverbs 12:20). The peacemaker shall have peace with God, peace
   in his own bosom, and that is the sweetest music which is made in a
   man's own breast. He shall have peace with others. The hearts of all
   shall be united to him. All shall honour him. He shall be called the
   repairer of the breach' (Isaiah 58:12). To conclude, the peacemaker
   shall die in peace. He shall carry a good conscience with him and leave
   a good name behind him. So I have done with the first part of the text
   Blessed are the peacemakers'. I proceed to the next part.
     __________________________________________________________________

19. They shall be called the children of God

   They shall be called the children of God.

   Matthew 5:9

   In these words the glorious privilege of the saints is set down. Those
   who have made their peace with God and labour to make peace among
   brethren, this is the great honour conferred upon them, They shall be
   called the children of God'.

   They shall be (called)', that is, they shall be so reputed and esteemed
   of God. God never miscalls anything. He does not call them children
   which are no children. Thou shalt be called the prophet of the Highest'
   (Luke 1:76), that is, thou shalt be so. They shall be called the
   children of God', that is, they shall be accounted and admitted for
   children.

   The proposition resulting is this: that peacemakers are the children of
   the most High. God is said in Scripture to have many children:

   By eternal generation. So only Christ is the natural Son of his Father.
   Thou art my Son: this day have I begotten thee' (Psalm 2:7).

   By creation. So the angels are the sons of God. When the morning stars
   sang together and all the sons of God shouted for joy' (Job 38:7).

   By participation of dignity. So king and rulers are said to be children
   of the high God. I have said, ye are gods, and all of you are children
   of the most High' (Psalm 82:6).

   By visible profession. So God has many children. Hypocrites forge a
   title of son-ship. The sons of God saw the daughters of men that they
   were fair' (Genesis 6:2).

   By real sanctification. So all the faithful are peculiarly and
   eminently the children of God.

   That I may illustrate and amplify this, and that believers may suck
   much sweetness out of this gospel-flower, I shall discuss and
   demonstrate these seven particulars:

   1 That naturally we are not the children of God.

   2 What it is to be the children of God.

   3 How we come to be made children.

   4 The signs of God's children.

   5 The love of God in making us children.

   6 The honour of God's children.

   7 The privileges of God's children.

   Naturally we are not the children of God. As Jerome says, we are not
   born God's children but made so. By nature we are strangers to God,
   swine not sons (2 Peter 2:22). Will a man settle his estate upon his
   swine? He will give them his acorns, not his jewels. By nature we have
   the devil for our father: Ye are of your father the devil (John 8:44).
   A wicked man may search the records of hell for his pedigree.

   What it is to be the children of God. This child-ship consists in two
   things. Adoption; infusion of grace.

   Child-ship consists in adoption: That we might receive the adoption of
   sons' (Galatians 4:5).

   Wherein does the true nature of adoption consist?

   In three things:

   (i) A transition or translation from one family to another. He that is
   adopted is taken out of the old family of the devil and hell (Ephesians
   2:2, 3) to which he was heir apparent, and is made of the family of
   heaven, of a noble family (Ephesians 2:19). God is his Father, Christ
   is his elder-brother, the saints co-heir, the angels fellow-servants in
   that family.

   (ii) Adoption consists in an immunity and disobligement from all the
   laws of the former family. Forget also thy father's house' (Psalm
   45:10). He who is spiritually adopted has now no more to do with sin.
   Ephraim shall say, what have I to do any more with idols?' (Hosea
   14:8). A child of God has indeed to do with sin as with an enemy to
   which he gives battle, but not as with a lord to which he yields
   obedience. He is freed from sin (Romans 6:7). I do not say he is freed
   from duty. Was it ever heard that a child should be freed from duty to
   his parents? This is such a freedom as rebels take.

   (iii) Adoption consists in a legal investitute into the rights and
   royalties of the family into which the person is to be adopted. These
   are chiefly two:

   The first royalty is a new name. He who is divinely adopted assumes a
   new name; before, a slave; now, a son; of a sinner, a saint. This is a
   name of honour better than any title of prince or monarch. To him that
   overcometh I will give a white stone, and in the stone a new name
   written' (Revelation 2:17). The white stone signifies remission. The
   new name signifies adoption, and the new name is put in the white stone
   to show that our adoption is grounded upon our justification; and this
   new name is written to show that God has all the names of his children
   enrolled in the book of life.

   The second royalty is a giving the party adopted an interest in the
   inheritance. The making one an heir implies a relation to an
   inheritance. A man does not adopt another to a title but to an estate.
   So God in adopting us for his children gives us a glorious inheritance:
   The inheritance of the saints in light' (Colossians 1:12).

   It is pleasant; it is an inheritance in light.

   It is safe; God keeps the inheritance for his children (1 Peter 1:4),
   and keeps them for the inheritance (1 Peter 1:5), so that they cannot
   be hindered from taking possession.

   There is no disinheriting, for the saints are co-heirs with Christ
   (Romans 8:17). Nay, they are members of Christ (Colossians 1:18). The
   members cannot be disinherited but the head must.

   The heirs never die. Eternity is a jewel of their crown. They shall
   reign for ever and ever' (Revelation 22:5).

   Before I pass to the next, here a question may arise. How do God's
   adopting and man's adopting differ?

   1 Man adopts to supply a defect, because he has no children of his own,
   but God does not adopt upon this account. He had a Son of his own, the
   Lord Jesus. He was his natural Son and the Son of his love, testified
   by a voice from heaven, This is my beloved Son' (Matthew 3:17). Never
   was there any Son so like the Father. He was his exact effigy, the
   express image of his person' (Hebrews 1:3). He was such a Son as was
   worth more than all the angels in heaven: Being made so much better
   than the angels' (Hebrews 1:4); so that God adopts not out of
   necessity, but pity.

   2 When a man adopts, he adopts but one heir, but God adopts many: In
   bringing many sons to glory' (Hebrews 2:10). Oh may a poor trembling
   Christian say, Why should I ever look for this privilege to be a child
   of God! It is true, if God did act as a man, if he adopted only one
   son, then you might despair. But he adopts millions. He brings many
   sons to glory'. Indeed this may be the reason why a man adopts but one,
   because he does not have enough estate for more. If he should adopt
   many his land would not hold out. But God has enough land to give to
   all his children. In my Father's house are many mansions' (John 14:2).

   3 Man when he adopts does it with ease. It is but sealing a deed and
   the thing is done. But when God adopts, it puts him to a far greater
   expense. It sets his wisdom on work to find out a way to adopt us. It
   was no easy thing to reconcile hell and heaven, to make the children of
   wrath the children of the promise; and when God in his infinite wisdom
   had found out a way, it was no easy way. It cost God the death of his
   natural Son, to make us his adopted sons. When God was about to
   constitute us sons and heirs, he could not seal the deed but by the
   blood of his own Son. It did not cost God so much to make us creatures
   as to make us sons. To make us creatures cost but the speaking of a
   word. To make us sons cost the effusion of blood.

   4 Man, when he adopts, settles but earthly privileges upon his heir,
   but God settles heavenly privileges justification, glorification. Men
   but entail their land upon the persons they adopt. God does more. He
   not only entails his land upon his children, but he entails himself
   upon them. I will be their God' (Hebrews 8:10). Not only heaven is
   their portion, but God is their portion.

   God's filiating or making of children is by infusion of grace. When God
   makes any his children he stamps his image upon them. This is more than
   any man living can do. He may adopt another, but he cannot alter his
   disposition. If he be of a morose rugged nature, he cannot alter it;
   but God in making of children fits them for son-ship. He prepares and
   sanctifies them for this privilege. He changes their disposition. He
   files off the ruggedness of their nature. He makes them not only sons,
   but saints. They are of another spirit (Numbers 14:24). They become
   meek and humble. They are partakers of the divine nature' (2 Peter
   1:4).

   The third thing is how we come to be the children of God.

   There is a double cause of our filiation or child-ship.

   The impulsive cause is God's free grace. We were rebels and traitors,
   and what could move God to make sinners sons, but free grace? Having
   predestinated us unto the adoption of children according to the good
   pleasure of his will' (Ephesians 1:5). Free grace gave the casting
   voice. Adoption is a mercy spun out of the bowels of free grace. It
   were much for God to take a clod of earth and make it a star, but it is
   more for God to take a piece of clay and sin and instate it into the
   glorious privilege of son-ship. How will the saints read over the
   lectures of free grace in heaven!

   The organic or instrumental cause of our son-ship is faith. Baptism
   does not make us children. That is indeed a badge and livery and gives
   us right to many external privileges, but the thing which makes God
   take cognisance of us for children is faith. Ye are all the children of
   God by faith in Christ Jesus' (Galatians 3:26). Before faith be wrought
   we have nothing to do with God. We are (as the apostle speaks in
   another sense) bastards and not sons (Hebrews 12:8). An unbeliever may
   call God his Judge, but not his Father. Wicked men may draw near to God
   in ordinances, and hope that God will be their Father, but while they
   are unbelievers they are bastards, and God will not father them but
   will lay them at the devil's door. Ye are the children of God by
   faith'. Faith legitimates us. It confers upon us the title of son-ship
   and gives us right to inherit.

   How then should we labour for faith! Without faith we are creatures,
   not children. Without faith we are spiritually illegitimate. This word
   illegitimate, is a term of infamy. Such as are illegitimate are looked
   upon with disgrace. We call them baseborn. You who ruffle it in your
   silks and velvets, but are in the state of nature, you are
   illegitimate. God looks upon you with an eye of scorn and contempt. You
   are a vile person, a son of the earth, of the seed of the serpent'. The
   devil can show as good a coat of arms as you.

   This word illegitimate' also imports infelicity and misery. Persons
   illegitimate cannot inherit legally. The land goes only to such as are
   lawful heirs. Till we are the children of God, we have no right to
   heaven, and there is no way to be children but by faith. Ye are the
   children of God by faith'.

   Here two things are to be discussed:

   1 What faith is.

   2 Why faith makes us children.

   1 What faith is. If faith instates us into son-ship, it concerns us to
   know what faith is. There is a twofold faith.

   (i) A more lax general faith. When we believe the truth of all that is
   revealed in the Holy Scriptures, this is not the faith which privileges
   us in son-ship. The devils believe all the articles in the creed. It is
   not the bare knowledge of a medicine or believing the sovereign virtue
   of it that will cure one that is ill. This general faith (so much cried
   up by some) will not save. This a man may have and not love God. He may
   believe that God will come to judge the quick and the dead, and hate
   him, as the prisoner believes the judge's coming to the assizes, and
   abhors the thoughts of him. Take heed of resting in a general faith.
   You may have this and be no better than devils.

   (ii) There is a special faith, when we not only believe the report we
   hear of Christ, but rest upon him, embrace him, taking hold of the
   horns of this altar', resolving there to abide. In the body there are
   sucking veins, which draw the meat into the stomach and concoct it
   there. So faith is the sucking vein which draws Christ into the heart
   and applies him there. This is the filiating faith. By this we are made
   the children of God, and wherever this faith is, it is not like physic
   in a dead man's mouth, but is exceedingly operative. It obliges to
   duty. It works by love (Galatians 5:6).

   But why does faith makes us children? Why should not other graces,
   repentance, love etc., do so? I answer: Because faith is instituted of
   God and honoured to this work of making us children. God's institution
   gives faith its value and validity. It is the king's stamp makes the
   coin pass current. If he would put his stamp upon brass or leather, it
   would go as current as silver. The great God has authorised and put the
   stamp of his institution upon faith, and that makes it pass for current
   and gives it a privilege above all the graces to make us children.

   Again, faith makes us children as it is the vital principle. The just
   shall live by faith' (Habakkuk 2:4). All God's children are living.
   None of them are stillborn. Now by faith we live'. As the heart is the
   fountain of life in the body, so faith is the fountain of life in the
   soul.

   Faith also makes us children as it is the uniting grace. It knits us to
   Christ. The other graces cannot do this. By faith we are one with
   Christ and so we are akin to God. Being united to the natural Son, we
   become adopted sons. The kindred comes in by faith. God is the Father
   of Christ. Faith makes us Christ's brethren (Hebrews 2:11), and so God
   comes to be our Father.

   The fourth particular to be discussed is to show the signs of God's
   children. It concerns us to know whose children we are. Augustine says
   that all mankind are divided into two ranks; either they are the
   children of God or the children of the devil.

   1 The first sign of our heavenly son-ship is tenderness of heart:
   Because thy heart was tender' (2 Chronicles 34:27). A childlike heart
   is a tender heart. He who before had a flinty, has now a fleshy heart.
   A tender heart is like melting wax to God. He may set what seal he will
   upon it. This tenderness of heart shows itself three ways.

   (i) A tender heart grieves for sin. A child weeps for offending his
   father. Peter showed a tender heart when Christ looked upon him and he
   remembered his sin, he wept as a child. Clement of Alexandria says, he
   never heard a cock crow but he wept. And some learned writers tell us
   that by much weeping there seemed to be as it were channels made in his
   blessed face. The least hair makes the eye weep. The least sin makes
   the heart smite. David's heart smote him when he cut off the lap of
   King Saul's garment! What would it have done if he had cut off his
   head?

   (ii) A tender heart melts under mercy. Though when God thunders by
   affliction, the rain of tears falls from a gracious eye, yet the heart
   is never so kindly dissolved as under the sunbeams of God's mercy. See
   how David's heart was melted with God's kindness: Who am I, O Lord God,
   and what is my house, that thou hast brought me hitherto?' (2 Samuel
   7:18). There was a gracious thaw upon his heart. So says a child of
   God, Lord, who am I (a piece of dust and sin kneaded together) that the
   orient beams of free grace should shine upon me? Who am I, that thou
   shouldest pity me when I lay in my blood and spread the golden wings of
   mercy over me? The soul is overcome with God's goodness, the tears
   drop, the love flames; mercy has a melting influence upon the soul.

   (iii) A tender heart trembles under God's threatenings. My flesh
   trembleth for fear of thee' (Psalm 119:120). Because thine heart was
   tender, and thou didst humble thyself before God, when thou heardest
   his words against this place, and didst rend thy clothes...' (2
   Chronicles 34:27). If the father be angry, the child trembles. When
   ministers denounce the menaces and threats of God against sin, tender
   souls sit in a trembling posture. This frame of heart God delights in.
   To this man will I look, even to him that trembleth at thy word'
   (Isaiah 66:2). A wicked man, like the Leviathan, is made without fear'
   (Job 41:33). He neither believes the promises nor dreads the
   threatenings. Let judgement be denounced against sin, he laughs at the
   shaking of a spear'. He thinks either that God is ignorant and does not
   see, or impotent and cannot punish. The mountains quake before the
   Lord, the hills melt, the rocks are thrown down by him (Nahum 1:5). But
   the hearts of sinners are more obdurate than the rocks. An hardened
   sinner like Nebuchadnezzar has the heart of a beast given to him'
   (Daniel 4:16). A childlike heart is a tender heart. The stone is taken
   away.

   2 The second sign of son-ship is assimilation. Ye have put on the new
   man which is renewed in knowledge after the image of him that created
   him' (Colossians 3:10). The child resembles the father. God's children
   are like their heavenly Father. They bear his very image and impress.
   Wicked men say they are the children of God, but there is too great a
   dissimilitude and unlikeness. The Jews bragged they were Abraham's
   children, but Christ disproves them by this argument, because they were
   not like him. Ye seek to kill me, a man that hath told you the truth,
   which I have heard of God; this did not Abraham' (John 8:40). You,
   Abraham's children, and go about to kill me! Abraham would not have
   murdered an innocent. You are more like Satan than Abraham. Ye are of
   your father the devil' (verse 44). Such as are proud, earthly,
   malicious may say, Our father which art in hell'. It is blasphemy to
   call God our Father and make the devil our pattern. God's children
   resemble him in meekness and holiness. They are his walking pictures.
   As the seal stamps its print and likeness upon the wax, so does God
   stamp the print and effigy of his own beauty upon his children.

   3 The third sign of God's children is, they have the Spirit of God. It
   is called the Spirit of adoption; ye have received the Spirit of
   adoption . . .' (Romans 8:15).

   How shall we know that we have received the Spirit of adoption, and so
   are in the state of adoption?

   The Spirit of God has a threefold work in them who are made children:

   (i) A regenerating work. (ii) A supplicating work. (iii) A witnessing
   work.

   (i) A regenerating work. Whomsoever the Spirit adopts, He regenerates.
   God's children are said to be born of the Spirit'. Except a man be born
   of water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God'
   (John 3:5). We must first be born of the Spirit before we are baptised
   with this new name of sons and daughters. We are not God's children by
   creation, but by renovation; not by our first birth, but by our new
   birth. This new birth produced by the Word as the material cause (James
   1:18), and by the Spirit as the efficient cause, is nothing else but a
   change of nature (Romans 12:2), which though it be not a perfect
   change, yet is a thorough change (1 Thessalonians 5:23). This change of
   heart is as necessary as salvation.

   How shall we know that we have this regenerating work of the Spirit?

   Two ways: by the pangs; by the products.

   By the pangs: there are spiritual pangs before the new birth, some
   bruisings of soul, some groanings and cryings out, some strugglings in
   the heart between flesh and Spirit. They were pricked at their heart'
   (Acts 2:37). The child has sharp throws before the birth; so it is in
   the new birth. I grant the new birth is marked by more and less'. All
   do not have the same pangs of humiliation, yet all have pangs; all feel
   the hammer of the law upon their heart, though some are more bruised
   with this hammer than others. God's Spirit is a Spirit of bondage
   before He is a Spirit of adoption (Romans 8:15). What then shall we say
   to those who are as ignorant about the new birth as Nicodemus: How can
   a man be born when he is old . . .?' (John 3:4). The new birth is a
   derision of the ungodly', though it be a great secret' to the godly.
   Some thank God they never had any trouble of spirit. They were always
   quiet. These bless God for the greatest curse. It is a sign they are
   not God's children. The child of grace is always born with pangs.

   The new birth is known by the products, which are three:

   Sensibility. The infant that is new-born is sensible of the least
   touch. If the Spirit has regenerated you, you are sensible of the
   ebullitions and first risings of sin which before you did not perceive.
   Paul cries out of the law in his members' (Romans 7:23). The new-born
   saint sees sin in the root.

   Circumspection. He who is born of the Spirit is careful to preserve
   grace. He plies the breast of ordinances (1 Peter 2:1). He is fearful
   of that which may endanger his spiritual life (1 John 5:18). He lives
   by faith, yet passes the time of his sojourning in fear (1 Peter 1:17).
   This is the first work of the Spirit in them who are made children, a
   regenerating work.

   (ii) The Spirit of God has a supplicating work in the heart. The Spirit
   of adoption is a Spirit of supplication. Ye have received the Spirit of
   adoption whereby we cry Abba, Father' (Romans 8:15). While the child is
   in the womb it cannot cry. While men lie in the womb of their natural
   estate, they cannot pray effectually, but when they are born of the
   Spirit, then they cry Abba, Father'. Prayer is nothing else but the
   soul's breathing itself into the bosom of its Father. It is a sweet and
   familiar intercourse with God. As soon as ever the Spirit of God comes
   into the heart, He sets it a-praying. No sooner was Paul converted but
   the next word is, Behold, he prayeth' (Acts 9:11). It is reported in
   the life of Luther that, when he prayed, it was with so much reverence
   as if he were praying to God, and with so much boldness, as if he had
   been speaking to his friend. And Eusebius reports of Constantine the
   Emperor that every day he used to shut up himself in some secret place
   in his palace, and there on bent knees make his devout prayers and
   soliloquies to God. God's Spirit tunes the strings of the affections,
   and then we make melody in prayer. For any to say, in derision, you
   pray by the Spirit', is a blasphemy against the Spirit. It is a main
   work of the Spirit of God in the hearts of his children to help them to
   pray: Because ye are sons, God has sent forth the Spirit of his Son
   into your hearts, crying, Abba, Father' (Galatians 4:6).

   But many of the children of God do not have such abilities to express
   themselves in prayer. How then does the Spirit help their infirmities?

   Though they do not have always the gifts of the Spirit in prayer, yet
   they have the groans of the Spirit (Romans 8:26). Gifts are the
   ornaments of prayer, but not the life of prayer. A carcass may be hung
   with jewels. Though the Spirit may deny fluency of speech, yet He gives
   fervency of desire, and such prayers are most prevalent. The prayers
   which the Spirit indites in the hearts of God's children have these
   threefold qualifications.

   The prayers of God's children are believing prayers. Prayer is the key.
   Faith is the hand that turns it. Faith feathers the arrow of prayer and
   makes it pierce the throne of grace. Whatsoever ye shall ask in prayer
   believing, ye shall receive' (Matthew 21:22). Whereupon, says Jerome, I
   would not presume to pray unless I bring faith along with me. To pray
   and not believe is (as one says) a kind of jeer offered to God, as if
   we thought either he did not hear or he would not grant.

   That faith may be animated in prayer, we must bring Christ in our arms
   when we appear before God. And Samuel took a sucking lamb, and offered
   it for a burnt-offering; and Samuel cried unto the Lord for Israel, and
   the Lord heard him' (1 Samuel 7:9). This sucking lamb typified Christ.
   When we come to God in prayer we must bring the Lamb, Christ along with
   us. Themistocles carried the king's son in his arms and so pacified the
   king when he was angry. The children of God present Christ in the arms
   of their faith.

   The prayers of God's children indited by the Spirit are ardent prayers.
   Ye have received the Spirit, whereby we cry Abba, Father' (Romans
   8:15). Father'; that implies faith. We cry; that implies fervency. The
   incense was to be laid upon burning coals (Leviticus 16:12). The
   incense was a type of prayer; the burning coals, of ardency in prayer.
   Elias prayed earnestly, James 5:17). In the Greek it is in praying he
   prayed', that is, he did it with vehemence. In prayer the heart must
   boil over with heat of affection. Prayer is compared to groans
   unutterable (Romans 8:26). It alludes to a woman that is in pangs. We
   should be in pangs when we are travailing for mercy. Such prayer
   commands God himself' (Isaiah 45:11).

   The prayers of God's children are heart-cleansing prayers. They purge
   out sin. Many pray against sin and sin against prayer. God's children
   not only pray against sin, but pray down sin.

   (iii) The Spirit of God has a witnessing work in the heart. God's
   children have not only the influence of the Spirit, but the witness.
   The Spirit itself beareth witness with our spirit that we are the
   children of God' (Romans 8:16). There is a threefold witness a child of
   God has the witness of the Word, the witness of conscience, the witness
   of the Spirit. The Word makes the major proposition. He who is in such
   a manner qualified is a child of God. Conscience makes the minor
   proposition; but you are so divinely qualified. The Spirit makes the
   conclusion therefore you are a child of God. The Spirit joins with the
   witness of conscience. The Spirit witnesseth with our spirits' (Romans
   8:16). The Spirit teaches conscience to search the records of Scripture
   and find its evidences for heaven. It helps conscience to spell out its
   name in a promise. It bears witness with our spirit.

   But how shall I know the witness of the Spirit from a delusion?

   The Spirit of God always witnesses according to the Word, as the echo
   answers the voice. Enthusiasts speak much of the Spirit, but they leave
   the Word. That inspiration which is either without the Word or against
   it, is an imposture. The Spirit of God indited the Word (2 Peter 1:21).
   Now if the Spirit should witness otherwise than according to the Word,
   the Spirit would be divided against Himself. He would be a spirit of
   contradiction, witnessing one thing for a truth in the Word and another
   thing different from it in a man's conscience.

   4 The fourth sign of God's children is zeal for God. They are zealous
   for his day, his truth, his glory. They who are born of God are
   impatient of his dishonour. Moses was cool in his own cause, but hot in
   God's. When the people of Israel had wrought folly in the golden calf,
   he breaks the tables. When St. Paul saw the people of Athens given to
   idolatry his spirit was stirred in him' (Acts 17:16). In the Greek it
   is his spirit was embittered', or, as the word may signify, he was in a
   paroxysm or burning fit of zeal. He could not contain, but with this
   fire of zeal discharges against their sin. As we shall answer for idle
   words, so for sinful silence. It is dangerous in this sense to be
   possessed with a dumb devil'. David says, the zeal of God's house had
   eaten him up' (Psalm 69:9). Many Christians whose zeal once had almost
   eaten them up, now they have eaten up their zeal. They are grown tepid
   and neutral. The breath of preferment blowing upon them has cooled
   their heat. I can never believe that he has the heart of a child in him
   that can be patient when God's glory suffers. Can an ingenuous child
   endure to hear his father reproached? Though we should be silent under
   God's displeasure, yet not under his dishonour. When there is an holy
   fire kindled in the heart, it will break forth at the lips. Zeal
   tempered with holiness is the white and sanguine which gives the soul
   its best complexion.

   Of all others let ministers be impatient when God's glory is impeached
   and eclipsed. A minister without zeal is like 'salt that has lost its
   savour'. Zeal will make men take injuries done to God as done to
   themselves. It is reported of Chrysostom that he reproved any sin
   against God as if he himself had received a personal wrong. Let not
   ministers be either shaken with fear or seduced with flattery. God
   never made ministers to be as false glasses, to make bad faces look
   fair. For want of this fire of zeal, they are in danger of another
   fire, even the burning lake' (Revelation 21:8), into which the fearful
   shall be cast.

   5 Those who are God's children and are born of God are of a more noble
   and celestial spirit than men of the world. They mind things above'
   (Colossians 3:2). Whatsoever is born of God overcometh the world' (1
   John 5:4). The children of God live in an higher region. They are
   compared to eagles (Isaiah 40:31), in regard of their sublimeness and
   heavenly-mindedness. Their souls are fled aloft. Christ is in their
   heart (Colossians 1:27) and the world is under their feet (Revelation
   12:1). Men of the world are ever tumbling in thick clay. They are 'sons
   of earth'; not eagles, but earthworms. The saints are of another
   spirit. They are born of God and walk with God as the child walks with
   the father. Noah walked with God' (Genesis 6:9). God's children show
   their high pedigree in their heavenly conversation (Philippians 3:20).

   6 Another sign of adoption is love to them that are children. God's
   children are knit together with the bond of love, as all the members of
   the body are knit together by several nerves and ligaments. If we are
   born of God, then we love the brotherhood' (1 Peter 2:17); He that
   loves the person, loves the picture. The children of God are his
   walking pictures, and if we are of God, we love those who have his
   effigy and portraiture drawn upon their souls. If we are born of God,
   we love the saints notwithstanding their infirmities. Children love one
   another though they have some imperfections of nature, a squint-eye, or
   a crooked back. We love gold in the ore, though it has some drossiness
   in it. The best saints have their blemishes. We read of the 'spot of
   God's children' (Deuteronomy 32:5). A saint in this life is like a fair
   face with a scar in it. If we are born of God we love his children
   though they are poor. We love to see the image and picture of our
   Father, though hung in never so poor a frame. We love to see a rich
   Christ in a poor man.

   And if we are children of the Highest, we show our love to God's
   children:

   (i) By prizing their persons above others. He who is born of God
   honoureth them that fear the Lord' (Psalm 15:4). The saints are the
   dearly beloved of God's soul' (Jeremiah 12:7). They are his jewels'
   (Malachi 3:17). They are of the true blood-royal, and he who is
   divinely adopted sets an higher estimate upon these than upon others.

   (ii) We show our love to the children of God by prizing their company
   above others. Children love to associate and be together. The communion
   of saints is precious. Christ's doves will flock together in company.
   Like associates with like'. I am a companion of all them that fear
   thee' (Psalm 119:63). We read that Abraham bowed himself to the
   children of Heth' (Genesis 23:7) A child of God has a love of civility
   to all, but a love of complacency only to such as are fellow-heirs with
   him of the same inheritance.

   By this persons may try their adoption. It appears plainly that they
   are not the children of God who hate those that are born of God. They
   soil and blacken the silver wings of Christ's doves by their aspersive
   reproaches. They cannot endure the society of the saints. As vultures
   hate sweet smells and are killed with them, so the wicked do not love
   to come near the godly. They cannot abide the precious perfume of their
   graces. They hate these sweet smells. It is a sign they are of the
   serpent's brood who hate the seed of the woman.

   7 The seventh sign of God's children is to delight to be much in God's
   presence. Children love to be in the presence of their father. Where
   the king is, there is the court. Where the presence of God is, there is
   heaven. God is in a special manner present in his ordinances. They are
   the ark of his presence. Now if we are children, we love to be much in
   holy duties. In the use of ordinances we draw near to God. We come into
   our Father's presence. In prayer we have secret conference with God. In
   the Word we hear God speaking from heaven to us, and how does every
   child of God delight to hear his Father's voice! In the sacraments God
   kisses his children with the kisses of his lips'. He gives them a smile
   of his face and a privy-seal of his love. Oh it is good to draw near to
   God' (Psalm 73:28). It is sweet being in his presence. Every true child
   of God says, a day in thy courts is better than a thousand' (Psalm
   84:10). Slighters of ordinances are none of God's children, because
   they care not to be in his presence. They love the tavern better than
   the temple. Cain went out from the presence of the Lord' (Genesis
   4:16); not that he could go out of God's sight (Psalm 139:7), but the
   meaning is, Cain went from the church of God where the Lord gave the
   visible signs of his presence to his people.

   8 The eighth sign is compliance with the will of our heavenly Father. A
   childlike heart answers to God's call as the echo answers to the voice.
   It is like the flower that opens and shuts with the sun. So it opens to
   God and shuts to temptation. This is the motto of a new-born saint,
   Speak, Lord, thy servant hears' (1 Samuel 3:9). When God bids his
   children pray in their closets, mortify sin, suffer for his name, they
   are ambitious to obey. They will lay down their lives at their Father's
   call. Hypocrites court God and speak him fair, but refuse to go on his
   errand. They are not children but rebels.

   9 The last sign is, He who is a child of God will labour to make others
   the children of God. The holy seed of grace propagates (Galatians 4:19;
   Philemon 10). He who is of the seed royal will be ambitiously desirous
   to bring others into the kindred. Are you divinely adopted? You will
   studiously endeavour to make your child a child of the most High.

   How Christians should bring up their children

   There are two reasons why a godly parent will endeavour to bring his
   child into the heavenly kindred:

   (i) Out of conscience. A good parent sees the injury he has done to his
   child. He has conveyed the plague of sin to him, and in conscience he
   will endeavour to make some recompense. In the old law, he that had
   smitten and wounded another was bound to see him healed and pay for his
   cure. Parents have given their children a wound in their souls and
   therefore must do what in them lies by admonition, prayers, tears, to
   see the wound healed.

   (ii) Out of flaming zeal to the honour of God. He who has tasted God's
   love in adoption looks upon himself as engaged to bring God all the
   glory he can. If he has a child or acquaintance that are strangers to
   God he would gladly promote the work of grace in their hearts. It is a
   glory to Christ when multitudes are born to him.

   How far are they from being God's children who have no care to bring
   others into the family of God! To blame are those masters who mind more
   their servants' work than their souls. To blame are those parents who
   are regardless of their children. They do not drop in principles of
   knowledge into them, but suffer them to have their head. They will let
   them lie and swear, but not ask blessing; read play-books but not
   Scripture.

   But, say some, to catechise and teach our children is to take God's
   name in vain.

   Is the fulfilling God's command taking his name in vain? These words
   which I command thee this day, thou shalt teach them diligently to thy
   children' (Deuteronomy 6:6, 7). Train up a child in the way he should
   go, and when he is old he will not depart from it' (Proverbs 22:6). Ye
   fathers, provoke not your children to wrath, but bring them up in the
   nurture and admonition of the Lord' (Ephesians 6:4). This threefold
   cord of Scripture is not easily broken.

   The saints of old were continually grafting principles of holy
   knowledge in their children. I know that Abraham will command his
   children, and they shall keep the way of the Lord' (Genesis 18:19). And
   thou Solomon, my son, know thou the God of thy father and serve him
   with a perfect heart' (1 Chronicles 28:9). Sure Abraham and David did
   not take God's name in vain! What need is there of instilling holy
   instructions to overtop the poisonful weeds of sin that grow! As
   husband-men, when they have planted young trees, they set stays to them
   to keep them from bending. Children are young plants. The heavenly
   precepts of their parents are like stays set about them, to keep them
   from bending to error and profaneness. When can there be a fitter
   season to disseminate and infuse knowledge into children than in their
   minority? Now is a time to give them the breast and let them suck in
   the 'sincere milk of the word' (1 Peter 2:2).

   But some may object that it is to no purpose to teach our children the
   knowledge of God. They have no sense of spiritual things, nor are they
   the better for our instructions. I answer:

   We read in Scripture of children who by virtue of instruction have had
   their tender years sanctified. Timothy's mother and grandmother taught
   him the Scriptures from his cradle: And that from a child thou hast
   known the holy Scriptures' (2 Timothy 3:15). Timothy sucked in religion
   as it were with his milk. We read of young children who cried Hosanna'
   to Christ and trumpeted forth his praises (Matthew 21:15). And sure
   those children of Tyre had some seeds of good wrought in them in that
   they showed their love to Paul and would help him on his way to the
   seashore. They all brought us on our way with wives and children' (Acts
   21:5). Saint Paul had a convoy of young saints to bring him to take
   ship.

   And again, suppose our counsel and instruction does not at present
   prevail with our children, it may afterwards take effect. The seed a
   man sows in his ground does not presently spring up, but in its season
   it brings forth a crop. He that plants a wood does not see the full
   growth till many years after. If we must not instruct our children
   because at present they do not reap the benefit, by the same reason we
   should not baptise our children, because at present they do not have
   the sense of baptism. Nay, by the same reason ministers should not
   preach the Word, because at present many of their hearers have no
   benefit.

   Again, if our counsels and admonitions do not prevail with our
   children, yet we have delivered our own souls'. There is comfort in the
   discharge of conscience. We must let alone issues and events. Duty is
   our work; success is God's.

   All which considered, should make parents whet holy instructions upon
   their children. They who are of the family of God and whom he has
   adopted for children, will endeavour that their children may be more
   God's children than theirs. They will travail in birth till Christ be
   formed in them'. A true saint is a loadstone that will be still drawing
   others to God. Let this suffice to have spoken of the signs of
   adoption. I proceed.

   The fifth particular to be discussed is the love of God in making us
   children. Behold what manner of love the Father hath bestowed upon us,
   that we should be called the sons of God!' (1 John 3:1). God showed
   power in making us creatures, but love in making us sons. Plato gave
   God thanks that he had made him a man and not a beast, but what cause
   have they to adore God's love, who has made them children! The apostle
   puts a Behold' to it. That we may the better behold God's love in
   making us children, consider three things.

   1 We were deformed. When I passed by thee and saw thee polluted in
   thine own blood, it was the time of love' (Ezekiel 16:6, 8). Mordecai
   adopted Esther because she was fair, but we were in our blood, and then
   God adopted us. He did not adopt us when we were clothed with the robe
   of innocence in paradise, when we were hung with the jewels of holiness
   and were white and ruddy; but when we were in our blood and had our
   leprous spots upon us. The time of our loathing was the time of God's
   loving.

   2 As we did not deserve to be made children so neither did we desire
   it. No landed man will force another to become his heir against his
   will. If a king should go to adopt a beggar and make him heir of the
   crown, if the beggar should refuse the king's favour and say, I had
   rather be as I am, I would be a beggar still'; the king would take it
   in high contempt of his favour and would not adopt him against his
   will. Thus it was with us. We had no willingness to be made children.
   We would have been begging still, but God out of his infinite mercy and
   indulgence, not only offers to make us children, but makes us willing
   to embrace the offer (Psalm 110:3). Behold what manner of love, is
   this!

   3 It is the wonder of love that God should adopt us for his children
   when we were enemies. If a man would make another heir of his land, he
   would adopt one that is near akin to him. No man would adopt an enemy.
   But that God should make us children when we were enemies; that he
   should make us heirs to the crown when we were traitors to the crown;
   oh amazing, astonishing love! Behold what manner of love, is this! We
   were not akin to God. We had by sin lost and forfeited our pedigree. We
   had done God all the injury and spite we could, defaced his image,
   violated his law, trampled upon his mercies, and when we had angered
   him, he adopted us. What stupendous love was this! Such love was never
   shown to the angels! When they fell (though they were of a more noble
   nature, and in probability might have done God more service than we
   can, yet) God never vouchsafed this privilege of adoption to them. He
   did not make them children, but prisoners. They were heirs only to the
   treasures of wrath' (Romans 2:5).

   Let all who are thus nearly related to God, stand admiring his love.
   When they were like Saul, breathing forth enmity against God; when
   their hearts stood out as garrisons against him, the Lord conquered
   their stubbornness with kindness, and not only pardoned, but adopted
   them. It is hard to say which is greater, the mystery or the mercy.
   This is such amazing love as we shall be searching into and adoring to
   all eternity. The bottom of it cannot be fathomed by any angel in
   heaven. God's love in making us children is a rich love. It is love in
   God to feed us, but it is rich love to adopt us. It is love to give us
   a crumb, but it is rich love to make us heirs to a crown.

   It is a distinguishing love that when God has passed by so many
   millions, he should cast a favourable aspect upon thee! Most are cut
   out for fuel, and are made vessels of wrath. And that God should say to
   thee, Thou art my son', here is the mirror of mercy, the meridian of
   love! Who, O who, can tread upon these hot coals, and his heart not
   burn in love to God?

   The sixth particular is the honour and renown of God's children. For
   the illustration of this, observe two things:

   I. God makes a precious account of them.

   2. He looks upon them as persons of honour.

   1 God makes a precious account of them. Since thou wast precious in my
   sight . . .' (Isaiah 43:4). A father prizes his child above his estate.
   How dearly did Jacob prize Benjamin! His life was bound up in the life
   of the lad' (Genesis 44:30). God makes a precious valuation of his
   children. The wicked are of no account with God. They are vile persons.
   I will make thy grave for thou art vile' (Nahum 1:14). Therefore the
   wicked are compared to chaff (Psalm 1:4), to dross (Psalm 119:119).
   There is little use of a wicked man while he lives and no loss of him
   when he dies. There is only a little chaff blown away, which may well
   be spared. But God's children are precious in his sight. They are his
   jewels (Malachi 3:17). The wicked are but lumber which serves only to
   cumber the ground'. But God's children are his jewels locked up in the
   cabinet of his decree from all eternity. God's children are the apple
   of his eye' (Zechariah 2:8), very dear and very tender to him, and the
   eyelid of his special providence covers them. The Lord accounts every
   thing of his children precious.

   Their name is precious. The wicked leave their name for a curse (Isaiah
   65:15). The names of God's children are embalmed (Isaiah 60:15). So
   precious are their names that God enters them in the book of life and
   Christ carries them on his breast. How precious must their name needs
   be, who have God's own name written upon them! Him that overcometh, I
   will write upon him the name of my God' (Revelation 3:12).

   Their prayers are precious. O my dove, in the clefts of the rock, let
   me hear thy voice, for sweet is thy voice' (Canticles 2:14). Every
   child of God is this dove. Prayer is the voice of the dove, and 'sweet
   is this voice'. The prayer of God's children is as sweet to him as
   music. A wicked man's prayer is as the howling' of a dog (Hosea 7:14).
   The prayer of the saints is as the singing of the bird. The finger of
   God's Spirit touching the lute-strings of their hearts, they make
   melody to the Lord. Their sacrifices shall be accepted upon mine altar'
   (Isaiah 56:7).

   Their tears are precious. They drop as pearls from their eyes. I have
   seen thy tears' (Isaiah 38:5). The tears of God's children drop as
   precious wine into God's bottle. Put thou my tears into thy bottle'
   (Psalm 56:8). A tear from a broken heart is a present for the king of
   heaven.

   Their blood is precious. Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death
   of his saints' (Psalm 116:15). This is the blood God will chiefly make
   inquisition for. Athaliah shed the blood of the king's children (2
   Kings 11:1). The saints are the children of the most High, and such as
   shed their blood shall pay dear for it. Thou hast given them blood to
   drink for they are worthy' (Revelation 16:6).

   2 God looks upon his children as persons of honour. Since thou wast
   precious in my sight, thou hast been honourable . . .' (Isaiah 43:4).

   God esteems them honourable. He calls them a crown and a royal diadem
   (Isaiah 62:3). He calls them his glory: Israel my glory (Isaiah 46:13)

   God makes them honourable. As a king creates dukes, marquises, earls,
   barons etc., so God installs his children into honour. He creates them
   noble persons, persons of renown. David thought it no small honour to
   be the king's son-in-law. Who am I that I should be son-in-law to the
   king?' (1 Samuel 18:18). What an infinite honour is it to be the
   children of the High God, to be of the blood-royal of heaven! The
   saints are of an ancient family. They are sprung from the Ancient of
   days' (Daniel 7:9). That is the best pedigree which is fetched from
   heaven. Here the youngest child is an heir, a co-heir with Christ who
   is heir of all (Hebrews 1:2; Romans 8:17). Consider the honour of God's
   children positively and comparatively.

   Positively: They have titles of honour. They are called kings'
   (Revelation 1:6); the excellent of the earth' (Psalm 16:3); vessels of
   honour' (2 Timothy 2:21).

   They have their escutcheon. You may see the saints' escutcheon or
   coat-armour. The Scripture has set forth their heraldry. Sometimes they
   give the lion in regard of their courage (Proverbs 28:1). Sometimes
   they give the eagle in regard of their sublimeness. They are ever
   flying up to heaven upon the two wings of faith and love. They shall
   mount up with wings as eagles' (Isaiah 40:31). Sometimes they give the
   dove in regard of their meekness and innocence (Canticles 2:14). This
   shows the children of God to be persons of renown.

   Consider the honour of God's children comparatively; and this
   comparison is double. Compare the children of God with Adam; with the
   angels.

   Compare the children of God with Adam in a state of innocence. Adam was
   a person of honour. He was the sole monarch of the world. All the
   creatures veiled to him as their sovereign. He was placed in the garden
   of Eden which was a paradise of pleasure. He was crowned with all the
   contentments of the earth. Nay more, Adam was God's lively picture. He
   was made in the likeness of God himself. Yet the state of the meanest
   of God's children by adoption is far more excellent and honourable than
   the state of Adam was, when he wore the robe of innocence, for Adam's
   condition, though it was glorious yet it was mutable, and was soon
   lost; Adam was a bright star, yet a falling star. But God's children by
   adoption are in a state unalterable. Adam had a posse non peccare', a
   possibility of standing, but believers have a non posse peccare', an
   impossibility of falling; once adopted, and ever adopted. As Isaac
   said, when he had given the blessing to Jacob, I have blessed him and
   he shall be blessed' (Genesis 27:33). So may we say of all God's
   children, they are adopted, and they shall be adopted; so that God's
   children are in a better and more glorious condition now than Adam was
   in all his regal honour and majesty.

   Let us ascend as high as heaven and compare God's children with the
   glorious and blessed angels. God's children are equal to the angels, in
   some sense above them, so that they must be persons of honour.

   God's children are equal to the angels. This is acknowledged by some of
   the angels themselves. I am thy fellow-servant' (Revelation 19:10).
   Here is a parallel made between John the Divine and the angel. The
   angel says to John, I am thy fellow-servant.'

   The children of God by adoption are in some sense above the angels, and
   that two ways.

   The angels are servants to God's children (Hebrews 1:14). Though they
   are glorious spirits', yet they are ministering spirits'. The angels
   are the saints' servitors. We have examples in Scripture of angels
   attending the persons of God's children. We read of angels waiting upon
   Abraham, Moses, Daniel, the Virgin Mary etc. Nor do the angels only
   render service to God's children while they live, but at their death
   too. Lazarus had a convoy of angels to carry him into the paradise of
   God. Thus we see the children of God have a pre-eminence and dignity
   above the angels. The angels are their servants both living and dying;
   and this is more to be observed, because it is never said in Scripture
   that the children of God are servants to the angels.

   God's children are above the angels, because Christ by taking their
   nature has ennobled and honoured it above the angelic. He in no wise
   took the nature of angels' (Hebrews 2:16). God by uniting us to Christ
   has made us nearer to himself than the angels. The children of God are
   members of Christ (Ephesians 5:30). This was never said of the angels.
   How can they be members of Christ, who are of a different nature from
   him? Indeed metaphorically and improperly Christ may be called the head
   of the angels, as they are subject to him (1 Peter 3:22). But that
   Christ is head of the angels in that near and sweet conjunction, as he
   is head of the believers, we nowhere find in Scripture. In this respect
   therefore I may clearly assert that the children of God have a
   superiority and honour even above the angels. Though by creation they
   are a little lower than the angels', yet by adoption and mystical union
   they are above the angels.

   How may this comfort a child of God in the midst either of calumny or
   penury! He is a person of honour. He is above the angels. A gentleman
   that is fallen to decay will sometimes boast of his parentage and noble
   blood; so a Christian who is poor in the world, yet by virtue of his
   adoption he is of the family of God. He has the true blood-royal
   running in his veins. He has a fairer coat of arms to show than the
   angels themselves.

   The seventh particular to be explained is to show the glorious
   privileges of God's children; and what I shall say now belongs not to
   the wicked. It is children's bread'. The fruit of paradise was to be
   kept with a flaming sword. So these sweet and heart-ravishing
   privileges are to be kept with a flaming sword, that impure sensual
   persons may not touch them. There are twelve rare privileges which
   belong to the children of God.

   1 If we are children, then God will be full of tender love and
   affection towards us. A father compassionates his child. Like as a
   father pitieth his children, so the Lord pitieth them that fear him'
   (Psalm 103:13). Oh the yearning of God's bowels to his children! Is
   Ephraim my dear son? Is he a pleasant child? My bowels are troubled for
   him, I will surely have mercy upon him, saith the Lord' (Jeremiah
   31:20). Towards the wicked God's wrath is kindled (Psalm 2:12). Towards
   them that are children, God's repentings are kindled (Hosea 11:8).
   Mercy and pity as naturally flow from our heavenly Father as light from
   the sun.

   Some may object: But God is angry and writes bitter things. How does
   this stand with love?

   God's love and his anger towards his children are not in opposition but
   'showing a difference'. They may stand together. He is angry in love.
   As many as I love I rebuke and chasten' (Revelation 3:19). We have as
   much need of afflictions as ordinances. A bitter pill may be as needful
   for preserving health as a julep or cordial. God afflicts with the same
   love as he adopts. God is most angry when he is not angry. His hand is
   heaviest when it is lightest (Hosea 14:4). Affliction is an argument of
   son-ship. If ye endure chastening, God dealeth with you as with sons'
   (Hebrews 12:7).

   Oh, says one, surely God does not love me. I am none of his child,
   because he does not follow me with such sore afflictions. Why, it is a
   sign of child-ship to be sometimes under the rod. God had one son
   without sin, but no son without stripes. God puts his children to the
   school of the cross, and there they learn best. God speaks to us in the
   Word, children, do not be proud, do not love the world; Walk
   circumspectly' (Ephesians 5:15). But, we are dull of hearing'; nay we
   'stop the ear'. I spake to thee in thy prosperity, but thou saidst, I
   will not hear' (Jeremiah 22:21). Now, says God, I shall lose my child
   if I do not correct him. Then God in love smites that he may save.
   Aristotle' speaks of a bird that lives among thorns, yet sings sweetly.
   God's children make the best melody in their heart, when God hedgeth
   their way with thorns' (Hosea 2:6). Afflictions are refining. The
   fining pot is for silver, and the furnace for gold' (Proverbs 17:3).
   Fiery trials make golden Christians. Afflictions are purifying. Many
   shall be tried and made white' (Daniel 12:10). We think God is going to
   destroy us, but he only lays us a-whitening. Some birds will not hatch
   but in time of thunder. Christians are commonly best in affliction. God
   will make his children at last bless him for sufferings. The eyes that
   sin shuts affliction opens. When Manasseh was in chains, then he knew
   the Lord was God' (2 Chronicles 33:13). Afflictions fit for heaven.
   First the stones of Solomon's temple were hewn and polished and then
   set up into a building. First the saints (who are called living
   stones') must be hewn and carved by sufferings as the corner stone was,
   and so made meet for the celestial building (Colossians 1:12). And is
   there not love in all God's Fatherly castigations?

   But there may be another objection, that sometimes God's children are
   under the black clouds of desertion. Is not this far from love?

   Concerning desertion, I must needs say that this is the saddest
   condition that can betide God's children. When the sun is gone, the dew
   falls. When the sunlight of God's countenance is removed, then the dew
   of tears falls from the eyes of the saints. In desertion God rains hell
   out of heaven (to use Calvin's expression). The arrows of the Almighty
   are within me, the poison whereof drinketh up my spirit, Job 6:4). This
   is the poisoned arrow that wounds to the heart. Desertion is a taste of
   the torments of the damned. God says, In a little wrath I hid my face
   from thee' (Isaiah 54:8). I may here gloss with Saint Bernard, Lord,
   dost thou call that a little wrath when thou hidest thy face? Is it but
   a little? What can be more bitter to me than the eclipsing of thy
   face?' God is in the Scripture called a light and a fire. The deserted
   soul feels the fire but does not see the light. But yet you who are
   adopted may spell love in all this. They say of Hercules, club that it
   was made of wood of olive. The olive is an emblem of peace. So God's
   club, whereby he beats down the soul in desertion, has something of the
   olive. There is peace and mercy in it. I shall hold forth a spiritual
   rainbow wherein the children of God may see the love of their Father in
   the midst of the clouds of desertion.

   Therefore I answer:

   (i) In time of desertion God leaves in his children a seed of comfort.
   His seed remaineth in him' (1 John 3:9). This seed of God is a seed of
   comfort. Though God's children in desertion lack the seal of the
   Spirit, yet they have the unction of the Spirit (1 John 2:27). Though
   they lack the sun, yet they have a daystar in their hearts. As the tree
   in winter, though it has lost its leaves and fruit, yet there is sap in
   the root; so in the winter of desertion there is the sap of grace in
   the root of the heart. As it is with the sun masking itself with a
   cloud when it denies light to the earth, yet it gives forth its
   influence; so though God's dear adopted ones may lose sight of his
   countenance, yet they have the influence of his grace.

   What grace appears in the time of desertion? I answer:

   An high prizing of God's love. If God should say to the deserted soul,
   What wilt thou and it shall be granted to half of the kingdom?, he
   would reply, Lord that I might see thee as I was wont to see thee in
   the sanctuary'; that I may have one golden beam of thy love. The
   deserted soul slights all other things in comparison. It is not gardens
   or orchards, or the most delicious objects that can give him
   contentment. They are like music to a sad heart. He desires, as
   Absalom, to see the king's face'.

   A lamenting after the Lord. It is the saddest day for him when the sun
   of righteousness is eclipsed. A child of God can better bear the
   world's stroke than God's absence. He is even melted into tears; the
   clouds of desertion produce spiritual rain, and whence is this weeping
   but from love?

   Willingness to suffer anything so he may have sight of God. A child of
   God could be content with Simon of Cyrene to carry the cross if he were
   sure Christ were upon it. He could willingly die, if with Simeon he
   might die with Christ in his arms. Behold here, the seed of God' in a
   believer, the work of sanctification, when he lacks the wine of
   consolation.

   (ii) I answer, God has a design of mercy in hiding his face from his
   adopted ones.

   First, it is for the trial of grace, and there are two graces brought
   to trial in time of desertion, faith and love.

   Faith: When we can believe against sense and feeling; when we are
   without experience, yet can trust to a promise; when we do not have the
   kisses of God's mouth', yet can cleave to the word of his mouth'; this
   is faith indeed. Here is the sparkling of the diamond.

   Love: When God smiles upon us, it is not much to love him, but when he
   seems to put us away in anger (Psalm 27:9), now to love him and be as
   the lime -- the more water is thrown upon it the hotter it burns --
   this is love indeed. That love sure is 'strong as death' (Canticles
   8:6) which the waters of desertion cannot quench.

   Secondly, it is for the exercise of grace. We are all for comfort. If
   it be put to our choice, we would be ever upon Mount Pisgah, looking
   into Canaan. We are loath to be in trials, agonies, desertions, as if
   God could not love us except he had us in his arms. It is hard to lie
   long in the lap of spiritual joy and not fall asleep. Too much sunshine
   causes a drought in our graces. Oftentimes when God lets down comfort
   into the heart, we begin to let down care. As it is with musicians,
   before they have money they will play you many a sweet lesson, but as
   soon as you throw them down money they are gone. You hear no more of
   them. Before joy and assurance, O the sweet music of prayer and
   repentance! But when God throws down the comforts of his Spirit, we
   either leave off duty or at least slacken the strings of our viol and
   grow remiss in it. You are taken with the money, but God is taken with
   the music. Grace is better than comfort. Rachel is more fair, but Leah
   is more fruitful. Comfort is fair to look upon, but grace has the
   fruitful womb. Now the only way to exercise grace and make it more
   vigorous and lively is sometimes to walk in darkness and have no light'
   (Isaiah 50:16). Faith is a star that shines brightest in the night of
   desertion. I said, I am cast out of thy sight; yet will I look again
   toward thy holy temple' (Jonah 2:4). Grace usually puts forth its most
   heroic acts at such a time.

   (iii) I answer: God may forsake his children in regard of vision, but
   not in regard of union. Thus it was with Jesus Christ when he cried
   out, my God, my God'. There was not a separation of the union between
   him and his Father, only a suspension of the vision. God's love through
   the interposition of our sins may be darkened and eclipsed, but still
   he is a Father. The sun may be hid in a cloud, but it is not out of the
   firmament. The promises in time of desertion may be, as it were,
   sequestered. We do not have the comfort from them as formerly, but
   still the believer's title holds good in law.

   (iv) I answer: when God hides his face from his child, his heart may be
   towards him. As Joseph, when he spake roughly to his brethren and made
   them believe he would take them for spies, still his heart was towards
   them and he was as full of love as ever he could hold. He was fain to
   go aside and weep. So God is full of love to his children even when he
   seems to look strange. And as Moses' mother when she put her child into
   the ark of bulrushes and went away a little from it, yet still her eye
   was toward it. The babe wept'; aye, and the mother wept too. So God,
   when he goes aside as if he had forsaken his children, yet he is full
   of sympathy and love towards them. God may change his countenance but
   not break his covenant. It is one thing for God to desert, another
   thing to disinherit. How shall I give thee up, Ephraim . . .' (Hosea
   11:8). It is a metaphor taken from a father going to disinherit his
   son, and while he is setting his hand to the deed, his bowels begin to
   melt and to yearn over him and he thinks thus within himself, Though he
   be a prodigal child, yet he is a child; I will not cut off the entail.
   So says God, How shall I give thee up?' Though Ephraim has been a
   rebellious son, yet he is a son, I will not disinherit him. God's
   thoughts may be full of love when there is a veil upon his face. The
   Lord may change his dispensation towards his children, but not his
   disposition. He may have the look of an enemy, but the heart of a
   Father. So that the believer may say, I am adopted; let God do what he
   will with me; let him take the rod or the staff; it is all one; He
   loves me.

   2 The second adoptional privilege is this if we are children then God
   will bear with many infirmities. A father bears much with a child he
   loves. I will spare them, as a man spareth his own son that serveth
   him' (Malachi 3:17). We often grieve the Spirit, abuse kindness. God
   will pass by much in his children. He hath not seen iniquity in Jacob'
   (Numbers 23:21). His love does not make him blind. He sees sin in his
   people but not with an eye of revenge, but pity. He sees sin in his
   children as a physician does a disease in his patient. He has not seen
   iniquity in Jacob so as to destroy him. God may use the rod (2 Samuel
   7:14), not the scorpion. O how much is God willing to pass by in his
   children, because they are children! God takes notice of the good that
   is in his children, and passes by the infirmity. God does quite
   contrary to us. We often take notice of the evil that is in others and
   overlook the good. Our eye is upon the flaw in the diamond, but we do
   not observe its sparkling. But God takes notice of the good that is in
   his children. God sees their faith and winks at their failings (1 Peter
   3:6). Even as Sarah obeyed Abraham, calling him lord'; the Holy Ghost
   does not mention her unbelief and laughing at the promise, but takes
   notice of the good in her, namely, her obedience to her husband. She
   obeyed Abraham, calling him lord'. God puts his finger upon the scars
   and infirmities of his children. How much did God wink at in Israel his
   firstborn! Israel often provoked him with their murmurings (Deuteronomy
   1:27), but God answered their murmurings with mercies. He spared them
   as a father spares his son.

   3 The third privilege is this -- if we are children then God will
   accept of our imperfect services. A parent takes anything in good part
   from his child. God accepts of the will for the deed (2 Corinthians
   8:12). Often times we come with broken prayers, but if we are children,
   God spells out our meaning and will take our prayers as a grateful
   present. A father loves to hear his child speak, though he but lisps
   and stammers. Like a crane, so did I chatter' (Isaiah 38:14). Good
   Hezekiah looked upon his praying as chattering, yet that prayer was
   heard (verse 5). A sigh and groan from an humble heart goes up as the
   smoke of incense. My groaning is not hid from thee' (Psalm 38:9). When
   all the glistering shows of hypocrites evaporate and come to nothing, a
   little that a child of God does in sincerity is crowned with
   acceptance. A father is glad of a letter from his son though there are
   blots in the letter, though there are false spellings and broken
   English. O what blottings are there in our holy things! What broken
   English sometimes! Yet coming from broken hearts it is accepted. Though
   there be weakness in duty, yet if there be willingness, the Lord is
   much taken with it. Says God, it is my child and he would do better. He
   hath accepted us in the beloved, (Ephesians 1:6).

   4 If we are children then God will provide for us. A father will take
   care for his children. He gives them allowance and lays up a portion (2
   Corinthians 12:14). So does our heavenly Father.

   He gives us our allowance: The God which fed me all my life long unto
   this day' (Genesis 48:15). Whence is our daily bread, but from his
   daily care? God will not let his children starve, though our unbelief
   is ready sometimes to question his goodness and say, Can God prepare a
   table?' See what arguments Christ brings to prove God's paternal care
   for his children. Behold the fowls of the air, they sow not, neither do
   they reap, yet your heavenly Father feedeth them' (Matthew 6:26). Does
   a man feed his bird, and will he not feed his child? Consider the
   lilies how they grow; they toil not, they spin not; if then, God so
   clothe the grass . . .' (Luke 12:27). Does God clothe the lilies and
   will he not clothe his lambs? The Lord careth for you' (1 Peter 5:7).
   As long as his heart is full of love, so long his head will be full of
   care. This should be as physic to kill the worm of unbelief.

   As God gives his children a viaticum' or bait' by the way, so he lays
   up a portion for them. It is your Father's good pleasure to give you
   the kingdom' (Luke 12:32). Our Father keeps the purse and will give us
   enough to bear our charges here, and when at death we take shipping and
   shall be set upon the shore of eternity, then will our heavenly Father
   bestow upon us a kingdom immutable and immarcescible. Lo, here is a
   portion which can never be summed up.

   5 If we are children then God will shield off dangers from us. A father
   will protect his child from injuries. God ever lies sentinel to keep
   off evil from his children temporal evil; spiritual evil.

   (i) God screens off temporal evil. There are many casualties and
   contingencies which are incident to life. God mercifully prevents them.
   He keeps watch and ward for his children. My defence is of God' (Psalm
   7:10). He that keeps Israel shall neither slumber nor sleep' (Psalm
   121:4). The eye of providence is ever awake. God gives his angels
   charge over his children (Psalm 91:11). A believer has a guard of
   angels for his lifeguard. We read of the wings of God in Scripture. As
   the breast of his mercy feeds his children, so the wings of his power
   cover them. How miraculously did God preserve Israel his firstborn! He
   with his wings sometimes covered, sometimes carried them. He bare you
   as upon eagles, wings' (Exodus 19:4), an emblem of God's providential
   care. The eagle fears no bird from above to hurt her young, only the
   arrow from beneath. Therefore she carries them upon her wings that the
   arrow must first hit her before it can come at her young ones. Thus God
   carries his children upon the wings of providence, and they are such
   that there is no clipping these wings, nor can any arrow hurt them.

   (ii) God shields off spiritual evils from his children. There shall no
   evil befall thee' (Psalm 91:10). God does not say no afflictions shall
   befall us, but no evil.

   But some may say, that sometimes evil in this sense befalls the godly.
   They spot themselves with sin. I answer:

   But that evil shall not be mortal. As quicksilver is in itself
   dangerous, but by ointments it is so tempered that it is killed, so sin
   is in itself deadly but being tempered with repentance and mixed with
   the sacred ointment of Christ's blood, the venomous damning nature of
   it is taken away.

   6 If we are children then God will reveal to us the great and wonderful
   things of his law. I thank thee, O Father, Lord of heaven and earth,
   because thou hast hid these things from the wise and prudent and hast
   revealed them unto babes' (Matthew 11:25). A father will teach his
   children. The child goes to his father, saying, Father, teach me my
   lesson'. So David goes to God: Teach me to do thy will, for thou art my
   God' (Psalm 143:10). The Lord glories in this title, I am the Lord thy
   God which teacheth thee to profit' (Isaiah 48:17). God's children have
   that anointing which teaches them all things necessary to salvation.
   They see those mysteries which are veiled over to carnal eyes, as
   Elisha saw those horses and chariots of fire which his servant did not
   see (2 Kings 6:17). The adopted see their own sins, Satan's snares, and
   Christ's beauty which they whom the god of the world has blinded cannot
   discern. Whence was it that David understood more than the ancients
   (Psalm 119:100)? He had a Father to teach him. God was his instructor.
   O God, thou hast taught me from my youth' (Psalm 71:17). Many a child
   of God complains of ignorance and dullness. Remember this -- your
   Father will be your tutor. He has promised to give his Spirit to lead
   thee into all truth' (John 16:13). And God not only informs the
   understanding, but inclines the will. He not only teaches us what we
   should do but enables us to do it. I will cause you to walk in my
   statutes' (Ezekiel 36:27). What a glorious privilege is this, to have
   the star of the Word pointing us to Christ, and the loadstone of the
   Spirit drawing!

   7 If we are children this gives us boldness in prayer. The child goes
   with confidence to his father, and he cannot find in his heart to deny
   him: How much more shall your heavenly Father give his Holy Spirit to
   them that ask him!' (Luke 11:13). All the father has is for his child.
   If he comes for money, who is it for but his child? If you come to God
   for pardon, for brokenness of heart, God cannot deny his child. Whom
   does he keep his mercies in store for, but his children?

   And that which may give God's children holy boldness in prayer is this;
   when they consider God not only in the relation of a father, but as
   having the disposition of a father. Some parents are of a morose,
   rugged nature, but God is the Father of mercies' (2 Corinthians 1:3).
   He begets all the bowels in the world. In prayer we should look upon
   God under this notion, a Father of mercy', sitting upon a throne of
   grace'. We should run to this heavenly Father in all conditions.

   In our sins, as that sick child who 'said unto his father, my head, my
   head!' (2 Kings 4:19). As soon as he found himself not well, he ran to
   his father to succour him. So in case of sin, run to God: My heart, my
   heart! O this dead heart, Father, quicken it; this hard heart, Father,
   soften it; Father, my heart, my heart!'

   In our temptations: A child, when another strikes him, runs to his
   father and complains. So when the devil strikes us by his temptations,
   let us run to our Father: Father, Satan assaults and hurls in his fiery
   darts. He would not only wound my peace, but thy glory. Father, take
   off the tempter. It is your child that is worried by this "red dragon".
   Father, will you not "bruise Satan" under my feet?' What a sweet
   privilege is this! When any burden lies upon our spirits, we may go to
   our Father and unload all our cares and griefs into his bosom!

   8 If we are children, then we are in a state of freedom. Claudius
   Lysias valued his freedom of Rome at an high rate (Acts 22:20). A state
   of son-ship is a state of freedom. This is not to be understood in an
   Antinomian sense, that the children of God are freed from the rule of
   the moral law. This is such a freedom as rebels take. Was it ever heard
   that a child should be freed from duty to his parents? But the freedom
   which God's children have is an holy freedom. They are freed from the
   law of sin' (Romans 8:2).

   It is the sad misery of an unregenerate person that he is in a state of
   vassalage. He is under the tyranny of sin. Justin Martyr used to say,
   It is the greatest slavery in the world for a man to be subject to his
   own passions. A wicked man is as very a slave as he that works in the
   galley. Look into his heart and there are legions of lusts ruling him.
   He must do what sin will have him. A slave is at the service of an
   usurping tyrant. If he bid him dig in the mine, hew in the quarries,
   tug at the oar, he must do it. Thus every wicked man must do what
   corrupt nature inspired by the devil bids him. If sin bids him be
   drunk, be unchaste, he is at the command of sin, as the ass is at the
   command of the driver. Sin first enslaves and then damns.

   But the children of God, though they are not free from the in-being of
   sin, yet they are freed from the law of sin. All sin's commands are
   like laws repealed which are not in force. Though sin live in a child
   of God it does not reign. Sin shall not have dominion over you' (Romans
   6:14). Sin does not have a coercive power over a child of God. There is
   a principle of grace in his heart which gives check to corruption. This
   is a believer's comfort though sin be not removed, yet it is subdued;
   and though he cannot keep sin out, yet he keeps sin under. The saints
   of God are said to crucify the flesh' (Galatians 5:24). Crucifying was
   a lingering death. First one member died, then another.

   Every child of God crucifies sin. Some limb of the old man is ever and
   anon dropping off. Though sin does not die perfectly, it dies daily.
   This is the blessed freedom of God's children, they are freed from the
   law of sin. They are led by the Spirit of God (Romans 8:14). This
   Spirit makes them free and cheerful in obedience. Where the Spirit of
   the Lord is, there is liberty' (2 Corinthians 3:17).

   9 If we are children then we are heirs apparent to all the promises.
   The promises are called precious (2 Peter 2:4). The promises are a
   cabinet of jewels. They are breasts full of the milk of the gospel. The
   promises are enriched with variety and are suited to a Christian's
   present condition. Does he want pardoning grace? There is a promise
   carries forgiveness in it (Jeremiah 31:34). Does he want sanctifying
   grace? There is a promise of healing (Hosea 14:4). Does he want
   corroborating grace? There is a promise of strength (Isaiah 41:10). And
   these promises are the children's bread. The saints are called heirs of
   the promise' (Hebrews 6:17). There is Christ and heaven in a promise;
   and there is never a promise in the Bible but an adopted person may lay
   a legal claim to it and say, This is mine.' The natural man who remains
   still in the old family has nothing to do with these promises. He may
   read over the promises (as one may read over another man's will or
   inventory) but has no right to them. The promises are like a garden of
   flowers, paled in and enclosed, which no stranger may gather, only the
   children of the family. Ishmael was the son of the bond-woman. He had
   no right to the family. Cast out the bond-woman and her son,' as Sarah
   once said to Abraham (Genesis 21:10). So the unbeliever is not adopted,
   he is none of the household, and God will say at the day of judgement,
   Cast out this son of the bond-woman into utter darkness', where is
   weeping and gnashing of teeth.

   10 If we are children, then we shall have our Father's blessing. They
   are the seed which the Lord has blessed' (Isaiah 61:9). We read that
   Isaac blessed his son Jacob: God give thee of the dew of heaven'
   (Genesis 27:28), which was not only a prayer for Jacob, but (as Luther
   says) a prophecy of that happiness and blessing which should come upon
   him and his posterity. Thus every adopted child has his heavenly
   Father's benediction. There is a special blessing distilled into all
   that he possesses. The Lord will bless his people with peace' (Exodus
   23:25; Psalm 29:11). He will not only give them peace, but they shall
   have it with a blessing. The wicked have the things they enjoy with
   God's leave, but the adopted have them with God's love. The wicked have
   them by providence; the saints by promise. Isaac had but one blessing
   to bestow. Hast thou but one blessing, my father?' (Genesis 27:38). But
   God has more blessings than one for his children. He blesses them in
   their souls, bodies, names, estate, posterity. He blesses them with the
   upper springs and the nether springs. He multiplies to bless them and
   his blessing cannot be reversed. As Isaac said concerning Jacob, I have
   blessed him, yea and he shall be blessed' (Genesis 27:33), so God
   blesses his children and they shall be blessed.

   11 If we are children, then all things that fall out shall turn to our
   good. All things work together for good to them that love God' (Romans
   8:28): good things; evil things.

   (i) Good things work for good to God's children. Mercies shall do them
   good. The mercies of God shall soften them. David's heart was overcome
   with God's mercy. Who am I, and what is my house . . .?' (2 Samuel
   7:18). I who was of a mean family, I who held the shepherd's staff,
   that now I should hold the royal sceptre! Nay, thou hast spoken of thy
   servant's house for a great while to come. Thou hast made a promise
   that my children shall sit upon the throne; yea, that the blessed
   Messiah shall come of my line and race. And is this the manner of man,
   O Lord God! As if he had said, Do men show such kindness undeserved?
   See how this good man's heart was dissolved and softened by mercy! The
   flint is soonest broken upon a soft pillow.

   Mercies make the children of God more fruitful. The ground bears the
   better crop for the cost that is laid upon it. God gives his children
   health and they spend and are spent for Christ. He gives them estates
   and they honour the Lord with their substance. The backs and bellies of
   the poor are the field where they sow the precious seed of their
   charity. A child of God makes his estate a golden clasp to bind his
   heart faster to God, a footstool to raise him up higher towards heaven.

   Ordinances shall work for good to God's children. The word preached
   shall do them good; it is a savour of life; it is a lamp to the feet
   and a laver to their hearts. The word preached is a means of health, a
   chariot of salvation. It is an engrafting and a transforming word; it
   is a word with unction, anointing their eyes to see that light. The
   preaching of the Word is that lattice where Christ looks forth and
   shows himself to his saints. This golden pipe of the sanctuary conveys
   the water of life. To the wicked the word preached works for evil; even
   the word of life becomes a savour of death. The same cause may have
   divers, nay, contrary effects. The sun dissolves the ice but hardens
   the clay. To the unregenerate and profane, the Word is not humbling but
   hardening. Jesus Christ, the best of preachers, was to some a rock of
   offence. The Jews sucked death from his sweet lips. It is sad that the
   breast should kill any. The wicked suck poison from that breast of
   ordinances where the children of God suck milk and are nourished unto
   salvation.

   The sacrament works for good to the children of God. In the Word
   preached the saints hear Christ's voice; in the sacrament they have his
   kiss. The Lord's Supper is to the saints a feast of fat things'. It is
   an healing and a sealing ordinance. In this charger, or rather chalice,
   a bleeding Saviour is brought in to revive drooping spirits. The
   sacrament has glorious effects in the hearts of God's children. It
   quickens their affections, strengthens their faith, mortifies their
   sin, revives their hopes, increases their joy. It gives a prelibation
   and foretaste of heaven.

   (ii) Evil things work for good to God's children. Unto the upright
   ariseth light in the darkness' (Psalm 112:4).

   Poverty works for good to God's children. It starves their lusts. It
   increases their graces. Poor in the world, rich in faith' (James 2:5).
   Poverty tends to prayer. When God has clipped his children's wings by
   poverty, they fly swiftest to the throne of grace.

   Sickness works for their good. It shall bring the body of death into a
   consumption. Though our outward man perish, yet the inward man is
   renewed day by day' (2 Corinthians 4:16). Like those two laurels at
   Rome, when the one withered the other flourished.' When the body
   withers the soul of a Christian flourishes. How often have we seen a
   lively faith in a languishing body! Hezekiah was better on his sick bed
   than upon his throne. When he was upon his sickbed he humbles himself
   and weeps. When he was on his throne he grew proud (Isaiah 39:2). God's
   children recover by sickness. In this sense, out of weakness they are
   made strong' (Hebrews 11:34).

   Reproach works for good to God's children; it increases their grace and
   their glory.

   Disgrace increases their grace. The husband-man by dunging his ground
   makes the soil more rich and fertile. God lets the wicked dung his
   people with reproaches and calumnies, that their hearts may be a richer
   soil for grace to grow in.

   Reproach increases their glory. He that unjustly takes from a saint's
   credit shall add to his crown. The sun shines brighter after an
   eclipse. The more a child of God is eclipsed by reproaches the brighter
   he shall shine in the kingdom of heaven.

   Persecution to God's children works for good. The godly may be compared
   to that plant which Gregory Nazianzen speaks of. It lives by dying and
   grows by cutting. The zeal and love of the saints is blown up by
   sufferings. Their joy flourishes. Tertullian says the primitive
   Christians rejoiced more in their persecutions than in their
   deliverances.

   Death works for good to the children of God. It is like the whirlwind
   to the prophet Elijah, which blew off his mantle, but carried him up to
   heaven. So death to a child of God is like a boisterous whirlwind which
   blows off the mantle of his flesh (for the body is but the mantle the
   soul is wrapped in), but it carries up the soul to God. This is the
   glorious privilege of the sons of God. Everything that falls out shall
   do them good. The children of God, when they come to heaven (as
   Chrysostom speaks), shall bless God for all cross providences.

   12 And lastly, if we are children we shall never finally perish (John
   5:24; 10:28). Those who are adopted are out of the power of damnation.
   There is no condemnation to them that are in Christ' (Romans 8:1). Will
   a father condemn his own son? God will never disinherit any of his
   children. Fathers may disinherit for some fault. Reuben for incest lost
   the prerogative of his birthright (Genesis 49:4). What is the reason
   parents disinherit their children? Surely this, because they can make
   them no better. They cannot make them fit for the inheritance. But when
   we are bad our heavenly Father knows how to make us better. He can make
   us fit to inherit. Giving thanks to the Father who hath made us meet
   for the inheritance' (Colossians 1:12). Therefore it being in his power
   to make us better and to work in us an idoneity and meetness for the
   inheritance, certainly he will never finally disinherit.

   Because this is so sweet a privilege, and the life of a Christian's
   comfort lies in it, therefore I shall clear it by arguments that the
   children of God cannot finally perish. The entail of hell and damnation
   is cut off. Not but that the best of God's children have that guilt
   which deserves hell, but Christ is the friend at court which has begged
   their pardon. Therefore the damning power of sin is taken away, which I
   prove thus:

   The children of God cannot finally perish, because God's justice is
   satisfied for their sins. The blood of Christ is the price paid not
   only meritoriously, but efficaciously for all them that believe. This
   being the blood of God' (Acts 20:28), justice is fully satisfied and
   does not meddle to condemn those for whom this blood was shed and to
   whom it is applied. Jesus Christ was a sponsor. He stood bound for
   every child of God as a surety. He said to justice, Have patience with
   them and I will pay thee all', so that the believer cannot be liable to
   wrath. God will not require the debt twice, both of the surety and the
   debtor (Romans 3:24, 26). God is not only merciful in pardoning his
   children, but righteous, He is just to forgive' (1 John 1:9). It is an
   act of God's equity and justice to spare the sinner when he has been
   satisfied in the surety.

   A damnatory sentence cannot pass upon the children of God, because they
   are so God's children, as withal they are Christ's spouse (Canticles
   4:11). There is a marriage union between Christ and the saints. Every
   child of God is a part of Christ. He is Christ mystical'. Now, shall a
   member of Christ perish? A child of God cannot perish but Christ must
   perish. Jesus Christ who is the Husband, is the Judge, and will he
   condemn his own spouse?

   Every child of God is transformed into the likeness of Christ. He has
   the same Spirit, the same judgement, the same will. He is a lively
   picture of Christ. As Christ bears the saints' names upon his breast,
   so they bear his image upon their hearts (Galatians 4:19). Will Christ
   suffer his own image to be destroyed? Theodosius counted them traitors
   who defaced his image. Christ will not let his image in believers be
   defaced and rent. He will not endure to see his own picture take fire.
   The sea has not only stinking carrion, but jewels thrown into it, but
   none of God's jewels shall ever be thrown into the dread sea of hell.

   If God's children could be capable of final perishing then pardon of
   sin were no privilege. The Scripture says, Blessed is he whose
   transgression is forgiven' (Psalm 32:1). But what blessedness were
   there in having sin forgiven, if afterwards a final and damnatory
   sentence should pass upon the heirs of promise? What were a man the
   better for the king's pardon if he were condemned after he were
   pardoned?

   If the children of God should be finally disinherited then the
   Scripture could not be fulfilled which tells us of glorious rewards.
   Verily there is a reward for the righteous' (Psalm 58:11). God sweetens
   his commands with promises. He ties duty and reward together. As in the
   body the veins carry the blood and the arteries carry the spirits, so
   one part of the Word carries duty in it, and another part of the Word
   carries reward. Now if the adopted of God should eternally miscarry,
   what reward were there for the righteous? And Moses did indiscreetly in
   looking to the recompense of the reward' (Hebrews 11:26). And so by
   consequence there would be a door opened to despair.

   By all which it appears that the children of God cannot be disinherited
   or reprobated. If they should lose happiness Christ should lose his
   purchase and should die in vain.

   Thus we have seen the glorious privileges of the children of God. What
   an encouragement is here to religion! How may this tempt men to turn
   godly! Can the world vie with a child of God? Can the world give such
   privileges as these? As Saul said, Will the son of Jesse give everyone
   of you fields and vineyards, and make you all captains of thousands?'
   (1 Samuel 22:7). Can the world do that for you which God does for his
   children? Can it give you pardon of sin or eternal life? Are not the
   gleanings of Ephraim better than the vintage of Abiezer?' (Judges 8:2).
   Is not godliness gain? What is there in sin that men should love it?
   The work of sin is drudgery and the wages death. They who see more in
   sin than in the privileges of adoption, let them go on and have their
   ears bored to the devil's service
     __________________________________________________________________

20. Exhortations to Christians as they are children of God

   1 There is a bill of indictment against those who declare to the world
   they are not the children of God: all profane persons. These have
   damnation written upon their forehead.

   Scoffers at religion. It were blasphemy to call these the children of
   God. Will a true child jeer at his Father's picture?

   Drunkards, who drown reason and stupefy conscience. These declare their
   sin as Sodom. They are children indeed, but cursed children' (2 Peter
   2:14).

   2 Exhortation, which consists of two branches.

   (i) Let us prove ourselves to be the children of God.

   (ii) Let us carry ourselves as the children of God.

   (i) Let us prove ourselves to be the children of God. There are many
   false and unscriptural evidences.

   Says one, The gravest divines in the country think me to be godly, and
   can they be mistaken? Are the seers blind?

   Others can but see the outward carriage and deportment. If that be
   fair, they may by the rule of charity judge well of thee. But what say
   God and conscience? Are these your compurgators? Are you a saint in
   God's calendar? It is a poor thing to have an applauding world and an
   accusing conscience.

   Oh but, says another, I hope I am a child of God; I love my heavenly
   Father.

   Why do you love God? Perhaps because God gives you corn and wine. This
   is a mercenary love, a love to yourself more than to God. You may lead
   a sheep all the field over with a bottle of hay in your hand, but throw
   away the hay, now the sheep will follow you no longer. So the
   squint-eyed hypocrite loves God only for the provender. When this
   fails, his affection fails too.

   But leaving these vain and false evidences of adoption, let us enquire
   for a sound evidence. The main evidence of adoption is sanctification.
   Search, O Christian, whether the work of sanctification has passed upon
   your soul! Is your understanding sanctified to discern the things which
   are excellent? Is your will sanctified to embrace heavenly objects? Do
   you love where God loves and hate where God hates? Are you a
   consecrated person? This argues the heart of a child. God will never
   reject those who have his image and superscription upon them.

   (ii) Let us carry ourselves as becomes the children of God, and let us
   deport ourselves as the children of the High God.

   In obedience: As obedient children' (1 Peter 1:14). If a stranger bid a
   child to do a thing, he regards him not. But if his father command, he
   presently obeys. Obey God out of love, obey him readily, obey every
   command. If he bid you part with your bosom-sin, leave and loathe it. I
   set before the sons of the house of the Rechabites pots full of wine,
   and cups, and I said unto them, Drink ye wine; but they said, we will
   drink no wine, for Jonadab, the son of Rechab our father, commanded us
   saying, Ye shall drink no wine, neither ye nor your sons for ever'
   (Jeremiah 35:5, 6). Thus when Satan and your own heart would be
   tempting you to a sin and set cups of wine before you, refuse to drink.
   Say, My heavenly Father has commanded me not to drink'. Hypocrites will
   obey God in some things which are consistent either with their credit
   or profit, but in other things they desire to be excused. Like Esau who
   obeyed his father in bringing him venison, because probably he liked
   the sport of hunting, but refused to obey him in a business of greater
   importance, namely, in the choice of his wife.

   Let us carry ourselves as God's children in humility. Be ye clothed
   with humility' (1 Peter 5:5). It is a becoming garment. Let a child of
   God look at his face every morning in the glass of God's Word and see
   his sinful spots. This will make him walk humbly all the day after. God
   cannot endure to see his children grow proud. He suffers them to fall
   into sin, as he did Peter, that their plumes may fall, and that they
   may learn to go on lower ground.

   Let us walk as the children of God in sobriety. But let us who are of
   the day be sober' (1 Thessalonians 5:8). God's children must not do as
   others. They must be sober.

   In their speeches; not rash, not unseemly. Let your speech be seasoned
   with salt' (Colossians 4:6). Grace must be the salt which seasons our
   words and makes them savoury. Our words must be solid and weighty, not
   feathery. God's children must speak the language of Canaan. Many
   pretend to be God's children, but their speech betrays them. Their lips
   do not drop as an honeycomb, but are like the sink, where all the filth
   of the house is carried out.

   The children of God must be sober in their opinions; hold nothing but
   what a sober man would hold. Error, as Saint Basil says, is a spiritual
   intoxication, a kind of frenzy. If Christ were upon the earth again, he
   might have patients enough. There are abundance of spiritual lunatics
   among us which need healing.

   The children of God must be sober in their attire. Whose adorning, let
   it not be that outward adorning of plaiting the hair and of wearing of
   gold . . . but let it be the hidden man of the heart' (1 Peter 3:3).
   God's children must not be conformed to the world (Romans 12:2). It is
   not for God's children to do as others, taking up every fashion. What
   is a naked breast but a glass in which you may see a vain heart? What
   is spotting of faces, but learning the black art? God may turn these
   black spots into blue. Walk soberly.

   Let us carry ourselves as the children of God in sedulity. We must be
   diligent in our calling. Religion does not seal warrants to idleness.
   It was Jerome's advice to his friend to be always well employed. Six
   days shalt thou labour'. God sets all his children to work. They must
   not be like the lilies which toil not, neither do they spin'. Heaven
   indeed is a place of rest. They rest from their labours' (Revelation
   14:13). There the saints shall lay aside all their working tools, and
   take the harp and viol, but while we are here, we must labour in a
   calling. God will bless our diligence, not our laziness.

   Let us carry ourselves as the children of God in magnanimity and
   heroicalness. The saints are highborn. They are of the true
   blood-royal, born of God. They must do nothing sneakingly or sordidly.
   They must not fear the faces of men. As said that brave-spirited
   Nehemiah, Shall such a man as I flee?' (Nehemiah 6:11) so should a
   child of God say, Shall I be afraid to do my duty? Shall I unworthily
   comply and prostitute myself to the lusts and humours of men? The
   children of the most High should do nothing to stain or dishonour their
   noble birth. A king's son scorns to do anything that is below him.

   Let us carry ourselves as the children of God in sanctity (1 Peter
   1:16). Holiness is the diadem of beauty. In this let us imitate our
   heavenly Father. A debauched child is a disgrace to his father. There
   is nothing more casts a reflection on our heavenly Father than the
   irregular actings of such as profess themselves his children. What will
   others say? Are these the children of the Most High? Is God their
   Father? The Name of God is blasphemed through you Gentiles' (Romans
   2:24). Oh let us do nothing unworthy of our heavenly Father.

   Let us carry ourselves as the children of God in cheerfulness. It was
   the speech of Jonadab to Amnon, Why art thou, being the king's son,
   lean?' (2 Samuel 13:4). Why do the children of God walk so pensively?
   Are they not heirs of heaven'? Perhaps they may meet with hard usage in
   the world, but let them remember they are the seed-royal, and are of
   the family of God. Suppose a man were in a strange land, and should
   meet there with unkind usage, yet he rejoices that he is son and heir,
   and has a great estate in his own country; so should the children of
   God comfort themselves with this, though they are now in a strange
   country, yet they have a title to the Jerusalem above, and though sin
   at present hangs about them (for they still have some relics of their
   disease) yet shortly they shall get rid of it. At death they shall
   shake off this viper.

   And lastly, let us carry ourselves as the children of God in holy
   longings and expectations. Children are always longing to be at home.
   We groan earnestly . . .' (2 Corinthians 5:2). There is bread enough in
   our Father's house. How should we long for home! Death carries a child
   of God to his Father's house. Saint Paul therefore desired to be
   dissolved. It is comfortable dying when by faith we can resign up our
   souls into our Father's hands. Father, into thy hands I commend my
   spirit' (Luke 23:46).
     __________________________________________________________________

21. Concerning persecution

   Blessed are they which are persecuted for righteousness' sake for
   theirs is the kingdom of heaven.

   Matthew 5:10

   We are now come to the last beatitude: Blessed are they which are
   persecuted . . '. Our Lord Christ would have us reckon the cost. Which
   of you intending to build a tower sitteth not down first and counteth
   the cost, whether he have enough to finish it?' (Luke 14:28). Religion
   will cost us the tears of repentance and the blood of persecution. But
   we see here a great encouragement that may keep us from fainting in the
   day of adversity. For the present, blessed; for the future, crowned.

   The words fall into two general parts.

   1 The condition of the godly in this life: They are persecuted'.

   2 Their reward after this life: Theirs is the kingdom of heaven'.

   I shall speak chiefly of the first, and wind in the other in the
   applicatory. The observation is that true godliness is usually attended
   with persecution. We must through much tribulation enter into the
   kingdom of God' (Acts 14:22). The Jews stirred up the chief men of the
   city and raised persecution against Paul . . .' (Acts 13:50). Luther
   makes it the very definition of a Christian, Christianus quasi
   crucianus.' Though Christ died to take away the curse from us, yet not
   to take away the cross from us. Those stones which are cut out for a
   building are first under the saw and hammer to be hewed and squared.
   The godly are called living stones' (1 Peter 2:5). And they must be
   hewn and polished by the persecutor's hand that they may be fit for the
   heavenly building. The saints have no charter of exemption from trials.
   Though they be never so meek, merciful, pure in heart, their piety will
   not shield them from sufferings. They must hang their harp on the
   willows and take the cross. The way to heaven is by way of thorns and
   blood. Though it be full of roses in regard of the comforts of the Holy
   Ghost, yet it is full of thorns in regard of persecutions. Before
   Israel got to Canaan, a land flowing with milk and honey, they must go
   through a wilderness of serpents and a Red Sea. So the children of God
   in their passage to the holy land must meet with fiery serpents and a
   red sea of persecution. It is a saying of Ambrose, There is no Abel but
   has his Cain.' St Paul fought with beasts at Ephesus (1 Corinthians
   15:32). Set it down as a maxim, if you will follow Christ, you must see
   the swords and staves. Put the cross in your creed. For the
   amplification of this, there are several things we are to take
   cognisance of.

   1 What is meant by persecution. 2 The several kinds of persecution. 3
   Why there must be persecution. 4 The chief persecutions are raised
   against the ministers of Christ. 5 What that persecution is which makes
   a man blessed.

   What is meant by persecution? The Greek word to persecute', signifies
   to vex and molest', sometimes to prosecute another', to arraign him at
   the bar', and to pursue him to the death'. A persecutor is a pricking
   briar' (Ezekiel 28:24); therefore the church is described to be a lily
   among thorns' (Canticles 2:2).

   What are the several kinds of persecution? There is a twofold
   persecution; a persecution of the hand; a persecution of the tongue.

   1 A persecution of the hand. Which of the prophets have not your
   fathers persecuted?' (Acts 7:52). For thy sake we are killed all the
   day long' (Romans 8:36; Galatians 4:29). This I call a bloody
   persecution, when the people of God are persecuted with fire and sword.
   So we read of the ten persecutions in the time of Nero, Domitian,
   Trajan etc.; and of the Marian persecution. England for five years
   drank a cup of blood and lately Piedmont and the confines of Bohemia
   have been scourged to death with the rod of the persecutor. God's
   Church has always, like Abraham's ram, been tied in a bush of thorns.

   2 The persecution of the tongue, which is twofold.

   (i) Reviling. This few think of or lay to heart, but it is called in
   the text, persecution. When men shall revile you and persecute you'.
   This is tongue persecution. His words were drawn swords' (Psalm 55:21).
   You may kill a man as well in his name as in his person. A good name is
   as precious ointment' (Ecclesiastes 7:1). A good conscience and a good
   name is like a gold ring set with a rich diamond. Now to smite another
   by his name is by our Saviour called persecution. Thus the primitive
   Christians endured the persecution of the tongue. They had trial of
   cruel mockings' (Hebrews 2:36). David was the song of the drunkards'
   (Psalm 69:12). They would sit on their ale-bench and jeer at him. How
   frequently do the wicked cast out the squibs of reproach at God's
   children: These are the holy ones!' Little do they think what they do.
   They are now doing Cain's work and Julian's. They are persecuting.

   (ii) Slandering. So it is in the text: When they shall persecute you
   and say all manner of evil against you falsely'. Slandering is tongue
   persecution. Thus Saint Paul was slandered in his doctrine. Report had
   it that he preached, Men might do evil that good might come of it'
   (Romans 3:8). Thus Christ who cast out devils was charged to have a
   devil (John 8:48). The primitive Christians were falsely accused for
   killing their children and for incest. They laid to my charge things
   that I knew not' (Psalm 35:11)

   Let us take heed of becoming persecutors. Some think there is no
   persecution but fire and sword. Yes, there is persecution of the
   tongue. There are many of these persecutors nowadays who by a devilish
   chemistry can turn gold into dung, the precious names of God's saints
   into reproach and disgrace. There have been many punished for clipping
   of coin. Of how much sorer punishment shall they be thought worthy, who
   clip the names of God's people to make them weigh lighter!

   Why there must be persecution. I answer for two reasons.

   1 In regard of God: his decree and his design.

   God's Decree: We are appointed "hereunto' (1 Thessalonians 3:3).
   Whoever brings the suffering, God sends it. God bade Shimei curse.
   Shimei's tongue was the arrow, but it was God that shot it.

   God's Design. God has a twofold design in the persecutions of his
   children.

   (i) Trials. Many shall be tried' (Daniel 12:10). Persecution is the
   touchstone of sincerity. It discovers true saints from hypocrites.
   Unsound hearts pretend fair in prosperity, but in time of persecution
   fall away (Matthew 13:20, 21). Hypocrites cannot sail in stormy
   weather. They will follow Christ to Mount Olivet, but not to Mount
   Calvary. Like green timber they shrink in the scorching sun of
   persecution. If trouble arises, hypocrites will rather make Demas their
   choice than Moses their choice. They will prefer thirty pieces of
   silver before Christ. God will have persecutions in the world to make a
   discovery of men. Suffering times are sifting times. When I am tried I
   shall come forth as gold' (Job 23:10). Job had a furnace-faith. A
   Christian of right breed (who is born of God), whatever he loses, will
   hold fast his integrity' (Job 2:3). Christ's true disciples will follow
   him upon the water.

   (ii) Purity. God lets his children be in the furnace that they may be
   partakers of his holiness' (Hebrews 12:10). The cross is physic. It
   purges out pride, impatience, love of the world. God washes his people
   in bloody waters to get out their spots and make them look white
   (Daniel 12:10). I am black, but comely' (Canticles 1:5). The torrid
   zone of persecution made the spouse's skin black, but her soul fair.
   See how differently afflictions work upon the wicked and godly. They
   make the one worse, the other better. Take a cloth that is rotten. If
   you scour and rub it, it frets and tears; but if you scour a piece of
   plate, it looks brighter. When afflictions are upon the wicked, they
   fret against God and tear themselves in impatience, but when the godly
   are scoured by these, they look brighter.

   There will be persecutions in regard of the enemies of the church.
   These vultures prey upon God's turtles. The church has two sorts of
   enemies.

   Open enemies. The wicked hate the godly. There is enmity between the
   seed of the woman and the seed of the serpent' (Genesis 3:15). As in
   nature there is an antipathy between the vine and the bay-tree, the
   elephant and the dragon; and as vultures have an antipathy against
   sweet smells; so in the wicked there is an antipathy against the people
   of God. They hate the sweet perfumes of their graces. It is true the
   saints have their infirmities, but the wicked do not hate them for
   these, but for their holiness, and from this hatred arises open
   violence. The thief hates the light, therefore would blow it out.

   Secret enemies, who pretend friendship but secretly raise persecutions
   against the godly. Such are hypocrites and heretics. Saint Paul calls
   them false brethren' (2 Corinthians 11:26). The church complains that
   her own sons had vexed her (Canticles 1:6). That is, those who had been
   bred up in her bosom and pretended religion and sympathy, these false
   friends vexed her. The church's enemies are them of her own house'.
   Such as are open pretenders but secret opposers of the faith are ever
   worst. A wen seems to be a part of the body, but is indeed an enemy to
   it. It disfigures and endangers it. They are the vilest and basest of
   men who hang forth Christ's colours, yet fight against him.

   The fourth particular is that the chief persecutions are raised against
   the ministers. Our Lord Christ turns himself directly to the apostles
   whom he was ready to commission and send abroad to preach: Blessed are
   ye when men shall persecute you' (verse 11). So persecuted they the
   prophets before you' (verse 12). Take, my brethren, the prophets for an
   example of suffering affliction' (James 5:10). No sooner is any man a
   minister, but he is a piece of a martyr. The ministers of Christ are
   his chosen vessels. Now as the best vessel of gold and silver passes
   through the fire, so God's chosen vessels pass often through the fire
   of persecution. All times are not like the silver age wherein
   Constantine lived. He was an honourer of the ministry. He would not sit
   down in the Council of Nicaea till the bishops who were convened there
   came and besought him. He would say, if he saw an infirmity in the
   clergy, that his royal purple would cover it. Ministers must not always
   look for such shines of the prince's favour. They must expect an
   alarum. Peter, a famous preacher, knew how to cast the net on the right
   side of the ship', and at one sermon he converted three thousand souls.
   Yet neither the divinity of his doctrine nor the sanctity of his life
   could exempt him from persecution. When thou shalt be old, another
   shall gird thee, and carry thee whither thou wouldest not'. It alludes
   to his suffering death for Christ. He was (says Eusebius) bound with
   chains and afterwards crucified at Jerusalem with his head downwards.
   Saint Paul, a holy man, who is steeled with courage, and fired with
   zeal, as soon as he entered into the ministry bonds and persecutions
   did abide him' (Acts 9:16; 20:23). He was made up of sufferings. I am
   ready to be offered up' (2 Timothy 4:6). He alludes to the drink
   offerings wherein the wine or blood used in sacrifice was poured out,
   thereby intimating by what manner of death he should glorify God; not
   by being sacrificed in the fire, but by pouring out his blood, which
   was when he was beheaded. And that it might seem no strange thing for
   God's ministers to be under the heat and rage of persecution, Stephen
   puts the question, Which of the prophets have not your fathers
   persecuted?' (Acts 7:52). Ignatius was torn with wild beasts. Cyprian,
   Polycarp martyred. Maximus, the emperor (as Eusebius relates), gave
   charge to his officers to put none to death but the governors and
   pastors of the Church.

   The reasons why the storm of persecution has chiefly fallen upon the
   ministers are:

   1 They have their corruptions as well as others, and lest they should
   be lifted up through the abundance of revelation', God lets loose some
   messenger of Satan' to vex and persecute them. God sees they have need
   of the flail to thresh off their husks. The fire God puts them into is
   not to consume but to refine them.

   2 The ministers are Christ's ensign-bearers to carry his colours. They
   are the captains of the Lord's host, therefore they are the most shot
   at. I am set for the defence of the gospel' (Philippians 1:17). The
   Greek word here used alludes to a soldier that is set in the forefront
   of the battle and has all the missiles flying about his ears. The
   minister's work is to preach against men's sins which are as dear to
   them as their right eye, and they cannot endure this. Every man's sin
   is his king to which he yields love and subjection. Now as Pilate said,
   Shall I crucify your king?' Men will not endure to have their king-sin
   crucified. This then being the work of the ministry, to divide between
   men and their lusts, to part these two old friends, no wonder it meets
   with so much opposition. When Paul preached against Diana, all the city
   was in an uproar. We preach against men's Dianas, those sins which
   bring them in pleasure and profit. This causes an uproar.

   3 From the malice of Satan. The ministers of Christ come to destroy his
   kingdom, therefore the old serpent will spit all his venom at them. If
   we tread upon the devil's head, he will bite us by the heel. The devil
   sets up several forts and garrisons in men's hearts -- pride,
   ignorance, unbelief. Now the weapons of the ministry beat down these
   strongholds (2 Corinthians 10:4). Therefore Satan raises his militia,
   all the force and power of hell against the ministry. The kingdom of
   Satan is a kingdom of darkness' (Acts 26:18; Revelation 16:10), and
   God's ministers are called the light of the world' (Matthew 5:14). They
   come to enlighten those that sit in darkness. This enrages Satan.
   Therefore he labours to eclipse the lights, to pull down the stars,
   that his kingdom of darkness may prevail. The devil is called a lion (1
   Peter 5:8). The souls of people are the lion's prey. The ministers'
   work is to take away this prey from this lion. Therefore how will he
   roar upon them, and seek to destroy them!

   (i) It shows us what a work the ministry is; though full of dignity,
   yet full of danger. The persecution of the tongue is the most gentle
   persecution can be expected. It is not possible (says Luther) to be a
   faithful preacher and not to meet with trials and oppositions.

   (ii) It shows the corruption of men's nature since the fall. They are
   their own enemies. They persecute those who come to do them most good.
   What is the work of the ministry but to save men's souls? to pull them
   as brands out of the fire'. Yet they are angry at this. We do not hate
   the physician who brings such physic as makes us sick, because it is to
   make us well; nor the surgeon who lances the flesh, because it is in
   order to a cure. Why then should we quarrel with the minister? What is
   our work but to bring men to heaven? We are ambassadors for Christ
   . . .' (2 Corinthians 5:20). We would have a peace made up between you
   and God; yet this is the folly of depraved nature, to requite evil for
   good. Aristoxenus used to moisten his flowers with wine, honey, and
   perfumes that they might not only smell more fragrantly but put forth
   more vigorously. So should we do with our ministers. Give them wine and
   honey. Encourage them in their work that they might act more
   vigorously. But instead of this we give them gall and vinegar to drink.
   We hate and persecute them. Most deal with their ministers as Israel
   did with Moses. He prayed for them and wrought miracles for them, yet
   they were continually quarrelling with him and sometimes ready to take
   away his life.

   (iii) If the fury of the world be against the ministers, then you that
   fear God had need pray much for them. Pray for us, that the Word of the
   Lord may have free course, and that we may be delivered from
   unreasonable and wicked men.' (2 Thessalonians 3:1, 2). People should
   pray for their ministers that God would give them the wisdom of the
   serpent', that they may not betray themselves to danger by
   indiscretion; and the boldness of the lion, that they may not betray
   the truth by fear.

   The next thing to be explained is what that suffering persecution is
   which makes a man blessed.

   1 I shall show what that suffering is which will not make us blessed.

   (i) That suffering is not reckoned for martyrdom, when we pull a cross
   upon ourselves. There is little comfort in such suffering. Augustine
   speaks of some in his time who were called Circumcellions, who out of
   an itch rather than zeal of martyrdom, would run themselves into
   sufferings. These were accessory to their own death, like King Saul who
   fell upon his own sword. We are bound by all lawful means to preserve
   our own lives. Jesus Christ did not suffer till he was called to it.
   Suspect that to be a temptation which bids us cast ourselves down into
   sufferings. When men through precipitance and rashness run themselves
   into trouble, it is a cross of their own making and not of God's laying
   upon them.

   (ii) That is not to be accounted martyrdom when we suffer for our
   offences. Let none of you suffer as an evildoer' (1 Peter 4:15). We
   indeed suffer justly' (Luke 23:41). I am not of Cyprian's mind that the
   thief on the cross suffered as a martyr. No, he suffered as an
   evildoer! Christ indeed took pity on him and saved him. He died a
   saint, but not a martyr. When men suffer by the hand of the magistrate
   for their uncleanness, blasphemies etc., these do not suffer
   persecution, but execution. They die not as martyrs, but as
   malefactors. They suffer evil for being evil.

   (iii) That suffering will not make men blessed, when they suffer, out
   of sinister respects, to be cried up as head of a party, or to keep up
   a faction. The apostle implies that a man may give his body to be
   burned, yet go to hell (1 Corinthians 13:3). Ambitious men may
   sacrifice their lives to purchase fame. These are the devil's martyrs.

   2 What that suffering persecution is which will make us blessed, and
   shall wear the crown of martyrdom.

   (i) When we suffer in a good cause. So it is in the text. Blessed are
   they which suffer for righteousness' sake'. It is the cause that makes
   a martyr. When we suffer for the truth and espouse the quarrel of
   religion, this is to suffer for righteousness' sake. For the hope of
   Israel I am bound with this chain' (Acts 28:20).

   (ii) When we suffer with a good conscience. A man may have a good cause
   and a bad conscience. He may suffer for righteousness' sake', yet he
   himself be unrighteous. Saint Paul, as he had a just cause, so he had a
   pure conscience. I have lived in all good conscience to this day' (Acts
   23:1). Paul kept a good conscience to his dying day. It has made the
   saints go as cheerfully to the stake as if they had been going to a
   crown. Look to it that there be no flaw in conscience. A ship that is
   to sail upon the waters must be preserved from leaking. When Christians
   are to sail on the waters of persecution, let them take heed there be
   no leak of guilt in their conscience. He who suffers (though it be in
   God's own cause) with a bad conscience, suffers two hells; a hell of
   persecution, and an hell of damnation.

   (iii) When we have a good call. Ye shall be brought before kings . . .'
   (Matthew 10:18). There is no question but a man may so far consult for
   his safety that if God by his providence open a door, he may fly in
   time of persecution (Matthew 10:23). But when he is brought before
   kings, and the case is such that either he must suffer or the truth
   must suffer, here is a clear call to suffering, and this is reckoned
   for martyrdom.

   (iv) When we have good ends in our suffering, namely, that we may
   glorify God, set a seal to the truth, and show our love to Christ. Ye
   shall be brought before kings for my sake' (Matthew 10:18). The
   primitive Christians burned more in love than in fire. When we look at
   God in our sufferings and are willing to make his crown flourish,
   though it be in our ashes, this is that suffering which carries away
   the garland of glory.

   (v) When we suffer as Christians. If any man suffer as a Christian, let
   him not be ashamed' (1 Peter 4:16). To suffer as a Christian is to
   suffer with such a spirit as becomes a Christian, which is:

   When we suffer with patience. Take, my brethren, the prophets for an
   example of suffering affliction and of patience' (James 5:10). A
   Christian must not repine but say, Shall I not drink the cup' of
   martyrdom which my Father has given me? There should be such a spirit
   of meekness in a Christian's suffering that it should be hard to say
   which is greater, his persecution or his patience. When Job had lost
   all, he kept the breastplate of innocence and the shield of patience.
   An impatient martyr is a solecism.

   To suffer as Christians is when we suffer with courage. Courage is a
   Christian's armour of proof. It steels and animates him. The three
   children or rather the three champions were of brave heroic spirits.
   They do not say to the king, We ought not to serve your gods', but We
   will not' (Daniel 3:18). Neither Nebuchadnezzar's music nor his furnace
   could alter their resolution. Tertullian was called an adamant for his
   invincible courage. Holy courage makes us (as one of the fathers says)
   have such faces of brass that we are not ashamed of the cross'. This is
   to suffer as Christians, when we are meek yet resolute. The more the
   fire is blown the more it flames. So it is with a brave-spirited
   Christian. The more opposition he meets with the more zeal and courage
   flames forth. What a spirit of gallantry was in Luther who said,
   writing to Melanchthon, If it be not the cause of God we are embarked
   in, let us desert it! If it be his cause and will bear us out, why do
   we not stand to it?'

   To suffer as Christians is to suffer with cheerfulness. Patience is a
   bearing the cross; cheerfulness is a taking up the cross. Christ
   suffered for us cheerfully. His death was a freewill offering (Luke
   12:50). He thirsted to drink of that cup of blood. Such must our
   sufferings be for Christ. Cheerfulness perfumes martyrdom and makes it
   the sacrifice of a sweet-smelling savour to God. Thus Moses suffered
   cheerfully. Moses, when he was come to years, chose rather to suffer
   affliction with the people of God than to enjoy the pleasures of sin
   for a season' (Hebrews 11:24, 25). Observe: When he was come to years':
   It was no childish act. It was not in his nonage, but when he was of
   years of discretion. He chose to suffer affliction,: Suffering was not
   so much his task as his choice. The cross was not so much imposed as
   embraced. This is to suffer as Christians, when we are volunteers; we
   take up the cross cheerfully, nay, joyfully. They departed from the
   presence of the council rejoicing that they were counted worthy to
   suffer shame for his name' (Acts 5:41). Or as it is more emphatic in
   the original, They rejoiced that they were so far graced as to be
   disgraced for the name of Christ'. Tertullian says of the primitive
   Christians, that they took more comfort in their sufferings than in
   their deliverance. And indeed well may a Christian be joyful in
   suffering because it is a great favour when God honours a man to be a
   witness to the truth. Christ's marks in Saint Paul's body were prints
   of glory. The saints have worn their sufferings as ornaments. Ignatius'
   chains were his jewels. Never have any princes been so famous for their
   victories as the martyrs for their sufferings.

   We suffer as Christians when we suffer and pray. Pray for them which
   despitefully use you' (Luke 6:28).

   There are two reasons why we should pray for our persecutors.

   Because our prayers may be a means to convert them. Stephen prayed for
   his persecutors: Lord, lay not this sin to their charge' (Acts 7:60).
   And this prayer was effectual to some of their conversions. Augustine
   says that the church of God was beholden to Stephen's prayer for all
   that benefit which was reaped by Paul's ministry.

   We should pray for our persecutors because they do us good, though
   against their will. They shall increase our reward. Every reproach
   shall add to our glory. Every injury shall serve to make our crown
   heavier. As Gregory Nazianzen speaks in one of his orations, Every
   stone which was thrown at Stephen was a precious stone which enriched
   him and made him shine brighter in the kingdom of heaven. Thus have I
   shown what that suffering is which makes us blessed, and shall wear the
   crown of martyrdom.

   1 It shows us what the nature of Christianity is, namely, sanctity
   joined with suffering. A true saint carries Christ in his heart and the
   cross on his shoulders. All that will live godly in Christ Jesus shall
   suffer persecution' (2 Timothy 3:12). Christ and his cross are never
   parted. It is too much for a Christian to have two heavens, one here
   and another hereafter. Christ's kingdom on earth is the kingdom of the
   cross. What is the meaning of the shield of faith, the helmet of hope,
   the breastplate of patience, but to imply that we must encounter
   sufferings? It is one of the titles given to the church, afflicted'
   (Isaiah 54:11). Persecution is the legacy bequeathed by Christ to his
   people. In the world ye shall have tribulation' (John 16:33). Christ's
   spouse is a lily among thorns. Christ's sheep must expect to lose their
   golden fleece. This the flesh does not like to hear of. Therefore
   Christ calls persecution the cross' (Matthew 16:24). It is cross to
   flesh and blood; we are all for reigning. When wilt thou restore the
   kingdom again to Israel?' (Acts 1:6). But the apostle tells of
   suffering before reigning. If we suffer, we shall also reign with him'
   (2 Timothy 2:12). How loath is corrupt flesh to put its neck under
   Christ's yoke, or stretch itself upon the cross! But religion gives no
   charter of exemption from suffering. To have two heavens is more than
   Christ had. Was the head crowned with thorns and do we think to be
   crowned with roses? Think it not strange concerning the fiery trial' (1
   Peter 4:12). If we are God's gold, it is not strange to be cast into
   the fire. Some there are that picture Erasmus half in heaven and half
   out. Methinks it represents a Christian in this life. In regard of his
   inward consolation he is half in heaven. In regard of his outward
   persecution he is half in hell.

   2 See hence that persecutions are not signs of God's anger or fruits of
   the curse, for blessed are they that are persecuted'. If they are
   blessed who die in the Lord, are they not blessed who die for the Lord?
   We are very apt to judge them hated and forsaken of God who are in a
   suffering condition. If thou be the Son of God, come down from the
   cross' (Matthew 27:40).The Jews made a question of it. They could
   hardly believe Christ was the Son of God when he hung upon the cross.
   Would God let him be reproached and forsaken if he were the Son of God?
   When the barbarians saw the viper on Paul's hand, they thought he was a
   great sinner. No doubt this man is a murderer' (Acts 28:4). So when we
   see the people of God afflicted and the viper of persecution fastens
   upon them, we are apt to say, These are greater sinners than others,
   and God does not love them. This is for want of judgement. Blessed are
   they who are persecuted'. Persecutions are pledges of God's love,
   badges of honour (Hebrews 12:7). In the sharpest trial there is the
   sweetest comfort. God's fanning his wheat is but to make it purer.

   1 It reproves such as would be thought good Christians but will not
   suffer persecution for Christ's sake. Their care is not to take up the
   cross, but to avoid the cross. When persecution arises because of the
   word, by and by he is offended' (Matthew 13:21). There are many
   professors who speak Christ fair, but will suffer nothing for him.
   These may be compared to the crystal which looks like pearl till it
   comes to the hammering, then it breaks. Many, when they see the
   palm-branches and garments spread, cry Hosanna' to Christ, but if the
   swords and staves appear, then they slink away. Bezal urged King Henry
   the Fourth (of France), then of Navarre, to engage himself in the
   Protestant religion, but he told him he would not launch out too far
   into the deep, so that, if a storm should arise, he might retreat back
   to the shore. It is to be feared there are some among us, who, if
   persecutions should come, would rather make Demas his choice than Moses
   his choice, and would study rather to keep their skin whole than their
   conscience pure. Erasmus highly extolled Luther's doctrine, but when
   the Emperor threatened all that should favour Luther's cause, he
   unworthily deserted it. Hypocrites will sooner renounce their baptism
   than take up the cross. If ever we should show ourselves Christians to
   purpose, we must with Peter throw ourselves upon the water to come to
   Christ. He that refuses to suffer, let him read over that sad
   scripture, Whosoever shall deny me before men, him will I also deny
   before my Father which is in heaven' (Matthew 10:33).

   2 It reproves them who are the opposers and persecutors of the saints.
   How great is their sin! They resist the Holy Ghost. Ye do always resist
   the Holy Ghost; which of the prophets have not your fathers
   persecuted?' (Acts 7:51, 52). Persecutors offer affront to Christ in
   heaven. They tread his jewels in the dust, touch the apple of his eye,
   pierce his sides. Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me?' (Acts 9:4).
   When the foot was trodden on, the head cried out. As the sin is great,
   so the punishment shall be proportionable. They have shed the blood of
   saints and prophets, and thou hast given them blood to drink, for they
   are worthy' (Revelation 16:6). Will not Christ avenge those who die in
   this quarrel? What is the end of persecutors? Diocletian proclaimed
   that the Christian churches and temples should be razed down, their
   Bibles burned. He would not permit any man that was a Christian to hold
   an office. Some of the Christians he cast alive into boiling lead.
   Others had their hands and lips cut off; only they had their eyes left
   that they might behold the tragedy of their own miseries. What was the
   end of this man? He ran mad and poisoned himself. Felix, captain to
   Emperor Charles the Fifth, being at supper at Augsburg, vowed he would
   ride up to the spurs in the blood of the Lutherans. A flux of blood
   came up that night into his throat wherewith he was choked. It were
   easy to tell how God's hand has so visibly gone out against persecutors
   that they might read their sin in their punishment.

   1 Let it exhort Christians to think beforehand and make account of
   sufferings. This reckoning beforehand can do us no hurt; it may do us
   much good.

   (i) The fore-thoughts of suffering will make a Christian very serious.
   The heart is apt to be feathery and frothy. The thoughts of suffering
   persecution would consolidate it. Why am I thus light? Is this a
   posture fit for persecution? Christians grow serious in the casting up
   their spiritual accounts. They reckon what religion must cost them and
   may cost them. It must cost them the blood of their sins. It may cost
   them the blood of their lives.

   (ii) The fore-thoughts of persecution will be as sauce to season our
   delights, that we do not surfeit upon them. How soon may there be an
   alarum sounded? How soon may the clouds drop blood? The thoughts of
   this would take off the heart from the immoderate love of the creature.
   Our Saviour at a great feast breaks out into mention of his death. She
   hath prepared this against my burial' (Mark 14:8). So the fore-thoughts
   of a change would be an excellent antidote against a surfeit.

   (iii) The fore-thoughts of sufferings would make them lighter when they
   come. The suddenness of an evil adds to the sadness. This was ill news
   to the fool in the gospel (who reckoned without his host). This night
   shall thy soul be required of thee' (Luke 12:20). This will be an
   aggravation of Babylon's miseries: Her plagues shall come in one day'
   (Revelation 18:8). Not that antichrist shall be destroyed in a day, but
   (in a day') that is, suddenly. The blow shall come unawares, when he
   does not think of it. The reckoning beforehand of suffering alleviates
   and shakes off the edge of it when it comes. Therefore Christ, to
   lighten the cross, still forewarns his disciples of sufferings that
   they might not come unlooked for (John 16:33; Acts 1:7).

   (iv) Fore-thoughts of persecution would put us in mind of getting our
   armour ready. It is dangerous as well as imprudent to have all to seek
   when the trial comes, as if a soldier should have his weapons to get
   when the enemy is in the field. Caesar, seeing a soldier whetting his
   sword when he was just going to fight, cashiered him. He that reckons
   upon persecution will be in a ready posture for it. He will have the
   shield of faith and the sword of the Spirit ready, that he may not be
   surprised unawares.

   Let us prepare for persecution. A wise pilot in a calm will prepare for
   a storm. God knows how soon persecution may come. There seems to be a
   cloud of blood hanging over the nation.

   How shall we prepare for sufferings? Do three things.

   1 Be persons rightly qualified for suffering.

   2 Avoid those things which will hinder suffering.

   3 Promote all helps to suffering.

   1 Labour to be persons rightly qualified for suffering. Be righteous
   persons. That man who would suffer for righteousness' sake' must
   himself be righteous. I mean evangelically righteous. In particular I
   call him righteous:

   (i) who breathes after sanctity (Psalm 119:5). Though sin cleaves to
   his heart yet his heart does not cleave to sin. Though sin has an
   alliance, yet no allowance. What I do I allow not!' (Romans 7:15). A
   good man hates the sin to which Satan most tempts and his heart most
   inclines (Psalm 119:128).

   (ii) A righteous person is one who makes God's grace his centre. The
   glory of God is more worth than the salvation of all men's souls. He
   who is divinely qualified is so zealously ambitious of God's glory that
   he does not care what he loses, so God may be a gainer. He prefers the
   glory of God before credit, estate, relations. It was the speech of
   Kiliaz, that blessed martyr, Had I all the gold in the world to dispose
   of, I would give it to live with my relations (though in prison), yet
   Jesus Christ is dearer to me than all.'

   (iii) A righteous person is one who values the jewel of a good
   conscience at an high rate. Good conscience is a saint's festival, his
   music, his paradise, and he will rather hazard anything than violate
   his conscience. They say of the Irish, if they have a good scimitar, a
   warlike weapon, they had rather take a blow on their arm than their
   scimitar should be hurt. To this I may compare a good conscience. A
   good man had rather sustain hurt in his body or estate than his
   conscience should be hurt. He had rather die than violate the virginity
   of his conscience. Such a man as this is evangelically righteous, and
   if God call him to it he is fit to suffer.

   2 Avoid those things which will hinder suffering.

   (i) The love of the world. God allows us the use of the world (1
   Timothy 6:7, 8). But take heed of the love of it. He that is in love
   with the world will be out of love with the cross. Demas hath forsaken
   me, having loved this present world' (2 Timothy 4:10). He not only
   forsook Paul's company but his doctrine. The love of the world chokes
   our zeal. A man wedded to the world will for thirty pieces of silver
   betray Christ and a good cause. Let the world be as a loose garment
   that you may throw off at pleasure. Before a man can die for Christ he
   must be dead to the world. Paul was crucified to the world (Galatians
   6:14). It will be an easy thing to die when we are dead before in our
   affections.

   (ii) Carnal fear. There is a twofold fear:

   A filial fear, when a man fears to displease God. When he fears he
   should not hold out, this is a good fear. Blessed is he that feareth
   always'. If Peter had feared his own heart better, and said, Lord
   Jesus, I fear I shall forsake thee; Lord strengthen me'; doubtless
   Christ would have kept him from falling.

   There is a cowardly fear, when a man fears danger more than sin, when
   he is afraid to be good; this fear is an enemy to suffering. God
   proclaimed that those who were fearful should not go to the wars
   (Deuteronomy 20:8). The fearful are unfit to fight in Christ's wars. A
   man possessed with fear does not consult what is best, but what is
   safest. If he may save his estate, he will snare his conscience. In the
   fear of man there is a snare' (Proverbs 29:25). Fear made Peter deny
   Christ, Abraham equivocate, David feign himself to be mad. Fear will
   put men upon indirect courses, making them study rather compliance than
   conscience. Fear makes sin appear little and suffering great. The
   fearful man sees double. He looks upon the cross through his
   perspective twice as big as it is. Fear argues sordidness of spirit. It
   will put one upon things most ignoble and unworthy. A fearful man will
   vote against his conscience. Fear enfeebles. It is like the cutting off
   Samson's locks. Fear melts away the courage. Their hearts melt because
   of you' (Joshua 2:9). And when a man's strength is gone he is very
   unfit to carry Christ's cross. Fear is the root of apostasy. Spira's
   fear made him abjure and recant his religion. Fear hurts one more than
   the adversary. It is not so much an enemy without the castle as a
   traitor within endangers it. It is not so much sufferings without as
   traitorous fear within which undoes a man. A fearful man is versed in
   no posture so much as in retreating. Oh take heed of this! Be afraid of
   this fear. Fear not them that can kill the body' (Luke 12:4).
   Persecutors can but kill the body which must shortly die. The fearful
   are set in the forefront of them that shall go to hell (Revelation
   21:8). Let us get the fear of God into our hearts. As one wedge drives
   out another, so the fear of God will drive out all other base fear.

   (iii) Take heed of a facile spirit. A facile-spirited man will be
   turned any way with a word. He will be wrought as wax. He is so tame
   that you may lead him whither you will. With fair speeches they deceive
   the hearts of the simple' (Romans 16:18). A facile Christian is
   malleable to anything. He is like wool that will take any dye. He is a
   weak reed that will be blown any way with the breath of men. One day
   you may persuade him to engage in a good cause, the next day to desert
   it. He is not made of oak but of willow. He will bend every way. Oh
   take heed of a facile spirit! It is not ingenuity but folly to suffer
   one's self to be abused. A good Christian is like Mount Sion that
   cannot be moved (Psalm 125:1). He is like Fabricius of whom it was
   said, a man might as well alter the course of the sun as turn him aside
   from doing justice. A good Christian must be firm to his resolution. If
   he be not a fixed, he will be a falling star.

   (iv) Take heed of listening to the voice of the flesh. St Paul
   conferred not with flesh and blood' (Galatians 1:16). The flesh will
   give bad counsel. First King Saul consulted with the flesh and
   afterwards he consulted with the devil. He sends to the witch of Endor.
   Oh, says the flesh, the cross of Christ is heavy! There is a nail in
   the yoke which will tear, and fetch blood. Be as a deaf adder stopping
   your ears to the charmings of the flesh.

   3 Promote those things which will help to suffer.

   (i) Inure yourselves to suffering. As a good soldier of Christ endure
   hardship' (2 Timothy 2:3). Jacob made the stone his pillow (Genesis
   28:18). It is good for a man that he bear the yoke in his youth'
   (Lamentations 3:27). The bearing of a lighter cross will fit for the
   bearing of an heavier. Learn to bear a reproach with patience and then
   you will be fitter to bear an iron chain. Saint Paul died daily. He
   began with lesser sufferings and so by degrees learned to be a martyr.
   As it is in sin, a wicked man learns to be expert in sin by degrees.
   First he commits a lesser sin, then a greater, then he arrives at
   custom in sin, then he grows impudent in sin, then he glories in sin
   (Philippians 3:19); so it is in suffering. First a Christian takes up
   the chips of the cross, a disgrace, a prison, and then he carries the
   cross itself.

   Alas how far are they from suffering who indulge the flesh: . . . that
   lie upon beds of ivory and stretch themselves upon their couches' (Amos
   6:4); a very unfit posture for suffering. That soldier is like to make
   but poor work of it who is stretching himself upon his bed when he
   should be in the field exercising his arms. What shall I say, says
   Jerome, to those Christians who make it all their care to perfume their
   clothes, to crisp their hair, to sparkle their diamonds, but if
   sufferings come, and the way to heaven has any water in it, they will
   not endure to set their feet upon it! Most people are too effeminate.
   They use themselves too nicely and tenderly. Those 'silken Christians'
   (as Tertullian calls them) that pamper the flesh, are unfit for the
   school of the cross. The naked breast and bare shoulder is too soft and
   tender to carry Christ's cross. Inure yourselves to hardship. Do not
   make your pillow too easy.

   (ii) Be well skilled in the knowledge of Christ. A man can never die
   for him he does not know. For which cause I suffer those things; for I
   know whom I have believed' (2 Timothy 1:12). Blind men are always
   fearful. A blind Christian will be fearful of the cross. Enrich
   yourselves with knowledge. Know Christ in his virtues, offices,
   privileges. See the preciousness in Christ. To you that believe he is
   precious' (1 Peter 2:7). His name is precious; it is as ointment poured
   forth. His blood is precious; it is as balm poured forth. His love is
   precious; it is as wine poured forth. Jesus Christ is made up of all
   sweets and delights. He himself is all that is desirable. He is light
   to the eye, honey to the taste, joy to the heart. Get but the knowledge
   of Christ and you will part with all for him. You will embrace him
   though it be in the fire. An ignorant man can never be a martyr. He may
   set up an altar, but he will never die for an unknown God.

   (iii) Prize every truth of God. The filings of gold are precious. The
   least ray of truth is glorious. Buy the truth and sell it not'
   (Proverbs 23:23). Truth is the object of faith (2 Thessalonians 2:13),
   the seed of regeneration (James 1:18), the spring of joy (1 Corinthians
   13:6). Truth crowns us with salvation (1 Timothy 2:4). If ever you
   would suffer for the truth, prize it above all things. He that does not
   prize truth above life will never lay down his life for the truth. The
   blessed martyrs sealed to the truth with their blood. There are two
   things God counts most dear to him, his glory and his truth. I will',
   says Bishop Jewel', deny my bishopric; I will deny my name and credit,
   but the truths of Christ I cannot deny.'

   (iv) Keep a good conscience. If there be any sin allowed in the soul,
   it will unfit for suffering. A man that has a boil upon his shoulders
   cannot carry a heavy burden. Guilt of conscience is like a boil. He
   that has this can never carry the cross of Christ. If a ship be sound
   and well-rigged, it will sail upon the water, but if it be full of
   holes and leaks, it will sink in the water. If conscience be full of
   guilt (which is like a leak in the ship), it will not sail in the
   bloody waters of persecution. An house will not stand in a storm, the
   pillars of it being rotten. If a man's heart be rotten, he will never
   stand in a storm of tribulation. How can a guilty person suffer when
   for ought he knows he is like to go from the fire at the stake to
   hell-fire! Let conscience be pure. Holding the mystery of the faith in
   a pure conscience' (1 Timothy 3:9). A good conscience will abide the
   fiery trial. This made the martyrs' flames beds of roses. Good
   conscience is a wall of brass. With the Leviathan, it laughs at the
   shaking of a spear' (Job 41:29). Let one be in prison, good conscience
   is a bird that can sing in this cage. Augustine calls it the paradise
   of a good conscience'.

   (v) Make the Scripture familiar to you (Psalm 119:50). The Scripture
   well digested by meditation will fit for suffering. The Scripture is a
   Christian's palladium, his magazine and fort-royal. It may be compared
   to the tower of David on which there hang a thousand bucklers'
   (Canticles 4:4). From these breasts of Scripture divine strength flows
   into the soul. Let the word of Christ dwell in you richly' (Colossians
   3:16). Jerome speaks of one who by frequent studying the Scripture made
   his breast the library of Christ'. The blessed Scripture as it is an
   honeycomb for comfort, so an armoury for strength. First, the martyrs'
   hearts did burn within them' (Luke 24:32) by reading the Scripture, and
   then their bodies were fit to burn. The Scripture arms a Christian both
   against temptation and persecution.

   Against temptation: Christ himself, when he was tempted by the devil
   ran to Scripture for armour: It is written'. Three times he wounds the
   old serpent with his sword. Jerome says of Saint Paul, he could never
   have gone through so many temptations but for his Scripture-armour.
   Christians, are you tempted? Go to Scripture; gather a stone hence to
   fling in the face of a Goliath-temptation. Are you tempted to pride?
   Read that scripture, God resisteth the proud' (1 Peter 5:5). Are you
   tempted to lust? Read James 1:15, When lust hath conceived, it bringeth
   forth sin; and sin when it is finished, bringeth forth death'.

   Against persecution: When the flesh draws back the Scripture will
   recruit us. It will put armour upon us and courage into us. Fear none
   of those things which thou shalt suffer. Behold the devil shall cast
   some of you into prison that you may be tried and you shall have
   tribulation ten days. Be thou faithful unto death and I will give thee
   a crown of life' (Revelation 2:10). O, says the Christian, I am not
   afraid to suffer. Fear none of those things thou shalt suffer.' But why
   should I suffer? I love God and is not this sufficient? Nay, but God
   will try your love. It is that ye may be tried'. God's gold is best
   tried in the furnace. But this persecution is so long! No, it is but
   for ten days'. It may be lasting but not everlasting. What are ten days
   put in balance with eternity? But what am I the better if I suffer?
   What comes of it? I will (says God) give thee a crown of life'. Though
   your body be martyred your soul shall be crowned. But I shall faint
   when trials comer My grace shall be sufficient' (2 Corinthians 12:9).
   The weak Christian has omnipotence to underprop him.

   (vi) Get a suffering frame of heart.

   What is that? you say. I answer: A self-denying frame. If any man will
   come after me let him deny himself and take up his cross' (Matthew
   16:24). Self-denial is the foundation of godliness, and if this be not
   well-laid, the whole building will fall. If there be any lust in our
   souls which we cannot deny, it will turn at length either to scandal or
   apostasy. Self-denial is the thread which must run along through the
   whole work of religion. The self-denying Christian will be the
   suffering Christian. Let him deny himself and take up his cross'.

   For the further explication of this, I shall do two things.

   1 Show what is meant by this word deny.

   2 What is meant by self.

   1 What is meant by deny? The word to deny' signifies to lay aside, to
   put off, to annihilate oneself. Beza renders it let him renounce
   himself'.

   2 What is meant by self? Self is taken four ways:

   Worldly self,

   Relative self,

   Natural self,

   Carnal self.

   A man must deny worldly self, that is, his estate. Behold we have
   forsaken all and followed thee' (Matthew 19:27). The gold of Ophir must
   be denied for the pearl of price. Let their money perish with them
   (said that noble Marquess of Vico) who esteem all the gold and silver
   in the world worth one hour's communion with Christ.

   A man must deny relative self, that is, his dearest relations, if God
   calls. If our nearest alliance, father or mother, stand in our way and
   would hinder us from doing our duty, we must either leap over them or
   tread upon them. If any man come to me and hate not father and mother
   and wife and children, etc., he cannot be my disciple' (Luke 14:26).
   Relations must not weigh heavier than Christ.

   A man must deny natural self. He must be willing to become a sacrifice
   and make Christ's crown flourish, though it be in his ashes. They loved
   not their lives unto the death' (Luke 14:26; Revelation 12:11). Jesus
   Christ was dearer to them than their own heart's blood.

   A man must deny self self. This I take to be the chief sense of the
   text. He must deny carnal ease. The flesh cries out for ease. It is
   loath to put its neck under Christ's yoke or stretch itself upon the
   cross. The flesh cries out, There is a lion in the way' (Proverbs
   22:13). We must deny our self-ease. They that lean on the soft pillow
   of sloth will hardly take up the cross. Thou as a good soldier of
   Christ endure hardness' (2 Timothy 2:3). We must force a way to heaven
   through sweat and blood. Caesar's soldiers fought with hunger and cold.

   A man must deny self-opinion. Every man by nature has an high opinion
   of himself. He is drunk with spiritual pride, and a proud man is unfit
   for suffering. He thinks himself too good to suffer. What (says he) I
   that am of such a noble descent, such high parts, such repute and
   credit in the world, shall I suffer? A proud man disdains the cross. Oh
   deny self-opinion! How did Christ come to suffer? He humbled himself
   and became obedient unto death' (Philippians 2:8). Let the plumes of
   pride fall.

   A man must deny self-confidence. Peter's confidence undid him. Though
   all men shall be offended because of thee, yet will I never be
   offended; though I should die with thee, yet will I not deny thee'
   (Matthew 26:33, 35). How did this man presume upon his own strength, as
   if he had more grace than all the apostles besides! His denying Christ
   was for want of denying himself. Oh deny your own strength! Samson's
   strength was in his locks. A Christian's strength lies in Christ. He
   who trusts to himself shall be left to himself. He who goes out in his
   own strength comes off to his own shame.

   A man must deny self-wisdom. We read of the wisdom of the flesh' (2
   Corinthians 1:12). Self-wisdom is carnal policy. It is wisdom (says the
   flesh) to keep out of suffering. It is wisdom not to declare against
   sin. It is wisdom to find out subtle distinctions to avoid the cross.
   The wisdom of the flesh is to save the flesh. Indeed there is a
   Christian prudence to be used. The serpent's eye must be in the dove's
   head. Wisdom and innocence do well, but it is dangerous to separate
   them. Cursed be that policy which teaches to avoid duty. This wisdom is
   not from above but is devilish (James 3:15). It is learned from the old
   serpent. This wisdom will turn to folly at last. It is like a man who
   to save his gold throws himself overboard into the water. So the
   politician to save his skin will damn his soul.

   A man must deny self-will. Saint Gregory calls the will the
   commander-in-chief of all the faculties of the soul. Indeed, in
   innocence, Adam had rectitude of mind and conformity of will. The will
   was like an instrument in tune. It was full of harmony and tuned
   sweetly to God's will, but now the will is corrupt and like a strong
   tide carries us violently to evil. The will has not only an
   indisposition to good, but an opposition. Ye have always resisted the
   Holy Ghost' (Acts 7:51). There is not a greater enemy than the will. It
   is up in arms against God (2 Peter 2:10). The will loves sin and hates
   the cross. Now if ever we suffer for God we must cross our own will.
   The will must be martyred. A Christian must say, Not my will but thy
   will be done.

   A man must deny self-reasonings. The fleshy part will be reasoning and
   disputing against sufferings. Why reason you these things in your
   hearts?' (Mark 2:8). Such reasonings as these will begin to arise in
   our hearts:

   1 Persecution is bitter.

   Oh but it is blessed! Blessed is he that endureth temptation . . .'
   (James 1:12). The cross is heavy, but the sharper the cross, the
   brighter the crown.

   2 But it is sad to part with estate and relations.

   But Christ is better than all. He is manna to strengthen; he is wine to
   comfort; he is salvation to crown.

   3 But liberty is sweet.

   This restraint makes way for enlargement. Thou hast enlarged me in
   distress' (Psalm 4:1). When the feet are bound with irons, the heart
   may be sweetly dilated and enlarged.

   Thus should we put to silence those self-reasonings which are apt to
   arise in the heart against sufferings.

   This self-denying frame of heart is very hard. This is to pluck out the
   right eye'. One says, a man has not so much to do in overcoming men and
   devils as in overcoming himself. Stronger is he who conquers himself
   than he who conquers the strongest walled city'. Self is the idol, and
   how hard it is to sacrifice this idol and to turn self-seeking into
   self-denial! But though it be difficult it is essential to suffering. A
   Christian must first lay down self before he can take up the cross.

   Alas! how far are they then from suffering that cannot deny themselves
   in the least things; who in their diet or apparel, instead of martyring
   the flesh, pamper the flesh! Instead of taking up the cross take up
   their cups! Is this self-denial, to let loose the reins to the flesh?
   It is sure that they who cannot deny themselves, if sufferings come,
   will deny Christ. Oh Christians, as ever you would be able to carry
   Christ's cross, begin to deny yourselves. Consider:

   Whatever you deny for Christ, you shall find again in Christ. Every one
   that hath forsaken houses or brethren or sisters or father or mother or
   wife or children or lands for my name's sake shall receive an
   hundred-fold, and shall inherit everlasting life' (Matthew 19:29). Here
   is a very saving bargain. Is it not gain enough to have ten in the
   hundred, nay above an hundred for one?

   It is but equity that you should deny yourselves for Christ. Did not
   Jesus Christ deny himself for you? He denied his joy; he left his
   Father's house; he denied his honour; he endured the shame (Hebrews
   12:2); he denied his life; he poured out his blood as a sacrifice upon
   the altar of the cross (Colossians 1:20). Did Christ deny himself for
   you, and will not you deny yourselves for him?

   Self-denial is the highest sign of a thoroughpaced Christian.
   Hypocrites may have great knowledge and make large profession, but it
   is only the true-hearted saint that can deny himself for Christ. I have
   read of an holy man who was once tempted by Satan, to whom Satan said,
   Why do you take all these pains? You watch and fast and abstain from
   sin. O man, what do you more than I? Are you no drunkard, no adulterer?
   No more am I. Do you watch? Let me tell you, I never slept. Do you
   fast? I never eat. What do you more than I? Why, says the good man, I
   will tell thee, Satan; I pray; I serve the Lord; nay, more than all, I
   deny myself. Nay, then, says Satan, you go beyond me for I exalt
   myself. And so he vanished. Self-denial is the best touchstone of
   sincerity. By this you go beyond hypocrites.

   To deny yourselves is but what others have done before you. Moses was a
   self-denier. He denied the honours and profits of the court (Hebrews
   11:24-26). Abraham denied his own country at God's call (Hebrews 11:8).
   Marcus Arethusus' who lived in the time of Julian the Emperor endured
   great torments for religion. If he would but have given an halfpenny
   towards the rebuilding of the idol's temple, he might have been
   released, but he would not do it, though the giving of an halfpenny
   might have saved his life. Here was a self-denying saint.

   There is a time shortly coming, that if you do not deny the world for
   Christ, the world will deny you. The world now denies satisfaction, and
   ere long it will deny house-room. It will not suffer you so much as to
   breathe in it. It will turn you out of possession; and, which is worse,
   not only the world will deny you, but Christ will deny you. Whosoever
   shall deny me before men, him will I also deny before my Father which
   is heaven' (Matthew 10:33).

   (vii) Get suffering graces; these three in particular:

   Faith; Love; Patience.

   Suffering grace is faith. Above all, taking the shield of faith'
   (Ephesians 6:16). The pretence of faith is one thing, the use of faith
   another. The hypocrite makes faith a cloak, the martyr makes it a
   shield. A shield is useful in time of danger; it defends the head; it
   guards the vitals. Such a shield is faith. Faith is a furnace grace.
   Though it be tried with fire, it is found unto praise and honour' (1
   Peter 1:7). Faith, like Hercules' club, beats down all oppositions. By
   faith we resist the devil (1 Peter 5:9). By faith we resist unto blood
   (Hebrews 11:34). Faith is a victorious grace. The believer will make
   Christ's crown flourish, though it be in his own ashes. An unbeliever
   is like Reuben: Unstable as water he shall not excel' (Genesis 49:4). A
   believer is like Joseph, who, though the archers shot at him, his bow
   abode in strength.' Cast a believer upon the waters of affliction, he
   can follow Christ upon the water, and not sink. Cast him into the fire,
   his zeal burns hotter than the flame. Cast him into prison, he is
   enlarged in spirit. Paul and Silas had their prison songs. Thou shalt
   tread upon the lion and adder' (Psalm 91:13). A Christian, armed with
   faith as a coat of mail, can tread upon those persecutions which are
   fierce as the lion and sting as the adder. Get faith.

   But how comes faith to be such armour of proof? I answer,

   Six manner of ways.

   (1) Faith unites the soul to Christ, and that blessed Head sends forth
   spirits into the members. I can do all things through Christ
   . . .'(Philippians 4:13). Faith is a grace that lives all upon the
   borrow. As when we want water, we go to the well and fetch it; when we
   want gold, we go to the mine; so faith goes to Christ and fetches his
   strength into the soul, whereby it is enabled both to do and suffer.
   Hence it is that faith is such a wonderworking grace.

   (2) Faith works in the heart a contempt of the world. Faith gives a
   true map of the world (Ecclesiastes 2:11). Faith shows the world in its
   night-dress, having all its jewels pulled off. Faith makes the world
   appear in an eclipse. The believer sees more eclipses than the
   astronomer. Faith shows the soul better things than the world. It gives
   a sight of Christ and glory. It gives a prospect of heaven. As the
   mariner in a dark night climbs up to the top of the mast and cries out,
   I see a star', so faith climbs up above sense and reason into heaven
   and sees Christ, that bright and morning star; and the soul, having
   once viewed his superlative excellencies, becomes crucified to the
   world. Oh, says the Christian, shall not I suffer the loss of all these
   things that I may enjoy Jesus Christ!

   (3) Faith gets strength from the promise. Faith lives in a promise.
   Take the fish out of the water and it dies. Take faith out of a promise
   and it cannot live. The promises are breasts of consolation. The child
   by sucking the breast gets strength; so does faith by sucking the
   breast of a promise. When a garrison is besieged and is ready almost to
   yield to the enemy, auxiliary forces are sent in to relieve it. So when
   faith begins to be weak and is ready to faint in the day of battle,
   then the promises muster their forces together, and all come in for
   faith's relief and now it is able to hold out in the fiery trial.

   (4) Faith gives the soul a right notion of suffering. Faith draws the
   true picture of sufferings. What is suffering? Faith says, it is but
   the suffering of the body, that body which must shortly by the course
   of nature drop into the dust. Persecution can but take away my life. An
   ague or fever may do as much. Now faith giving the soul a right notion
   of sufferings and taking (as it were) a just measure of them, enables a
   Christian to prostrate his life at the feet of Christ.

   (5) Faith reconciles providences and promises. As it was on St Paul's
   voyage, providence seemed to be against him. There was a crosswind
   arose called Euroclydon (Acts 27:14), but God had given him a promise
   that he would save his life, and the lives of all that sailed with him
   in the ship (verse 24). Therefore when the wind blew never so contrary,
   Paul believed it would at last blow him to the haven. So when sense
   says, Here is a cross providence, sufferings come, I shall be undone,
   then faith says all things shall work for good to them that love God'
   (Romans 8:28). This providence, though bloody, shall fulfil the
   promise. Affliction shall work for my good. It shall heal my corruption
   and save my soul. Thus faith, making the wind and tide go together, the
   wind of a providence with the tide of the promise, enables a Christian
   to suffer persecution.

   (6) Faith picks sweetness out of the cross. Faith shows the soul God
   reconciled and sin pardoned; and then how sweet is every suffering! The
   bee gathers the sweetest honey from the bitterest herb. A bitter
   medicine often gives strength to the weary'. So faith from the sharpest
   trials gathers the sweetest comforts. Faith looks upon suffering as
   God's love-token. Afflictions (says Nazianzen) are sharp arrows, but
   they are shot from the hand of a loving Father. Faith can taste honey
   at the end of the rod. Faith fetches joy out of suffering (John 16:20).
   Faith gets an honeycomb in the belly of the lion; it finds a jewel
   under the cross; and thus you see how faith comes to be such armour of
   proof. Above all, taking the shield of faith'. A believer having cast
   his anchor in heaven cannot sink in the waters of persecution.

   2 Suffering grace is love. Get hearts fired with love to the Lord
   Jesus. Love is a grace both active and passive.

   (1) Love is active. It lays a law of constraint upon the soul; The love
   of Christ constrains us' (2 Corinthians 5:14). Love is the wing of the
   soul that sets it flying and the weight of the soul that sets it going.
   Love never thinks it can do enough for Christ. As he who loves the
   world never thinks he can take enough pains for it, love is never
   weary. It is not tired unless with its own slowness.

   (2) Love is passive; it enables to suffer. A man that loves his friend
   will suffer anything for him rather than he shall be wronged. The
   Curtii laid down their lives for the Romans because they loved them.
   Love made our dear Lord suffer for us. As the pelican out of her love
   to her young ones, when they are bitten with serpents, feeds them with
   her own blood to recover them again, so when we had been bitten by the
   old serpent, that Christ might recover us he fed us with his own blood.
   Jacob's love to Rachel made him almost hazard his life for her. Many
   waters cannot quench love' (Canticles 8:7). No, not the waters of
   persecution. Love is strong as death' (Canticles 8:6). Death makes its
   way through the greatest oppositions. So love will make its way to
   Christ through the prison and the furnace.

   But all pretend love to Christ. How shall we know that we have such a
   love to him as will make us suffer? I answer: True love is a love of
   friendship, which is genuine and ingenuous when we love Christ for
   himself. There is a mercenary and meretricious love, when we love
   divine objects for something else. A man may love the queen of truth
   for the jewel at her ear, because she brings preferment. A man may love
   Christ for his head of gold' (Canticles 5:11), because he enriches with
   glory. But true love is when we love Christ for his loveliness, namely,
   that infinite and superlative beauty which shines in him, as Augustine
   says, We love Jesus on account of Jesus'; that is, as a man loves sweet
   wine for itself.

   True love is a love of desire, when we desire to be united to Christ as
   the fountain of happiness. Love desires union. The soul that loves
   Christ is ambitious of death because this dissolution tends to union.
   Death slips one knot and ties another.

   True love is a love of benevolence, when so far as we are able we
   endeavour to lift up Christ's name in the world. As the wise men
   brought him gold and frankincense' (Matthew 2:11), so we bring him our
   tribute of service and are willing that he should rise though it be by
   our fall. In short, that love which is kindled from heaven makes us
   give Christ the pre-eminence of our affection. I would cause thee to
   drink of spiced wine of the juice of my pomegranate' (Canticles 8:2).
   It the spouse has a cup which is more juicy and spiced Christ shall
   drink off that. Indeed we can never love Christ too much. We may love
   gold in the excess, but not Christ. The angels do not love Christ to
   his worth. Now when love is boiled up to this height, it will enable us
   to suffer. Love is strong as death'. The martyrs first burned in love,
   and then in fire.

   3 The third suffering grace is patience. Patience is a grace made and
   cut out for suffering. Patience is a sweet submission to the will of
   God, whereby we are content to bear anything that he is pleased to lay
   upon us. Patience makes a Christian invincible. It is like the anvil
   that bears all strokes. We cannot be men without patience. Passion
   unmans a man. It puts him beside the use of reason. We cannot be
   martyrs without patience. Patience makes us endure (James 5:10). We
   read of a beast like unto a leopard and his feet were as the feet of a
   bear and the dragon gave him his power . . .' (Revelation 13:2). This
   beast is to be understood of the antichristian power. Antichrist may be
   compared to a leopard for subtlety and fierceness, and on his head was
   the name of blaspheming (verse 1), which agrees with that description
   of the man of sin, He sitteth in the temple of God showing himself that
   he is God' (2 Thessalonians 2:4); and the dragon gave him power' (verse
   2), that is the devil, and it was given to him to make war with the
   saints' (Revelation 13:7). Well, how come the saints to bear the heat
   of this fiery trial? (verse 10): Here is the patience of the saints.'
   Patience overcomes by suffering. A Christian without patience is like a
   soldier without arms. Faith keeps the heart up from sinking. Patience
   keeps the heart down from murmuring. Patience is not provoked by
   injuries. It is sensible but not peevish. Patience looks to the end of
   sufferings. This is the motto: God will guarantee the end also.' As the
   watchman waits for the dawning of the morning, so the patient Christian
   suffers and waits till the day of glory begins to dawn upon him. Faith
   says, God will come, and patience says, I will stay his leisure. These
   are those suffering graces which are a Christian's armour of proof.

   (viii) Treasure up suffering promises. The promises are faith's
   bladders to keep it from sinking. They are the breast-milk a Christian
   lives on in time of sufferings. They are honey at the end of the rod.
   Hoard up the promises.

   God has made promises of direction that he will give us a spirit of
   wisdom in that hour, teaching us what to say. I will give you a mouth
   and wisdom which all your adversaries shall not be able to gainsay nor
   resist' (Luke 21:15). You shall not need study. God will put an answer
   into your mouth. This many of God's sufferers can set their seal to.
   The Lord has on a sudden darted such words into their mouths as their
   enemies could easier censure than contradict.

   God has made promises of protection. No man shall set on thee to hurt
   thee' (Acts 18:10). How safe was Paul when he had omnipotence itself to
   screen off danger! And there shall not an hair of your head perish'
   (Luke 21:18). Persecutors are lions, but chained lions.

   God has made promises of his special presence with his saints in
   suffering. I will be with him in trouble' (Psalm 91:15). If we have
   such a friend to visit us in prison, we shall do well enough. Though we
   change our place we shall not change our keeper. I will be with him.'
   God will hold our head and heart when we are fainting! What if we have
   more afflictions than others, if we have more of God's company! God's
   honour is dear to him. It would not be for his honour to bring his
   children into sufferings and leave them there. He will be with them to
   animate and support them, yea, when new troubles arise; He shall
   deliver thee in six troubles' (Job 5:19).

   The Lord has made promises of deliverance. I will deliver him and
   honour him' (Psalm 91:15). God will open a back door for his people to
   escape out of sufferings. He will with the temptation make a way to
   escape' (1 Corinthians 10:13). Thus he did to Peter (Acts 12:7-10).
   Peter's prayers had opened heaven, and God's angel opens the prison.
   God can either prevent a snare or break it. To God the Lord belong the
   issues from death' (Psalm 68:20). He who can strengthen our faith can
   break our fetters. The Lord sometimes makes enemies the instruments of
   breaking those snares which themselves have laid (Esther 8:8).

   In the case of martyrdom God has made promises of consolation. Your
   sorrow shall be turned into joy' (John 16:20). There is the water
   turned into wine. Be of good cheer, Paul' (Acts 23:11). In time of
   persecution God broaches the wine of consolation. Cordials are kept for
   fainting. Philip the Landgrave of Hesse, professed that he himself
   experienced the divine consolations of the martyrs. Stephen 'saw the
   heavens opened' (Acts 7:56). Glover, that blessed martyr, cried out at
   the stake in an holy rapture, He is come, He is come', meaning the
   Comforter.

   Promises of compensation. God will abundantly recompense all our
   sufferings, in this life an hundred-fold, and in the world to come life
   everlasting' (Matthew 19:29). Augustine calls this the best and
   greatest usury. Our losses for Christ are gainful. He that loseth his
   life for my sake shall find it' (Matthew 10:39).

   (ix) Set before your eyes suffering examples. Look upon others as
   patterns to imitate. Take my brethren the prophets for an example of
   suffering affliction' (James 5:10). Examples have more influence upon
   us than precepts. The one instruct, the other animate. As they show
   elephants the blood of grapes and mulberries to make them fight the
   better, so the Holy Ghost shows us the blood of saints and martyrs to
   infuse a spirit of zeal and courage into us. Micaiah was in the prison;
   Jeremiah in the dungeon; Isaiah was sawn asunder. The primitive
   Christians, though their flesh boiled, roasted, dismembered, yet like
   the adamant they remained invincible. Such was their zeal and patience
   in suffering that their persecutors stood amazed and were more weary in
   tormenting than they were in enduring. When John Huss was brought to be
   burned, they put upon his head a triple crown of paper printed with red
   devils, which when he saw, says he, My Lord Jesus Christ wore a crown
   of thorns for me, why then shall I not wear this crown, how ignominious
   soever?' Polycarp, Bishop of Smyrna, when he came before the proconsul
   was bidden to deny Christ and swear by the Emperor; he replied: I have
   served Christ these eighty-six years and he has not once hurt me, and
   shall I deny him now?' Saunders that blessed martyr, said, Welcome the
   cross of Christ; my Saviour began to me in a bitter cup and shall not I
   pledge him? You Baynham, you papist that look for miracles, I feel no
   more pain in the fire than if I were in a bed of down.' Another of the
   martyrs said, The ringing of my chain has been sweet music in my ears.
   O what a comforter (says he) is a good conscience!' Another martyr,
   kissing the stake, said, I shall not lose my life but change it for a
   better. Instead of coals I shall have pearls!' Another, when the chain
   was fastening to him, said, Blessed be God for this wedding girdle!'
   These suffering examples we should lay up. God is still the same God.
   He has as much love in his heart to pity us and as much strength in his
   arm to help us. Let us think with ourselves what courage the very
   heathens have shown in their sufferings. Julius Caesar was a man of an
   heroic spirit. When he was foretold of a conspiracy against him in the
   senate-house, he answered he had rather die than fear. Mutius Scaevola
   having his hand held over the fire till the flesh fried and his sinews
   began to shrink, yet he bore it with an undaunted spirit. Quintus
   Curtius reports of Lysimachus, a brave captain, that being adjudged to
   be cast naked to a lion, when the lion came roaring upon him,
   Lysimachus wrapped his shirt about his arm and thrust it into the
   lion's mouth and taking hold of his tongue killed the lion. Did nature
   infuse such a spirit of courage and gallantry into heathens! How should
   grace much more into Christians! Let us be of St Paul's mind: Not
   counting my life dear, so that I might finish my course with joy' (Acts
   20:24).

   (x) Let us lay in suffering considerations. A wise Christian is
   considerative.

   Consider whom we suffer for. It is for Christ, and we cannot suffer for
   a better friend. There is many a man will suffer shame and death for
   his lusts. He will suffer disgrace for a drunken lust. He will suffer
   death for a revengeful lust. Shall others die for their lusts and shall
   not we die for Christ? Will a man suffer for that lust which damns him,
   and shall not we suffer for that Christ which saves us? Oh remember we
   espouse God's own quarrel and he will not suffer us to be losers. If no
   man shall kindle a fire on God's altar for nought' (Malachi 1:10), then
   surely no man shall sacrifice himself for God in the fire for nought.

   It is a great honour to suffer persecution. Ambrose, speaking in the
   encomium of his sister said, I will say this of her, she was a martyr'.
   It is a great honour to be singled out to bear witness to the truth.
   They departed from the council rejoicing that they were counted worthy
   to suffer shame for his name' (Acts 5:41). It is a title that has been
   given to kings, Defender of the faith'. A martyr is in a special
   manner, a defender of the faith'. Kings are defenders of the faith by
   their swords, martyrs by their blood. Gregory Nazianzen calls
   Athanasius the bulwark of truth'. It is a credit to appear for God.
   Martyrs are not only Christ's followers, but his ensign-bearers. The
   Romans had their Camilli and Fabricii, brave warriors which graced the
   field. God calls out none but his champions to fight his battles. We
   read that Abraham called forth his trained soldiers (Genesis 14:14),
   such as were more expert and valiant. What an honour is it to be one of
   Christ's trained band! The disciples dreamed of a temporal reign (Acts
   1:6). Christ tells them (verse 8), Ye shall be witnesses unto me in
   Jerusalem . . '. To bear witness by their sufferings to the truth of
   Christ's divinity and passion was a greater honour to the disciples
   than to have had a temporal reign upon earth. A bloody cross is more
   honourable than a purple robe. Persecution is called the fiery trial'
   (1 Peter 4:12). God has two fires, one where he puts his gold, and
   another where he puts his dross. The fire where he puts his dross is
   hellfire. The fire where he puts his gold is the fire of persecution.
   God honours his gold when he puts it into the fire. A spirit of glory
   rests upon you' (1 Peter 1:7; 1 Peter 4:14). Persecution, as it is a
   badge of our Order, so an ensign of our glory. What greater honour can
   be put upon a mortal man than to stand up in the cause of God? And not
   only to die in the Lord but to die for the Lord? Ignatius called his
   fetters his spiritual pearls. St Paul gloried more in his iron chain
   than if it had been a gold chain (Acts 28:20).

   Consider what Jesus Christ endured for us. Calvin says that Christ's
   whole life was a series of sufferings. Christian, what is your
   suffering? Are you poor? So was Christ. Foxes have holes and the birds
   of the air have nests, but the Son of Man hath not where to lay his
   head' (Matthew 8:20). Are you surrounded with enemies? So was Christ.
   Against thy holy child Jesus whom thou hast anointed, both Herod and
   Pontius Pilate with the Gentiles . . . were gathered together' (Acts
   4:27). Do our enemies lay claim to religion? So did his. The chief
   priests took the silver pieces and said, It is not lawful to put them
   into the treasury because it is the price of blood' (Matthew 27:6).
   Godly persecutors! Are you reproached? So was Christ. They bowed the
   knee before him, and mocked him, saying, Hail, King of the Jews'
   (Matthew 27:29). Are you slandered? So was Christ. He casteth out
   devils through the prince of devils' (Matthew 9:34). Are you
   ignominiously used? So was Christ. Some began to spit upon him' (Mark
   14:65). Are you betrayed by friends? So was Christ. Judas, betrayest
   thou the Son of Man with a kiss?' (Luke 22:48). Is your estate
   sequestered? And do the wicked cast lots for it? So Christ was dealt
   with. They parted his garments, casting lots' (Matthew 27:35). Do we
   suffer unjustly? So did Christ. His very judge acquitted him. Then said
   Pilate to the chief priests and to the people, I find no fault in this
   man' (Luke 23:4). Are you barbarously dragged and haled away to
   suffering? So was Christ. When they had bound him (though he came to
   loose them) they led him away' (Matthew 27:2). Do you suffer death? So
   did Christ. When they were come to Calvary, there they crucified him'
   (Luke 23:33). They gave him gall and vinegar to drink, the one
   deciphering the bitterness, the other the sharpness of his death.
   Christ underwent not only the blood of the cross but the curse of the
   cross (Galatians 3:13). He had an agony in his soul. My soul is
   exceeding sorrowful unto death' (Matthew 26:38). The soul of Christ was
   overcast with a cloud of God's displeasure. The Greek Church speaking
   of the sufferings of Christ, calls them unknown sufferings'. Did the
   Lord Jesus endure all this for us, and shall not we suffer persecution
   for his name? Say, as holy Ignatius, I am willing to die for Christ,
   for Christ my love was crucified'. Our cup is nothing to the cup which
   Christ drank. His cup was mixed with the wrath of God, and if he bore
   God's wrath for us, well may we bear man's wrath of him.

   Great is the honour we bring to Christ and the gospel by suffering. It
   was an honour to Caesar that he had such soldiers as were able to fight
   with hunger and cold and endure hardship in their marches. It is an
   honour to Christ that he has such listed under him as will leave all
   for him. It proclaims him to be a good Master when his servants will
   wear his livery though it be sullied with disgrace and lined with
   blood. Paul's iron chain made the gospel wear a golden chain.
   Tertullian says of the saints in his time that they took their
   sufferings more kindly than if they had had deliverance. Oh, what a
   glory was this to the truth, when they durst embrace it in the flame!
   And as the saints, sufferings adorn the gospel, so they propagate it.
   Basil says, the zeal and constancy of the martyrs in the primitive
   times made some of the heathens to be Christianised. The Church is
   founded in blood and by blood it increases'. The showers of blood have
   ever made the church fruitful. Paul's being bound made the truth more
   enlarged (Philippians 1:13). The gospel has always flourished in the
   ashes of martyrs.

   Consider who it is that we have engaged ourselves to in baptism. There
   we took our press-money. We solemnly vowed that we would be true to
   Christ's interest and fight it out under his banner to the death. And
   how often have we in the blessed supper taken the oath of allegiance to
   Jesus Christ that we would be his liege-servants and that death should
   not part us! Now if when being called to it, we refuse to suffer
   persecution for his name, Christ will bring our baptism as an
   indictment against us. Christ is called the Captain of our salvation'
   (Hebrews 2:10). We have listed ourselves by name under this Captain.
   Now if, for fear, we shall fly from our colours, it is perjury in the
   highest degree, and how shall we be able to look Christ in the face
   another day? That oath which is not kept inviolably shall be punished
   infallibly. Where does the flying roll' of curses light, but in the
   house of him that 'sweareth falsely' (Zechariah 5:4)?

   Our sufferings are light. This light affliction . . .' (2 Corinthians
   4:17) 1 It is heavy to flesh and blood, but it is light to faith.
   Affliction is light in a threefold respect:

   1 It is light in comparison of sin. He that feels sin heavy feels
   suffering light. Sin made Paul cry out, O wretched man that I am!'
   (Romans 7:24). He does not cry out of his iron chain but of his sin.
   The greater noise drowns the lesser. When the sea roars the rivers are
   silent. He that is taken up about his sins, and sees how he has
   provoked God, thinks the yoke of affliction light (Micah 7:9).

   2 Affliction is light in comparison of hell. What is persecution to
   damnation? What is the fire of martyrdom to the fire of the damned? It
   is no more than the pricking of a pin to a death's wound. Who knoweth
   he power of thine anger' (Psalm 90:11)? Christ himself could not have
   borne that anger had he not been more than a man.

   3 Affliction is light in comparison of glory. The weight of glory makes
   persecution light. If, says Chrysostom, the torments of all the men in
   the world could be laid upon one man, it were not worth one hour's
   being in heaven. And if persecution be light we should in a manner set
   light by it. Let us neither faint through unbelief, nor fret through
   impatience.

   Our sufferings are short: After ye have suffered awhile' (1 Peter
   5:10); or as it is in the Greek, a little'. Our sufferings may be
   lasting, not everlasting. Affliction is compared to a cup'
   (Lamentations 4:21). The wicked drink of a sea of wrath which has no
   bottom. It will never be emptied. But it is only a cup of martyrdom,
   and God will say, Let this cup pass away'. The rod of the wicked shall
   not rest upon the lot of the righteous' (Psalm 125:3). The rod may be
   there, it shall not rest. Christ calls his sufferings an hour' (Luke
   22:53). Can we not suffer one hour? Persecution is sharp, but short.
   Though it has a sting to torment, yet it has a wing to fly. Sorrow
   shall fly away' (Isaiah 35:10). It is but awhile when the saints shall
   have a writ of ease granted them. They shall weep no more, suffer no
   more. They shall be taken off the torturing wrack and laid in Christ's
   bosom. The people of God shall not always be in the iron furnace; a
   year of Jubilee will come. The water of persecution like a land-flood
   will soon be dried up.

   While we suffer for Christ we suffer with Christ: If we suffer with him
   . . .' (Romans 8:17). Jesus Christ bears part of the suffering with us.
   Oh, says the Christian, I shall never be able to hold out. But remember
   you suffer with Christ. He helps you to suffer. As our blest Saviour
   said: I am not alone; the Father is with me' (John 16:32); so a
   believer may say, I am not alone, my Christ is with me'. He bears the
   heaviest end of the cross. My grace is sufficient for thee' (2
   Corinthians 12:9). Underneath are the everlasting arms' (Deuteronomy
   33:27). If Christ put the yoke of persecution over us, he will put his
   arms under us. The Lord Jesus will not only crown us when we conquer,
   but he will enable us to conquer. When the dragon fights against the
   godly, Christ is that Michael which stands up for them and helps them
   to overcome (Daniel 12:1).

   He that refuses to suffer persecution shall never be free from
   suffering:

   Internal sufferings. He that will not suffer for conscience shall
   suffer in conscience. Thus Francis Spira, after he had for fear abjured
   that doctrine which once he professed, was in great terror of mind and
   became a very anatomy. He professed he felt the very pains of the
   damned in his soul. He who was afraid of the stake was set upon the
   wrack of conscience.

   External sufferings: Pendleton refused to suffer for Christ; not long
   after, his house was on fire and he was burned in it. He who would not
   burn for Christ was afterwards made to burn for his sins.

   Eternal sufferings: Suffering the vengeance of eternal fire' (Jude 7).

   These present sufferings cannot hinder a man from being blessed.
   Blessed are they that are persecuted . . .' We think, Blessed are they
   that are rich'; nay, but Blessed are they that are persecuted'. Blessed
   is the man that endures temptation . . .' (James 11, 12). If ye suffer
   for righteousness, sake, happy are ye' (1 Peter 3:14).

   Persecution cannot hinder us from being blessed. I shall prove this by
   four demonstrations:

   They are blessed who have God for their God. Happy is that people whose
   God is the Lord' (Psalm 144:15). But persecution cannot hinder us from
   having God for our God. Our God is able to deliver us' (Daniel 3:17).
   Though persecuted, yet they could say, our God'. Therefore persecution
   cannot hinder us from being blessed.

   They are blessed whom God loves, but persecution cannot hinder the love
   of God. Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? Shall
   persecution?' (Romans 8:35). The goldsmith loves his gold as well when
   it is in the fire as when it is in his bag. God loves his children as
   well in adversity, as in prosperity. As many as I love I rebuke'
   (Revelation 3:19). God visits his children in prison. Be of good cheer,
   Paul' (Acts 23:11). God sweetens their sufferings. As the sufferings of
   Christ abound in us, so our consolation also aboundeth' (2 Corinthians
   1:5). As the mother, having given her child a bitter pill, gives it
   afterwards a lump of sugar; persecution is a bitter pill but God gives
   the comforts of his Spirit to sweeten it. If persecution cannot hinder
   God's love, then it cannot hinder us from being blessed.

   They are blessed for whom Christ prays; but such as are persecuted have
   Christ praying for them. Keep through thine own name those whom thou
   hast given me' (John 17:11); which prayer, though made for all
   believers, yet especially for his apostles which he foretold should be
   martyrs (John 16:2). Now if persecution cannot hinder Christ's prayer
   for us, then it cannot impede or obstruct our blessedness.

   They are blessed that have sin purged out; but persecution purges out
   sin (Isaiah 27:9; Hebrews 12:11). Persecution is a corrosive to eat out
   the proud flesh. It is a fan to winnow us, a fire to refine us.
   Persecution is the physic God applies to his children to carry away
   their ill humours. That surely which purges out sin cannot hinder
   blessedness.

   (xi) The great suffering consideration is the glorious reward which
   follows sufferings: Theirs is the kingdom of heaven.' The hope of
   reward, says Saint Basil, is very powerful and moving. Moses had an eye
   at the recompense of reward' (Hebrews 11:26), yea, Christ himself
   (Hebrews 12:2). Many have done great things for hope of a temporal
   reward. Camillus when his country was oppressed by the Gauls, ventured
   his life for his country, to purchase fame and honour. If men will
   hazard their lives for a little temporal honour, what should we do for
   the reward of glory? A merchant, says Chrysostom, does not mind a few
   storms at sea, but he thinks of the emolument and gain when the ship
   comes fraught home. So a Christian should not be over-solicitous about
   his present sufferings, but think of the rich reward when he shall
   arrive at the heavenly port. Great is your reward in heaven' (verse
   12). The cross is a golden ladder by which we climb up to heaven. A
   Christian may lose his life, but not his reward. He may lose his head,
   but not his crown. If he that gives a cup of cold water, shall not lose
   his reward, then much less he that gives a draught of warm blood. The
   rewards of glory may sweeten all the waters of Marah. It should be a
   spur to martyrdom.

   Not that we can merit this reward by our sufferings. I will give thee a
   crown of life' (Revelation 2:10). The reward is the legacy which free
   grace bequeaths. Alas, what proportion is there between a drop of blood
   and a weight of glory? Christ himself, as he was man only (setting
   aside his Godhead), did not merit by his sufferings, for Christ, as he
   was man only, was a creature. Now a creature cannot merit from the
   Creator. Christ's sufferings, as he was man only, were finite,
   therefore could not merit infinite glory. Indeed, as he was God, his
   sufferings were meritorious; but consider him purely as man, they were
   not. This I urge against the Papists. If Christ's sufferings, as he was
   man only (though as man he was above the angels), could not merit, then
   what man upon earth, what prophet or martyr is able to merit anything
   by his sufferings?

   But though we have no reward ex merito', by merit, we shall have it ex
   gratia', by grace. So it is in the text, Great is your reward in
   heaven'. The thoughts of this reward should animate Christians. Look
   upon the crown, and faint if you can. The reward is as far above your
   thoughts as it is beyond your deserts. A man that is to wade through a
   deep water, fixes his eyes upon the firm land before him. While
   Christians are wading through the deep waters of persecution they
   should fix the eyes of their faith on the land of promise. Great is
   your reward in heaven'. They that bear the cross patiently shall wear
   the crown triumphantly.

   Christ's suffering saints shall have greater degrees in glory (Matthew
   19:28). God has his highest seats, yea, his thrones for his martyrs. It
   is true, he that has the least degree of glory, a doorkeeper in heaven,
   will have enough; but as Joseph gave to Benjamin a double mess above
   the rest of his brethren, so God will give to his sufferers a double
   portion of glory. Some orbs in heaven are higher, some stars brighter.
   God's martyrs shall shine brighter in the heavenly horizon.

   Oh, often look upon the recompense of the reward'. Not all the silks of
   Persia, the spices of Arabia, the gold of Ophir, can be compared to
   this glorious reward. How should the thoughts of this whet and steel us
   with courage in our sufferings! When they threatened Basil with
   banishment, he comforted himself with this, that he should be either
   under heaven or in heaven. It was the hope of this reward which so
   animated those primitive martyrs, who, when there was incense put into
   their hands and there was no more required of them for the saving of
   their lives but to sprinkle a little of that incense upon the altar in
   honour of the idol, they would rather die than do it. This glorious
   reward in heaven is called a reigning with Christ. If we suffer, we
   shall also reign with him': first martyrs, then kings. Julian honoured
   all those who were slain in his battles. So does the Lord Jesus. After
   the saints' crucifixion, follows their coronation. They shall reign'.
   The wicked first reign and then suffer. The godly first suffer and then
   reign. The saints shall have a happy reign. It shall be both peaceable
   and durable. Who would not swim through blood to this crown? Who would
   not suffer joyfully? Christ says, Be exceeding glad' (verse 12). The
   Greek word signifies to leap for joy'. Christians should have their
   spirits elevated and exhilarated when they contemplate the weight of
   glory.

   If you would be able to suffer, pray much. Beg of God to clothe you
   with a spirit of zeal and magnanimity. To you it is given in the behalf
   of Christ, not only to believe on him, but also to suffer for his sake'
   (Philippians 1:29). It is a gift of God to be able to suffer. Pray for
   this gift. Do not think you can be able of yourselves to lay down life
   and liberty for Christ. Peter was overconfident of himself. I will lay
   down my life for thy sake' (John 13:37). But Peter's strength undid
   him. Peter had habitual grace, but he lacked auxiliary grace.
   Christians need fresh gales from heaven. Pray for the Spirit to animate
   you in your sufferings. As the fire hardens the potter's vessel which
   is at first weak and limber, so the fire of the Spirit hardens men
   against sufferings. Pray that God will make you like the anvil that you
   may bear the strokes of persecutors with invincible patience.
     __________________________________________________________________

An appendix to the beatitudes

   His commandments are not grievous

   1 John 5:3

   You have seen what Christ calls for poverty of spirit, pureness of
   heart, meekness, mercifulness, cheerfulness in suffering persecution,
   etc. Now that none may hesitate or be troubled at these commands of
   Christ, I thought good (as a closure to the former discourse) to take
   off the surmises and prejudices in men's spirits by this sweet,
   mollifying Scripture, His commandments are not grievous.'

   The censuring world objects against religion that it is difficult and
   irksome. Behold what a weariness is it!' (Malachi 1:13). Therefore the
   Lord, that he may invite and encourage us to obedience, draws religion
   in its fair colours and represents it to us as beautiful and pleasant,
   in these words: His commandments are not grievous.' this may well be
   called a sweetening ingredient put into religion and may serve to take
   off that asperity and harshness which the carnal world would put upon
   the ways of God.

   For the clearing of the terms, let us consider:

   1. What is meant here by commandments?

   By this word, commandments, I understand gospel-precepts; faith,
   repentance, self-denial etc.

   2. What is meant by not grievous?'

   The Greek word signifies they are not tedious or heavy to be borne.
   There is a meiosis in the words. His commands are not grievous', that
   is, they are easy, sweet, excellent.

   Hence observe that none of God's commandments are grievous, when he
   calls us to be meek, merciful, pure in heart. These commandments are
   not grievous. My burden is light' (Matthew 11:30). The Greek word there
   for burden', signifies properly the ballast of a ship' which glides
   through the waves as swiftly and easily as if the ship had no weight or
   pressure in it. Christ's commandments are like the ballast of a ship,
   useful, but not troublesome. All his precepts are sweet and facile,
   therefore called pleasantness' (Proverbs 3:17). To illustrate and
   amplify this, consider two things:
    1. Why Christ lays commands upon his people.
    2. 2. That these commands are not grievous.

   1 Why Christ lays commands upon his people. There are two reasons.

   (i) In regard of Christ, it is suitable to his dignity and state. He is
   Lord paramount. This name is written on his thigh and vesture, King of
   kings' (Revelation 19:16). And shall not a king appoint laws to his
   subjects? It is one of the regal rights, the flowers of the crown, to
   enact laws and statutes. What is a king without his laws? And shall not
   Christ (by whom kings reign', Proverbs 8:15) put forth his royal edicts
   by which the world shall be governed?

   (ii) In regard of the saints, it is well for the people of God that
   they have laws to bind and check the exorbitancies of their unruly
   hearts. How far would the vine spread its luxuriant branches were it
   not pruned and tied? The heart would be ready to run wild in sin if it
   did not have affliction to prune it and the laws of Christ to bind it.
   The precepts of Christ are called a yoke' (Matthew 11:30). The yoke is
   useful. It keeps the oxen in from straggling and running out. So the
   precepts of Christ as a yoke keep the godly from straggling into sin.
   Whither should we not run, into what damnable opinions and practices,
   did not Christ's laws lay a check and restraint upon us? Blessed be God
   for precepts! That is a blessed yoke which yokes our corruptions. We
   should run to hell were it not for this yoke. The laws of Christ are a
   spiritual hedge which keeps the people of God within the pastures of
   ordinances. Some that have broken this hedge and have straggled are now
   in the devil's pound. Thus we see what need the saints have of the
   royal law.

   2 The second thing I am to demonstrate is that Christ's commands are
   not grievous. I confess they are grievous to the unregenerate man. To
   mourn for sin, to be pure in heart, to suffer persecution for
   righteousness' sake, is a hard word, grievous to flesh and blood.
   Therefore Christ's commands are compared to bands and cords, because
   carnal men look upon them so. God's commands restrain men from their
   excess and bind them to their good behaviour. Therefore, they hate
   these bonds and instead of breaking off sin, say, Let us break their
   bands asunder and cast away their cords from us' (Psalm 2:3). A carnal
   man is like an untamed heifer which will not endure the yoke, but kicks
   and flings, or like a wild bull in a net' (Isaiah 51:20). Thus to a
   person in the state of nature Christ's commands are grievous.

   Nay, to a child of God, so far as corruption prevails (for he is but in
   part regenerate), Christ's laws seem irksome. The flesh cries out that
   it cannot pray or suffer. The law in the members, rebels against
   Christ's law. Only the spiritual part prevails and makes the flesh
   stoop to Christ's injunctions. A regenerate person, so far as he is
   regenerate, does not count God's commandments grievous. They are not a
   burden, but a delight.

   Divine commands are not grievous if we consider them first positively
   in these eight particulars:

   (1) A Christian consents to God's commands, therefore they are not
   grievous. I consent to the law that it is good' (Romans 7:16). What is
   done with consent is easy. If the virgin gives her consent, the match
   goes on cheerfully. A godly man in his judgement approves of Christ's
   laws, and in his will consents to them. Therefore they are not
   grievous. A wicked man is under a force; terror of conscience hales him
   to duty. He is like a slave that is chained to the galley. He must work
   whether he will or no. He is forced to pull the rope, tug at the oar.
   But a godly man is like a free subject that consents to his prince's
   laws and obeys out of choice as seeing the equity and rationality of
   them. Thus a gracious heart sees a beauty and equity in the commands of
   heaven that draws forth consent, and this consent makes them that they
   are not grievous.

   (2) They are Christ's commands, therefore not grievous. Take my yoke'
   (Matthew 11:29). Gospel commands are not the laws of a tyrant, but of a
   Saviour. The husband's commands are not grievous to the wife. It is her
   ambition to obey. This is enough to animate and excite obedience,
   Christ's commands. As Peter said in another sense, Lord if it be thou,
   bid me come unto thee upon the water' (Matthew 14:28), so says a
   gracious soul; Lord, if it be thou that wouldest have me mourn for sin
   and breathe after heart purity; if it be thou (dear Saviour) that
   biddest me do these things, I will cheerfully obey. Thy commandments
   are not grievous'. A soldier at the word of his general makes a brave
   onset.

   (3) Christians obey out of a principle of love, and then God's
   commandments are not grievous. Therefore in Scripture serving and
   loving of God are put together. The sons of the strangers that join
   themselves to the Lord, to serve him and to love the name of the Lord
   ...' (Isaiah 56:6). Nothing is grievous to him that loves. Love
   lightens a burden; it adds wings to obedience. An heart that loves God
   counts nothing tedious but its own dullness and slowness of motion.
   Love makes sin heavy and Christ's burden light.

   (4) A Christian is carried on by the help of the Spirit, and the Spirit
   makes every duty easy. The Spirit helpeth our infirmities' (Romans
   8:26). The Spirit works in us both to will and to do' (Philippians
   2:13). When God enables us to do what he commands then his commandments
   are not grievous'. If two carry a burden it is easy. The Spirit of God
   helps us to do duties, to bear burdens. He draws as it were in the yoke
   with us. If the scrivener guides the child's hand and helps it to frame
   its letter, now it is not hard for the child to write. If the loadstone
   draw the iron, it is not hard for the iron to move. If the Spirit of
   God as a divine loadstone draw and move the heart, now it is not hard
   to obey. When the bird has wings given it, it can fly. Though the soul
   of itself be unable to do that which is good, yet having two wings
   given it (like that woman in the Revelation, (Revelation 12:14), the
   wing of faith and the wing of the Spirit, now it flies swiftly in
   obedience. The Spirit lifted me up' (Ezekiel 11:1). The heart is
   heavenly in prayer when the Spirit lifts it up. The sails of a mill
   cannot move of themselves, but when the wind blows then they turn
   round. When a gale of the Spirit blows upon the soul, now the sails of
   the affections move swiftly in duty.

   (5) All Christ's commands are beneficial, not grievous. And now, O
   Israel, what doth the Lord thy God require of thee, but to fear the
   Lord thy God, to love him, to keep his statutes which I command thee
   this day for thy good' (Deuteronomy 10:12, 13). Christ's commands carry
   meat in the mouth of them, and then surely they are not grievous.
   Salvation runs along in every precept. To obey Christ's laws is not so
   much of duty as our privilege. All Christ's commands centre in
   blessedness. Physic is in itself very unpleasant, yet because it tends
   to health no man refuses it. Divine precepts are to the fleshy part
   irksome, yet, having such excellent operation as to make us both holy
   and happy, they are not to be accounted grievous. The apprentice is
   content to go through hard service, because it makes way for his
   freedom. The scholar willingly wrestles with the knotty difficulties of
   arts and sciences because they serve both to ennoble and advance him.
   How cheerfully does a believer obey those laws which reveal Christ's
   love! That suffering is not grievous which leads to a crown. This made
   Saint Paul say, I take pleasure in infirmities, in persecutions' (2
   Corinthians 12:10).

   (6) It is honourable to be under Christ's commands. Therefore they are
   not grievous. The precepts of Christ do not burden us but adorn us. It
   is an honour to be employed in Christ's service. How cheerfully did the
   rowers row the barge that carried Caesar! The honour makes the precept
   easy. A crown of gold is in itself heavy, but the honour of the crown
   makes it light and easy to be worn. I may say of every command of
   Christ, as Solomon speaks of wisdom, She shall give to thine head an
   ornament of grace: a crown of glory shall she deliver to thee'
   (Proverbs 4:9). It is honourable working at court. The honour of
   Christ's yoke makes it easy and eligible.

   (7) Christ's commands are sweetened with joy and then they are not
   grievous. Cicero questions whether that can properly be called a burden
   which is carried with joy and pleasure? When the wheels of a chariot
   are oiled they run swiftly. When God pours in the oil of gladness, how
   fast does the soul run in the ways of his commandments! Joy strengthens
   for duty. The joy of the Lord is your strength' (Nehemiah 7:10); and
   the more strength, the less weariness. God sometimes drops down comfort
   and then a Christian can run in the yoke.

   (8) Gospel commands are finite, therefore not grievous. Christ will not
   always be laying his commands upon us. Christ will shortly take off the
   yoke from our neck and set a crown upon our head. There is a time
   coming when we shall not only be free from our sins, but our duties
   too. Prayer and fasting are irksome to the flesh. In heaven there will
   be no need of prayer or repentance. Duties shall cease there. Indeed in
   heaven the saints shall love God, but love is no burden. God will shine
   forth in his beauty, and to fall in love with beauty is not grievous.
   In heaven the saints shall praise God, but their praising of him shall
   be so sweetened with delight that it will not be a duty any more, but
   part of their reward. It is the angels' heaven to praise God. This then
   makes Christ's commands not grievous; though they are spiritual, yet
   they are temporary; it is but a while and duties shall be no more. The
   saints shall not so much be under commands as embraces. Wait but a
   while and you shall put off your armour and end your weary marches.
   Thus we have seen that Christ's commands considered in themselves are
   not grievous.

   Let us consider Christ's commands comparatively, and we shall see they
   are not grievous. Let us make a fourfold comparison. Compare Gospel
   commands:

   1 With the severity of the moral law,

   2 With the commands of sin,

   3 With the torments of the damned,

   4 With the glory of heaven

   1 Christ's commands in the gospel are not grievous compared with the
   severity of the moral law. The moral law was such a burden as neither
   we nor our fathers could bear. Cursed is every one that continueth not
   in all things which are written in the book of the law to do them'
   (Galatians 3:10). Impossible it is that any Christian should come up to
   the strictness of this. The golden mandates of the gospel comparatively
   are easy. For:

   (1) In the gospel, if there be a desire to keep God's commandments, it
   is accepted. If there be first a willing mind it is accepted' (Nehemiah
   1:11; 2 Corinthians 8:12). Though a man had had never so good a mind to
   have fulfilled the moral law, it would not have been accepted. He must
   de facto' (in actual deed) have obeyed (Galatians 3:12). But in the
   gospel God crowns the desire. If a Christian says in humility, Lord, I
   desire to obey thee, I would be more holy' (Isaiah 26:8), this desire
   springing from love passes for current.

   (2) In the gospel a surety is admitted in the court. The law would not
   admit of a surety. It required personal obedience. But now, God so far
   indulges us that, what we cannot of ourselves do, we may do by a proxy.
   Christ is called a surety of a better testament' (Hebrews 7:22). We
   cannot walk so exactly. We tread awry and fall short in everything, but
   God looks upon us in our surety, and Christ having fulfilled all
   righteousness' (Matthew 3:15), it is all one as if we had fulfilled the
   law in our own persons.

   (3) The law commanded and threatened, but gave no strength to perform.
   It Egyptianized, requiring the full tale of brick, but gave no straw.
   But now God with his commands gives power. Gospel-precepts are
   sweetened with promises. God commands, Make you a new heart' (Ezekiel
   18:31). Lord, may the soul say, I make a new heart? I can as well make
   a new world. But see Ezekiel 36:26, A new heart also will I give you'.
   God commands us to cleanse ourselves: Wash you, make you clean' (Isaiah
   1:16). Lord, where should I have power to cleanse myself? Who can bring
   a clean thing out of an unclean?' (Job 14:4). See the precept turned
   into a promise: From all your filthiness and from your idols will I
   cleanse you' (Ezekiel 36:25). If, when the child cannot go, the father
   takes it by the hand and leads it, now it is not hard for the child to
   go. When we cannot go, God takes us by the hand, I taught Ephraim also
   to go, taking them by their arms' (Hosea 11:3).

   (4) In the gospel God winks at infirmities where the heart is right.
   The law called for perfect obedience. It was death to have shot but an
   hairbreadth short of the mark. It were sad if the same rigour should
   continue upon us. Woe to the holiest man that lives (says Augustine) if
   God comes to weigh him in the balance of his justice. It is with our
   best duties as with gold. Put the gold in the fire and you will see
   dross come out. What drossiness in our holy things! But in the gospel,
   though God will not endure haltings, yet he will pass by failings. Thus
   Christ's commands in the gospel are not grievous compared with the
   severity of the moral law.

   Christ's commands are not grievous compared with the commands of sin.
   Sin lays an heavy yoke upon men. Sin is compared to a talent of lead
   (Zechariah 5:7) to show the weightiness of it. The commands of sin are
   burdensome. Let a man be under the power and rage of any lust (whether
   it be covetousness or ambition), how he tires and excruciates himself!
   What hazards does he run, even to the endangering of his health and
   soul, that he may satisfy his lust! They weary themselves to commit
   iniquity' (Jeremiah 9:5). And are not Christ's precepts easy and sweet
   in comparison of sin's austere and inexorable commands? Therefore
   Chrysostom says well that virtue is easier than vice. Temperance is
   less burdensome than drunkenness. Doing justice is less burdensome than
   violence. There is more difficulty and perplexity in the contrivement
   (Micah 2:1) and pursuit of wicked ends than in obeying the sweet and
   gentle precepts of Christ. Hence it is that a wicked man is said to
   travail with iniquity' (Psalm 7:14), to show what anxious pain and
   trouble he has in bringing about his wickedness. What tedious and
   hazardous journeys did Antiochus Epiphanes take in persecuting the
   people of the Jews! Many have gone with more pain to hell than others
   have to heaven.

   3 Christ's commands are not grievous compared with the grievous
   torments of the damned. The rich man cries out I am tormented in this
   flame' (Luke 16:24). Hell fire is so inconceivably torturing that the
   wicked do not know either how to bear or to avoid it. The torment of
   the damned may be compared to a yoke and it differs from other yokes.
   Usually the yoke is laid but upon the neck of the beast, but the
   hell-yoke is laid upon every part of the sinner. His eyes shall behold
   nothing but bloody tragedies. His ears shall hear the groans and
   shrieks of blaspheming spirits. He shall suffer in every member of his
   body and faculty of his soul, and this agony though violent yet
   perpetual. The yoke of the damned shall never be taken off. The
   footprints show no return' Sinners might break the golden chain of
   God's commands, but they cannot break the iron chain of his
   punishments. It is as impossible for them to file this chain as to
   scale heaven.

   And are not gospel-commands easy in comparison of hell-torments? What
   does Christ command? He bids you repent. Is it not better to weep for
   sin than bleed for it? Christ bids you pray in your families and
   closets. Is it not better praying than roaring? He bids you sanctify
   the Sabbath. Is it not better to keep an holy rest to the Lord than to
   be for ever without rest? Hell is a restless place. There is no
   intermission of torment for one minute of an hour. I appeal to the
   consciences of men. Are not Christ's commands sweet and facile in
   comparison of the insupportable pains of reprobates? Is not obeying
   better than damning? Are not the cords of love better than the chains
   of darkness?

   4 Gospel commands are not grievous compared with the glory of heaven.
   What an infinite disproportion is there between service and reward!
   What are all the saints, labours and travails in religion compared with
   the crown of recompense? The weight of glory makes duty light.

   Behold here an encouraging argument to religion. How may this make us
   in love with the ways of God! His commandments are not grievous'.
   Believers are not now under the thundering curses of the law, no, nor
   under the ceremonies of it, which were both numerous and burdensome.
   The ways of God are equal, his statutes eligible! He bids us mourn that
   we may be comforted. He bids us be poor in spirit that he may settle a
   kingdom upon us. God is no hard Master. His commandments are not
   grievous.' O Christian, serve God out of choice (Psalm 119:3). Think of
   the joy, the honour, the reward of godliness. Never more grudge God
   your service. Whatever he prescribes, let your hearts subscribe.

   It reproves them that refuse to obey these sweet and gentle commands of
   Christ. Israel would none of me' (Psalm 81:11). We may cry out with
   Augustine that the generality of men choose rather to put their neck in
   the devil's yoke than to submit to the sweet and easy yoke of Christ.
   What should be the reason that, when God's commandments are not
   grievous', his ways pleasantness, his service perfect freedom, yet men
   should not vail to Christ's sceptre nor stoop to his laws?

   Surely the cause may be that inbred hatred which is naturally in men's
   hearts against Christ. Sinners are called God-haters' (Romans 1:30).
   Sin begets not only a dislike of the ways of God, but hatred; and from
   disaffection flows disloyalty. His citizens hated him and sent a
   message after him, saying, We will not have this man to reign over us'
   (Luke 19:14)

   Besides this inbred hatred against Christ, the devil labours to blow
   the coals and increase this odium and antipathy. He raises an evil
   report upon religion as those spies did on Canaan. They brought up an
   evil report of the land' (Numbers 13:32). Satan is implacably
   malicious, and as he sometimes accuses us to God, so he accuses God to
   us, and says, He is an hard Master and his commandments are grievous.
   It is the devil's design to do as the sons of Eli, who made the
   offering of God to be abhorred' (1 Samuel 2:17). If there be any hatred
   and prejudice in the heart against religion, an enemy hath done this'
   (Matthew 13:28, 38). The devil raises in the hearts of men a twofold
   prejudice against Christ and his ways:

   (1) The paucity of them that embrace religion. The way of Christ is but
   a pathway (Psalm 119:35), whereas the way of pleasure and vanity is the
   roadway. Many ignorantly conclude that must needs be the best way which
   most go. I answer: There are but few that are saved, and will not you
   be saved because so few are saved? A man does not argue thus in other
   things: there are but few rich, therefore I will not be rich; nay,
   therefore, he the rather strives to be rich. Why should not we argue
   thus wisely about our souls? There are but few that go to heaven,
   therefore we will labour the more to be of the number of that few.

   What a weak argument is this: there are but few that embrace religion,
   therefore you will not! Those things which are more excellent are more
   rare. There are but few pearls and diamonds; in Rome, few senators. The
   fewness of them that embrace religion argues the way of religion
   excellent. It is not every man than can get to Corinth."

   We are warned not to sail with the multitude (Exodus 23:2). Most fish
   goes to the Devil's net.

   (2) The ways of religion are rendered deformed and unlovely by the
   scandals of professors.

   I answer: I acknowledge the lustre of religion has been much eclipsed
   and sullied by the scandals of men. This is an age of scandals. Many
   have made the pretence of religion a key to open the door to all
   ungodliness. Never was God's name more taken in vain. This is that our
   Saviour has foretold. It must needs be that offences come' (Matthew
   18:7). But to take off this prejudice, consider: scandals are not from
   religion, but for want of religion. Religion is not the worse, though
   some abuse it. To dislike religion because some of the professors of it
   are scandalous is as if one should say, Because the servant is
   dishonest, therefore he will not have a good opinion of his master. Is
   Christ the less glorious because some that wear his livery are
   scandalous? Is religion the worse because some of her followers are
   bad? Is wine the worse because some are intemperate? Shall a woman
   dislike chastity because some of her neighbours are unchaste? Let us
   argue soberly. Judge not according to the appearance, but judge
   righteous judgement' (John 7:24).

   God sometimes permits scandals to fall out in the church out of a
   design:

   (1) As a just judgement upon hypocrites. These squint-eyed devotionists
   who serve God for their own ends, the Lord in justice suffers them to
   fall into horrid debauched practices that he may lay open their
   baseness to the world and that all may see they were but piebald
   Christians, painted devils; Judas, first a sly hypocrite, afterwards a
   visible traitor.

   (2) Scandals are for hardening of the profane. Some desperate sinners
   who would never give God a good word, they would not be won by
   religion, they shall be wounded by it. God lets scandals be to be a
   break neck to men and to engulf them more in sin. Jesus Christ (God
   blessed for ever') is to some a rock of offence' (Romans 9:33). His
   blood, which is to some balm, is to others poison. If the beauty of
   religion does not allure, the scandals of some of its followers shall
   precipitate men to hell.

   (3) Scandals in the church are for the caution of the godly. The Lord
   would have his people walk tremblingly. Be not high-minded, but fear'
   (Romans 11:20). When cedars fall, let the bruised reed' tremble. The
   scandals of professors are not to discourage us but to warn us. Let us
   tread more warily. The scandals of others are sea-marks for the saints
   to avoid. And let all this serve to take off these prejudices from
   religion. Though Satan may endeavour by false disguises to render the
   gospel odious, yet there is a beauty and a glory in it. God's
   commandments are not grievous'.

   Let me persuade all men cordially to embrace the ways of God. His
   commandments are not grievous'. God never burdens us but that he may
   unburden us of our sins. His commands are our privileges. There is joy
   in the way of duty (Psalm 19:11), and heaven at the end.
     __________________________________________________________________

                                    Indexes
     __________________________________________________________________

Index of Scripture References

   Genesis

   [1]1:26   [2]2:21   [3]3:10   [4]3:12   [5]3:15   [6]3:17   [7]3:18
   [8]4:13   [9]4:16   [10]6:2   [11]6:3   [12]6:9   [13]6:9   [14]13:8
   [15]14:14   [16]18:17   [17]18:19   [18]19:2   [19]19:20   [20]21:10
   [21]22:12   [22]23:7   [23]25:32   [24]26:15   [25]26:32   [26]27:28
   [27]27:33   [28]27:33   [29]27:38   [30]27:38   [31]28:16   [32]28:17
   [33]28:18   [34]30:14   [35]32:24   [36]32:30   [37]34:2   [38]39:9
   [39]39:12   [40]41:40   [41]42:1-2   [42]42:25   [43]44:30
   [44]48:15   [45]49:4   [46]49:4

   Exodus

   [47]2:6   [48]2:9   [49]2:13   [50]4:6   [51]14:5   [52]15:11
   [53]15:24-25   [54]17:3   [55]19:4   [56]19:18   [57]22:1   [58]23:1
   [59]23:1   [60]23:1   [61]23:2   [62]23:5   [63]23:11   [64]23:25
   [65]25:11   [66]25:14   [67]26:3-4   [68]30:18   [69]33:18
   [70]33:18   [71]33:19   [72]33:23   [73]33:32   [74]35:22-24

   Leviticus

   [75]3:3   [76]4:11   [77]6:13   [78]9:14   [79]13:8   [80]13:45
   [81]13:46   [82]16:12   [83]16:13   [84]19:9   [85]19:16   [86]19:16
   [87]19:17   [88]25:35   [89]26:40

   Numbers

   [90]5:12-22   [91]12:2   [92]12:3   [93]12:8   [94]13:23   [95]13:32
   [96]13:32   [97]14:24   [98]14:24   [99]18:21   [100]19:22
   [101]23:10   [102]23:21   [103]23:21

   Deuteronomy

   [104]1:27   [105]6:6-7   [106]10:12-13   [107]14:28-29   [108]15:7-8
   [109]15:10   [110]15:10   [111]16:11   [112]20:8   [113]23:18
   [114]24:6   [115]27:17   [116]27:24   [117]28:15-20   [118]28:16-18
   [119]28:65-66   [120]29:19   [121]32:2   [122]32:5   [123]32:5
   [124]32:5   [125]33:27

   Joshua

   [126]2:9   [127]7:21   [128]15:19

   Judges

   [129]2:4-5   [130]8:2   [131]10:10   [132]15:4-5   [133]15:18
   [134]16:25

   Ruth

   [135]1:21   [136]4:11

   1 Samuel

   [137]1:13   [138]1:15   [139]2:17   [140]2:23-24   [141]3:9
   [142]3:18   [143]7:9   [144]10:12   [145]11:2   [146]12:3
   [147]15:24   [148]15:24   [149]15:30   [150]18:18   [151]22:7
   [152]24:16-17   [153]25:11   [154]26:7   [155]26:12   [156]26:23
   [157]28:7   [158]28:15

   2 Samuel

   [159]6:22   [160]6:22   [161]7:14   [162]7:18   [163]7:18   [164]7:18
   [165]12:14   [166]13   [167]13:2   [168]13:4   [169]13:5   [170]13:15
   [171]14:32   [172]14:32-33   [173]16:5   [174]16:11   [175]16:11
   [176]16:12   [177]22:26   [178]24:24

   1 Kings

   [179]1:39   [180]8:38   [181]10:3   [182]10:27   [183]11:11
   [184]11:14   [185]14:30   [186]17:10   [187]19:12   [188]19:12
   [189]21:4   [190]21:12   [191]21:13   [192]21:19   [193]21:27

   2 Kings

   [194]4:8-37   [195]4:19   [196]6:17   [197]6:22   [198]6:22
   [199]6:25   [200]10:16   [201]11:1

   1 Chronicles

   [202]21:24   [203]28:9

   2 Chronicles

   [204]8:18   [205]16:12   [206]18:9   [207]19:2   [208]19:2
   [209]20:2-3   [210]21:19   [211]33:12   [212]33:13   [213]34:27
   [214]34:27

   Ezra

   [215]9:6

   Nehemiah

   [216]1:11   [217]1:11   [218]6:11   [219]7:10   [220]8:10   [221]9:5

   Esther

   [222]1:4   [223]3:9   [224]5:2   [225]5:2   [226]6:3   [227]8:8
   [228]8:15

   Job

   [229]1:21   [230]2:3   [231]5:19   [232]6:4   [233]14:4   [234]14:4
   [235]15:11   [236]15:14   [237]19:25-26   [238]19:26-27
   [239]21:12-13   [240]21:14   [241]23:10   [242]27:6   [243]29:3
   [244]29:14-15   [245]30:31   [246]38:7   [247]38:7   [248]39:30
   [249]41:15   [250]41:24   [251]41:24   [252]41:29   [253]41:29
   [254]41:33   [255]42:6

   Psalms

   [256]1:4   [257]2:3   [258]2:7   [259]2:12   [260]3:8   [261]4:1
   [262]4:7   [263]4:7   [264]6:8   [265]6:8   [266]7:10   [267]7:14
   [268]9:10   [269]10:9   [270]10:11   [271]10:17   [272]12:2
   [273]15:3   [274]15:4   [275]16:3   [276]16:11   [277]16:11
   [278]16:11   [279]16:11   [280]17:15   [281]17:15   [282]17:15
   [283]19:1   [284]19:11   [285]21:3   [286]22:6   [287]22:16
   [288]25:15   [289]26:4-5   [290]27:9   [291]27:12   [292]29:11
   [293]30:5   [294]32:1   [295]32:2   [296]32:2   [297]32:2   [298]33:1
   [299]34:8   [300]35:11   [301]35:11   [302]35:12-13   [303]36:8
   [304]36:8-9   [305]36:9   [306]36:9   [307]37:11   [308]37:26
   [309]37:26   [310]37:26   [311]37:30   [312]38:9   [313]38:12-13
   [314]41:1   [315]41:1   [316]41:1   [317]41:2   [318]42:2   [319]42:2
   [320]42:3   [321]43:5   [322]45:2   [323]45:10   [324]45:13
   [325]45:14   [326]48:14   [327]48:14   [328]49:4   [329]49:20
   [330]50:23   [331]51:3   [332]51:3   [333]51:4   [334]51:8
   [335]51:10   [336]51:17   [337]55:21   [338]56:8   [339]56:8
   [340]56:8   [341]56:8   [342]58:11   [343]61:2   [344]63:1
   [345]63:3   [346]63:5   [347]63:5   [348]64:3   [349]65:9-10
   [350]65:13   [351]66:18   [352]68:20   [353]68:21   [354]69:9
   [355]69:12   [356]71:17   [357]73:1   [358]73:1   [359]73:18
   [360]73:25   [361]73:28   [362]73:28   [363]74:14   [364]76:2
   [365]77:2   [366]78:19   [367]80:5   [368]81:10   [369]81:10
   [370]81:11   [371]81:11   [372]82:6   [373]84:10   [374]87:7
   [375]89:33   [376]90:11   [377]91:10   [378]91:11   [379]91:13
   [380]91:15   [381]91:15   [382]92:13   [383]94:1   [384]94:12
   [385]94:19   [386]95:3   [387]97:11   [388]102:27   [389]103:3
   [390]103:11   [391]103:13   [392]103:17   [393]104:10   [394]104:10
   [395]104:10   [396]106:16   [397]106:35   [398]107:5   [399]107:9
   [400]107:9   [401]107:9   [402]109:16   [403]109:69   [404]110:3
   [405]110:3   [406]111:1   [407]112:1   [408]112:4   [409]112:5
   [410]112:6   [411]112:9   [412]115:15   [413]116:7   [414]116:15
   [415]116:18   [416]118:12   [417]119:2   [418]119:3   [419]119:5
   [420]119:20   [421]119:30   [422]119:35   [423]119:50   [424]119:63
   [425]119:72   [426]119:97   [427]119:100   [428]119:104
   [429]119:119   [430]119:120   [431]119:128   [432]119:136
   [433]119:140   [434]120:7   [435]121:4   [436]122:4   [437]125:1
   [438]125:3   [439]126:5   [440]131:2   [441]132:14   [442]133:1
   [443]137:1   [444]137:2   [445]137:4   [446]139:7   [447]139:23
   [448]140:3   [449]141:7   [450]143:7   [451]143:10   [452]144:15
   [453]144:15   [454]144:15   [455]145:9   [456]147:14   [457]149:4
   [458]149:8

   Proverbs

   [459]1:24   [460]1:26   [461]1:28   [462]1:29   [463]2:14   [464]2:25
   [465]3:17   [466]4:8   [467]4:9   [468]6:19   [469]7:3-4   [470]7:23
   [471]8   [472]8:15   [473]8:18   [474]10:12   [475]10:22   [476]11:17
   [477]11:25   [478]11:30   [479]12:20   [480]13:5   [481]13:7
   [482]13:20   [483]14:13   [484]14:14   [485]14:15   [486]14:34
   [487]15:9   [488]16:5   [489]16:32   [490]17:3   [491]17:14
   [492]19:2   [493]19:11   [494]19:11   [495]19:17   [496]20:3
   [497]21:25   [498]22:1   [499]22:6   [500]22:13   [501]22:24
   [502]23:5   [503]23:23   [504]23:23   [505]23:27   [506]23:32
   [507]25:18   [508]27:4   [509]27:7   [510]27:7   [511]27:24
   [512]27:24   [513]28:1   [514]28:1   [515]28:13   [516]28:25
   [517]29:25   [518]29:25   [519]30:8   [520]30:12   [521]30:15
   [522]30:20   [523]34

   Ecclesiastes

   [524]1:8   [525]2:2   [526]2:2   [527]2:8   [528]2:11   [529]2:18
   [530]5:10   [531]5:13   [532]6:2   [533]7:1   [534]7:9   [535]7:29
   [536]8:11   [537]10:19   [538]11:1   [539]11:2   [540]11:7
   [541]12:6   [542]12:10

   Song of Solomon

   [543]1:2   [544]1:5   [545]1:6   [546]2:2   [547]2:5   [548]2:11-12
   [549]2:14   [550]2:14   [551]2:14   [552]4:4   [553]4:8   [554]4:9
   [555]4:11   [556]5:2   [557]5:6   [558]5:6   [559]5:7   [560]5:7
   [561]5:11   [562]5:11   [563]5:13   [564]8:2   [565]8:6   [566]8:6
   [567]8:7

   Isaiah

   [568]1:6   [569]1:15   [570]1:16   [571]1:18   [572]6:3   [573]9:6
   [574]9:6   [575]11:6   [576]11:6-9   [577]16:9   [578]16:11
   [579]22:4-5   [580]22:12   [581]22:14   [582]25:6   [583]25:9
   [584]26:8   [585]26:9   [586]26:9   [587]26:9   [588]27:5   [589]27:9
   [590]28:10   [591]30:8-9   [592]30:18   [593]30:22   [594]32:6
   [595]32:15   [596]33:1   [597]33:17   [598]33:24   [599]35:1
   [600]35:10   [601]38:5   [602]38:5   [603]38:5   [604]38:14
   [605]39:2   [606]40:2   [607]40:31   [608]40:31   [609]41:8
   [610]41:10   [611]43:4   [612]43:4   [613]43:25   [614]44:3
   [615]44:3   [616]44:22   [617]45:11   [618]45:19   [619]46:13
   [620]48:17   [621]49:5   [622]49:5   [623]49:15-16   [624]50:7
   [625]50:16   [626]51:20   [627]53:5   [628]54:5   [629]54:7
   [630]54:8   [631]54:11   [632]55:1   [633]55:1-2   [634]55:7
   [635]55:7   [636]55:13   [637]56:6   [638]56:7   [639]57:2
   [640]57:15   [641]57:16   [642]57:17   [643]57:18   [644]57:20
   [645]57:20   [646]57:20   [647]57:21   [648]58:1   [649]58:1
   [650]58:7   [651]58:9   [652]58:10   [653]58:10   [654]58:12
   [655]59:17   [656]60:8   [657]60:15   [658]61:1   [659]61:3
   [660]61:3   [661]61:8   [662]61:9   [663]61:10   [664]62:3
   [665]63:10   [666]65:15   [667]66:2

   Jeremiah

   [668]2:13   [669]4:14   [670]5:7   [671]6:11   [672]7:16   [673]9:5
   [674]12:2   [675]12:7   [676]15:16   [677]16:7   [678]17:11
   [679]18:12   [680]20:4   [681]22:21   [682]23:6   [683]23:32
   [684]31:14   [685]31:14   [686]31:19   [687]31:19   [688]31:20
   [689]31:33   [690]31:34   [691]31:34   [692]32:39   [693]35:5-6
   [694]50:20   [695]51:56

   Lamentations

   [696]2:18   [697]3:22   [698]3:27   [699]4:21

   Ezekiel

   [700]1:8   [701]3:20   [702]7:16   [703]7:16   [704]7:19   [705]10:4
   [706]11:1   [707]16:6   [708]16:6   [709]16:6   [710]16:8
   [711]18:31   [712]20:43   [713]21:9-10   [714]28:5   [715]28:24
   [716]33:31   [717]33:31   [718]33:32   [719]36:25   [720]36:25
   [721]36:26   [722]36:26   [723]36:26   [724]36:26   [725]36:27
   [726]36:27   [727]36:37   [728]47:12

   Daniel

   [729]2:35   [730]3:17   [731]3:18   [732]3:22   [733]4:16   [734]5:3
   [735]5:6   [736]7:9   [737]12:1   [738]12:3   [739]12:10   [740]12:10
   [741]12:10

   Hosea

   [742]1:4   [743]1:9   [744]2:6   [745]2:9   [746]2:19   [747]7:14
   [748]10:2   [749]11:3   [750]11:8   [751]11:8   [752]11:8   [753]11:8
   [754]12:1   [755]12:4   [756]12:4   [757]12:4   [758]14:1   [759]14:4
   [760]14:4   [761]14:8

   Joel

   [762]2:2   [763]2:12   [764]2:12

   Amos

   [765]1:11   [766]2:7   [767]2:7   [768]5:12   [769]6:4   [770]6:5-6
   [771]6:13   [772]8:5

   Jonah

   [773]2:4   [774]3:2   [775]4:9

   Micah

   [776]2:1   [777]3:2   [778]3:10-11   [779]6:8   [780]6:11   [781]7:9
   [782]7:18

   Nahum

   [783]1:5   [784]1:6   [785]1:14

   Habakkuk

   [786]1:13   [787]2:4   [788]2:6

   Zephaniah

   [789]2:3

   Haggai

   [790]2:12-13

   Zechariah

   [791]2:8   [792]3:3   [793]3:4-5   [794]5:4   [795]5:7   [796]7:11
   [797]7:12   [798]7:12   [799]8:18-23   [800]10:2   [801]10:7
   [802]11:8   [803]12:10   [804]12:10   [805]12:10   [806]12:10
   [807]12:10   [808]12:11   [809]13:1   [810]13:6

   Malachi

   [811]1:8   [812]1:10   [813]1:13   [814]3:17   [815]3:17   [816]3:17
   [817]3:17

   Matthew

   [818]1:21   [819]2:9-11   [820]2:11   [821]2:11   [822]2:18
   [823]3:15   [824]3:17   [825]5:1-2   [826]5:1-12   [827]5:3
   [828]5:3   [829]5:4   [830]5:5   [831]5:6   [832]5:6   [833]5:7
   [834]5:8   [835]5:8   [836]5:9   [837]5:9   [838]5:10   [839]5:11
   [840]5:12   [841]5:12   [842]5:12   [843]5:14   [844]5:14   [845]5:20
   [846]5:22   [847]5:44   [848]5:48   [849]6:2   [850]6:16   [851]6:26
   [852]6:33   [853]7:2   [854]7:29   [855]8:12   [856]8:20   [857]8:24
   [858]9:2   [859]9:34   [860]10:7   [861]10:18   [862]10:18
   [863]10:23   [864]10:33   [865]10:33   [866]10:39   [867]11:12
   [868]11:25   [869]11:29   [870]11:29   [871]11:29   [872]11:30
   [873]11:30   [874]12:20   [875]13:5   [876]13:7   [877]13:7
   [878]13:13   [879]13:17   [880]13:20-21   [881]13:21   [882]13:28
   [883]13:38   [884]14:28   [885]15:28   [886]15:32   [887]15:32
   [888]15:32   [889]16:24   [890]16:24   [891]16:25   [892]16:26
   [893]17:2   [894]18:7   [895]18:21   [896]18:22   [897]18:27
   [898]18:27   [899]18:28   [900]19:27   [901]19:28   [902]19:29
   [903]19:29   [904]21:5   [905]21:15   [906]21:22   [907]23:19
   [908]23:25   [909]23:27   [910]24:46   [911]25:11   [912]25:21
   [913]25:25   [914]25:30   [915]25:34   [916]25:37   [917]25:40
   [918]25:42   [919]26:15   [920]26:33   [921]26:35   [922]26:38
   [923]26:52   [924]27   [925]27:2   [926]27:3   [927]27:6   [928]27:29
   [929]27:35   [930]27:40   [931]28:6   [932]28:20

   Mark

   [933]2:8   [934]3:5   [935]4:1   [936]4:39   [937]5:5   [938]5:5
   [939]6:12   [940]9:24   [941]9:50   [942]11:25   [943]11:26
   [944]14:8   [945]14:37   [946]14:49   [947]14:65   [948]16:14

   Luke

   [949]1:47   [950]1:53   [951]1:76   [952]2:14   [953]2:48   [954]3:22
   [955]4:33   [956]5:29   [957]5:31   [958]6:21   [959]6:21   [960]6:21
   [961]6:25   [962]6:28   [963]6:36   [964]6:38   [965]7   [966]7:38
   [967]7:38   [968]8:6   [969]8:46   [970]9:55   [971]11:13
   [972]11:13   [973]11:52   [974]12:4   [975]12:19   [976]12:20
   [977]12:20   [978]12:27   [979]12:32   [980]12:32   [981]12:50
   [982]13:3   [983]13:25   [984]14:18   [985]14:26   [986]14:26
   [987]14:28   [988]15:7   [989]15:7   [990]15:7   [991]15:7
   [992]15:10   [993]15:18   [994]15:18   [995]15:21   [996]15:24
   [997]16:2   [998]16:14   [999]16:24   [1000]16:24   [1001]17:21
   [1002]17:21   [1003]18:11   [1004]18:13   [1005]18:13   [1006]19:8
   [1007]19:14   [1008]19:16-17   [1009]20:47   [1010]21:5   [1011]21:14
   [1012]21:15   [1013]21:18   [1014]22:48   [1015]22:53   [1016]23:4
   [1017]23:33   [1018]23:41   [1019]23:43   [1020]23:46   [1021]24:32

   John

   [1022]2:7   [1023]2:9   [1024]2:14-15   [1025]3:4   [1026]3:4
   [1027]3:5   [1028]3:18   [1029]3:34   [1030]3:34   [1031]3:36
   [1032]4:22   [1033]4:24   [1034]4:29   [1035]4:34   [1036]5:24
   [1037]6:50   [1038]7:24   [1039]7:38-39   [1040]7:46   [1041]8:18
   [1042]8:40   [1043]8:44   [1044]8:44   [1045]8:44   [1046]8:44
   [1047]8:46   [1048]8:48   [1049]10:27   [1050]10:28   [1051]10:28
   [1052]10:42   [1053]12:42   [1054]13:37   [1055]14:2   [1056]14:10
   [1057]14:16   [1058]14:26   [1059]14:27   [1060]15:3   [1061]15:4
   [1062]16:2   [1063]16:7-8   [1064]16:13   [1065]16:20   [1066]16:20
   [1067]16:20   [1068]16:22   [1069]16:22   [1070]16:24   [1071]16:32
   [1072]16:33   [1073]16:33   [1074]16:33   [1075]16:33   [1076]17:11
   [1077]17:11   [1078]17:17   [1079]17:21   [1080]17:22   [1081]17:23
   [1082]18:11   [1083]20:13   [1084]20:25

   Acts

   [1085]1:6   [1086]1:6   [1087]1:7   [1088]1:8   [1089]2:3
   [1090]2:15   [1091]2:24   [1092]2:28   [1093]2:37   [1094]2:41
   [1095]3:2   [1096]4:16   [1097]4:27   [1098]4:32   [1099]5:3
   [1100]5:3   [1101]5:39   [1102]5:41   [1103]5:41   [1104]6:15
   [1105]7:27   [1106]7:51   [1107]7:51   [1108]7:51   [1109]7:51-52
   [1110]7:52   [1111]7:52   [1112]7:55   [1113]7:56   [1114]7:60
   [1115]7:60   [1116]8:22   [1117]9:4   [1118]9:6   [1119]9:6
   [1120]9:8   [1121]9:11   [1122]9:15   [1123]9:16   [1124]9:25
   [1125]9:31   [1126]9:39   [1127]10:4   [1128]10:33   [1129]11:18
   [1130]12:7-10   [1131]13:46   [1132]13:50   [1133]14:22   [1134]15:9
   [1135]15:9-10   [1136]15:39   [1137]16:27   [1138]17:16   [1139]17:30
   [1140]18:10   [1141]20:9-12   [1142]20:23   [1143]20:23   [1144]20:24
   [1145]20:28   [1146]21:5   [1147]22:20   [1148]23:1   [1149]23:11
   [1150]23:11   [1151]26:18   [1152]26:18   [1153]26:18   [1154]26:20
   [1155]26:25   [1156]27:14   [1157]27:24   [1158]28:4   [1159]28:5
   [1160]28:20   [1161]28:20

   Romans

   [1162]1:8   [1163]1:29   [1164]1:30   [1165]1:31   [1166]1:31
   [1167]1:31   [1168]1:31   [1169]2:4   [1170]2:4   [1171]2:5
   [1172]2:5   [1173]2:24   [1174]3:8   [1175]3:13   [1176]3:24
   [1177]3:26   [1178]5:3   [1179]5:5   [1180]6:7   [1181]6:14
   [1182]6:17   [1183]6:21   [1184]6:23   [1185]7:4   [1186]7:15
   [1187]7:15   [1188]7:16   [1189]7:23   [1190]7:23   [1191]7:23
   [1192]7:24   [1193]8:1   [1194]8:2   [1195]8:14   [1196]8:15
   [1197]8:15   [1198]8:15   [1199]8:15   [1200]8:16   [1201]8:16
   [1202]8:17   [1203]8:17   [1204]8:17   [1205]8:23   [1206]8:23-26
   [1207]8:26   [1208]8:26   [1209]8:26   [1210]8:26   [1211]8:28
   [1212]8:28   [1213]8:28   [1214]8:28   [1215]8:29   [1216]8:35
   [1217]8:36   [1218]8:36   [1219]9:6   [1220]9:22   [1221]9:33
   [1222]10:3   [1223]10:15   [1224]11:13   [1225]11:20   [1226]12:1
   [1227]12:2   [1228]12:2   [1229]12:17   [1230]12:18   [1231]12:19
   [1232]12:20   [1233]13:14   [1234]14:17   [1235]15:13   [1236]15:13
   [1237]16:17   [1238]16:18

   1 Corinthians

   [1239]1:10   [1240]3:9   [1241]3:18   [1242]6:19   [1243]7:15
   [1244]7:31   [1245]8:12   [1246]9:7   [1247]9:11   [1248]9:14
   [1249]9:26   [1250]10:13   [1251]10:25-28   [1252]13:1   [1253]13:3
   [1254]13:6   [1255]13:12   [1256]13:12   [1257]15:10   [1258]15:31
   [1259]15:32   [1260]15:50   [1261]15:55   [1262]15:58   [1263]16:22

   2 Corinthians

   [1264]1:3   [1265]1:5   [1266]1:5   [1267]1:12   [1268]1:22
   [1269]1:22   [1270]1:22   [1271]2:7   [1272]2:16   [1273]3:17
   [1274]4:4   [1275]4:6   [1276]4:16   [1277]4:17   [1278]5:1
   [1279]5:2   [1280]5:8   [1281]5:12   [1282]5:14   [1283]5:14
   [1284]5:20   [1285]5:20   [1286]5:20   [1287]5:20   [1288]5:20
   [1289]6:10   [1290]6:14   [1291]6:18   [1292]7:1   [1293]7:4
   [1294]7:10   [1295]7:10   [1296]7:11   [1297]7:11   [1298]7:11
   [1299]8:12   [1300]8:12   [1301]10:4   [1302]11:14   [1303]11:24-26
   [1304]11:26   [1305]12:2   [1306]12:9   [1307]12:9   [1308]12:10
   [1309]12:14   [1310]12:14   [1311]13:11

   Galatians

   [1312]1:16   [1313]2:20   [1314]3:1   [1315]3:4   [1316]3:10
   [1317]3:12   [1318]3:13   [1319]3:26   [1320]4:5   [1321]4:6
   [1322]4:19   [1323]4:19   [1324]4:29   [1325]5:6   [1326]5:22
   [1327]5:22   [1328]5:23   [1329]5:24   [1330]5:24   [1331]6:1
   [1332]6:1   [1333]6:14

   Ephesians

   [1334]1:3   [1335]1:4   [1336]1:5   [1337]1:6   [1338]1:6
   [1339]1:13   [1340]1:13   [1341]1:13-14   [1342]2:2   [1343]2:2-3
   [1344]2:10   [1345]2:19   [1346]3:8   [1347]3:17   [1348]4
   [1349]4:3   [1350]4:10   [1351]4:11   [1352]4:16   [1353]4:18-19
   [1354]4:19   [1355]4:19   [1356]4:24   [1357]4:26-27   [1358]4:26-27
   [1359]4:30-31   [1360]4:31   [1361]4:32   [1362]5:11   [1363]5:11
   [1364]5:15   [1365]5:19   [1366]5:30   [1367]6:4   [1368]6:16
   [1369]6:16

   Philippians

   [1370]1:13   [1371]1:17   [1372]1:29   [1373]2:8   [1374]2:13
   [1375]2:21   [1376]3:6   [1377]3:8   [1378]3:8   [1379]3:9
   [1380]3:9   [1381]3:19   [1382]3:20   [1383]3:20   [1384]4:8
   [1385]4:13   [1386]4:13   [1387]4:19

   Colossians

   [1388]1:12   [1389]1:12   [1390]1:12   [1391]1:18   [1392]1:19
   [1393]1:20   [1394]1:20   [1395]1:27   [1396]2:10   [1397]3:2
   [1398]3:2   [1399]3:5   [1400]3:5   [1401]3:10   [1402]3:12
   [1403]3:12   [1404]3:12   [1405]3:12   [1406]3:13   [1407]3:16
   [1408]4:6

   1 Thessalonians

   [1409]1:6   [1410]1:10   [1411]2:12   [1412]2:19   [1413]3:3
   [1414]4:3   [1415]4:3   [1416]4:12   [1417]4:17   [1418]5:8
   [1419]5:13   [1420]5:19   [1421]5:22   [1422]5:23   [1423]5:25

   2 Thessalonians

   [1424]2:4   [1425]2:12   [1426]2:12   [1427]2:13   [1428]2:16
   [1429]3:1-2

   1 Timothy

   [1430]1:8   [1431]1:14   [1432]1:17   [1433]2:4   [1434]2:5
   [1435]3:9   [1436]3:9   [1437]3:11   [1438]4   [1439]4:6   [1440]4:7
   [1441]6:3-4   [1442]6:3-4   [1443]6:4   [1444]6:7   [1445]6:7-8
   [1446]6:9   [1447]6:9   [1448]6:10   [1449]6:16   [1450]6:17-18
   [1451]13

   2 Timothy

   [1452]1:12   [1453]1:14   [1454]2:3   [1455]2:3   [1456]2:12
   [1457]2:15   [1458]2:21   [1459]2:25   [1460]2:25   [1461]3:2
   [1462]3:2   [1463]3:2-3   [1464]3:2-3   [1465]3:3   [1466]3:4-5
   [1467]3:7   [1468]3:12   [1469]3:15   [1470]4:2   [1471]4:6
   [1472]4:10

   Titus

   [1473]1:13   [1474]1:15   [1475]1:15   [1476]1:15   [1477]2:14
   [1478]3:2   [1479]3:8   [1480]3:14

   Philemon

   [1481]1:10

   Hebrews

   [1482]1:2   [1483]1:3   [1484]1:4   [1485]1:14   [1486]1:14
   [1487]2:10   [1488]2:10   [1489]2:11   [1490]2:16   [1491]2:36
   [1492]3:6   [1493]3:7-8   [1494]3:7-8   [1495]3:12   [1496]3:12
   [1497]4:2   [1498]4:9   [1499]5:4   [1500]6:1   [1501]6:8
   [1502]6:10   [1503]6:17   [1504]6:18   [1505]7:22   [1506]8:10
   [1507]10:24   [1508]11:2   [1509]11:6   [1510]11:8   [1511]11:10
   [1512]11:14   [1513]11:24-25   [1514]11:24-26   [1515]11:26
   [1516]11:26   [1517]11:27   [1518]11:27   [1519]11:34   [1520]11:34
   [1521]11:36-37   [1522]11:37   [1523]12:2   [1524]12:2   [1525]12:7
   [1526]12:7   [1527]12:8   [1528]12:10   [1529]12:11   [1530]12:11
   [1531]12:14   [1532]12:14   [1533]12:14   [1534]12:22   [1535]12:23
   [1536]12:23   [1537]12:28   [1538]13:16   [1539]13:20

   James

   [1540]1:12   [1541]1:15   [1542]1:18   [1543]1:18   [1544]1:18
   [1545]1:21   [1546]1:21   [1547]1:21   [1548]1:25   [1549]1:27
   [1550]2:5   [1551]2:5   [1552]2:5   [1553]2:5   [1554]2:13
   [1555]2:15   [1556]2:18   [1557]3:6   [1558]3:14-15   [1559]3:14-15
   [1560]3:15   [1561]3:17   [1562]3:17   [1563]3:17   [1564]4:7
   [1565]4:8   [1566]4:9   [1567]4:11   [1568]4:14   [1569]5:3
   [1570]5:10   [1571]5:10   [1572]5:10   [1573]5:10   [1574]5:16
   [1575]5:17   [1576]5:20   [1577]5:20   [1578]11   [1579]12

   1 Peter

   [1580]1:4   [1581]1:4   [1582]1:5   [1583]1:7   [1584]1:7   [1585]1:8
   [1586]1:8   [1587]1:8   [1588]1:8   [1589]1:8   [1590]1:14
   [1591]1:16   [1592]1:16   [1593]1:16   [1594]1:17   [1595]2:1
   [1596]2:1   [1597]2:1   [1598]2:2   [1599]2:2   [1600]2:3   [1601]2:5
   [1602]2:5   [1603]2:7   [1604]2:7   [1605]2:9   [1606]2:14
   [1607]2:16   [1608]2:17   [1609]2:23   [1610]3:3   [1611]3:4
   [1612]3:4   [1613]3:4   [1614]3:6   [1615]3:9   [1616]3:9
   [1617]3:14   [1618]3:22   [1619]4:12   [1620]4:12   [1621]4:14
   [1622]4:14   [1623]4:15   [1624]4:16   [1625]5:2   [1626]5:4
   [1627]5:5   [1628]5:5   [1629]5:7   [1630]5:8   [1631]5:9
   [1632]5:10   [1633]5:10

   2 Peter

   [1634]1:4   [1635]1:4   [1636]1:4   [1637]1:11   [1638]1:11
   [1639]1:21   [1640]2:3   [1641]2:4   [1642]2:7   [1643]2:10
   [1644]2:14   [1645]2:22   [1646]2:22   [1647]3:3   [1648]3:5
   [1649]3:9   [1650]3:9

   1 John

   [1651]1:3   [1652]1:9   [1653]2:15   [1654]2:17   [1655]2:25
   [1656]2:27   [1657]2:27   [1658]3:1   [1659]3:2   [1660]3:2
   [1661]3:2-3   [1662]3:9   [1663]3:9   [1664]3:15   [1665]5:3
   [1666]5:4   [1667]5:6   [1668]5:10   [1669]5:18

   3 John

   [1670]1:9

   Jude

   [1671]1:3   [1672]1:6   [1673]1:6   [1674]1:6   [1675]1:7   [1676]1:9
   [1677]1:23

   Revelation

   [1678]1:5   [1679]1:6   [1680]1:6   [1681]1:20   [1682]2:7
   [1683]2:7   [1684]2:7   [1685]2:10   [1686]2:10   [1687]2:10
   [1688]2:17   [1689]3:1   [1690]3:12   [1691]3:17   [1692]3:17
   [1693]3:17   [1694]3:17   [1695]3:17   [1696]3:19   [1697]3:19
   [1698]3:21   [1699]3:21   [1700]3:21   [1701]4:10   [1702]7
   [1703]7:9   [1704]7:9   [1705]7:16   [1706]7:17   [1707]9:7-8
   [1708]10:3   [1709]12:1   [1710]12:1   [1711]12:3   [1712]12:11
   [1713]12:11   [1714]12:14   [1715]12:15   [1716]13:1   [1717]13:2
   [1718]13:2   [1719]13:7   [1720]13:10   [1721]14:7   [1722]14:13
   [1723]14:13   [1724]15:2-3   [1725]16:6   [1726]16:6   [1727]16:10
   [1728]17:4   [1729]18:8   [1730]19:9   [1731]19:10   [1732]19:16
   [1733]20:12   [1734]21:7   [1735]21:8   [1736]21:8   [1737]21:8
   [1738]21:10   [1739]21:19   [1740]21:21   [1741]21:25   [1742]21:27
   [1743]22:5   [1744]22:5   [1745]22:12
     __________________________________________________________________

Index of Scripture Commentary

   Matthew

   [1746]5:1-2   [1747]5:3   [1748]5:3   [1749]5:5   [1750]5:5
   [1751]5:6   [1752]5:6   [1753]5:7   [1754]5:8   [1755]5:8   [1756]5:9
   [1757]5:9   [1758]5:10
     __________________________________________________________________

            This document is from the Christian Classics Ethereal
               Library at Calvin College, http://www.ccel.org,
                   generated on demand from ThML source.

References

   1. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=1&scrV=26#xii-p2.5
   2. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=2&scrV=21#xiii-p44.1
   3. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=3&scrV=10#xix-p12.1
   4. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=3&scrV=12#xiv-p51.1
   5. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=3&scrV=15#xxiii-p23.1
   6. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=3&scrV=17#iv-p9.2
   7. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=3&scrV=18#xx-p19.1
   8. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=4&scrV=13#viii-p15.1
   9. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=4&scrV=16#xxi-p89.3
  10. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=6&scrV=2#xxi-p9.1
  11. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=6&scrV=3#xi-p19.1
  12. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=6&scrV=9#xviii-p87.1
  13. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=6&scrV=9#xxi-p83.6
  14. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=13&scrV=8#xx-p60.2
  15. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=14&scrV=14#xxiii-p147.2
  16. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=18&scrV=17#xviii-p107.3
  17. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=18&scrV=19#xxi-p99.1
  18. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=19&scrV=2#xviii-p33.1
  19. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=19&scrV=20#xi-p8.1
  20. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=21&scrV=10#xxi-p171.6
  21. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=22&scrV=12#x-p7.1
  22. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=23&scrV=7#xxi-p87.2
  23. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=25&scrV=32#xv-p26.1
  24. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=26&scrV=15#ix-p6.1
  25. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=26&scrV=32#x-p15.1
  26. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=27&scrV=28#xxi-p172.2
  27. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=27&scrV=33#xxi-p125.1
  28. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=27&scrV=33#xxi-p172.6
  29. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=27&scrV=38#v-p13.1
  30. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=27&scrV=38#xxi-p172.5
  31. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=28&scrV=16#x-p14.2
  32. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=28&scrV=17#xviii-p84.4
  33. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=28&scrV=18#xxiii-p77.2
  34. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=30&scrV=14#xv-p52.2
  35. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=32&scrV=24#xviii-p125.6
  36. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=32&scrV=30#viii-p45.4
  37. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=34&scrV=2#xviii-p77.1
  38. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=39&scrV=9#xviii-p62.2
  39. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=39&scrV=12#xviii-p76.2
  40. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=41&scrV=40#vii-p22.2
  41. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=42&scrV=1#xv-p28.1
  42. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=42&scrV=25#xvi-p4.7
  43. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=44&scrV=30#xxi-p114.2
  44. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=48&scrV=15#xxi-p155.1
  45. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=49&scrV=4#xxiii-p121.5
  46. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=49&scrV=4#xxi-p186.3
  47. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=2&scrV=6#x-p4.3
  48. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=2&scrV=9#xviii-p30.1
  49. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=2&scrV=13#xx-p60.3
  50. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=4&scrV=6#xiv-p46.2
  51. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=14&scrV=5#viii-p8.1
  52. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=15&scrV=11#xviii-p4.1
  53. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=15&scrV=24#xiv-p32.2
  54. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=17&scrV=3#xiv-p32.3
  55. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=19&scrV=4#xxi-p158.4
  56. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=19&scrV=18#xviii-p84.1
  57. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=22&scrV=1#viii-p30.2
  58. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=23&scrV=1#xvii-p31.1
  59. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=23&scrV=1#xvii-p32.3
  60. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=23&scrV=1#xvii-p38.2
  61. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=23&scrV=2#xxiv-p45.1
  62. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=23&scrV=5#xvii-p15.2
  63. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=23&scrV=11#xvii-p59.2
  64. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=23&scrV=25#xxi-p172.3
  65. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=25&scrV=11#xviii-p84.2
  66. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=25&scrV=14#xviii-p84.2
  67. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=26&scrV=3#xx-p28.2
  68. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=30&scrV=18#viii-p33.2
  69. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=33&scrV=18#xvii-p89.2
  70. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=33&scrV=18#xix-p28.1
  71. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=33&scrV=19#xvii-p89.3
  72. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=33&scrV=23#xix-p4.2
  73. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=33&scrV=32#xix-p24.1
  74. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=35&scrV=22#xvii-p81.2
  75. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=3&scrV=3#x-p5.4
  76. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=4&scrV=11#xviii-p59.2
  77. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=6&scrV=13#xv-p38.2
  78. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=9&scrV=14#xviii-p24.1
  79. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=13&scrV=8#xviii-p55.4
  80. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=13&scrV=45#viii-p27.2
  81. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=13&scrV=46#xviii-p55.4
  82. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=16&scrV=12#xxi-p76.2
  83. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=16&scrV=13#xvii-p76.3
  84. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=19&scrV=9#xvii-p60.1
  85. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=19&scrV=16#xvii-p32.1
  86. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=19&scrV=16#xx-p49.2
  87. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=19&scrV=17#xvii-p16.1
  88. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=25&scrV=35#xvii-p59.1
  89. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=26&scrV=40#viii-p21.1
  90. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=5&scrV=12#viii-p28.2
  91. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=12&scrV=2#iii-p14.1
  92. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=12&scrV=3#xiv-p32.1
  93. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=12&scrV=8#xvii-p43.1
  94. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=13&scrV=23#xiii-p30.3
  95. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=13&scrV=32#xxiv-p42.1
  96. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=13&scrV=32#vii-p21.1
  97. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=14&scrV=24#xviii-p60.4
  98. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=14&scrV=24#xxi-p38.1
  99. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=18&scrV=21#xvii-p61.2
 100. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=19&scrV=22#xviii-p118.4
 101. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=23&scrV=10#xv-p34.1
 102. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=23&scrV=21#xv-p8.2
 103. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=23&scrV=21#xxi-p152.2
 104. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=1&scrV=27#xxi-p152.5
 105. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=6&scrV=6#xxi-p98.1
 106. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=10&scrV=12#xxiv-p21.1
 107. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=14&scrV=28#xvii-p61.1
 108. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=15&scrV=7#xvii-p58.1
 109. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=15&scrV=10#xvii-p108.1
 110. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=15&scrV=10#xvii-p115.1
 111. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=16&scrV=11#xvii-p61.3
 112. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=20&scrV=8#xxiii-p73.1
 113. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=23&scrV=18#xviii-p50.1
 114. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=24&scrV=6#xvii-p44.3
 115. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=27&scrV=17#viii-p38.2
 116. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=27&scrV=24#xx-p61.4
 117. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=28&scrV=15#xviii-p104.2
 118. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=28&scrV=16#v-p11.2
 119. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=28&scrV=65#xi-p5.3
 120. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=29&scrV=19#iv-p36.2
 121. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=32&scrV=2#iii-p31.3
 122. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=32&scrV=5#xviii-p12.3
 123. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=32&scrV=5#xx-p58.1
 124. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=32&scrV=5#xxi-p84.2
 125. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=33&scrV=27#xxiii-p156.4
 126. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Josh&scrCh=2&scrV=9#xxiii-p73.3
 127. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Josh&scrCh=7&scrV=21#xviii-p43.1
 128. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Josh&scrCh=15&scrV=19#xii-p3.1
 129. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Judg&scrCh=2&scrV=4#viii-p24.3
 130. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Judg&scrCh=8&scrV=2#xxi-p194.2
 131. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Judg&scrCh=10&scrV=10#viii-p25.1
 132. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Judg&scrCh=15&scrV=4#xx-p61.2
 133. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Judg&scrCh=15&scrV=18#xv-p27.1
 134. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Judg&scrCh=16&scrV=25#ix-p4.3
 135. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ruth&scrCh=1&scrV=21#xvii-p54.2
 136. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ruth&scrCh=4&scrV=11#xvii-p123.1
 137. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=1&scrV=13#xviii-p59.3
 138. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=1&scrV=15#xviii-p125.7
 139. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=2&scrV=17#xxiv-p42.2
 140. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=2&scrV=23#xiv-p16.3
 141. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=3&scrV=9#xxi-p90.1
 142. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=3&scrV=18#xiv-p6.1
 143. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=7&scrV=9#xxi-p75.1
 144. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=10&scrV=12#viii-p14.1
 145. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=11&scrV=2#xviii-p26.1
 146. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=12&scrV=3#xv-p22.2
 147. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=15&scrV=24#viii-p14.2
 148. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=15&scrV=24#viii-p14.4
 149. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=15&scrV=30#viii-p14.3
 150. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=18&scrV=18#xxi-p121.1
 151. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=22&scrV=7#xxi-p194.1
 152. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=24&scrV=16#xiv-p37.1
 153. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=25&scrV=11#xvii-p71.2
 154. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=26&scrV=7#xiv-p32.5
 155. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=26&scrV=12#xiv-p32.5
 156. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=26&scrV=23#xiv-p32.6
 157. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=28&scrV=7#viii-p24.4
 158. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=28&scrV=15#iv-p17.1
 159. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=6&scrV=22#vii-p23.4
 160. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=6&scrV=22#xviii-p89.1
 161. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=7&scrV=14#xxi-p152.3
 162. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=7&scrV=18#vii-p22.3
 163. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=7&scrV=18#xxi-p57.1
 164. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=7&scrV=18#xxi-p174.1
 165. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=12&scrV=14#viii-p46.1
 166. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=13&scrV=0#xv-p24.2
 167. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=13&scrV=2#viii-p7.1
 168. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=13&scrV=4#xxii-p23.1
 169. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=13&scrV=5#xviii-p32.2
 170. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=13&scrV=15#viii-p29.2
 171. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=14&scrV=32#xix-p5.2
 172. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=14&scrV=32#viii-p24.5
 173. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=16&scrV=5#v-p2.1
 174. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=16&scrV=11#xiv-p32.4
 175. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=16&scrV=11#xiv-p45.1
 176. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=16&scrV=12#xiv-p46.1
 177. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=22&scrV=26#xvii-p5.3
 178. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=24&scrV=24#iii-p37.4
 179. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=1&scrV=39#xviii-p106.2
 180. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=8&scrV=38#xviii-p12.2
 181. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=10&scrV=3#iv-p11.1
 182. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=10&scrV=27#iv-p10.2
 183. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=11&scrV=11#vii-p16.1
 184. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=11&scrV=14#vii-p16.1
 185. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=14&scrV=30#viii-p29.3
 186. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=17&scrV=10#xvii-p79.2
 187. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=19&scrV=12#xiv-p17.4
 188. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=19&scrV=12#xx-p10.4
 189. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=21&scrV=4#viii-p7.2
 190. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=21&scrV=12#viii-p35.3
 191. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=21&scrV=13#xviii-p45.1
 192. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=21&scrV=19#xv-p22.4
 193. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=21&scrV=27#viii-p16.2
 194. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=4&scrV=8#xvii-p102.3
 195. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=4&scrV=19#xxi-p165.1
 196. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=6&scrV=17#xxi-p162.4
 197. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=6&scrV=22#xiv-p37.2
 198. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=6&scrV=22#xiv-p37.3
 199. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=6&scrV=25#xv-p37.2
 200. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=10&scrV=16#viii-p35.1
 201. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=11&scrV=1#xxi-p118.2
 202. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1Chr&scrCh=21&scrV=24#xv-p37.1
 203. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1Chr&scrCh=28&scrV=9#xxi-p99.2
 204. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=2Chr&scrCh=8&scrV=18#vii-p15.1
 205. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=2Chr&scrCh=16&scrV=12#xviii-p36.3
 206. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=2Chr&scrCh=18&scrV=9#vii-p9.1
 207. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=2Chr&scrCh=19&scrV=2#xx-p23.4
 208. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=2Chr&scrCh=19&scrV=2#xx-p23.5
 209. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=2Chr&scrCh=20&scrV=2#xx-p21.1
 210. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=2Chr&scrCh=21&scrV=19#xvii-p10.2
 211. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=2Chr&scrCh=33&scrV=12#viii-p49.1
 212. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=2Chr&scrCh=33&scrV=13#xxi-p136.6
 213. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=2Chr&scrCh=34&scrV=27#xxi-p55.1
 214. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=2Chr&scrCh=34&scrV=27#xxi-p58.2
 215. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ezra&scrCh=9&scrV=6#viii-p14.5
 216. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Neh&scrCh=1&scrV=11#xxiv-p31.1
 217. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Neh&scrCh=1&scrV=11#xv-p31.1
 218. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Neh&scrCh=6&scrV=11#xxii-p21.1
 219. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Neh&scrCh=7&scrV=10#xxiv-p23.1
 220. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Neh&scrCh=8&scrV=10#xiii-p32.2
 221. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Neh&scrCh=9&scrV=5#iv-p37.1
 222. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Esth&scrCh=1&scrV=4#xiii-p58.1
 223. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Esth&scrCh=3&scrV=9#xx-p52.3
 224. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Esth&scrCh=5&scrV=2#vii-p10.1
 225. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Esth&scrCh=5&scrV=2#xix-p12.2
 226. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Esth&scrCh=6&scrV=3#vii-p33.1
 227. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Esth&scrCh=8&scrV=8#xxiii-p141.5
 228. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Esth&scrCh=8&scrV=15#xix-p9.2
 229. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=1&scrV=21#xiv-p45.2
 230. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=2&scrV=3#xxiii-p20.4
 231. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=5&scrV=19#xxiii-p140.2
 232. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=6&scrV=4#xxi-p138.1
 233. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=14&scrV=4#xxiv-p33.4
 234. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=14&scrV=4#xviii-p125.1
 235. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=15&scrV=11#xiii-p12.1
 236. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=15&scrV=14#xviii-p125.2
 237. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=19&scrV=25#xix-p31.1
 238. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=19&scrV=26#xix-p6.2
 239. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=21&scrV=12#ix-p4.1
 240. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=21&scrV=14#xviii-p26.12
 241. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=23&scrV=10#xxiii-p20.3
 242. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=27&scrV=6#xiv-p19.2
 243. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=29&scrV=3#v-p11.1
 244. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=29&scrV=14#xvii-p67.1
 245. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=30&scrV=31#xi-p21.2
 246. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=38&scrV=7#xix-p5.1
 247. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=38&scrV=7#xxi-p7.1
 248. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=39&scrV=30#xv-p36.5
 249. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=41&scrV=15#xvii-p71.1
 250. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=41&scrV=24#xvii-p72.1
 251. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=41&scrV=24#xviii-p37.2
 252. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=41&scrV=29#xviii-p34.3
 253. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=41&scrV=29#xxiii-p81.2
 254. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=41&scrV=33#xxi-p58.4
 255. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=42&scrV=6#vi-p30.1
 256. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=1&scrV=4#xxi-p114.4
 257. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=2&scrV=3#xxiv-p14.1
 258. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=2&scrV=7#xxi-p6.1
 259. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=2&scrV=12#xxi-p133.3
 260. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=3&scrV=8#v-p2.3
 261. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=4&scrV=1#xxiii-p110.1
 262. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=4&scrV=7#xiii-p29.5
 263. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=4&scrV=7#xiii-p29.10
 264. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=6&scrV=8#x-p17.2
 265. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=6&scrV=8#x-p5.7
 266. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=7&scrV=10#xxi-p158.1
 267. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=7&scrV=14#xxiv-p35.4
 268. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=9&scrV=10#xviii-p26.6
 269. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=10&scrV=9#xvii-p44.1
 270. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=10&scrV=11#xi-p18.3
 271. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=10&scrV=17#xvi-p10.1
 272. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=12&scrV=2#xviii-p60.2
 273. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=15&scrV=3#xvii-p32.2
 274. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=15&scrV=4#xxi-p86.1
 275. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=16&scrV=3#xxi-p122.2
 276. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=16&scrV=11#xiii-p46.1
 277. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=16&scrV=11#xiii-p55.2
 278. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=16&scrV=11#xiii-p58.2
 279. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=16&scrV=11#xix-p13.3
 280. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=17&scrV=15#xvi-p16.1
 281. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=17&scrV=15#xix-p10.2
 282. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=17&scrV=15#xix-p14.1
 283. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=19&scrV=1#v-p2.2
 284. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=19&scrV=11#xxiv-p52.1
 285. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=21&scrV=3#vii-p5.2
 286. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=22&scrV=6#vii-p22.1
 287. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=22&scrV=16#xvii-p31.5
 288. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=25&scrV=15#xix-p29.2
 289. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=26&scrV=4#xx-p23.2
 290. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=27&scrV=9#xxi-p148.1
 291. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=27&scrV=12#xvii-p38.1
 292. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=29&scrV=11#xxi-p172.4
 293. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=30&scrV=5#x-p11.2
 294. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=32&scrV=1#xxi-p191.1
 295. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=32&scrV=2#v-p4.1
 296. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=32&scrV=2#xviii-p6.1
 297. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=32&scrV=2#xviii-p57.1
 298. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=33&scrV=1#xiv-p34.2
 299. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=34&scrV=8#xiii-p27.6
 300. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=35&scrV=11#xvii-p31.3
 301. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=35&scrV=11#xxiii-p14.3
 302. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=35&scrV=12#xiv-p27.4
 303. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=36&scrV=8#iv-p28.1
 304. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=36&scrV=8#xiii-p46.3
 305. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=36&scrV=9#xvi-p5.1
 306. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=36&scrV=9#xix-p13.2
 307. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=37&scrV=11#xiv-p42.1
 308. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=37&scrV=26#xvii-p5.3
 309. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=37&scrV=26#xvii-p47.1
 310. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=37&scrV=26#xvii-p107.1
 311. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=37&scrV=30#xviii-p86.1
 312. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=38&scrV=9#xxi-p153.4
 313. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=38&scrV=12#xiv-p9.1
 314. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=41&scrV=1#xvii-p5.3
 315. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=41&scrV=1#xvii-p48.1
 316. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=41&scrV=1#xvii-p104.1
 317. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=41&scrV=2#xvii-p109.1
 318. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=42&scrV=2#xv-p11.2
 319. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=42&scrV=2#xv-p49.1
 320. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=42&scrV=3#x-p6.1
 321. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=43&scrV=5#xiii-p41.1
 322. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=45&scrV=2#iii-p12.3
 323. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=45&scrV=10#xxi-p25.1
 324. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=45&scrV=13#xviii-p17.2
 325. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=45&scrV=14#xiv-p3.1
 326. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=48&scrV=14#iv-p35.1
 327. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=48&scrV=14#xiii-p30.5
 328. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=49&scrV=4#xvi-p20.2
 329. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=49&scrV=20#xii-p2.6
 330. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=50&scrV=23#xvi-p12.1
 331. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=51&scrV=3#viii-p20.1
 332. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=51&scrV=3#xii-p2.1
 333. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=51&scrV=4#viii-p25.2
 334. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=51&scrV=8#xi-p5.2
 335. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=51&scrV=10#xviii-p125.3
 336. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=51&scrV=17#xviii-p83.1
 337. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=55&scrV=21#xxiii-p13.1
 338. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=56&scrV=8#x-p8.2
 339. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=56&scrV=8#viii-p26.2
 340. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=56&scrV=8#x-p5.3
 341. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=56&scrV=8#xxi-p117.2
 342. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=58&scrV=11#xxi-p192.1
 343. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=61&scrV=2#vi-p37.2
 344. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=63&scrV=1#xv-p39.4
 345. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=63&scrV=3#xv-p46.8
 346. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=63&scrV=5#xiii-p29.4
 347. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=63&scrV=5#xvi-p4.6
 348. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=64&scrV=3#xvii-p31.2
 349. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=65&scrV=9#xvi-p11.2
 350. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=65&scrV=13#xvii-p91.1
 351. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=66&scrV=18#xviii-p28.1
 352. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=68&scrV=20#xxiii-p141.4
 353. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=68&scrV=21#xviii-p34.2
 354. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=69&scrV=9#xxi-p81.2
 355. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=69&scrV=12#xxiii-p13.4
 356. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=71&scrV=17#xxi-p162.6
 357. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=73&scrV=1#xviii-p99.1
 358. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=73&scrV=1#xviii-p102.1
 359. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=73&scrV=18#vii-p11.4
 360. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=73&scrV=25#xv-p11.1
 361. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=73&scrV=28#xvi-p6.2
 362. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=73&scrV=28#xxi-p89.1
 363. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=74&scrV=14#viii-p28.3
 364. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=76&scrV=2#xx-p38.2
 365. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=77&scrV=2#xiii-p41.2
 366. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=78&scrV=19#xviii-p36.1
 367. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=80&scrV=5#xvii-p50.1
 368. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=81&scrV=10#xvi-p4.8
 369. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=81&scrV=10#xvi-p20.1
 370. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=81&scrV=11#xxiv-p40.1
 371. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=81&scrV=11#xv-p16.1
 372. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=82&scrV=6#xxi-p8.1
 373. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=84&scrV=10#xxi-p89.2
 374. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=87&scrV=7#xi-p6.1
 375. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=89&scrV=33#xvi-p9.4
 376. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=90&scrV=11#xxiii-p153.1
 377. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=91&scrV=10#xxi-p159.1
 378. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=91&scrV=11#xxi-p158.3
 379. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=91&scrV=13#xxiii-p121.6
 380. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=91&scrV=15#xxiii-p140.1
 381. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=91&scrV=15#xxiii-p141.1
 382. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=92&scrV=13#iii-p38.2
 383. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=94&scrV=1#xiv-p12.3
 384. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=94&scrV=12#v-p12.2
 385. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=94&scrV=19#xiii-p29.12
 386. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=95&scrV=3#xiii-p49.1
 387. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=97&scrV=11#xiii-p45.2
 388. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=102&scrV=27#xvi-p6.1
 389. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=103&scrV=3#xiv-p22.1
 390. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=103&scrV=11#xi-p4.4
 391. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=103&scrV=13#xxi-p133.1
 392. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=103&scrV=17#xvii-p89.1
 393. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=104&scrV=10#x-p12.2
 394. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=104&scrV=10#vi-p15.1
 395. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=104&scrV=10#xvii-p76.2
 396. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=106&scrV=16#xviii-p85.3
 397. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=106&scrV=35#xviii-p80.2
 398. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=107&scrV=5#xv-p26.2
 399. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=107&scrV=9#xvi-p4.3
 400. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=107&scrV=9#xvi-p9.1
 401. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=107&scrV=9#xvi-p24.1
 402. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=109&scrV=16#xvii-p5.2
 403. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=109&scrV=69#xvii-p5.1
 404. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=110&scrV=3#xv-p46.4
 405. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=110&scrV=3#xxi-p107.1
 406. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=111&scrV=1#xviii-p59.4
 407. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=112&scrV=1#v-p14.1
 408. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=112&scrV=4#xxi-p178.1
 409. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=112&scrV=5#xvii-p122.1
 410. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=112&scrV=6#xvii-p105.1
 411. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=112&scrV=9#xvii-p58.2
 412. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=115&scrV=15#v-p12.1
 413. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=116&scrV=7#iv-p25.2
 414. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=116&scrV=15#xxi-p118.1
 415. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=116&scrV=18#viii-p31.1
 416. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=118&scrV=12#xvii-p10.5
 417. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=119&scrV=2#xviii-p60.1
 418. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=119&scrV=3#xxiv-p39.1
 419. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=119&scrV=5#xxiii-p66.1
 420. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=119&scrV=20#xv-p38.1
 421. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=119&scrV=30#xviii-p8.2
 422. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=119&scrV=35#xxiv-p43.1
 423. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=119&scrV=50#xxiii-p82.1
 424. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=119&scrV=63#xxi-p87.1
 425. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=119&scrV=72#iii-p36.1
 426. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=119&scrV=97#xviii-p8.3
 427. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=119&scrV=100#xxi-p162.5
 428. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=119&scrV=104#xviii-p75.1
 429. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=119&scrV=119#xxi-p114.5
 430. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=119&scrV=120#xxi-p58.1
 431. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=119&scrV=128#xxiii-p66.3
 432. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=119&scrV=136#viii-p34.2
 433. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=119&scrV=140#xviii-p110.2
 434. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=120&scrV=7#xx-p23.1
 435. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=121&scrV=4#xxi-p158.2
 436. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=122&scrV=4#iv-p10.1
 437. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=125&scrV=1#xxiii-p74.2
 438. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=125&scrV=3#xxiii-p155.3
 439. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=126&scrV=5#xiii-p6.1
 440. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=131&scrV=2#vi-p26.1
 441. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=132&scrV=14#xviii-p20.1
 442. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=133&scrV=1#xx-p34.4
 443. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=137&scrV=1#viii-p39.1
 444. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=137&scrV=2#viii-p39.2
 445. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=137&scrV=4#viii-p39.3
 446. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=139&scrV=7#xxi-p89.4
 447. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=139&scrV=23#xviii-p61.1
 448. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=140&scrV=3#xvii-p10.6
 449. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=141&scrV=7#vii-p25.1
 450. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=143&scrV=7#xiii-p33.1
 451. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=143&scrV=10#xxi-p162.2
 452. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=144&scrV=15#xxiii-p163.1
 453. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=144&scrV=15#v-p5.2
 454. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=144&scrV=15#iv-p25.1
 455. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=145&scrV=9#xvii-p87.2
 456. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=147&scrV=14#xx-p14.1
 457. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=149&scrV=4#xiv-p43.1
 458. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=149&scrV=8#vii-p27.2
 459. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=1&scrV=24#xi-p16.1
 460. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=1&scrV=26#ix-p5.4
 461. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=1&scrV=28#xi-p16.1
 462. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=1&scrV=29#xviii-p54.2
 463. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=2&scrV=14#ix-p5.1
 464. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=2&scrV=25#xvii-p106.1
 465. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=3&scrV=17#xxiv-p10.2
 466. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=4&scrV=8#vii-p23.3
 467. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=4&scrV=9#xxiv-p22.1
 468. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=6&scrV=19#xx-p61.3
 469. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=7&scrV=3#vi-p13.3
 470. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=7&scrV=23#xviii-p26.9
 471. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=8&scrV=0#iii-p36.4
 472. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=8&scrV=15#xxiv-p12.2
 473. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=8&scrV=18#xv-p46.3
 474. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=10&scrV=12#xv-p46.6
 475. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=10&scrV=22#vii-p6.1
 476. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=11&scrV=17#xx-p34.1
 477. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=11&scrV=25#xvii-p79.1
 478. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=11&scrV=30#iii-p38.3
 479. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=12&scrV=20#xx-p68.1
 480. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=13&scrV=5#vii-p23.1
 481. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=13&scrV=7#vi-p29.1
 482. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=13&scrV=20#xviii-p123.1
 483. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=14&scrV=13#xiii-p24.1
 484. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=14&scrV=14#xvi-p4.4
 485. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=14&scrV=15#xx-p54.1
 486. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=14&scrV=34#xii-p2.2
 487. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=15&scrV=9#xv-p46.7
 488. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=16&scrV=5#vi-p24.1
 489. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=16&scrV=32#xiv-p36.1
 490. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=17&scrV=3#xxi-p136.4
 491. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=17&scrV=14#xx-p31.2
 492. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=19&scrV=2#xviii-p26.5
 493. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=19&scrV=11#xiv-p13.1
 494. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=19&scrV=11#xvii-p46.2
 495. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=19&scrV=17#xvii-p112.3
 496. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=20&scrV=3#xx-p30.1
 497. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=21&scrV=25#xv-p36.1
 498. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=22&scrV=1#xviii-p77.3
 499. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=22&scrV=6#xxi-p98.2
 500. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=22&scrV=13#xxiii-p99.1
 501. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=22&scrV=24#xiv-p48.2
 502. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=23&scrV=5#iv-p18.2
 503. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=23&scrV=23#xx-p24.1
 504. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=23&scrV=23#xxiii-p80.1
 505. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=23&scrV=27#iv-p36.1
 506. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=23&scrV=32#xiii-p4.1
 507. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=25&scrV=18#xvii-p38.3
 508. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=27&scrV=4#xx-p53.2
 509. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=27&scrV=7#xv-p30.2
 510. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=27&scrV=7#xv-p52.3
 511. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=27&scrV=24#vii-p8.1
 512. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=27&scrV=24#xv-p46.2
 513. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=28&scrV=1#xviii-p62.1
 514. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=28&scrV=1#xxi-p123.1
 515. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=28&scrV=13#xvii-p44.4
 516. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=28&scrV=25#xx-p52.1
 517. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=29&scrV=25#xviii-p39.1
 518. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=29&scrV=25#xxiii-p73.2
 519. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=30&scrV=8#xvii-p51.1
 520. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=30&scrV=12#xviii-p85.2
 521. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=30&scrV=15#iv-p21.2
 522. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=30&scrV=20#xviii-p91.1
 523. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=34&scrV=0#iii-p36.4
 524. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Eccl&scrCh=1&scrV=8#xix-p14.2
 525. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Eccl&scrCh=2&scrV=2#xiii-p20.4
 526. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Eccl&scrCh=2&scrV=2#xi-p5.5
 527. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Eccl&scrCh=2&scrV=8#iv-p11.2
 528. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Eccl&scrCh=2&scrV=11#xxiii-p125.1
 529. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Eccl&scrCh=2&scrV=18#xvii-p110.2
 530. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Eccl&scrCh=5&scrV=10#iv-p14.1
 531. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Eccl&scrCh=5&scrV=13#iv-p20.1
 532. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Eccl&scrCh=6&scrV=2#vi-p10.1
 533. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Eccl&scrCh=7&scrV=1#xxiii-p13.2
 534. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Eccl&scrCh=7&scrV=9#xiv-p10.1
 535. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Eccl&scrCh=7&scrV=29#xiv-p51.2
 536. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Eccl&scrCh=8&scrV=11#xi-p18.1
 537. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Eccl&scrCh=10&scrV=19#xiii-p55.1
 538. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Eccl&scrCh=11&scrV=1#xvii-p112.1
 539. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Eccl&scrCh=11&scrV=2#xvii-p54.1
 540. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Eccl&scrCh=11&scrV=7#xiii-p27.1
 541. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Eccl&scrCh=12&scrV=6#xvii-p124.1
 542. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Eccl&scrCh=12&scrV=10#iii-p40.2
 543. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=1&scrV=2#xiii-p27.3
 544. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=1&scrV=5#xxiii-p21.3
 545. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=1&scrV=6#xxiii-p24.2
 546. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=2&scrV=2#xxiii-p9.2
 547. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=2&scrV=5#xiii-p27.5
 548. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=2&scrV=11#xiii-p46.2
 549. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=2&scrV=14#xx-p10.3
 550. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=2&scrV=14#xxi-p116.1
 551. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=2&scrV=14#xxi-p123.3
 552. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=4&scrV=4#xxiii-p82.2
 553. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=4&scrV=8#xiv-p28.1
 554. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=4&scrV=9#xviii-p20.2
 555. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=4&scrV=11#xxi-p189.1
 556. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=5&scrV=2#xiii-p44.2
 557. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=5&scrV=6#viii-p23.2
 558. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=5&scrV=6#xiii-p44.2
 559. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=5&scrV=7#xv-p36.4
 560. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=5&scrV=7#xvii-p27.2
 561. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=5&scrV=11#xxiii-p133.1
 562. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=5&scrV=11#xiii-p20.1
 563. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=5&scrV=13#xiii-p27.4
 564. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=8&scrV=2#xxiii-p135.2
 565. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=8&scrV=6#xxiii-p132.2
 566. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=8&scrV=6#xxi-p148.2
 567. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=8&scrV=7#xxiii-p132.1
 568. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=1&scrV=6#xi-p5.1
 569. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=1&scrV=15#xviii-p45.2
 570. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=1&scrV=16#xxiv-p33.3
 571. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=1&scrV=18#viii-p22.2
 572. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=6&scrV=3#xviii-p84.5
 573. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=9&scrV=6#xiii-p20.2
 574. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=9&scrV=6#xx-p37.1
 575. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=11&scrV=6#xvii-p10.4
 576. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=11&scrV=6#xx-p19.3
 577. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=16&scrV=9#x-p12.1
 578. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=16&scrV=11#xvii-p57.3
 579. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=22&scrV=4#viii-p44.1
 580. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=22&scrV=12#ix-p4.5
 581. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=22&scrV=14#ix-p4.5
 582. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=25&scrV=6#xvi-p25.1
 583. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=25&scrV=9#xvi-p25.1
 584. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=26&scrV=8#xxiv-p31.4
 585. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=26&scrV=9#xv-p5.1
 586. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=26&scrV=9#xv-p11.1
 587. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=26&scrV=9#xv-p36.2
 588. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=27&scrV=5#xi-p18.5
 589. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=27&scrV=9#xxiii-p166.1
 590. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=28&scrV=10#iii-p31.2
 591. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=30&scrV=8#xiv-p48.1
 592. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=30&scrV=18#xi-p18.6
 593. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=30&scrV=22#xviii-p12.6
 594. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=32&scrV=6#xvi-p17.2
 595. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=32&scrV=15#xviii-p118.2
 596. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=33&scrV=1#xv-p22.3
 597. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=33&scrV=17#xix-p9.3
 598. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=33&scrV=24#xiii-p32.6
 599. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=35&scrV=1#xviii-p118.3
 600. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=35&scrV=10#xxiii-p155.5
 601. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=38&scrV=5#x-p17.1
 602. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=38&scrV=5#xxi-p117.1
 603. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=38&scrV=5#xxi-p153.3
 604. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=38&scrV=14#xxi-p153.2
 605. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=39&scrV=2#xxi-p180.2
 606. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=40&scrV=2#xvii-p84.1
 607. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=40&scrV=31#xxi-p83.3
 608. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=40&scrV=31#xxi-p123.2
 609. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=41&scrV=8#v-p6.3
 610. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=41&scrV=10#xxi-p171.4
 611. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=43&scrV=4#xxi-p114.1
 612. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=43&scrV=4#xxi-p119.1
 613. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=43&scrV=25#xiv-p21.1
 614. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=44&scrV=3#xiii-p21.2
 615. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=44&scrV=3#xvi-p9.2
 616. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=44&scrV=22#xiii-p40.4
 617. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=45&scrV=11#xxi-p76.5
 618. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=45&scrV=19#xvi-p4.1
 619. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=46&scrV=13#xxi-p120.2
 620. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=48&scrV=17#xxi-p162.3
 621. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=49&scrV=5#iii-p33.1
 622. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=49&scrV=5#xviii-p20.4
 623. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=49&scrV=15#xiii-p42.1
 624. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=50&scrV=7#xvii-p92.1
 625. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=50&scrV=16#xxi-p149.1
 626. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=51&scrV=20#xxiv-p14.2
 627. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=53&scrV=5#xvii-p95.1
 628. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=54&scrV=5#v-p6.2
 629. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=54&scrV=7#xiii-p45.3
 630. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=54&scrV=8#xxi-p138.2
 631. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=54&scrV=11#xxiii-p51.2
 632. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=55&scrV=1#xv-p10.1
 633. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=55&scrV=1#xvi-p17.3
 634. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=55&scrV=7#xi-p7.2
 635. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=55&scrV=7#xiv-p23.1
 636. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=55&scrV=13#xx-p19.2
 637. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=56&scrV=6#xxiv-p19.1
 638. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=56&scrV=7#xxi-p116.3
 639. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=57&scrV=2#xx-p15.1
 640. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=57&scrV=15#xviii-p18.1
 641. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=57&scrV=16#xvi-p8.1
 642. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=57&scrV=17#xiii-p43.1
 643. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=57&scrV=18#xiii-p3.1
 644. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=57&scrV=20#xviii-p122.1
 645. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=57&scrV=20#xx-p26.1
 646. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=57&scrV=20#xx-p34.2
 647. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=57&scrV=21#xx-p34.3
 648. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=58&scrV=1#iii-p30.4
 649. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=58&scrV=1#xvii-p24.1
 650. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=58&scrV=7#xvii-p116.1
 651. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=58&scrV=9#viii-p45.2
 652. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=58&scrV=10#xvi-p17.1
 653. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=58&scrV=10#xvii-p57.1
 654. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=58&scrV=12#xx-p68.2
 655. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=59&scrV=17#xi-p4.2
 656. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=60&scrV=8#iii-p36.2
 657. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=60&scrV=15#xxi-p115.2
 658. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=61&scrV=1#vi-p20.1
 659. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=61&scrV=3#xiii-p21.3
 660. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=61&scrV=3#xiii-p6.2
 661. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=61&scrV=8#xvii-p116.3
 662. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=61&scrV=9#xxi-p172.1
 663. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=61&scrV=10#xv-p46.5
 664. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=62&scrV=3#xxi-p120.1
 665. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=63&scrV=10#viii-p46.2
 666. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=65&scrV=15#xxi-p115.1
 667. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=66&scrV=2#xxi-p58.3
 668. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=2&scrV=13#xvi-p5.2
 669. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=4&scrV=14#xviii-p91.2
 670. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=5&scrV=7#iv-p20.3
 671. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=6&scrV=11#xiv-p10.3
 672. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=7&scrV=16#x-p7.2
 673. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=9&scrV=5#xxiv-p35.2
 674. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=12&scrV=2#xviii-p59.1
 675. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=12&scrV=7#xxi-p86.2
 676. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=15&scrV=16#xv-p29.1
 677. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=16&scrV=7#xiii-p45.1
 678. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=17&scrV=11#xv-p22.5
 679. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=18&scrV=12#xi-p4.1
 680. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=20&scrV=4#xi-p5.4
 681. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=22&scrV=21#xxi-p136.2
 682. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=23&scrV=6#xv-p8.1
 683. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=23&scrV=32#iii-p17.2
 684. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=31&scrV=14#xvi-p4.5
 685. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=31&scrV=14#xvi-p9.1
 686. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=31&scrV=19#xi-p18.2
 687. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=31&scrV=19#viii-p44.3
 688. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=31&scrV=20#xxi-p133.2
 689. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=31&scrV=33#v-p5.1
 690. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=31&scrV=34#xiv-p21.2
 691. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=31&scrV=34#xxi-p171.2
 692. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=32&scrV=39#xx-p16.1
 693. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=35&scrV=5#xxii-p14.2
 694. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=50&scrV=20#v-p4.2
 695. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=51&scrV=56#xiv-p12.2
 696. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Lam&scrCh=2&scrV=18#viii-p32.2
 697. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Lam&scrCh=3&scrV=22#xvi-p9.3
 698. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Lam&scrCh=3&scrV=27#xxiii-p77.3
 699. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Lam&scrCh=4&scrV=21#xxiii-p155.2
 700. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=1&scrV=8#xvii-p64.2
 701. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=3&scrV=20#xvii-p24.2
 702. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=7&scrV=16#viii-p10.1
 703. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=7&scrV=16#x-p1.1
 704. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=7&scrV=19#iv-p17.3
 705. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=10&scrV=4#viii-p44.4
 706. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=11&scrV=1#xxiv-p20.4
 707. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=16&scrV=6#xii-p2.3
 708. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=16&scrV=6#xviii-p12.5
 709. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=16&scrV=6#xxi-p106.1
 710. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=16&scrV=8#xxi-p106.1
 711. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=18&scrV=31#xxiv-p33.1
 712. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=20&scrV=43#viii-p27.1
 713. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=21&scrV=9#ix-p4.4
 714. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=28&scrV=5#iv-p20.2
 715. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=28&scrV=24#xxiii-p9.1
 716. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=33&scrV=31#iii-p30.3
 717. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=33&scrV=31#xviii-p83.2
 718. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=33&scrV=32#xv-p17.2
 719. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=36&scrV=25#xxiv-p33.5
 720. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=36&scrV=25#xviii-p13.1
 721. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=36&scrV=26#xxiv-p33.2
 722. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=36&scrV=26#viii-p50.1
 723. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=36&scrV=26#x-p4.4
 724. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=36&scrV=26#xiv-p55.2
 725. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=36&scrV=27#xviii-p87.2
 726. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=36&scrV=27#xxi-p162.8
 727. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=36&scrV=37#xiv-p55.2
 728. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=47&scrV=12#xvii-p99.1
 729. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=2&scrV=35#xviii-p5.1
 730. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=3&scrV=17#xxiii-p163.2
 731. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=3&scrV=18#xxiii-p45.1
 732. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=3&scrV=22#xviii-p77.2
 733. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=4&scrV=16#xxi-p58.6
 734. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=5&scrV=3#iv-p17.4
 735. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=5&scrV=6#iv-p17.5
 736. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=7&scrV=9#xxi-p121.2
 737. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=12&scrV=1#xxiii-p156.5
 738. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=12&scrV=3#iii-p32.2
 739. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=12&scrV=10#xxi-p136.5
 740. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=12&scrV=10#xxiii-p20.1
 741. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=12&scrV=10#xxiii-p21.2
 742. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=1&scrV=4#vii-p17.1
 743. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=1&scrV=9#viii-p37.1
 744. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=2&scrV=6#xxi-p136.3
 745. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=2&scrV=9#xvii-p100.2
 746. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=2&scrV=19#xiii-p42.1
 747. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=7&scrV=14#xxi-p116.2
 748. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=10&scrV=2#xviii-p60.3
 749. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=11&scrV=3#xxiv-p33.6
 750. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=11&scrV=8#viii-p44.5
 751. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=11&scrV=8#xvi-p8.3
 752. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=11&scrV=8#xxi-p133.4
 753. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=11&scrV=8#xxi-p151.1
 754. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=12&scrV=1#iv-p19.1
 755. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=12&scrV=4#viii-p24.2
 756. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=12&scrV=4#viii-p45.3
 757. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=12&scrV=4#x-p5.5
 758. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=14&scrV=1#viii-p27.3
 759. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=14&scrV=4#xxi-p135.2
 760. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=14&scrV=4#xxi-p171.3
 761. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=14&scrV=8#xxi-p25.2
 762. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Joel&scrCh=2&scrV=2#viii-p44.2
 763. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Joel&scrCh=2&scrV=12#viii-p28.1
 764. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Joel&scrCh=2&scrV=12#viii-p44.2
 765. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Amos&scrCh=1&scrV=11#xvii-p14.2
 766. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Amos&scrCh=2&scrV=7#xv-p20.1
 767. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Amos&scrCh=2&scrV=7#xvi-p22.1
 768. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Amos&scrCh=5&scrV=12#xv-p22.1
 769. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Amos&scrCh=6&scrV=4#xxiii-p78.1
 770. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Amos&scrCh=6&scrV=5#xi-p21.1
 771. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Amos&scrCh=6&scrV=13#xiii-p30.4
 772. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Amos&scrCh=8&scrV=5#xviii-p48.1
 773. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Jonah&scrCh=2&scrV=4#xxi-p149.2
 774. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Jonah&scrCh=3&scrV=2#iii-p40.1
 775. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Jonah&scrCh=4&scrV=9#xiv-p6.2
 776. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Mic&scrCh=2&scrV=1#xxiv-p35.3
 777. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Mic&scrCh=3&scrV=2#xviii-p54.1
 778. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Mic&scrCh=3&scrV=10#viii-p35.2
 779. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Mic&scrCh=6&scrV=8#xvii-p116.2
 780. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Mic&scrCh=6&scrV=11#xviii-p87.4
 781. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Mic&scrCh=7&scrV=9#xxiii-p152.2
 782. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Mic&scrCh=7&scrV=18#xvii-p87.1
 783. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Nah&scrCh=1&scrV=5#xxi-p58.5
 784. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Nah&scrCh=1&scrV=6#iv-p17.2
 785. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Nah&scrCh=1&scrV=14#xxi-p114.3
 786. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Hab&scrCh=1&scrV=13#xviii-p94.1
 787. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Hab&scrCh=2&scrV=4#xxi-p52.1
 788. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Hab&scrCh=2&scrV=6#iv-p20.5
 789. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Zeph&scrCh=2&scrV=3#xiv-p29.1
 790. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Hag&scrCh=2&scrV=12#xviii-p93.2
 791. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Zech&scrCh=2&scrV=8#xxi-p114.7
 792. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Zech&scrCh=3&scrV=3#xii-p2.4
 793. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Zech&scrCh=3&scrV=4#vi-p21.1
 794. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Zech&scrCh=5&scrV=4#xxiii-p150.2
 795. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Zech&scrCh=5&scrV=7#xxiv-p35.1
 796. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Zech&scrCh=7&scrV=11#xvi-p20.3
 797. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Zech&scrCh=7&scrV=12#iii-p31.1
 798. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Zech&scrCh=7&scrV=12#xvii-p10.3
 799. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Zech&scrCh=8&scrV=18#xx-p16.2
 800. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Zech&scrCh=10&scrV=2#xiii-p29.11
 801. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Zech&scrCh=10&scrV=7#xiii-p29.7
 802. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Zech&scrCh=11&scrV=8#xviii-p94.3
 803. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Zech&scrCh=12&scrV=10#xiii-p21.1
 804. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Zech&scrCh=12&scrV=10#xii-p3.2
 805. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Zech&scrCh=12&scrV=10#viii-p47.1
 806. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Zech&scrCh=12&scrV=10#ix-p6.3
 807. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Zech&scrCh=12&scrV=10#x-p4.1
 808. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Zech&scrCh=12&scrV=11#viii-p47.2
 809. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Zech&scrCh=13&scrV=1#xviii-p113.1
 810. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Zech&scrCh=13&scrV=6#viii-p22.1
 811. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Mal&scrCh=1&scrV=8#xviii-p83.3
 812. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Mal&scrCh=1&scrV=10#xxiii-p146.1
 813. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Mal&scrCh=1&scrV=13#xxiv-p4.1
 814. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Mal&scrCh=3&scrV=17#xviii-p87.5
 815. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Mal&scrCh=3&scrV=17#xxi-p86.3
 816. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Mal&scrCh=3&scrV=17#xxi-p114.6
 817. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Mal&scrCh=3&scrV=17#xxi-p152.1
 818. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=1&scrV=21#xviii-p15.4
 819. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=2&scrV=9#iii-p3.1
 820. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=2&scrV=11#xxiii-p135.1
 821. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=2&scrV=11#xvii-p76.4
 822. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=2&scrV=18#viii-p6.1
 823. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=3&scrV=15#xxiv-p32.2
 824. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=3&scrV=17#xxi-p34.1
 825. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=1#iii-p2.1
 826. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=1#i-p0.3
 827. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=3#iv-p2.1
 828. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=3#vii-p2.1
 829. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=4#viii-p2.1
 830. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=5#xiv-p2.1
 831. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=6#xv-p2.1
 832. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=6#xvi-p2.1
 833. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=7#xvii-p2.1
 834. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=8#xix-p2.1
 835. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=8#xviii-p2.1
 836. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=9#xx-p2.1
 837. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=9#xxi-p2.1
 838. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=10#xxiii-p2.1
 839. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=11#xxiii-p25.1
 840. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=12#xxiii-p167.3
 841. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=12#xxiii-p171.1
 842. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=12#xxiii-p25.2
 843. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=14#iii-p25.1
 844. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=14#xxiii-p29.3
 845. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=20#xviii-p17.3
 846. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=22#xiv-p17.3
 847. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=44#xiv-p27.1
 848. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=48#xviii-p55.3
 849. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=2#xvii-p121.1
 850. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=16#viii-p16.1
 851. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=26#xxi-p155.2
 852. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=33#xv-p39.3
 853. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=7&scrV=2#xvii-p102.2
 854. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=7&scrV=29#iii-p11.1
 855. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=8&scrV=12#x-p8.1
 856. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=8&scrV=20#xxiii-p148.1
 857. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=8&scrV=24#v-p1.1
 858. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=9&scrV=2#xiii-p15.2
 859. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=9&scrV=34#xxiii-p148.5
 860. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=10&scrV=7#xvii-p22.1
 861. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=10&scrV=18#xxiii-p41.1
 862. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=10&scrV=18#xxiii-p42.1
 863. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=10&scrV=23#xxiii-p41.2
 864. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=10&scrV=33#xxiii-p118.1
 865. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=10&scrV=33#xxiii-p53.2
 866. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=10&scrV=39#xxiii-p143.2
 867. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=11&scrV=12#xv-p36.3
 868. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=11&scrV=25#xxi-p162.1
 869. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=11&scrV=29#xxiv-p18.1
 870. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=11&scrV=29#xiv-p10.4
 871. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=11&scrV=29#xiv-p31.3
 872. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=11&scrV=30#xxiv-p10.1
 873. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=11&scrV=30#xxiv-p13.1
 874. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=12&scrV=20#xv-p41.1
 875. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=13&scrV=5#xiii-p20.5
 876. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=13&scrV=7#xviii-p52.1
 877. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=13&scrV=7#xx-p42.1
 878. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=13&scrV=13#iii-p30.1
 879. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=13&scrV=17#iv-p19.2
 880. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=13&scrV=20#xxiii-p20.2
 881. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=13&scrV=21#xxiii-p53.1
 882. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=13&scrV=28#xxiv-p42.3
 883. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=13&scrV=38#xxiv-p42.3
 884. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=14&scrV=28#xxiv-p18.2
 885. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=15&scrV=28#xviii-p66.1
 886. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=15&scrV=32#iii-p21.1
 887. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=15&scrV=32#xvi-p8.2
 888. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=15&scrV=32#xvii-p57.2
 889. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=16&scrV=24#xxiii-p86.1
 890. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=16&scrV=24#xxiii-p51.4
 891. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=16&scrV=25#vi-p23.2
 892. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=16&scrV=26#iii-p26.1
 893. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=17&scrV=2#xix-p9.1
 894. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=18&scrV=7#xxiv-p47.1
 895. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=18&scrV=21#xiv-p23.2
 896. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=18&scrV=22#xiv-p23.3
 897. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=18&scrV=27#xiv-p21.3
 898. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=18&scrV=27#xvii-p44.5
 899. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=18&scrV=28#xvii-p44.2
 900. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=19&scrV=27#xxiii-p96.1
 901. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=19&scrV=28#xxiii-p170.1
 902. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=19&scrV=29#xxiii-p114.1
 903. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=19&scrV=29#xxiii-p143.1
 904. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=21&scrV=5#xiv-p31.1
 905. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=21&scrV=15#xxi-p101.2
 906. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=21&scrV=22#xxi-p74.1
 907. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=23&scrV=19#xviii-p19.1
 908. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=23&scrV=25#xviii-p17.1
 909. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=23&scrV=27#xviii-p17.1
 910. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=24&scrV=46#iv-p7.1
 911. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=25&scrV=11#xv-p39.1
 912. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=25&scrV=21#xix-p13.1
 913. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=25&scrV=25#xvii-p93.2
 914. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=25&scrV=30#xvii-p93.2
 915. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=25&scrV=34#iv-p7.2
 916. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=25&scrV=37#xvii-p121.2
 917. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=25&scrV=40#xvii-p102.1
 918. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=25&scrV=42#xvii-p73.5
 919. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=26&scrV=15#xviii-p44.1
 920. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=26&scrV=33#xxiii-p101.1
 921. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=26&scrV=35#xxiii-p101.1
 922. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=26&scrV=38#xxiii-p148.13
 923. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=26&scrV=52#xiv-p15.1
 924. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=27&scrV=0#viii-p13.1
 925. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=27&scrV=2#xxiii-p148.10
 926. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=27&scrV=3#viii-p13.2
 927. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=27&scrV=6#xxiii-p148.3
 928. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=27&scrV=29#xxiii-p148.4
 929. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=27&scrV=35#xxiii-p148.8
 930. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=27&scrV=40#xxiii-p52.1
 931. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=28&scrV=6#iv-p21.1
 932. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=28&scrV=20#iii-p13.4
 933. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=2&scrV=8#xxiii-p104.1
 934. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=3&scrV=5#viii-p34.1
 935. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=4&scrV=1#iii-p35.2
 936. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=4&scrV=39#xiv-p47.1
 937. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=5&scrV=5#xii-p2.9
 938. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=5&scrV=5#xvii-p14.1
 939. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=6&scrV=12#ix-p6.2
 940. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=9&scrV=24#viii-p26.1
 941. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=9&scrV=50#xx-p45.1
 942. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=11&scrV=25#xiv-p20.1
 943. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=11&scrV=26#xiv-p26.1
 944. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=14&scrV=8#xxiii-p57.1
 945. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=14&scrV=37#xv-p15.1
 946. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=14&scrV=49#iii-p35.1
 947. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=14&scrV=65#xxiii-p148.6
 948. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=16&scrV=14#xviii-p37.1
 949. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=1&scrV=47#xiii-p29.9
 950. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=1&scrV=53#xvi-p4.2
 951. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=1&scrV=76#xxi-p4.1
 952. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=2&scrV=14#xx-p37.3
 953. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=2&scrV=48#viii-p45.1
 954. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=3&scrV=22#x-p4.2
 955. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=4&scrV=33#viii-p38.1
 956. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=5&scrV=29#xviii-p120.1
 957. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=5&scrV=31#ix-p5.3
 958. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=6&scrV=21#viii-p5.1
 959. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=6&scrV=21#viii-p31.2
 960. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=6&scrV=21#xvi-p9.1
 961. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=6&scrV=25#x-p8.3
 962. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=6&scrV=28#xxiii-p47.1
 963. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=6&scrV=36#xvii-p89.4
 964. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=6&scrV=38#xvii-p112.2
 965. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=7&scrV=0#viii-p19.1
 966. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=7&scrV=38#x-p5.1
 967. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=7&scrV=38#xviii-p112.1
 968. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=8&scrV=6#ix-p2.1
 969. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=8&scrV=46#xvi-p5.3
 970. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=9&scrV=55#xx-p27.2
 971. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=11&scrV=13#xvi-p11.1
 972. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=11&scrV=13#xxi-p163.1
 973. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=11&scrV=52#xvii-p20.1
 974. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=12&scrV=4#xxiii-p73.4
 975. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=12&scrV=19#iv-p9.1
 976. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=12&scrV=20#xvii-p74.1
 977. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=12&scrV=20#xxiii-p58.1
 978. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=12&scrV=27#xxi-p155.3
 979. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=12&scrV=32#vii-p19.1
 980. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=12&scrV=32#xxi-p156.1
 981. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=12&scrV=50#xxiii-p46.1
 982. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=13&scrV=3#x-p9.2
 983. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=13&scrV=25#xv-p39.2
 984. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=14&scrV=18#xv-p14.1
 985. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=14&scrV=26#xxiii-p97.1
 986. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=14&scrV=26#xxiii-p98.1
 987. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=14&scrV=28#xxiii-p3.1
 988. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=15&scrV=7#iii-p32.1
 989. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=15&scrV=7#x-p10.1
 990. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=15&scrV=7#x-p5.2
 991. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=15&scrV=7#xviii-p27.2
 992. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=15&scrV=10#iii-p32.1
 993. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=15&scrV=18#viii-p20.2
 994. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=15&scrV=18#viii-p24.1
 995. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=15&scrV=21#viii-p20.2
 996. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=15&scrV=24#xi-p5.6
 997. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=16&scrV=2#xvii-p93.1
 998. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=16&scrV=14#xviii-p55.1
 999. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=16&scrV=24#xxiv-p36.1
1000. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=16&scrV=24#xv-p49.2
1001. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=17&scrV=21#v-p8.4
1002. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=17&scrV=21#vii-p27.1
1003. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=18&scrV=11#vi-p24.2
1004. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=18&scrV=13#vi-p13.1
1005. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=18&scrV=13#x-p5.6
1006. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=19&scrV=8#viii-p30.1
1007. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=19&scrV=14#xxiv-p41.2
1008. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=19&scrV=16#vii-p34.3
1009. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=20&scrV=47#vii-p34.1
1010. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=21&scrV=5#xx-p43.1
1011. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=21&scrV=14#xvii-p81.1
1012. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=21&scrV=15#xxiii-p138.1
1013. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=21&scrV=18#xxiii-p139.2
1014. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=22&scrV=48#xxiii-p148.7
1015. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=22&scrV=53#xxiii-p155.4
1016. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=23&scrV=4#xxiii-p148.9
1017. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=23&scrV=33#xxiii-p148.11
1018. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=23&scrV=41#xxiii-p36.2
1019. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=23&scrV=43#xix-p21.1
1020. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=23&scrV=46#xxii-p24.2
1021. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=24&scrV=32#xxiii-p82.4
1022. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=2&scrV=7#xvi-p26.1
1023. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=2&scrV=9#xiii-p6.4
1024. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=2&scrV=14#xiv-p10.5
1025. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=4#xviii-p27.3
1026. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=4#xxi-p67.3
1027. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=5#xxi-p64.1
1028. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=18#v-p7.1
1029. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=34#iii-p10.1
1030. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=34#xvi-p17.4
1031. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=36#xi-p11.1
1032. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=4&scrV=22#xviii-p26.7
1033. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=4&scrV=24#xix-p5.3
1034. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=4&scrV=29#iii-p11.2
1035. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=4&scrV=34#iii-p21.2
1036. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=24#xxi-p186.1
1037. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=50#xv-p46.1
1038. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=7&scrV=24#xxiv-p47.2
1039. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=7&scrV=38#xviii-p118.1
1040. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=7&scrV=46#iii-p11.3
1041. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=18#iii-p13.1
1042. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=40#xxi-p59.2
1043. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=44#xii-p2.7
1044. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=44#xiv-p11.1
1045. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=44#xxi-p19.2
1046. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=44#xxi-p59.3
1047. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=46#xviii-p107.1
1048. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=48#xxiii-p14.2
1049. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=10&scrV=27#xx-p10.2
1050. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=10&scrV=28#iv-p31.1
1051. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=10&scrV=28#xxi-p186.1
1052. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=10&scrV=42#iii-p12.1
1053. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=12&scrV=42#iii-p12.2
1054. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=13&scrV=37#xxiii-p172.2
1055. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=2#xxi-p35.2
1056. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=10#xiii-p27.2
1057. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=16#xiii-p34.1
1058. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=26#xiii-p12.2
1059. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=27#xx-p37.4
1060. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=15&scrV=3#xviii-p110.1
1061. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=15&scrV=4#xvii-p118.3
1062. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=16&scrV=2#xxiii-p165.2
1063. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=16&scrV=7#xiii-p18.1
1064. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=16&scrV=13#xxi-p162.7
1065. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=16&scrV=20#xxiii-p129.1
1066. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=16&scrV=20#xxiii-p142.1
1067. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=16&scrV=20#xiii-p10.1
1068. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=16&scrV=22#xiii-p29.8
1069. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=16&scrV=22#xix-p11.3
1070. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=16&scrV=24#xiii-p29.2
1071. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=16&scrV=32#xxiii-p156.2
1072. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=16&scrV=33#xiii-p40.1
1073. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=16&scrV=33#xvi-p15.2
1074. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=16&scrV=33#xxiii-p51.3
1075. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=16&scrV=33#xxiii-p58.3
1076. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=17&scrV=11#xxiii-p165.1
1077. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=17&scrV=11#xx-p39.1
1078. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=17&scrV=17#xviii-p110.3
1079. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=17&scrV=21#xx-p39.1
1080. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=17&scrV=22#xx-p40.1
1081. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=17&scrV=23#xx-p39.1
1082. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=18&scrV=11#xiv-p45.3
1083. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=20&scrV=13#viii-p23.1
1084. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=20&scrV=25#x-p14.1
1085. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=1&scrV=6#xxiii-p147.3
1086. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=1&scrV=6#xxiii-p51.5
1087. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=1&scrV=7#xxiii-p58.3
1088. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=1&scrV=8#xxiii-p147.4
1089. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=2&scrV=3#xviii-p116.1
1090. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=2&scrV=15#xvii-p37.1
1091. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=2&scrV=24#xviii-p117.1
1092. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=2&scrV=28#xix-p11.1
1093. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=2&scrV=37#xxi-p67.1
1094. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=2&scrV=41#iii-p22.2
1095. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=3&scrV=2#iii-p36.3
1096. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=4&scrV=16#xviii-p117.2
1097. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=4&scrV=27#xxiii-p148.2
1098. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=4&scrV=32#xx-p67.2
1099. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=5&scrV=3#viii-p11.1
1100. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=5&scrV=3#xviii-p94.2
1101. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=5&scrV=39#viii-p21.3
1102. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=5&scrV=41#xxiii-p147.1
1103. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=5&scrV=41#xxiii-p46.3
1104. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=6&scrV=15#vii-p35.2
1105. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=7&scrV=27#xx-p60.1
1106. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=7&scrV=51#xxiii-p103.1
1107. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=7&scrV=51#viii-p21.2
1108. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=7&scrV=51#viii-p52.1
1109. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=7&scrV=51#xxiii-p54.1
1110. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=7&scrV=52#xxiii-p11.1
1111. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=7&scrV=52#xxiii-p25.6
1112. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=7&scrV=55#xvi-p14.1
1113. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=7&scrV=56#xxiii-p142.3
1114. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=7&scrV=60#xvii-p46.1
1115. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=7&scrV=60#xxiii-p49.1
1116. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=8&scrV=22#ix-p6.4
1117. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=9&scrV=4#xxiii-p54.2
1118. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=9&scrV=6#xiii-p20.3
1119. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=9&scrV=6#vi-p32.2
1120. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=9&scrV=8#iii-p30.2
1121. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=9&scrV=11#xxi-p71.2
1122. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=9&scrV=15#xiii-p22.2
1123. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=9&scrV=16#xxiii-p25.4
1124. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=9&scrV=25#v-p8.5
1125. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=9&scrV=31#xiii-p28.1
1126. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=9&scrV=39#xvii-p99.2
1127. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=10&scrV=4#xvii-p90.2
1128. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=10&scrV=33#xiv-p7.1
1129. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=11&scrV=18#viii-p13.3
1130. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=12&scrV=7#xxiii-p141.3
1131. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=13&scrV=46#xv-p16.1
1132. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=13&scrV=50#xxiii-p7.2
1133. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=14&scrV=22#xxiii-p7.1
1134. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=15&scrV=9#xviii-p114.1
1135. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=15&scrV=9#vii-p28.2
1136. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=15&scrV=39#xx-p27.1
1137. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=16&scrV=27#xii-p2.8
1138. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=17&scrV=16#xxi-p81.1
1139. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=17&scrV=30#viii-p31.3
1140. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=18&scrV=10#xxiii-p139.1
1141. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=20&scrV=9#xvii-p17.2
1142. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=20&scrV=23#xviii-p90.1
1143. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=20&scrV=23#xxiii-p25.4
1144. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=20&scrV=24#xxiii-p144.2
1145. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=20&scrV=28#xxi-p188.1
1146. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=21&scrV=5#xxi-p101.3
1147. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=22&scrV=20#xxi-p167.1
1148. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=23&scrV=1#xxiii-p40.1
1149. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=23&scrV=11#xxiii-p142.2
1150. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=23&scrV=11#xxiii-p164.3
1151. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=26&scrV=18#xi-p11.2
1152. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=26&scrV=18#xviii-p26.3
1153. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=26&scrV=18#xxiii-p29.2
1154. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=26&scrV=20#x-p9.1
1155. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=26&scrV=25#xiv-p19.1
1156. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=27&scrV=14#xxiii-p128.1
1157. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=27&scrV=24#xxiii-p128.2
1158. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=28&scrV=4#xxiii-p52.2
1159. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=28&scrV=5#xvii-p40.2
1160. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=28&scrV=20#xxiii-p147.8
1161. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=28&scrV=20#xxiii-p39.1
1162. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=1&scrV=8#xvii-p29.2
1163. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=1&scrV=29#xx-p49.1
1164. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=1&scrV=30#xxiv-p41.1
1165. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=1&scrV=31#xiv-p47.2
1166. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=1&scrV=31#xvii-p10.1
1167. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=1&scrV=31#xvii-p73.3
1168. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=1&scrV=31#xx-p44.1
1169. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=2&scrV=4#xi-p4.3
1170. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=2&scrV=4#xi-p7.1
1171. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=2&scrV=5#viii-p53.2
1172. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=2&scrV=5#xxi-p108.1
1173. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=2&scrV=24#xxii-p22.2
1174. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=3&scrV=8#xxiii-p14.1
1175. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=3&scrV=13#xvii-p27.1
1176. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=3&scrV=24#xxi-p188.2
1177. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=3&scrV=26#xxi-p188.2
1178. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=5&scrV=3#xiii-p32.4
1179. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=5&scrV=5#xiii-p15.1
1180. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=6&scrV=7#xxi-p25.3
1181. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=6&scrV=14#xxi-p169.1
1182. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=6&scrV=17#xviii-p124.2
1183. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=6&scrV=21#vii-p23.2
1184. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=6&scrV=23#xi-p8.2
1185. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=7&scrV=4#xvii-p64.4
1186. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=7&scrV=15#xviii-p31.1
1187. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=7&scrV=15#xxiii-p66.2
1188. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=7&scrV=16#xxiv-p17.1
1189. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=7&scrV=23#viii-p33.1
1190. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=7&scrV=23#xviii-p23.1
1191. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=7&scrV=23#xxi-p69.1
1192. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=7&scrV=24#xxiii-p152.1
1193. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=1#xxi-p186.2
1194. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=2#xxi-p167.2
1195. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=14#xxi-p170.1
1196. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=15#xxi-p60.1
1197. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=15#xxi-p67.2
1198. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=15#xxi-p71.1
1199. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=15#xxi-p76.1
1200. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=16#xxi-p78.1
1201. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=16#xxi-p78.2
1202. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=17#xxiii-p156.1
1203. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=17#xxi-p31.1
1204. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=17#xxi-p121.3
1205. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=23#v-p8.2
1206. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=23#xviii-p125.5
1207. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=26#xxiv-p20.1
1208. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=26#xv-p11.3
1209. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=26#xxi-p73.1
1210. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=26#xxi-p76.4
1211. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=28#xxiii-p128.3
1212. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=28#v-p9.1
1213. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=28#xviii-p105.1
1214. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=28#xxi-p173.1
1215. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=29#xviii-p14.2
1216. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=35#xxiii-p164.1
1217. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=36#vii-p25.2
1218. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=36#xxiii-p11.2
1219. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=9&scrV=6#xviii-p99.2
1220. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=9&scrV=22#viii-p53.3
1221. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=9&scrV=33#xxiv-p50.1
1222. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=10&scrV=3#xv-p13.1
1223. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=10&scrV=15#iii-p17.1
1224. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=11&scrV=13#iii-p34.2
1225. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=11&scrV=20#xxiv-p51.1
1226. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=12&scrV=1#xviii-p84.3
1227. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=12&scrV=2#xxi-p64.3
1228. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=12&scrV=2#xxii-p19.2
1229. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=12&scrV=17#xiv-p16.2
1230. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=12&scrV=18#xx-p28.1
1231. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=12&scrV=19#xiv-p12.1
1232. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=12&scrV=20#xiv-p27.2
1233. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=13&scrV=14#xviii-p32.1
1234. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=14&scrV=17#v-p8.3
1235. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=15&scrV=13#xiii-p29.1
1236. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=15&scrV=13#xvi-p15.1
1237. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=16&scrV=17#xx-p61.1
1238. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=16&scrV=18#xxiii-p74.1
1239. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=10#xx-p13.1
1240. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=9#iii-p34.3
1241. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=18#vi-p23.1
1242. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=6&scrV=19#xviii-p18.2
1243. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=7&scrV=15#xx-p18.1
1244. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=7&scrV=31#iv-p15.1
1245. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=8&scrV=12#xviii-p79.2
1246. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=9&scrV=7#iii-p37.3
1247. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=9&scrV=11#iii-p24.1
1248. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=9&scrV=14#iii-p37.2
1249. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=9&scrV=26#xvi-p3.1
1250. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=10&scrV=13#xxiii-p141.2
1251. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=10&scrV=25#xviii-p79.1
1252. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=13&scrV=1#xvii-p73.2
1253. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=13&scrV=3#xxiii-p37.1
1254. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=13&scrV=6#xxiii-p80.4
1255. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=13&scrV=12#xix-p8.1
1256. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=13&scrV=12#xix-p8.3
1257. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=10#vi-p30.4
1258. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=31#viii-p32.1
1259. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=32#xxiii-p7.5
1260. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=50#xiv-p24.1
1261. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=55#xiii-p32.7
1262. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=58#iii-p35.3
1263. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=16&scrV=22#xvii-p101.1
1264. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=3#xxi-p164.1
1265. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=5#xxiii-p164.4
1266. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=5#xiii-p22.3
1267. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=12#xxiii-p102.1
1268. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=22#v-p8.1
1269. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=22#xiii-p16.1
1270. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=22#xx-p38.1
1271. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=7#xiii-p9.1
1272. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=16#iii-p39.1
1273. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=17#xxi-p170.2
1274. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=4#xviii-p26.2
1275. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=6#xix-p6.1
1276. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=16#xxi-p180.1
1277. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=17#xxiii-p151.1
1278. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=1#vii-p13.2
1279. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=2#xxii-p24.1
1280. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=8#xix-p20.1
1281. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=12#xiii-p29.6
1282. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=14#xxiii-p131.1
1283. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=14#xvii-p63.1
1284. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=20#iii-p23.1
1285. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=20#iii-p34.1
1286. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=20#xvii-p23.1
1287. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=20#xx-p36.2
1288. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=20#xxiii-p31.1
1289. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=6&scrV=10#xiii-p32.5
1290. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=6&scrV=14#xx-p25.1
1291. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=6&scrV=18#v-p6.1
1292. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=7&scrV=1#xviii-p85.1
1293. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=7&scrV=4#xiii-p29.3
1294. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=7&scrV=10#xiii-p6.3
1295. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=7&scrV=10#viii-p6.2
1296. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=7&scrV=11#xiv-p12.5
1297. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=7&scrV=11#viii-p29.1
1298. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=7&scrV=11#viii-p33.3
1299. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=8&scrV=12#xxiv-p31.2
1300. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=8&scrV=12#xxi-p153.1
1301. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=10&scrV=4#xxiii-p29.1
1302. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=11&scrV=14#xiii-p23.1
1303. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=11&scrV=24#v-p1.2
1304. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=11&scrV=26#xxiii-p24.1
1305. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=2#vii-p11.3
1306. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=9#xxiii-p84.2
1307. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=9#xxiii-p156.3
1308. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=10#xxiv-p21.2
1309. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=14#iii-p37.1
1310. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=14#xxi-p154.1
1311. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=13&scrV=11#xx-p56.1
1312. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=1&scrV=16#xxiii-p75.1
1313. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=2&scrV=20#vi-p30.3
1314. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=3&scrV=1#xiv-p18.1
1315. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=3&scrV=4#xiv-p18.2
1316. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=3&scrV=10#xxiv-p30.1
1317. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=3&scrV=12#xxiv-p31.3
1318. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=3&scrV=13#xxiii-p148.12
1319. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=3&scrV=26#xxi-p42.1
1320. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=4&scrV=5#xxi-p21.1
1321. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=4&scrV=6#xxi-p71.3
1322. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=4&scrV=19#xxi-p91.1
1323. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=4&scrV=19#xxi-p190.1
1324. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=4&scrV=29#xxiii-p11.3
1325. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=5&scrV=6#xxi-p50.1
1326. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=5&scrV=22#xiii-p22.1
1327. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=5&scrV=22#xiii-p12.3
1328. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=5&scrV=23#xiv-p8.1
1329. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=5&scrV=24#xiv-p24.2
1330. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=5&scrV=24#xxi-p169.2
1331. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=6&scrV=1#xi-p3.1
1332. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=6&scrV=1#xiv-p29.5
1333. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=6&scrV=14#xxiii-p70.3
1334. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=3#v-p3.1
1335. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=4#xviii-p14.1
1336. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=5#xxi-p41.1
1337. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=6#xvii-p118.1
1338. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=6#xxi-p153.5
1339. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=13#xiii-p16.1
1340. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=13#xviii-p115.1
1341. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=13#xiii-p30.2
1342. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=2&scrV=2#xvii-p11.1
1343. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=2&scrV=2#xxi-p24.1
1344. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=2&scrV=10#xvii-p86.1
1345. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=2&scrV=19#xxi-p24.2
1346. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=3&scrV=8#xiii-p22.4
1347. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=3&scrV=17#xviii-p18.1
1348. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=0#vii-p11.2
1349. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=3#xx-p12.1
1350. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=10#xix-p21.2
1351. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=11#iii-p13.3
1352. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=16#xx-p42.2
1353. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=18#xviii-p26.8
1354. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=19#viii-p51.1
1355. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=19#xv-p24.1
1356. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=24#xviii-p14.3
1357. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=26#xiv-p10.2
1358. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=26#xiv-p44.1
1359. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=30#xiv-p44.2
1360. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=31#xiv-p17.1
1361. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=32#xx-p57.1
1362. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=5&scrV=11#vii-p31.1
1363. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=5&scrV=11#xx-p23.3
1364. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=5&scrV=15#xxi-p136.1
1365. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=5&scrV=19#xviii-p59.5
1366. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=5&scrV=30#xxi-p130.2
1367. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=6&scrV=4#xxi-p98.3
1368. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=6&scrV=16#xxiii-p121.1
1369. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=6&scrV=16#x-p13.1
1370. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=1&scrV=13#xxiii-p149.1
1371. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=1&scrV=17#xxiii-p28.1
1372. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=1&scrV=29#xxiii-p172.1
1373. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=8#xxiii-p100.1
1374. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=13#xxiv-p20.2
1375. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=21#xx-p51.3
1376. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=3&scrV=6#vi-p24.3
1377. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=3&scrV=8#vi-p32.1
1378. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=3&scrV=8#xv-p42.1
1379. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=3&scrV=9#vi-p13.2
1380. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=3&scrV=9#vi-p24.4
1381. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=3&scrV=19#xxiii-p77.4
1382. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=3&scrV=20#xviii-p87.3
1383. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=3&scrV=20#xxi-p83.7
1384. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=4&scrV=8#xviii-p80.3
1385. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=4&scrV=13#xxiii-p124.1
1386. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=4&scrV=13#vi-p30.2
1387. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=4&scrV=19#vi-p37.1
1388. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=1&scrV=12#xxi-p28.1
1389. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=1&scrV=12#xxi-p136.7
1390. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=1&scrV=12#xxi-p186.4
1391. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=1&scrV=18#xxi-p31.2
1392. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=1&scrV=19#iv-p29.1
1393. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=1&scrV=20#xxiii-p115.2
1394. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=1&scrV=20#xx-p41.1
1395. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=1&scrV=27#xxi-p83.4
1396. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=2&scrV=10#xv-p8.3
1397. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=3&scrV=2#vii-p29.1
1398. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=3&scrV=2#xxi-p83.1
1399. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=3&scrV=5#xv-p20.2
1400. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=3&scrV=5#xviii-p51.1
1401. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=3&scrV=10#xxi-p59.1
1402. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=3&scrV=12#xiv-p29.2
1403. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=3&scrV=12#xiv-p34.3
1404. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=3&scrV=12#xvii-p11.3
1405. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=3&scrV=12#xvii-p75.1
1406. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=3&scrV=13#xiv-p25.1
1407. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=3&scrV=16#xxiii-p82.3
1408. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=4&scrV=6#xxii-p17.1
1409. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=1&scrV=6#xiii-p32.3
1410. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=1&scrV=10#xviii-p15.3
1411. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=2&scrV=12#vii-p35.1
1412. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=2&scrV=19#iii-p38.4
1413. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=3&scrV=3#xxiii-p18.1
1414. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=4&scrV=3#xviii-p98.1
1415. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=4&scrV=3#xviii-p98.2
1416. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=4&scrV=12#xviii-p80.1
1417. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=4&scrV=17#iv-p31.2
1418. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=5&scrV=8#xxii-p16.1
1419. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=5&scrV=13#xx-p13.2
1420. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=5&scrV=19#xi-p6.2
1421. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=5&scrV=22#xviii-p76.1
1422. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=5&scrV=23#xxi-p64.4
1423. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=5&scrV=25#iii-p39.2
1424. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=2Thess&scrCh=2&scrV=4#xxiii-p136.4
1425. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=2Thess&scrCh=2&scrV=12#ix-p5.2
1426. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=2Thess&scrCh=2&scrV=12#xviii-p31.2
1427. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=2Thess&scrCh=2&scrV=13#xxiii-p80.2
1428. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=2Thess&scrCh=2&scrV=16#xiii-p34.2
1429. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=2Thess&scrCh=3&scrV=1#xxiii-p32.1
1430. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=1&scrV=8#xx-p21.2
1431. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=1&scrV=14#vi-p33.1
1432. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=1&scrV=17#xix-p5.4
1433. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=2&scrV=4#xxiii-p80.5
1434. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=2&scrV=5#xx-p37.2
1435. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=3&scrV=9#xviii-p10.1
1436. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=3&scrV=9#xxiii-p81.1
1437. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=3&scrV=11#xvii-p31.4
1438. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=4&scrV=0#iii-p16.1
1439. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=4&scrV=6#iii-p29.2
1440. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=4&scrV=7#xv-p52.1
1441. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=6&scrV=3#xv-p17.1
1442. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=6&scrV=3#xv-p19.1
1443. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=6&scrV=4#xx-p53.1
1444. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=6&scrV=7#xviii-p108.1
1445. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=6&scrV=7#xxiii-p70.1
1446. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=6&scrV=9#iv-p20.4
1447. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=6&scrV=9#iv-p34.2
1448. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=6&scrV=10#xviii-p41.1
1449. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=6&scrV=16#xix-p5.5
1450. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=6&scrV=17#xvii-p62.1
1451. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=13&scrV=0#iii-p16.1
1452. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=1&scrV=12#xxiii-p79.1
1453. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=1&scrV=14#v-p3.4
1454. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=2&scrV=3#xxiii-p99.2
1455. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=2&scrV=3#xxiii-p77.1
1456. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=2&scrV=12#xxiii-p51.6
1457. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=2&scrV=15#iii-p16.2
1458. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=2&scrV=21#xxi-p122.3
1459. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=2&scrV=25#xiv-p29.3
1460. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=2&scrV=25#xvii-p15.1
1461. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=3&scrV=2#xviii-p44.2
1462. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=3&scrV=2#xx-p51.1
1463. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=3&scrV=2#xvii-p100.1
1464. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=3&scrV=2#xviii-p46.1
1465. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=3&scrV=3#xx-p51.2
1466. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=3&scrV=4#xviii-p38.1
1467. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=3&scrV=7#xviii-p26.11
1468. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=3&scrV=12#xxiii-p51.1
1469. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=3&scrV=15#xxi-p101.1
1470. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=4&scrV=2#iii-p22.1
1471. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=4&scrV=6#xxiii-p25.5
1472. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=4&scrV=10#xxiii-p70.2
1473. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Titus&scrCh=1&scrV=13#xvii-p16.2
1474. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Titus&scrCh=1&scrV=15#xvii-p118.2
1475. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Titus&scrCh=1&scrV=15#xviii-p93.1
1476. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Titus&scrCh=1&scrV=15#xviii-p104.1
1477. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Titus&scrCh=2&scrV=14#xviii-p15.2
1478. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Titus&scrCh=3&scrV=2#xvii-p40.1
1479. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Titus&scrCh=3&scrV=8#xvii-p64.3
1480. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Titus&scrCh=3&scrV=14#xvii-p64.1
1481. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Phlm&scrCh=1&scrV=10#xxi-p91.2
1482. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=1&scrV=2#xxi-p121.3
1483. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=1&scrV=3#xxi-p34.2
1484. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=1&scrV=4#xxi-p34.3
1485. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=1&scrV=14#xiv-p43.2
1486. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=1&scrV=14#xxi-p129.1
1487. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=2&scrV=10#xxiii-p150.1
1488. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=2&scrV=10#xxi-p35.1
1489. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=2&scrV=11#xxi-p53.1
1490. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=2&scrV=16#xxi-p130.1
1491. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=2&scrV=36#xxiii-p13.3
1492. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=3&scrV=6#xx-p46.1
1493. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=3&scrV=7#xi-p13.1
1494. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=3&scrV=7#viii-p53.1
1495. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=3&scrV=12#xviii-p35.1
1496. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=3&scrV=12#xviii-p40.1
1497. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=4&scrV=2#xviii-p124.1
1498. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=4&scrV=9#iv-p32.1
1499. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=5&scrV=4#iii-p13.2
1500. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=6&scrV=1#xviii-p93.3
1501. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=6&scrV=8#xvii-p86.2
1502. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=6&scrV=10#xvii-p102.4
1503. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=6&scrV=17#xxi-p171.5
1504. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=6&scrV=18#xiii-p32.1
1505. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=7&scrV=22#xxiv-p32.1
1506. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=8&scrV=10#xxi-p37.1
1507. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=10&scrV=24#xx-p49.3
1508. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=11&scrV=2#xvii-p29.3
1509. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=11&scrV=6#xviii-p40.2
1510. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=11&scrV=8#xxiii-p117.2
1511. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=11&scrV=10#vii-p13.1
1512. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=11&scrV=14#iv-p36.3
1513. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=11&scrV=24#xxiii-p46.2
1514. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=11&scrV=24#xxiii-p117.1
1515. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=11&scrV=26#xxiii-p167.1
1516. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=11&scrV=26#xxi-p192.2
1517. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=11&scrV=27#xix-p4.1
1518. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=11&scrV=27#xix-p29.1
1519. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=11&scrV=34#xxiii-p121.4
1520. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=11&scrV=34#xxi-p180.3
1521. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=11&scrV=36#v-p1.3
1522. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=11&scrV=37#xiv-p39.1
1523. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=12&scrV=2#xxiii-p115.1
1524. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=12&scrV=2#xxiii-p167.2
1525. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=12&scrV=7#xxi-p135.3
1526. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=12&scrV=7#xxiii-p52.3
1527. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=12&scrV=8#xxi-p42.2
1528. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=12&scrV=10#xxiii-p21.1
1529. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=12&scrV=11#xxiii-p166.1
1530. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=12&scrV=11#xx-p66.1
1531. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=12&scrV=14#xviii-p125.4
1532. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=12&scrV=14#xx-p4.2
1533. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=12&scrV=14#xx-p23.6
1534. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=12&scrV=22#xiii-p54.1
1535. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=12&scrV=23#iv-p30.1
1536. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=12&scrV=23#xviii-p96.1
1537. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=12&scrV=28#vii-p17.3
1538. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=13&scrV=16#xvii-p90.1
1539. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=13&scrV=20#xx-p36.1
1540. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=12#xxiii-p106.1
1541. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=15#xxiii-p83.2
1542. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=18#xviii-p124.3
1543. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=18#xxi-p64.2
1544. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=18#xxiii-p80.3
1545. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=21#xiv-p7.2
1546. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=21#xiv-p29.4
1547. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=21#xviii-p12.1
1548. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=25#iii-p29.1
1549. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=27#xvii-p76.1
1550. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=2&scrV=5#v-p12.3
1551. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=2&scrV=5#vii-p24.1
1552. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=2&scrV=5#vii-p28.1
1553. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=2&scrV=5#xxi-p179.1
1554. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=2&scrV=13#xvii-p73.4
1555. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=2&scrV=15#xvii-p73.1
1556. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=2&scrV=18#xvii-p66.1
1557. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=3&scrV=6#xiv-p17.2
1558. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=3&scrV=14#xiv-p47.3
1559. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=3&scrV=14#xx-p26.2
1560. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=3&scrV=15#xxiii-p102.2
1561. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=3&scrV=17#xx-p4.1
1562. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=3&scrV=17#xx-p27.3
1563. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=3&scrV=17#xx-p31.1
1564. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=4&scrV=7#xiv-p12.4
1565. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=4&scrV=8#viii-p30.3
1566. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=4&scrV=9#ix-p4.2
1567. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=4&scrV=11#xvii-p33.1
1568. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=4&scrV=14#xi-p15.1
1569. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=5&scrV=3#xvii-p93.3
1570. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=5&scrV=10#xxiii-p136.1
1571. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=5&scrV=10#xxiii-p144.1
1572. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=5&scrV=10#xxiii-p25.3
1573. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=5&scrV=10#xxiii-p44.1
1574. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=5&scrV=16#xvii-p17.1
1575. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=5&scrV=17#xxi-p76.3
1576. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=5&scrV=20#iii-p27.3
1577. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=5&scrV=20#xvii-p26.1
1578. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=11&scrV=0#xxiii-p161.1
1579. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=12&scrV=0#xxiii-p161.1
1580. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=4#xviii-p97.1
1581. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=4#xxi-p30.1
1582. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=5#xxi-p30.2
1583. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=7#xxiii-p121.2
1584. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=7#xxiii-p147.6
1585. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=8#iv-p27.1
1586. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=8#xiii-p30.1
1587. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=8#xiii-p31.1
1588. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=8#xix-p11.2
1589. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=8#xix-p29.3
1590. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=14#xxii-p14.1
1591. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=16#xviii-p107.2
1592. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=16#xviii-p11.1
1593. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=16#xxii-p22.1
1594. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=17#xxi-p70.3
1595. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=1#xvii-p29.1
1596. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=1#xvii-p40.1
1597. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=1#xxi-p70.1
1598. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=2#xv-p9.1
1599. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=2#xxi-p99.3
1600. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=3#xv-p30.1
1601. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=5#xx-p67.1
1602. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=5#xxiii-p7.4
1603. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=7#xv-p34.2
1604. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=7#xxiii-p79.2
1605. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=9#xiii-p40.2
1606. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=14#xiv-p16.1
1607. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=16#xiii-p40.3
1608. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=17#xxi-p84.1
1609. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=23#xiv-p31.2
1610. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=3#xxii-p19.1
1611. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=4#xiv-p34.1
1612. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=4#xviii-p20.3
1613. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=4#xx-p10.1
1614. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=6#xxi-p152.4
1615. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=9#xiv-p18.4
1616. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=9#xiv-p27.3
1617. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=14#xxiii-p161.2
1618. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=22#xxi-p130.3
1619. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=4&scrV=12#xxiii-p147.5
1620. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=4&scrV=12#xxiii-p51.7
1621. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=4&scrV=14#xxiii-p147.7
1622. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=4&scrV=14#v-p12.4
1623. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=4&scrV=15#xxiii-p36.1
1624. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=4&scrV=16#xxiii-p43.1
1625. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=5&scrV=2#iii-p15.1
1626. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=5&scrV=4#vii-p8.2
1627. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=5&scrV=5#xxiii-p83.1
1628. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=5&scrV=5#xxii-p15.1
1629. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=5&scrV=7#xxi-p155.4
1630. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=5&scrV=8#xxiii-p29.4
1631. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=5&scrV=9#xxiii-p121.3
1632. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=5&scrV=10#xxiii-p155.1
1633. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=5&scrV=10#xiv-p55.1
1634. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=4#v-p3.2
1635. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=4#xviii-p124.4
1636. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=4#xxi-p38.2
1637. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=11#vi-p22.1
1638. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=11#vii-p17.2
1639. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=21#xxi-p80.1
1640. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=3#xv-p15.2
1641. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=4#xxi-p171.1
1642. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=7#viii-p34.3
1643. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=10#xxiii-p103.2
1644. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=14#xxii-p3.1
1645. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=22#xviii-p12.4
1646. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=22#xxi-p19.1
1647. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=3#xviii-p55.2
1648. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=5#xviii-p26.13
1649. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=9#xi-p18.4
1650. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=9#xiv-p35.1
1651. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=1&scrV=3#xiii-p28.2
1652. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=1&scrV=9#xxi-p188.3
1653. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=2&scrV=15#xv-p51.1
1654. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=2&scrV=17#iv-p18.1
1655. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=2&scrV=25#iv-p34.1
1656. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=2&scrV=27#xviii-p106.1
1657. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=2&scrV=27#xxi-p140.2
1658. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=3&scrV=1#xxi-p105.1
1659. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=3&scrV=2#xix-p8.2
1660. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=3&scrV=2#xix-p10.1
1661. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=3&scrV=2#xix-p26.1
1662. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=3&scrV=9#v-p3.3
1663. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=3&scrV=9#xxi-p140.1
1664. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=3&scrV=15#xiv-p11.2
1665. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=5&scrV=3#xxiv-p2.1
1666. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=5&scrV=4#xxi-p83.2
1667. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=5&scrV=6#xviii-p15.5
1668. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=5&scrV=10#xviii-p36.2
1669. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=5&scrV=18#xxi-p70.2
1670. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=3John&scrCh=1&scrV=9#xx-p52.2
1671. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Jude&scrCh=1&scrV=3#xx-p25.2
1672. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Jude&scrCh=1&scrV=6#vii-p16.2
1673. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Jude&scrCh=1&scrV=6#vii-p21.2
1674. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Jude&scrCh=1&scrV=6#xviii-p26.4
1675. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Jude&scrCh=1&scrV=7#xxiii-p160.1
1676. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Jude&scrCh=1&scrV=9#xiv-p18.3
1677. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Jude&scrCh=1&scrV=23#xvii-p16.3
1678. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=1&scrV=5#xiv-p41.1
1679. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=1&scrV=6#xi-p7.3
1680. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=1&scrV=6#xxi-p122.1
1681. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=1&scrV=20#iii-p38.1
1682. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=2&scrV=7#iii-p30.5
1683. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=2&scrV=7#xiii-p50.1
1684. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=2&scrV=7#xiii-p57.1
1685. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=2&scrV=10#xxiii-p84.1
1686. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=2&scrV=10#xxiii-p168.1
1687. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=2&scrV=10#vii-p5.1
1688. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=2&scrV=17#xxi-p27.1
1689. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=3&scrV=1#xviii-p8.1
1690. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=3&scrV=12#xxi-p115.3
1691. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=3&scrV=17#vi-p9.1
1692. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=3&scrV=17#vi-p24.5
1693. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=3&scrV=17#xv-p13.2
1694. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=3&scrV=17#xviii-p26.10
1695. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=3&scrV=17#xviii-p27.1
1696. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=3&scrV=19#xxiii-p164.2
1697. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=3&scrV=19#xxi-p135.1
1698. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=3&scrV=21#vii-p11.1
1699. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=3&scrV=21#vii-p11.5
1700. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=3&scrV=21#xiii-p59.1
1701. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=4&scrV=10#vii-p14.3
1702. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=7&scrV=0#vii-p10.2
1703. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=7&scrV=9#xiii-p57.3
1704. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=7&scrV=9#vii-p9.2
1705. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=7&scrV=16#xiii-p53.1
1706. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=7&scrV=17#x-p11.1
1707. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=9&scrV=7#xiii-p4.2
1708. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=10&scrV=3#xviii-p34.1
1709. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=12&scrV=1#xiii-p43.2
1710. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=12&scrV=1#xxi-p83.5
1711. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=12&scrV=3#xvii-p11.2
1712. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=12&scrV=11#xxiii-p98.2
1713. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=12&scrV=11#vii-p10.3
1714. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=12&scrV=14#xxiv-p20.3
1715. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=12&scrV=15#iii-p27.1
1716. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=13&scrV=1#xxiii-p136.3
1717. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=13&scrV=2#xxiii-p136.2
1718. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=13&scrV=2#xxiii-p136.5
1719. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=13&scrV=7#xxiii-p136.6
1720. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=13&scrV=10#xxiii-p136.7
1721. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=14&scrV=7#xi-p19.2
1722. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=14&scrV=13#xiii-p48.2
1723. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=14&scrV=13#xxii-p20.1
1724. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=15&scrV=2#xiii-p56.1
1725. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=16&scrV=6#xxi-p118.3
1726. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=16&scrV=6#xxiii-p54.3
1727. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=16&scrV=10#xxiii-p29.2
1728. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=17&scrV=4#iii-p27.2
1729. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=18&scrV=8#xxiii-p58.2
1730. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=19&scrV=9#xiii-p48.1
1731. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=19&scrV=10#xxi-p127.1
1732. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=19&scrV=16#xxiv-p12.1
1733. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=20&scrV=12#xvii-p110.1
1734. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=21&scrV=7#vii-p15.2
1735. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=21&scrV=8#xviii-p39.2
1736. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=21&scrV=8#xxi-p82.1
1737. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=21&scrV=8#xxiii-p73.5
1738. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=21&scrV=10#xiii-p57.2
1739. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=21&scrV=19#vii-p14.2
1740. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=21&scrV=21#vii-p14.1
1741. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=21&scrV=25#vii-p16.3
1742. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=21&scrV=27#xviii-p97.2
1743. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=22&scrV=5#vii-p17.4
1744. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=22&scrV=5#xxi-p32.1
1745. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=22&scrV=12#vii-p34.2
1746. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=1#iii-p0.1
1747. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=3#iv-p0.1
1748. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=3#vii-p0.1
1749. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=5#viii-p0.1
1750. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=5#xiv-p0.1
1751. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=6#xv-p0.1
1752. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=6#xvi-p0.1
1753. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=7#xvii-p0.1
1754. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=8#xviii-p0.1
1755. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=8#xix-p0.1
1756. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=9#xx-p0.1
1757. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=9#xxi-p0.1
1758. file:///ccel/w/watson/beatitudes/cache/beatitudes.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=10#xxiii-p0.1
