     __________________________________________________________________

           Title: Calvin: Commentaries
      Creator(s): Calvin, Jean
                  Haroutunian, Joseph (Editor/Translator)
     Print Basis: 1958
          Rights: Public Domain
   CCEL Subjects: All; Bible; Classic
      LC Call no: BS485.C333 1958
     LC Subjects:

                  The Bible

                  Works about the Bible
     __________________________________________________________________

                              CALVIN: COMMENTARIES

    THE LIBRARY OF CHRISTIAN CLASSICS

  Volume XXIII

   Newly translated and edited by

   JOSEPH HAROUTUNIAN, Ph.D., D.D.

   Cyrus H. McCormick Professor of Systematic Theology,

   McCormick Theological Seminary, Chicago, Illinois

   In collaboration with

   LOUISE PETTIBONE SMITH, A.M., Ph.D.

   Professor of Biblical History, Emeritus,

   Wellesley College, Wellesley, Massachusetts

   PHILADELPHIA

   THE WESTMINSTER PRESS

   First published MCMLVIII

   Library of Congress Catalog Card No.: 58-5060
     __________________________________________________________________

GENERAL EDITORS' PREFACE

   The Christian Church possesses in its literature an abundant and
   incomparable treasure. But it is an inheritance that must be reclaimed
   by each generation. THE LIBRARY OF CHRISTIAN CLASSICS is designed to
   present in the English language, and in twenty-six volumes of
   convenient size, a selection of the most indispensable Christian
   treatises written prior to the end of the sixteenth century.

   The practice of giving circulation to writings selected for superior
   worth or special interest was adopted at the beginning of Christian
   history. The canonical Scriptures were themselves a selection from a
   much wider literature. In the Patristic era there began to appear a
   class of works of compilation (often designed for ready reference in
   controversy) of the opinions of well-reputed predecessors, and in the
   Middle Ages many such works were produced. These medieval anthologies
   actually preserve some noteworthy materials from works otherwise lost.

   In modern times, with the increasing inability even of those trained in
   universities and theological colleges to read Latin and Greek texts
   with ease and familiarity, the translation of selected portions of
   earlier Christian literature into modern languages has become more
   necessary than ever; while the wide range of distinguished books
   written in vernaculars such as English makes selection there also
   needful. The efforts that have been made to meet this need are too
   numerous to be noted here, but none of these collections serves the
   purpose of the reader who desires a library of representative treatises
   spanning the Christian centuries as a whole. Most of them embrace only
   the age of the Church Fathers, and some of them have long been out of
   print. A fresh translation of a work already translated may shed much
   new light upon its meaning. This is true even of Bible translations
   despite the work of many experts through the centuries. In some
   instances old translations have been adopted in this series, but
   wherever necessary or desirable, new ones have been made. Notes have
   been supplied where these were needed to explain the author's meaning.
   The introductions provided for the several treatises and extracts will,
   we believes furnish welcome guidance.

   JOHN BAILLIE

   JOHN T. MCNEILL

   HENRY P. VAN DUSEN
     __________________________________________________________________

PREFACE

   In making this selection from Calvin's Biblical Commentaries, our first
   intention was to use the translations of the Calvin Translation
   Society. However, it soon became clear that we had to make one of our
   own. For this there were two very good reasons. The older translation
   is about a hundred years old, and its style is no longer our own.
   Calvin's Commentaries were composed by way of either lecture or
   dictation. Their Latin style, although uneven, has the vividness and
   directness of the spoken word. It is the style of a master of the
   language, and it is neither strange nor archaic. Therefore, it seemed
   to us unjust both to Calvin and to the reader to perpetuate English
   versions of the Commentaries that are both out of date and to us
   stilted. We have tried to make a translation which is at once true to
   the original and in good and vivid present-day English. It is too much
   to hope that we have succeeded in every passage we have selected. Any
   translator knows that fidelity in expressing the meaning and feeling of
   an author in another tongue is a subtle and risky business. We only
   hope that we have produced a readable translation without doing Calvin
   undue violence. We wanted the reader to enjoy Calvin as well as
   understand him. We hope we have met with some, even if uneven, success.

   The older translations are from the hands of a number of scholars.
   Their English styles are different, and not of the same quality.
   Besides, the exegetical and theological predilections of the several
   translators have understandably colored their versions of the Latin
   text. In a selection like ours we would have had to put together, in
   immediate succession, passages with different styles and different
   adequacy as translations. This would have produced a book with a
   garbled and bewildering style. We made a new translation to avoid such
   an intolerable defect.

   We must say a word as to why we offer the reader this particular volume
   out of the vast body of Calvin's Commentaries. We had no single
   principle of selection. We took what we liked -- rather, a small
   fraction of what we liked and would have included if we had had the
   space. We were intent upon giving the reader good specimens of Calvin's
   way of explaining Biblical texts, to bring out his qualities as an
   exegete. We wanted to show his concern with literary and historical
   questions, his understanding of Scripture both as the Word of God and
   as a human document, his constant preoccupation with the upbuilding of
   the church. We could not and did not ignore present-day issues in the
   interpretation of the Bible in theology and practical church life. We
   did the best we could to include material in which Calvin can be of
   some help to the church today. We did our selecting with such interests
   in mind. However, we do hope that this book has a certain continuity
   which will convey a proper sense of the integrity of Calvin's mind.

   Our organization of the material is one of many possible. The one we
   adopted seemed natural to us. We have not given special chapters to
   Calvin's teachings on man, sin, the Holy Spirit, eschatology, politics.
   We had to choose between depth and spread, and we chose depth. We have
   much more material in hand, and someday we may be able to use it,
   especially if there is sufficient demand for it.

   I wish to express my gratitude to Prof. Louise P. Smith who
   collaborated with me, especially in preparing the Old Testament
   passages. Her knowledge of Scripture and Calvin, her patience and good
   sense, her encouragement, have been invaluable in this laborious
   undertaking. I am also grateful to the editors and the publisher for
   their help, and to Mrs. George W. Baird who typed the major part of the
   manuscript. I wish to thank Rev. Kenneth M. Keeler and the First
   Presbyterian Church of Santa Fe, New Mexico, for giving me a study
   where I worked happily for seven months. My thanks are due also to
   Prof. Calvin Schmitt of the McCormick Theological Seminary Library for
   the bibliographical help he gave me, and to Prof. Edward A. Dowey, Jr.,
   for his criticisms and suggestions, especially with regard to the
   Introduction.

   JOSEPH HAROUTUNIAN

   McCormick Theological Seminary,

   Chicago, Illinois
     __________________________________________________________________

General Introduction

  CALVIN AS BIBLICAL COMMENTATOR

   In these translated selections from the Biblical Commentaries of
   Calvin, we have tried to produce a readable version of a representative
   part of his work in this field. The Commentaries were translated into
   English soon after they were published in the second half of the
   sixteenth century. (They were retranslated about the middle of the
   nineteenth century, by the Calvin Translation Society, Edinburgh, and
   have been reprinted in this second version.) They were also translated
   immediately into French and somewhat later into Dutch and German.
   Calvin's Commentaries profoundly influenced the churches of the
   Reformed tradition; and there can be little doubt that a renewed
   interest in them and study of them would not only contribute to a
   better understanding of Calvin, but would also have a profound
   influence on the mind and life of the church today. Our primary
   interest in preparing this volume has been to present Calvin as a
   Biblical commentator, with the hope that many will be induced to turn
   to the Commentaries themselves in search of the light Calvin throws
   upon the meaning of the Scriptures.

   We concur in the judgment of many before us that Calvin was, for
   various reasons, a unique and extremely illuminating commentator. His
   education as a humanist, his extensive knowledge of the work of other
   interpreters of the Bible, his classical and patristic erudition, his
   insights as a Reformer and churchman, and his exegetical competence and
   grasp of the Biblical mind -- all these make him an endlessly fresh and
   eye-opening interpreter.

    I. THE QUALITY OF THE COMMENTATOR

   Calvin's Commentaries and sermons fill volumes 23-55 of his Works (in
   Corpus Reformatorum [1] ); and the Commentaries by themselves fill
   forty-five volumes in English: thirty on the Old Testament, fifteen on
   the New Testament (in the series of the Calvin Translation Society).

   The grandeur of this achievement becomes all the more evident when we
   remember that these Commentaries were the work not of a detached
   scholar, but of a Reformer whose days were filled largely with pastoral
   work both in the church and in the state. His multiple activities and
   preoccupations in the latter capacity, especially in the light of his
   delicate and sickly physical condition, leave one amazed at the
   diligence and perseverance which made Calvin's literary output
   (fifty-nine volumes in his Works) possible. One must not forget the
   several versions of the Institutes, his numerous tracts and thousands
   of letters. Calvin believed not only in the Word of God, but also in
   human words as means of promoting the gospel and serving the church.

   The Commentary on Romans, the first, was published in 1540. The latest,
   Joshua (1564) and Ezekiel, chs. 1-20 (1565), were published after
   Calvin's death. In between came the great Commentaries on Genesis, the
   four last Books of Moses (Harmony), the Psalms, Isaiah, Jeremiah, and
   Lamentations, Ezekiel, and the Minor Prophets (Calvin preached on the
   other books such as Deuteronomy, Job, and Samuel, but he did not
   lecture on them). There were also the Commentaries on all the books of
   the New Testament, except 2 John and 3 John and Revelation. The Harmony
   of Exodus-Deuteronomy (four volumes in English) and the Harmony of the
   Gospels (three volumes) deserve special mention as astonishing works of
   organization, both of narrative and of topics. They are, in fact,
   convincing evidence of Calvin's grasp of Scripture as a whole and in
   detail. It is impossible to single out the greater Commentaries. Each
   is valuable for the insights it gives into the Word of God contained in
   it. One has only to consult Calvin on a few given passages of Scripture
   to recognize that he is indeed a teacher without an equal. Calvin
   comments with the conviction that any passage of Scripture he may
   examine contains a Word of God full of God's wisdom, applicable to the
   condition of his hearers and readers in one respect or another. This
   conviction enables him to respond to the Bible with a vitality and
   intelligence which certainly go into the making of the mass of
   interesting material contained in the Commentaries from one end to the
   other. So it is that in spite of the occasional dips, one is aware of
   walking through on a high road, with solid pleasure and frequent
   excitement of illumination.

   Most of the Old Testament Commentaries were delivered as lectures.
   Calvin spoke slowly and quietly, so that his words could be recorded
   fairly accurately by his students and more exactly by his secretaries.
   Afterward he went over what had been taken down, corrected it, and
   allowed it to be published with proper dedications to friends and
   persons of importance in England and elsewhere.

   It is important to remember that these lectures were delivered at the
   Academy, which provided education to the children of Geneva, and
   attracted students of theology by the hundreds from France, England,
   Scotland, Holland, and elsewhere. Some of the greatest Protestant
   theologians of the day were trained in this Academy. But the majority
   of those who attended his lectures went to their several countries to
   work, and often to suffer, for the establishment and the progress of
   the Reformed faith. What these men needed was clear, sure, and strong
   grasp of Scripture doctrine, available for the new churches or
   gatherings of Protestants in their own lands, surrounded by hostile
   forces and in constant peril. Calvin commented for the upbuilding of
   these people and the churches they came from and went to.

   He began his lectures always with the prayer, "May the Lord grant that
   we study the heavenly mysteries of his wisdom, making true progress in
   religion to his glory and our upbuilding." The closing prayer was
   longer, and in it Calvin laid before the Lord the special needs of the
   faithful as the Scripture just studied had revealed them.

   The Scripture passage was read in the original language, then
   translated into Latin. [2] Calvin's Latin translation is apparently his
   own; in the classroom, it was made directly from the text. He was of
   course as familiar with the Vulgate as most modern English translators
   are with the Authorized Version, and like the modern translators, he
   enjoyed making improvements. [3] His wording is said to be closest, in
   the Old Testament, to the translation of Leo Jud, printed at Zurich in
   1543 (reprinted 1545 and 1557 [4] ); but it does not seem so close as
   to suggest actual dependence. For example, in Gen. 1:6 Jud's
   translation runs, Dixit quoque Deus sit extensio; Calvin's, Et dixit
   Deus sit extensio.

   What Hebrew text he used is apparently uncertain. Available, besides
   the Brescia edition used by Luther, were the Soncino (1488), the
   Bomberg editions, printed at Venice (1518-1526), and three editions of
   Münster, printed at Basel (1534, 1536, 1546). None of them differed
   significantly from the Brescia edition. The Complutensian Polyglot,
   finally published in 1521, was used by Beza (according to Delitzsch)
   and presumably was available to Calvin.

   Calvin's opponents have minimized his knowledge of Hebrew (Il n'en
   connoissoit gueres que les caracteres [5] ), but the Commentaries
   themselves offer sufficient evidence to the contrary. He deals
   repeatedly with disputes over the roots from which words were derived,
   and with various grammatical constructions. Further, he has a real
   sense of Hebrew style and uses it frequently as a guide to
   interpretation. [6] He recognizes fully the importance of "synonymous
   parallelism." He takes for granted the relative antiquity and accuracy
   of the Masoretic Hebrew in comparison with the Septuagint and the
   Vulgate, and he therefore uses them both along with the Targum,
   Theodotian, and the church fathers, much as he uses the commentaries of
   his own contemporaries, as aids to the interpretation of the text, not
   as independent authorities.

   While translating the New Testament, Calvin has both the Vulgate and
   Erasmus before him. But he does not hesitate to make his own rendition.
   This statement could be substantiated from almost every other page of
   the New Testament Commentaries. One or two examples will suffice. He
   translates heuriskomai as inveniam ("that I may find"), against
   Erasmus' reperior and the Vulgate's invenior; and he justifies his
   rendition by saying "as Budaeus [7] (the great Hellenist) shows by
   various examples" (on Phil. 3:9). Erasmus translates alla mallon
   eucharistia, of Eph. 5:4, as sed magis gratiarum actio, "but rather by
   giving thanks greatly." Calvin prefers Jerome's sed magis gratia. He
   admits that the Greek word usually means "thanksgiving," but he thinks
   the present context requires that it be translated as gracious.

   As to the New Testament text, Calvin clearly uses that of Erasmus. But
   references to ancient and more recent "manuscripts" show that he was
   not satisfied simply to follow even an authority like Erasmus.

   Erasmus' influence on Calvin as critic and exegete was far-reaching.
   The former's insistence upon the necessity of knowing the original
   languages of the Bible [8] ; his principle that the more obscure
   passages of the Bible should be interpreted with the help of those
   which are clear [9] ; his plea for understanding the Bible in its
   "natural, or historical and grammatical" sense, and spiritually, that
   is, for moral edification [10] ; his view of the Bible as having been
   written under the direction of the Holy Spirit (Ut enim Spiritus ille
   divinus, mentium apostoliarum moderatur) without a forced uniformity as
   to content [11] ; his conviction that various and divergent accounts
   and teachings in the Bible do not diminish its authority and saving
   power [12] ; his critical attitude with regard to the authorship of
   certain books, and his independence in relation to patristic
   interpreters, including Jerome; his dictum: In fontibus versetur
   oportet, qui vellit esse vere theologus -- "Every man who would be a
   true theologian must return to the sources" [13] -- all this, together
   with the example of free and competent examination of Scripture he sets
   in his emendations and annotations, are written large in Calvin's
   Commentaries. (How much of this agreement is to be credited to the
   direct influence of Erasmus on Calvin and how much to the humanistic
   classical training which Calvin had received is of course debatable.)

   Calvin divides his text conveniently, so that he may be able to deal
   with a story or topic as a whole. After explaining a given passage in
   general, he then proceeds to discuss specific verses, phrases, and
   words, which he repeats sometimes in Latin and sometimes in the
   original. As he proceeds, he uses Latin renditions of the text which
   are not the same as those first given. His mind is on the original
   Hebrew or Greek and not on a Latin version, whether his own or
   another's.

   As the occasion demands, Calvin goes into details in discussing a
   geographical and historical point. He appeals to classic authorities;
   to Jewish, pagan, Christian writers of antiquity, like Josephus, Pliny,
   and Jerome; and he quotes the best authorities of his own day. But he
   is brief and to the point. He weighs evidence, expresses an opinion,
   and moves on. It is seldom that he loses himself in detail and turns
   aside from his main purpose (as he does on Gen. 15:2, where his
   discussion of mesek, sagah, shuk, and Damascus must have bored all but
   the hardiest students). After details have been dealt with, he returns
   to the meaning of the whole passage, often giving a summary of its
   teaching, or stating the central theme and applying it to the need of
   the church and of his hearers and readers. He had a habit, which must
   have brought reassurance to his students, of marking the end of the
   treatment of a passage by saying, "Now we have [tenemus] the prophet's
   meaning."

   He paraphrases frequently, clarifying statements and ideas for the
   duller students. One can imagine the quick dipping of quill pens in the
   ink whenever the class heard "as if he were to say" (acsi diceret),
   followed by the repetition of a text in his own words. Often he
   projects his mind into those of his hearers, and takes up a line of
   thought which is of special practical concern to them. It is surprising
   how often he does the same for a present-day reader. One can hear the
   soft-spoken lecturer occasionally shaking up the unconcerned with
   well-aimed and adroit thrusts, and waking them up to the relevance of
   the Word of God to their own and their churches' condition. The Word
   applied, and Calvin was eminently resourceful in pointing this out to
   the mind of the not too bright student. The occasional belaboring of
   the obvious must no doubt be attributed to Calvin's concern with what
   we would call "average mentality." He can also make his point clear by
   an occasional flash of humor: "the uproar made by a fallen leaf," [14]
   the suggestion that he might wear a military uniform to class, [15] the
   comment on bracelets and nose rings [16] or the asses' ears. [17]
   Calvin was never boisterous, but he certainly had wit and could be
   witty -- a good but rare quality in a commentator!

   Characteristically, his worst term of condemnation for any
   interpretation is "frigid," by which he means not so much "remote" or
   "lifeless" as lacking in the power to give living faith to the church;
   on the other hand, his favorite word of praise is "solid," a sound and
   sure foundation for the church's faith. Eight years separated the
   printing of the Isaiah Commentary and that on the Minor Prophets. A
   comparison of Calvin's treatment of Isa. 2:4 with that of Micah 4:2
   (Written eight years later) shows him addressing himself to different
   specific situations. And yet it also reveals the continuity of his
   thought in his primary concern with the upbuilding of the church.

   With all this practical concern with the "progress" of his students and
   of the churches, Calvin was a conscientious historical critic. His
   comments did not degenerate into the undisciplined exhortation which
   often goes with "practical preaching." He neither practiced nor
   encouraged irresponsibility toward "the genuine sense" of Scripture.
   The students were to know what the author of a given text meant by what
   he said, and any "spiritual" meaning other than one derived from the
   author's intention was at once misleading and unedifying. Calvin said
   bluntly of Ezek. 17:1-2, "The prophet's discourse cannot be understood
   without a knowledge of the history [behind it]." Calvin's concern with
   history will be dealt with later. [18] Here we point it out as an
   essential part of his work as a lecturer, contributive rather than
   irrelevant to the hearing of God's Word.

   Calvin's refusal to be diverted from his main purpose is clear also in
   his use of classical and early Christian literature. The list of
   classical references is a long one. Cicero appears most often (sixteen
   times in the Pentateuch Harmony alone); but there are quotations from
   all the better-known Latin authors (Horace, Juvenal, Seneca, Terence,
   Cato, Quintilian, Virgil, Plautus, Suetonius, Tacitus, Livy, Pliny),
   and from the Greek authors (Homer, Euripides, Xenophon, Ovid,
   Aristophanes, Epicurus, Plutarch, and Aesop). He quotes Plato and
   Aristotle with respect. He admires Plato's wisdom and piety, but
   objects to the "angelology" of Platonism (2 Peter 1:4, Col. 2:18,
   etc.). He quotes Aristotle on the distinction between anger and hatred
   (from "The Second Book on Rhetoric"), and refers with approval to his
   saying that the tongue should be an image of the understanding (Gal.
   5:19, 1 Cor. 14:11). In the field of law, he speaks of Portius' law,
   Flavian law, the laws of Sempronius, and Valerius' law (Acts 16:35,
   22:25, 1 Tim. 1:10). Herodotus, Pliny, Gellius, Homer all contributed a
   discussion of the giant Og in Deut. 3:4. It is not always possible to
   tell whether Calvin is depending on his own memory of a quoted passage,
   or on a collection of quotations such as the Adagies of Erasmus. Calvin
   was admired by his friends and feared by his enemies as a most learned
   man. But he never makes a display of his erudition and it seldom
   interferes with a forthright presentation of the meaning he saw it and
   with his communication with his hearers and readers.

   The same holds for his use of ancient Christian literature. Hundreds of
   references in the Commentaries, quotations, approving and disapproving
   discussions make it obvious that Calvin had an extensive and masterly
   knowledge of Augustine, Jerome, and Chrysostom. He obviously learned a
   great deal from all three, and depended upon the latter two, as well as
   on Josephus, for his knowledge of Biblical times and places. But his
   knowledge is not limited to these giants. He makes apt reference, with
   frequent quotations, to Tertullian and Cyprian; to Irenaeus and Origen;
   to Cyril of Jerusalem, Epiphanius, Basil, Gregory Nazianzen, Hilary,
   Lactantius, and Ambrose of Milan; to Eusebius and Socrates, the
   historians; to Pope Leo I, Gregory the Great, and Bernard of Clairvaux.
   But again, the fathers are consulted for the help they may provide for
   understanding Scripture; they do not interfere with his exposition of
   it.

   Calvin was grateful to contemporary commentators like Melanchthon,
   Bucer, Bullinger, and others (on Romans [19] ). But the use he makes of
   their works keeps a consistent pattern. No references are given to
   exhibit his own learning. However, his comments show that he had read
   and pondered over the works of his contemporaries. Ecolampadius, [20]
   he says, interprets rightly and prudently, but one needs leisure to
   read his work (Dan. 9:25). He quotes approvingly and supports by his
   own argument Luther's designation of Ps. 132:14 as "the bloody
   promise," but he disagrees with Luther on Dan. 8:22-23; "Luther
   indulging his own thoughts too freely refers this to the masks of
   Antichrist." He gives high praise to Bucer in the Preface to Psalms,
   [21] but he says of him elsewhere (Preface to Romans) that he is too
   prolix for busy men to read, and too profound to be understood by the
   simple, and that because of the incredible fecundity of his mind, he
   does not know where to stop.

   Calvin declares (and truly) that he does not expend words refuting
   contrary opinions unless he knows the faithful are troubled by them.
   [22] Most of his arguments therefore are with the "papists" and the
   Anabaptists. There are uncomplimentary references to "the doctors of
   the Sorbonne." Jewish commentators are usually treated as a group and
   dismissed as blind to the relation between the Old Testament and
   Christ. He uses their judgment frequently on details, especially the
   meaning or derivation of words. Kimchi he mentions by name and calls
   him "the most correct interpreter among the rabbis" (Ps. 112:5).

   It is ironical that Calvin in spite of his frequent references to "the
   blindness of the Jews" was himself attacked, especially by the
   theological faculty of Wittenberg, as "a Judaizer." A pamphlet against
   his method of interpreting Scripture, which was published in 1593, bore
   the horrendous title "Calvin Judaizing, that is, the Jewish Glosses and
   Corruptions by which John Calvin did not Fear to Corrupt the most
   Luminous Passages of Sacred Scriptures and its witness to the Glorious
   Trinity, the Deity of Christ and of the Holy Spirit, including the
   Predictions of the Prophets on the Coming of the Messiah, His Birth,
   Passion, Resurrection, and Sitting at the Right Hand of God, in a
   Detestable Fashion. A Refutation of the Corruptions is Added." The
   reason for such attacks was of course Calvin's insistence on attending
   to the "genuine sense" of Scripture. [23] He despised the allegorical
   method of interpreting Scripture which had provided Christians with
   their favorite means of twisting the Bible into a religious book of
   their own liking. In insisting upon the original meaning of a text, he
   deprived the orthodox, even among Protestants, of many of their
   traditional proof texts. He even undermined the traditional doctrine of
   Biblical authority. But he taught the Protestant ministry how to read
   their Bible, and to understand it as the Word of God to the churches --
   which is the utmost a commentator can do.

   Calvin published his Commentaries to give his readers insight into the
   Word of God and to point out its relevance to their own life and
   situation. To this end he cultivated accuracy, brevity, and lucidity.
   He achieved his purpose to a degree that has aroused the admiration and
   gratitude of generations of readers. And in this day, as Prof. James
   Everett Frame of Union Theological Seminary of New York used to say, a
   man who would understand his Bible will do well to have Calvin's
   Commentaries within easy reach.

   Here we must not fail to point out that every salient point of Calvin's
   theology is discussed, and is often more briefly and clearly and
   persuasively presented, in the direct statements of the Commentaries
   than in the sustained and usually technical arguments of the
   Institutes. We hope that our selections on faith, providence, Jesus
   Christ, and so on, will help the reader to correct many an impression
   he has received either by dipping into the Institutes or by secondhand
   acquaintance with Calvin. We ourselves were repeatedly and pleasantly
   surprised by what we found in these Commentaries: we hope the reader
   will find the same instruction and pleasure.index1

    II. THE PREPARATION OF THE COMMENTARIES

   In the main, the Old Testament Commentaries were delivered as lectures,
   and the New Testament Commentaries were dictated at home. We owe an
   enormous debt to Calvin's friends and secretaries who wrote down his
   lectures and sermons, and took dictation at his home. [24] Among these
   special mention must be made of Jean Budé, the son of the great
   humanist Guillaume Budé, and his brother-in-law Charles de Jonvillers,
   both of whom were refugees from France and lived on Calvin's street.
   They worked tirelessly with him in the preparation of the Commentaries
   on Jeremiah and Lamentations, on Ezekiel, Daniel, and the Twelve Minor
   Prophets, which occupy seventeen volumes in English translation. They
   have left us firsthand accounts of the way Calvin's Commentaries were
   composed and made ready for publication.See Papacy

   Budé wrote of the beginning of the work: "When some years ago that most
   learned man, John Calvin, at the advice and request of friends,
   undertook to explain the Psalms of David in the School, some of us his
   hearers began to take notes in our own way, for our own private study,
   according to our own judgment, and at will. But aroused by what we
   heard, we began to think how unjust it would be to a great many people,
   and to the whole church, if the benefit of such lectures were to be
   restricted to a few people. We did our best to take down the lectures
   word for word. Without wasting time, I joined myself with two zealous
   brothers for this purpose; and it happened by God's grace that our
   effort was not without success. For, when we put our several notes
   together, and wrote out the lectures, we found that little had escaped
   us, and that we could fill the gaps without much trouble. Calvin
   himself is our witness that this is what happened in the first
   undertaking in which our abilities were put to the test. All the
   hearers [of the lectures] will readily acknowledge that we followed the
   same procedure far better in taking down the lectures on Hosea; for by
   this time we were more skillful at our job through much repetition and
   long practice." [25]

   And we have the following, from Charles Jonvillers, on the preparation
   of the Commentary on Ezekiel:

   "On February 13, 1563, Calvin began to expound Ezekiel in the Public
   School; even though he was constantly afflicted by various serious
   diseases, and had either to be carried to the lecture hall in a wooden
   chair, or arrive perforce on a horse; for his frail body had become so
   worn out that there was hardly any strength left in him. And yet, for a
   whole year after that February, the virulence of his disease did not
   keep him from discharging his responsibilities of preaching and
   lecturing.

   "Finally, in February of the following year, when he had finished
   chapter twenty (except for four verses), he was forced to stay at home
   and almost continuously in bed. Still, even while his mind had to carry
   the burden of his illness, he was constantly thinking, or dictating;
   and he often kept writing, so that it is hardly credible how much he
   accomplished even when he could not leave his house because of bad
   health. Among other things, he corrected diligently the greater part of
   these lectures, as is evident from the copy with his notations, which I
   have saved with care along with the rest." [26]

   A passage from The Life of John Calvin, by Nicolas Colladon, a minister
   and friend of Calvin, gives us a glimpse of the latter at work:

   "About the month of September (1558), he was attacked by a prolonged
   and dreadful fever; and while it lasted, he was forced, to his great
   regret, to stop both reading and preaching. But he did not cease to
   work at home, in spite of the remonstrances of those around him that he
   spare himself. At this very time he revised and improved his Commentary
   on Isaiah, which had already been printed in the year 1551. Besides, at
   this time his lectures on all the Minor Prophets were printed; for
   previously there had been only a separate printing of his lectures on
   Hosea. It may be that when he was seized by the fever he had already
   read all the Minor Prophets, and there were only two or three lectures
   on Malachi left. However, since the printer was nearby, Calvin, wanting
   to avoid publishing an imperfect work, worked over his lectures in his
   own rooms and dictated them to several persons who were able to be
   present. Thus these lectures, as well as the others, were taken down
   from his mouth, and printed like the rest. He worked in his room
   because it was winter and he had the fever; and it was not good for him
   to go outside." [27]

   Again, according to Colladon: "Calvin on his part did not in the least
   spare himself. He worked much harder than his strength and health could
   bear. Every other week he preached one sermon a day. [28] Three times a
   week he lectured on theology. He was present at every meeting of the
   consistory, and made all the remonstrances. Every Friday, at a
   discussion on Scripture, which was called the congregation, what he
   added after the main speaker was like a lesson in itself. He did not
   fail to visit the sick, to give pastoral advice, and to do an endless
   number of things that went with the ordinary exercises of his ministry.
   Aside from the usual activities, he was greatly occupied with the
   faithful in France. He instructed, exhorted, counseled, and comforted
   them in the midst of persecution, as well as interceded for them, or
   had others do it when he thought there was a way." [29]

   After describing Calvin's excellent memory, Colladon goes on to say:
   "It is not that he had much time to prepare his lectures, for even
   though he would have preferred to do so, he had no leisure for it. And
   for a truth, most of the time he did not have one whole hour for
   preparation. . . . I will add still another evidence for his
   [remarkable] memory: If, while he was dictating, someone came in to
   speak to him and stayed a half hour, or even an hour, most often he
   would remember where he had left off, and would go on from there as
   though nothing had happened, whether he was dictating letters, or a
   commentary, or something else. . . .

   "He slept very little. Even though this meant he was less than
   energetic, it did not keep him from being ready for work and the
   fulfillment of his duties. On the days when he was not to preach, he
   would stay in bed and at five or six o'clock would ask for a number of
   books, so that he might dictate with someone writing down his work. If
   it was his week, he was always ready to go up into the pulpit. When he
   returned home, he went to his bed and lay down on it with his clothes
   still on, and taking some book, continued his labors. . . . So it is
   that he dictated most of his books in the morning, working continually
   and in a very happy state of mind." [30]

    III. CALVIN AS RENAISSANCE HUMANIST

   I. Calvin's "Literalism"

   Calvin's exegetical method and procedure were the product of a century
   of classical humanism, first in Italy, but later especially in Northern
   Europe. Humanists, such as Lorenzo Valla [31] (1407-1457), Guillaume
   Budé [32] (1467-1540) and Erasmus [33] (1466-1536), had in common a
   zeal for recovering the literature of Greece and Rome, and for
   publishing reliable versions of the old classics. They loved the wisdom
   and style of the ancient writers, and drank up their sayings for new
   insight into a virtuous and happy life. These men, and many others like
   them, were fine linguists and critics, with whom it was axiomatic that
   the establishment of the best possible text of a writing was the first
   step toward understanding it. They compared manuscripts and
   authorities, and assumed the responsibility of producing their own
   editions of the classics. Calvin, who was trained in the humanistic
   method, and admired Budé and Erasmus greatly, took it for granted that
   before commenting on any passage in Scripture, he had to ascertain what
   the author of it actually said.

   The so-called literalism of Calvin is directly related to the
   Renaissance scholars' desire to get at the original and "genuine"
   meaning of a text. Reformers, like Luther, Bucer, and Zwingli, as well
   as Calvin, who were all indebted to Erasmus and the humanistic method,
   agreed that the natural meaning of a statement was to be preferred to
   one arrived at by way of allegorizing or supplying a meaning other than
   the literal. This method was a commonplace among humanists, who applied
   it to Greek and Roman writings earlier than to the Bible. Allegory was
   contrary to the humanistic canon of interpretation; and "literalism,"
   that is, the desire to get at an author's own mind, was of its essence.

   So we find Calvin bent upon establishing what a given author in fact
   said. He criticized the church fathers, especially Augustine,
   Chrysostom, and Jerome, for dealing too subtly with the texts, for
   allegorizing and speculation; even though he obviously takes their
   understanding of the Bible more seriously than he does that of the
   humanists. [34] He complains repeatedly that even while Augustine's
   remarks on a given passage are good, they are irrelevant to the purpose
   of its writer (on Rom. 8:28, John 1:16). Allegorizing was
   misunderstanding, and misunderstanding was the evil a scholar had to
   avoid by all means.

   Neither the humanists nor Calvin meant by the literal meaning
   necessarily an unspiritual meaning. The natural interpretation of a
   passage for them was one that did Justice to the intention of the
   author. When Calvin protested against allegorizing, he was protesting
   not against finding a spiritual meaning in a passage, but against
   finding one that was not there. The Word of God written for the
   upbuilding of the church was of course spiritual, but in the primary
   sense of leading to the knowledge of God and obedience to him. Calvin's
   "literalism" establishes rather than dissolves the mystery of the Word
   of God, provided for the Christian's help and comfort.

   2. Calvin as Historian

   As a disciplined humanist, Calvin recognized that the Biblical writers,
   for example the prophets, wrote for their own times and situations. In
   this sense, Calvin is a confirmed "historicist." When Isaiah, or Hosea,
   or Jeremiah, or a psalmist speaks he speaks for the benefit of God's
   people or the church in his own day. The Holy Spirit does indeed speak
   by them prophesying the Messiah, and for the future church. Calvin can
   say that Isaiah foresaw the glory of Christ (on John 12:45). But he
   habitually looks at the prophecies quoted in the New Testament, not
   from the position of the prophet, but from that of the apostles or
   Evangelists who "applied" them to their own situation. Even while he
   assumes that the New Testament writers wrote as dictated and directed
   by the Holy Spirit, as a commentator he is concerned with the way they
   dealt with the Old Testament; and he speaks of their activity as
   applying [traho, apto], both in the active and in the passive. [35] His
   basic conviction in this matter, put in practice throughout his
   Commentaries, is that the Old Testament applied to the situation of the
   early church, especially to the mission of Christ, and that the Bible
   as a whole applies to the situation of the church in his time So, he is
   interested in the way the New Testament writers applied prophecy to
   their own history after Christ. In fact, in the Old Testament itself,
   the exodus from Egypt is more than an incident in the past. It is a
   parable of the life of Israel, and we might add, of human life in
   general. The same is true of the mission of Christ, and his cross.
   Calvin was profoundly impressed with the analogy between Christ's
   destiny and that of the church in his time. Thus he saw a profound
   continuity between the Old Testament and the New, and between both and
   the events of his day (on Matt. 3:3).

   To Calvin, the ultimate end of the Bible is the Kingdom of Christ, his
   reign over the people of God, and their faithfulness and obedience to
   him. This end was seen in the Old Testament dimly, or as he likes to
   say, umbratile, in a shadowy way. It was only right that when Christ
   came, the Evangelists should have applied the prophecies to him; for
   the words fitted him and his work far better than they did David, or
   Cyrus, and their works. Commenting on Matt. 27:35, he says that the
   statement of Ps. 22:18, They parted my garments among them, and did
   they cast lots upon my vesture, applies better to Christ than to David
   who was speaking of himself only by way of metaphor. The same according
   to Calvin is true of Ps. 118:22, The stone which the builders rejected,
   the same is become the head of the corner (Matt. 21:42). Christ himself
   applies Jer. 7:11, But you have made it a den of robbers, to his own
   situation, when he cleanses the Temple (Matt. 21:13).

   As a critic Calvin recognized in the Bible a natural working of the
   human mind which is not always too clear or too apt. Commenting on 1
   Peter 3:14, And be not afraid of their terror, neither be troubled, he
   goes so far as to accuse Peter of misconstruing Isaiah (ch. 8). But he
   excuses Peter on the ground that he was only referring to the prophet
   for a purpose of his own, and not explaining "every word used by the
   prophet." He says that when Paul quoted Ps. 68:19, in Eph. 4:8, When he
   ascended up on high, he led captivity captive, and gave gifts to men,
   he actually changed the wording of the psalm, even though "he can
   hardly be said to have departed from the substance." But he believes
   that Paul did not actually quote the psalm; he "used it as an
   expression of his own, adapted to the matter on hand." Paul more than
   once gets into difficulties by using "the Greek translators" (on Heb.
   10:5, 38), and at least once one cannot tell what prophet he is quoting
   from (on 1 Cor. 15:54). When Stephen says in Acts 7:16 that the
   patriarchs were taken to Shechem and buried in a sepulcher bought by
   Abraham, he clearly contradicts Gen. 50:13, Josh. 24:32. Calvin refers
   to Jerome's statement that the pilgrim Paula saw the tombs of the
   twelve patriarchs in Shechem. But he is not convinced. He says that
   perhaps Moses was using "synecdoche," that is, Joseph stands for the
   patriarchs; or that perhaps Luke was following an old tradition. He
   ends the discussion with, Quare hic locus corrigendus est. Hence this
   verse must be corrected! (See also on Josh. 24:32, Gen. 46:8, 47:31.)
   He also admits that when Luke made Paul speak Hebrew in Jerusalem, he
   may have been mistaken. Calvin thinks Paul spoke the common language of
   the day -- Aramaic (Acts 22:2). He thinks Mark is less accurate than
   Luke about Easter morning (on Mark 16:1), and that Matthew's version of
   Jesus' denunciation in ch. 23:24 is defective (defecta est oratio apud
   Matthaeum). Even Christ himself does not quote Isaiah exactly, but
   applies his words to his own purpose (on Matt. 15:7).

   3. The Reliability and Inspiration of the Bible

   Calvin studied the Bible as a book composed by human beings, according
   to the interests of the authors, and he followed the practices familiar
   to critics of literature. In this his humanism is obvious. But he also
   was a humanist of the bent of Lefèvre d'Étaples, [36] Erasmus, or
   Bucer, when he put his method to a theological use. Calvin was not
   interested in the Bible as a merely human product. His critical study
   was inspired by a profound and powerful desire to get back, through
   texts and versions, to "the oracles of God." If some humanists went
   back to the classical authors for new wisdom on man, Calvin, with the
   other Reformers, went back to the Bible for the wisdom of God.

   It is important to remember that the Bible was to him above all the
   Word of God spoken for the edification of the church. This explains his
   willingness to admit many unsolved problems of detail, even while he
   insists that the writers of the Bible were the mouthpieces of God. He
   sees that the Evangelists differ one from another in many a detail (on
   Matt. 22:2), but he insists that they agree on the main points of a
   story or parable. Where there is a question of numbers, as of women and
   angels at the resurrection, he points to the writers' unconcern for
   exact information in such matters and draws the reader's attention to
   the gospel or law. In fact, he sets aside a discrepancy of a thousand,
   between an account of Moses (Num. 25:90) and that of Paul, by remarking
   that the Biblical writers cared no more than the ancient Romans for
   numerical minutiae (on 1 Cor. 10:8). Paul was concerned to warn the
   church at Corinth against idolatry. What mattered was the reliability
   of the Bible with regard to the word of God and the promises of God,
   and not factual accuracy on detail.

   The humanists believed in the wisdom of the classics, feeding their
   minds on the sayings (of which they made collections) of the ancient
   philosophers; but they did so not for mere factual accuracy, but for
   the edification of their age. There is a suggestive analogy between the
   humanist attitude toward the classics and Calvin's toward the Bible.
   The Word of God spoken by the Spirit was the word of salvation and
   every blessing that goes with it. One had to believe in it and receive
   it with gratitude. It was worthy of the most diligent investigation. So
   one did one's best to understand the Bible, and to discover its
   consistency as the Word of God. A man had to attend to the chief
   business on hand. What we have in the Bible is the wisdom of God, a
   "Christian philosophy," a way of life that will enable us to live and
   die well in a world where the devil rages and perils are always at
   hand. Indeed the humanistic method required that one deal with
   questions of time, place, and authorship raised by the texts; but one
   also had to be prepared to leave them unsettled, and go on to the main
   point, to what was said of God's glory and man's duty. [37]

   Calvin knew that there were variant versions of the Bible, but he did
   not know -- nobody knew -- in his time, that there were various
   traditions behind the Biblical literature. Today we recognize that
   "contradictions" in the Bible are due to "date, authorship, and
   composition." But our way was not open to Calvin. Both assuming the
   inerrancy of the Spirit and knowing the ways of the human mind, Calvin
   did his best to harmonize contradictory statements. But even where he
   failed, he was satisfied that the intention of the Spirit in dictating
   "the oracles of God" was fulfilled; that the Word of God for the
   guidance of the church had been properly received and set down for the
   benefit of God's people.

   Calvin indeed insisted that the Spirit "dictated" the oracles of God.
   But such dictation did not so much establish the authority of the Bible
   as give us the Word of God for the upbuilding of the church and the
   benefit of the Christian in particular situations. Since the Holy
   Spirit spoke by the prophets, God himself spoke; so, when men read the
   Bible, they attend to their God. But what is their business but to
   listen to him and to hear him for obedience? So it is that the
   Christians read the whole of the Bible as the Word of God: not to
   believe God spoke because the Bible tells us he does, but that as they
   read the Bible, God himself may speak to their condition. The authority
   of the Bible is to Calvin the authority of God revealing himself and
   speaking to a Christian's specific need; and the inspiration of the
   writers of the Bible is presupposed in God's self-revelation to the
   Christian who reads it.

   Calvin's doctrine of the authority of Scripture is discussed at length
   by theologians and church historians. Unfortunately, too many of them
   rely on sections of the Institutes, and fail to test the conclusions
   they draw by the content of the Commentaries themselves. [38]

   Calvin, of course, accepts the whole Bible as the Word of God and he
   uses terms like "dictation" and "amanuensis of the Holy Spirit." In his
   Commentaries he shifts back and forth between God and the prophet as
   the speaker in the same way in which the prophets alternate the first
   and third person in their oracles. But those who see in such phrases a
   doctrine of inerrant Scripture and exact verbal inspiration forget that
   Calvin himself had a good deal of experience in dictating to
   secretaries and to students, and then correcting the results. God, the
   Holy Spirit, is of course inerrant, and the Word of God given by the
   Spirit was formulated to serve best the needs of God's church. But the
   human instruments, being men, were certainly not perfect. And they did
   remain men. Isaiah remained a great poet and Ezekiel indulged in
   wearisome repetitions. Calvin made no assumption of a succession of
   miracles to eliminate every slip. [39]

   Calvin trusted the fidelity of those to whom God had entrusted his Word
   more than he trusted the care of the Jewish rabbis who supplied the
   vowel points. More fundamentally, he trusted the providence of God to
   provide his chosen in all ages with needful instruction. He himself
   seldom emends (but see Ezek. 16:43); however, when he discusses
   emendations suggested by others, he dismisses them, not on the ground
   of impiety, but because of the better sense he can find in the
   Masoretic text (e.g., Ezek. 14:4). Inerrancy is not for Calvin the
   basis for the authority of Scripture.

   Calvin uses the doctrine of inspiration against the Church of Rome.
   [40] The Bible is the Word of God as over against the word of man as
   found in the papacy. His contention is that the Spirit spoke by the
   prophets and not by the pope or the Roman Church. The fathers could be
   wrong and often were; the councils could be wrong and often were; the
   tradition and the canon law could be and often were wrong. Over against
   all these, the Bible could not be and was not wrong. So when the
   fathers, the councils, or the tradition in general oppose the Bible,
   the Bible is right, and all the rest are wrong.

   But the things at issue between Rome and the Reformers were not the
   incarnation of our Lord, or his resurrection, or any miracle or
   prophecy. They were not the number of Israelites who came out of Egypt
   or the genealogies of Matthew and Luke. They did not even have to do
   with "the date, authorship, or composition" of the books of the Bible.
   All such questions, which have agitated men from "the age of reason" to
   our own day, were not the points at issue. Therefore, the question of
   verbal infallibility and plenary inspiration, with the relevant
   questions having to do with "science and religion" or "faith and
   reason," were not at issue. The issue was a proper exposition of the
   Christian faith: the grace of God, sin, justification, the ministry,
   and the sacraments; in short, the gospel. The heart of the Bible to
   Calvin as to Luther is Christ -- the anticipation of Christ and the
   witness to Christ, Christ's own work and his relation to the people of
   God. [41] This is where the inspiration of the writers is crucial.
   Witness to Christ is the reason for inspiration, as it is also the
   reason for the work of the Spirit in the church. The Spirit spoke by
   the prophets about Christ! And as he spoke about Christ and all that is
   relevant to our salvation by him, he spoke with absolute authority. The
   Church of Rome had corrupted the gospel. The gospel in its purity was
   to be found in Scripture. This purity of the gospel was the work of the
   Spirit, who had dictated the gospel, as found throughout the Bible, to
   the writers.

   At a later time, inspiration meant infallibility with regard to
   miracles, predictions, and sundry accounts of matters of fact. For the
   "fundamentalists," the test of belief in inspiration has been an
   acceptance of factual statements that seem contrary to natural process,
   or others that seem to involve contradiction. A grain of historical
   sense should suggest that Calvin was neither liberal, nor orthodox, nor
   neo-orthodox; even though all these can claim him in one respect or
   another. He was liberal in his determination to understand the Biblical
   writers historically He was orthodox in his belief that the Bible was
   "dictated" by the Spirit. He was "neo-orthodox" in making Christ who
   came to save sinners central to the whole Bible.

   4. Knowledge of God

   The language of the Spirit is the language of human beings, and even
   while it is dictated, spoken, it is dictated or spoken not in an alien
   tongue with an alien logic but in the familiar tongue of man with its
   common logic. However, the speech of the Spirit is a heavenly
   discourse, concerning God and his benefits, spoken not to satisfy our
   curiosity as to his "essence," but that we may know his power. [42] The
   language of the Bible is intended not to disclose God as he is in
   himself, but as he is toward us. He is toward us, not as an informant
   first but as a Savior, with his power. To know God in fact is to know
   above all his power; and we know his power in the faithfulness, peace,
   joy, the spiritual gifts, we receive from him. God's power and Word go
   together. According to Calvin, God's power is spiritual and the Spirit
   of God, who is witness to God's power above all, speaks a spiritual
   language which is accommodated to our understanding by the use of our
   common language.

   There is a knowledge that gives a man power over the thing known; the
   knowledge of the Christian man is the opposite of this. By the
   knowledge of God the Christian subjects himself to God's power. The
   latter knowledge differs from "the speculative," which Calvin
   considered incongruous with the Christian's relation to God. We know
   God, not to use him, but to worship and obey him. Therefore we know,
   not God's essence (as we know the essence of an object), but his grace
   and will by and for worship and obedience. This knowledge is one
   adapted to our role as creatures, and one sufficient for this role; not
   more and not less than we need to believe in God and obey him. It is
   knowledge first and last of God's love exercised toward us; a knowledge
   carrying with it a certainty all its own by the same acting of God; but
   one in which "facts" as read in the Bible act as "signs" of God's
   spiritual power, and establish the sovereignty of God as God by
   pointing to him whose "being" is hidden from the mind of man. [43]

   There is of course a singular congruity between the sign and the thing
   signified: as between the resurrection and the victory of God over sin
   and death; or between the ascension and the return of the Son to the
   right hand of the Father. But prior to the congruity we discern, there
   is the congruity of God's own doing, as established by the Holy Spirit.
   If we recognize the signs as signs, it is because the Spirit gives us
   light as an aspect of God's redemptive work. When we put Calvin's
   doctrine of inspiration in its proper context, and remember the unique
   way in which Biblical language is to him a signification of God's love
   and power as present in the church, we realize that Calvin used the
   Bible neither as an authoritarian nor as an anti-authoritarian, neither
   as a Hodge nor as a Sabatier; the Bible was to him the vehicle of God's
   power first, and secondly of our knowledge of Him.

   5. Knowledge of Man

   Calvin's belief that the Bible is God's Word, and his discipline as a
   humanist, are not sufficient for explaining his greatness as a
   commentator. What indeed is it that keeps a reader of these volumes of
   Commentaries interested, as he proceeds chapter after chapter, verse
   after verse? The variety in the treatment of the texts of course does a
   great deal to prevent boredom. But the positive interest of the reader
   is maintained by Calvin's constant concern with the light that the
   texts throw upon the life of man in its many aspects and its
   tantalizing depth. The Institutes begin with the proposition that the
   knowledge of God and the knowledge of man are inseparable one from the
   other, and that they together constitute the only true and solid wisdom
   (vera demum ac solida sapientia). [44] Here in the Commentaries Calvin
   makes full use of this principle. The stories of "holy men" like
   Abraham, Moses, David, Jeremiah, Peter, Paul, and Jesus himself become
   occasions for illuminating comments upon humanity and its ways. Calvin
   does not, any more than the Biblical writers, apologize for God's
   elect. Aware of God's faithfulness and grace, he gives the reader
   "realistic" insights into the characters he depicts and helps him to
   understand himself as well as his fellow men. Thus it is that the
   Commentaries remain endlessly and perennially interesting. And the fact
   that Calvin sees all things ultimately in the light of the gospel gives
   his wisdom a special quality which we might well characterize as
   "Christian understanding." He knows that the wisdom of the Bible is not
   the wisdom of the "philosophers." [45] But to him it is wisdom,
   presented to us by the Holy Spirit himself, as wisdom without which we
   would have only our folly. It is clear that this conviction kept
   Calvin's ardor and his thought alive and made him a superb commentator
   on the Bible.

   The Bible contains a definite perspective upon human life. Calvin
   appropriates it, and uses it freely and variously for an understanding
   of man. Calvin's interpretation of this perspective may well appear to
   some readers as "pessimistic." In the light of God's wisdom, men seem
   to be given to folly which produces in turn the miseries writ large in
   their history. The failings of patriarch, king, and apostle, not to
   mention those of God's people in general, are set down impressively in
   the Bible, and Calvin does not fail to point them out. He points out
   the infidelities, rebellions, cowardices, and malefactions of men which
   have brought contempt for God and misery upon themselves. History is
   tragic; but it is neither hopeless nor futile. Universal though evil
   is, men act as responsible beings, under the mercy as well as the
   judgment of God who is wise and knows what he is doing. Calvin
   entertains neither Stoic fatalism nor humanistic "faith in man." He
   repudiates both fatalism and "free will" because he sees history as the
   drama of God's sovereign dealings with sinners, for their salvation and
   the fulfillment of God's purpose. Thus history is suffused, as Jonathan
   Edwards would say, "with a divine and supernatural light" ; in it the
   Spirit speaks with the might of the living God toward faith and a godly
   life. So, the miseries of men are seen in the context of God's mercy
   and faithfulness, even his judgment and wrath cooperating with his
   Fatherly benevolence, toward the predestined purpose of his
   self-disclosure to men as illumined by Jesus Christ who is God
   manifested in the flesh.

    IV. INTERPRETER FOR THE SUFFERING CHURCH

   In Calvin's mind there was a profound and prevailing continuity between
   Christ and the church: between the experience of Christ and the
   experience of God's people, whether in days of the "fathers," or in the
   early Christian church, or in his own day. There is hardly a Biblical
   account of the trials and tribulations of the godly that does not
   occasion a lively discussion from Calvin's pen. He never fails to see
   Christian life sub specie crucis. The prophets were persecuted, and
   Christ was crucified. Christ's disciples were persecuted, and so were
   the Christians in the early church; so also were Christians in England,
   Scotland, Germany, Italy, Spain, Holland, Eastern Europe, and
   especially in Calvin's own country, France. News of the tortures,
   exiles, executions from these lands came to Calvin both by letter and
   by word of mouth from the many who sought refuge in Geneva. He spent
   much time and effort helping the refugees in the city, and writing
   letters of comfort and encouragement to Christian people in hopeless
   situations abroad. [46] Geneva itself was an object of ecclesiastical
   hatred and political machination, and in danger of invasion. Within the
   city there were rebellions, divisions, and all manner of restiveness.
   The fact is that all through his ministry Calvin's mind and soul were
   preoccupied with the sufferings that were the lot of the Protestants
   among whom he labored and for whom he was called upon to provide
   instruction, guidance, and encouragement; sufferings for which there
   often was no human help.

   Calvin appropriated the sufferings of God's people depicted in the
   Bible for the evangelicals in Europe and for himself. It is hardly
   possible, as we read his comments on Noah, David, Job, Jeremiah, or on
   the disciples of Jesus, to escape the truth that they all are vivified
   by their profound appropriateness to his condition. [47] Calvin turns
   again and again to the inescapable and bewildering fact that in this
   world the disciples of Christ have suffered far more grievously than
   the wicked who have abused and oppressed them. So it had been in the
   past; so it was in his own day; so it was in his own person. He
   suffered physically as well as mentally all his days. He lived under
   cares and contentions which gradually killed him at the age of
   fifty-six. The image of Calvin as a stern and insensitive puritan
   overlord does not bear examination. He not only felt the afflictions of
   his fellow evangelicals, but also commented upon them constantly both
   as an interpreter of the Bible and also as a "theologian." It is quite
   possible and even necessary to see Calvin's work as a whole in the
   light of the wrongs that were perpetrated against the faithful
   throughout his ministry. It is no exaggeration to say that if one
   overlooks the mystery of the world's animosity to the gospel and to
   those who adhere to it, one is bound to misunderstand Calvin profoundly
   and to misconstrue his work both as a thinker and as a man of action.
   The following discussion of particular doctrines from this point of
   view is intended to give the reader a helpful clue to Calvin's mind. It
   is not meant to be a complete exposition, nor is it meant to obscure
   Calvin's primary concerns with the "honor of God," justification by
   faith alone, obedience to God in man's total life, and so on, which are
   essential for understanding his theology. We have not dwelt upon these
   latter emphases in Calvin because they are commonplaces of all adequate
   expositions of his work.

   I. The Providence of God [48]

   The suffering of the righteous confronts us directly with the
   providence of God; and the doctrine of providence was constantly on
   Calvin's mind and to it he made a peculiar contribution. It was
   traditional in medieval theology to write on "providence and free
   will." The providence of God, although welcome as providing for man's
   necessities, was a stumbling block in so far as it made man's own
   freedom doubtful. So the main interest of the philosophical theologians
   was to reconcile God's providence with man's freedom and
   responsibility. Now, all this is changed by Calvin. He finishes his
   comments on Acts 20:32 with the characteristic and blunt statement:
   "Since Scripture teaches that we have sufficient help in God's power,
   let us be mindful that only they are strong in the Lord who renounce
   their free will and lean upon him who alone, as Paul confesses rightly,
   is able to build up." When people suffered dungeon and exile, yea, were
   at the brink of death in the hands of irresistible foes, it was
   irrelevant and futile to reconcile providence with the free will of
   man. These victims of oppression were not free against the combined
   power of church and state. The only proper question under the
   circumstances was, "What did God intend by their suffering?" What these
   people needed to know was that God was "at the helm" and that neither
   torture nor death came upon them without the providence of God who was
   their Father. They were comforted, not by the knowledge of their
   freedom, which they did not have, but by faith in the sovereignty of
   God the Father which Calvin would not let them forget.

   When Calvin took up the other matter of providence in relation to human
   wickedness, he insisted upon man's sin (as in the case of Judas), and
   upon the subtle tyranny of Satan over human beings (Matt. 26:14). But
   once again he insisted upon the proposition that no evil is perpetrated
   apart from God's providence and his use of it for his glory and the
   good of his people. Even as a sinner, a man could receive hope and
   courage from the faith that his own wickedness was under God's
   providence and would further, in spite of himself, God's glory.

   We are not concerned here with justifying Calvin against his
   detractors. The point is that his doctrine of providence grew out of
   his preoccupation with the sufferings of "the elect," and can be stated
   and understood properly in that context. "Since Scripture teaches!" In
   a way, it is quite unwarranted to claim that Scripture in toto denies
   man's freedom in so far as he is a responsible being. Calvin himself
   does not deny, in fact he insists upon, the doctrine of man's
   responsibility (on Matt. 11:21). But he is far from wrong in the
   insight that Scripture is a celebration of God's peculiar sovereignty
   as God and Father, and was written above all by men who set themselves
   to instill courage and hope among God's troubled people, declaring
   God's control over the affairs of men and the hope of the fulfillment
   of his purpose through all the vicissitudes of human existence. In any
   case, Calvin's doctrine of providence, with all the thought he spent
   upon it, means that whether we are good or evil, whether we live or
   die, we are God's.

   The subject of providence requires a discussion of miracles. To Calvin,
   the miracles of the Bible were in a class by themselves. They were the
   work of God the Father, in praise of Christ and for the sake of the
   church; and the knowledge of them was the work of the Spirit. They were
   to Calvin the means with which God revealed himself to his people. They
   were strictly "signs" in the sense of the Gospel of John. God worked
   them not to inflame man's taste for miracles in general, but as
   vehicles of his grace suitable for human apprehension. What made a
   miracle a sign was the Word of God. A miracle without the Word was to
   Calvin a prodigy which even the Pharaoh's magicians could perform (Ex.
   7:12). It proved, not God's grace, but his judgment which blinded the
   people and made them deaf to God's word. Calvin recognized no sure way
   to discriminate between a sign and an imposture except by the Word of
   God as illumined by his Spirit (on 1 John 4:1 f.).

   Calvin was aware that men are always gaping for miracles (on John
   11:18). The more they feel their weakness before the powers of nature,
   the more they look for a supernatural power that will enable them to
   overcome the evils caused by nature and the climax of these evils in
   death. The miraclemongers care, not about the Kingdom of God, but about
   their convenience and their belly (on John 6:26). They have no taste
   for the cross, and therefore they debase the power of Christ with their
   "hope of gain." Calvin knew all this as a permanent temptation in the
   church. He insisted, therefore, repeatedly and strongly that miracle
   and doctrine go together (on Matt. 24:23, Mark 16:20), and refused to
   identify God's power with the working of miracles (on 1 Thess. 1:4),
   holding that the Word of God is superior to miracles (on John 4:48,
   20:31). Christians languished and died in prisons without any miracle
   to enable them to escape. These people lived, not by miracles, but by
   the Word of God, by their faithfulness to Christ. What they had
   available was not the hope of physical escape, but the greater miracle
   of faithfulness and joy. Therefore, Calvin received the Biblical
   miracles as signs of God's power; but he knew the same power by the
   preaching of the gospel, by the miracle of weak men made strong, both
   as to those who preach and as to those who hear (on Mark 16:20).

   2. Predestination

   Calvin's doctrine of predestination is a complex matter, and is above
   all directed against the Roman Church, in support of "justification by
   faith." [49] But here it is necessary to keep in mind the persecution
   of the Protestants in his day. As in Scripture, so in Calvin's mind it
   was no small comfort that the sufferings of the church were predestined
   according to the will and the purpose of God. [50] Predestination meant
   to Calvin, as to Paul, that the sufferings of the Christians were no
   accident in the history of mankind. The unfolding of history was the
   realization of God's purpose which went back to the beginning. The
   doctrine of predestination for Calvin was bound up with the doctrine of
   history as the continued fulfillment of God's purpose. There had been,
   there was, and there was to be nothing fortuitous, nothing apart from
   God's intention, nothing that originates from man's will and caprice.
   Jesus Christ had been called and predestined by God for his mission,
   together with his suffering and cross. His gospel, scoffed at and
   rejected by the world, was no novelty. It had been in God's purpose and
   was promised in prophecy through the ages. So as age followed age,
   fulfillment followed fulfillment, all according to God's own eternal
   purpose.

   Calvin's doctrine of predestination was inspired by the need of the
   Protestant churches for a knowledge of the continuity between the
   gospel they believed and for which they suffered, and the promises of
   God made from the beginning and through the ages. Like the early
   church, like evangelist and apostle, the Reformer took great pains to
   establish the antiquity of the gospel he preached. A church under
   persecution was plagued with profound doubts. Excommunicated
   ex-Romanists, subject to enemy power, deprived of home and goods, in
   exile and at death's door, these poor people who lived in anxiety and
   despair, subject to miseries from which even the dregs and criminals of
   society were exempt, had nothing to sustain them except the promises of
   God. They were invited by Calvin to turn their eyes to Abraham and
   Moses and Noah and David, to the great deliverance of God, to the
   mysterious workings of his "secret purpose," to the manifestations of
   his wisdom and power, rooted in his eternal purpose and his predestined
   end -- all established in Jesus Christ crucified, risen, ascended, and
   at the right hand of God the Father Almighty. If one abstracts the
   doctrine of predestination before the ages from the promises of God
   made by creation and fulfilled through the ages since, one does
   violence to Calvin's mind on this matter (see especially on 2 Tim.
   1:9-10, Titus 1:2).

   This introduction is not the place for a full exposition of such a
   complex and profound doctrine as predestination. We are interested only
   in indicating that Calvin's version of this doctrine cannot be
   understood properly except in relation to the suffering church. For
   instance, it is common to think of predestination as deterministic (on
   Rom. 9:17). Determinism means that one fact arises from one or more
   others by way of a natural necessity and that one can discover how one
   situation determines another. But one does not study the condition of
   the Christians in this world and arrive at an understanding of
   predestination. There is no open and comprehensible explanation of
   God's ways with his people one by one. God's purpose remains God's
   secret, and he alone can justify his deeds among men. So, God's
   predestination remained a mystery to Calvin, and was affirmed not as a
   doctrine of determinism arrived at by observing "the causes and
   connections of things," but by fixing the mind and heart upon the Word
   of God, upon Christ and the history of God's people. Determinism has
   nothing to do with the mystery of evil. On the contrary, it explains
   the mystery away. Predestination as Calvin understands it is
   inseparable from that same mystery and the very ground of courage for
   living with it.

   3. Faith and Reason

   Calvin refused to "explain" to himself or to others the workings of
   God's purpose in the fearful destiny of the believers in the world. On
   the other hand, the triumph of Christ, his ascension and sitting at
   God's right hand, were the immovable signs of God's sovereignty and
   thus the certainty of the fulfillment of God's predestined purpose.
   Predestination therefore meant to Calvin hope in a world where
   "determinism" could have produced only despair. This hope Calvin
   received from Scripture, and he was determined to let Scripture rule
   his mind and keep it within the bounds of sanity.

   But the Word and promise of God made no sense to the carnal mind. The
   Word of God was both a stumbling block and a foolishness, and the flesh
   recoiled from it. There was no way of verifying it while believers were
   tortured and murdered all around him. There was no way of justifying
   the ways of God in His world except by faith.

   Faith which is the proper work of the Spirit must rely upon and draw
   its strength from the promise of God in Christ and Scripture. It has no
   mandate to supersede the Word of God. And this is so because faith is
   to believe in God's love and care for his people in the midst of their
   humiliations and sufferings. But this love and care we know, not by our
   cogitations upon "the facts of life," but by adhering to God's word in
   the Bible. "Reason," which confronts us with the injustices and
   cruelties of this world, cannot attain to a certain knowledge of God's
   beneficence. The usual rational arguments for God's justice and mercy,
   based upon the observed workings of God's providence, even though
   Calvin himself used them, gave him no "certain knowledge." There was no
   use trying to make sense of the suffering of the elect by deep or high
   thinking. Therefore, the primacy of faith in our knowledge of God
   became established as a fixed point in Calvin's theology.

   But faith did not solve the problem raised by reason to reason's
   satisfaction. The Spirit did not open to him the "secret counsel" of
   God, because in fact Scripture itself confronted him with this secret
   counsel, rather than removed its secrecy. Faith, therefore, could not,
   any more than reason, penetrate to a knowledge of God as he is in
   himself. Faith was a gift of God whose main function was to create in
   man a certain knowledge of God's goodness toward us. The miracle of
   faith was the miracle of joy in the midst of suffering. The knowledge
   of God given by the Word and the Spirit was a knowledge which occurred
   and became established with the joy of partaking in the cross of
   Christ. If the Christians not only bore their cross, but also rejoiced
   in bearing it, it was by the doing of God's own Spirit who regenerated
   them, made them new creatures. The doctrine of the Spirit comes to life
   in Calvin's theology, because he recognized that the comfort and joy of
   Christians at their cross is the work of the living God who "spoke by
   the prophets."

   Faith is the knowledge of God's goodness toward his suffering people,
   and not a vague and general sense of the divine. Calvin did not deny
   that the carnal mind has a confused and idolatrous awareness of God.
   But he knew that a natural knowledge of God, without his
   self-revelation in Christ crucified and risen, by the inward working of
   his Spirit, is no match whatsoever against the machinations of the
   devil and the cruelty of men. He knew that human cogitation, without
   God's illumination and power, is helpless before the monstrous evils
   which proclaim the power of Satan and his reign of darkness and death.
   Calvin knew this, and felt it adequately. He knew the misery of this
   body of death, and he knew also that a mind conjoined with this body
   must inevitably be overwhelmed by a life that is in fact a shadow of
   death (on 2 Cor. 4:11-12). Sufferings of this life act as portents of
   death, and before death, says Calvin, "all the powers of men succumb
   with terror" (on 2 Cor. 1:8). Calvin was deeply impressed, doubtless in
   himself as in others, with the elemental desire to live and the
   shrinking of the flesh from its destruction (on 2 Cor. 5:1, Gal. 2:20,
   2 Tim. 4:7). He knew how brave men are away from danger, and how they
   turn into trembling leaves when they meet it (on John 18:17). This was
   no academic matter with him. He knew it as a common human reality. And
   he knew that in the jaws of hell, it is only the Lord who gives true
   courage. "Let us, therefore," he says, "learn to be strong nowhere but
   in the Lord" (ibid.).

   4. Jesus Christ

   The Commentaries contain numerous and weighty statements that we know
   God in Christ. Commenting on 1 Peter 3:21, Calvin says, "Hence all
   cogitation on God apart from Christ is an immense abyss which
   immediately swallows up our whole mind." In another place, speaking of
   the knowledge of God among the Athenians, he says that "the Lord
   allowed the men of Athens to fall into extreme madness" (on Acts
   17:16). Abyss, labyrinth, madness: such were words which came to
   Calvin's mind when he considered man's knowledge of God apart from
   Christ. For those who have taken up their cross for the gospel's sake,
   there is no knowledge of God's goodness except in the knowledge of the
   crucified and risen Christ.

   In the context of the Christian life, Christ's mediatorship was to
   Calvin a continuing experience as well as a historical event. That God
   had revealed himself as Father in a man who was tempted and suffered,
   who exercised his Sonship by the death of the cross, was at the center
   of the gospel to multitudes of Christians who suffered and were tempted
   under their cross. Calvin's Christ was nothing if he was not the
   Comforter of the church, the source of the Christian's courage and
   hope, and his power of endurance.

   This explains two of the characteristic emphases of Calvin: the
   humanity and the Kingship of Christ, perhaps his Kingship and humanity,
   as two focuses of his mediatorship. No one after Paul in the history of
   the church, so far as we know, made so much of the ascension of Christ
   and his sitting at the right hand of the Father, as did Calvin. There
   is nothing more joyful for a Christian than to know that Christ
   crucified is at God's right hand as the King and comfort of his people,
   reigning over the church, interceding with the Father for his people,
   protecting and watching over them in their tribulations. Hence in
   Calvin's thought the death, resurrection, ascension of Christ, issue in
   his sitting at God's right hand as the climax of his own mission; from
   it they derive their whole glory as elements of the gospel. The sitting
   at the right hand is also the source of all the benefits that
   Christians receive from God the Father. It is not too much to say that
   if one takes away Christ at God's right hand, the whole gospel as
   addressed to the suffering church falls to pieces, because the
   Christians are left without their Christ, and therefore without their
   God. Hence, there is no image so alive in Calvin's mind as that of the
   Son seated next to the Father. Calvin insisted upon the ascension of
   the same Christ who lived and died for us. The Christ who sits at God's
   right hand is not a spirit who is ignorant of our flesh. He has gone
   from us to lift our minds up to our God and his heaven. So it is that
   he gives us his spiritual gifts, by the Spirit, of courage and hope in
   the midst of our trials. Thus it is that he is at once "the vicar of
   God" (on Mark 16:19) and our brother.

   Calvin was as little concerned with the divine "essence" of Christ as
   he was with the essence of God in general. It is the divine power and
   grace of Christ that he finds of decisive importance for the church. He
   of course never denied, he emphatically affirmed, the union of divine
   and human natures in Christ. By the standard of the Church fathers, he
   was orthodox enough. But the words "essence" or "nature" belonged to
   contexts of thought that were not his own. He had no stomach for the
   kind of metaphysical reflection that is required by the mind's desire
   to penetrate to God's or Christ's essence. The main point of Calvin's
   insistence on the deity of Christ was that he was the agent of our
   salvation. Commenting on Col. 1:15, he insists that Christ is "the
   image of the invisible God," not only by virtue of his essence, but
   also as one in whom God makes himself known to us. We know nothing
   about Christ's divine nature apart from what he has done and continues
   to do for us. And he has done and continues to do his work as a human
   being and our brother. Our brother is our King, and our King is our
   brother. This situation is stated properly in terms, not of essence,
   but of God's saving work; provided we bear in mind with Calvin that the
   one and the same saving work was at once the Father's and the Son's by
   the Spirit.

   Calvin's eloquent comments on the events of Christ's life and death as
   recorded in the Gospels are clearly intended to show the Christians
   that they are suffering after their King and participating in his life.
   Here the deity of Christ in no wise vitiates his authentically human
   experience of temptation and "Passion." Calvin pays his tribute to
   orthodoxy by reminding himself that the Son of God put on humanity and
   shared our life freely and voluntarily. He even shows a predilection
   for the notion that he was "God clothed in human flesh" (on Luke
   19:41), or "manifested in the flesh" (on John 1:1, 1 Tim. 3:16). "And
   yet, in Christ we see the infinite glory of God united with our
   polluted flesh so that they become one" (on 1 Tim. 3:16). Calvin's
   concern for the encouragement of the church led him not only to
   emphasize Christ's common humanity but also to present it as a state of
   creaturely weakness. The human nature of Christ was not that of Adam
   before the Fall! He was no ideal and splendid specimen of humanity such
   as man is supposed to have been before he sinned (Augustine [51] ). He
   had "our polluted flesh" ; our flesh with all its susceptibilities and
   pains. When he was slapped, or whipped, or finally nailed to the wood,
   he did not look down upon the proceedings as a bemused god or hero; he
   suffered as suffer the believers who are tormented by their
   persecutors.

   It is quite evident that the orthodox understanding of the two natures
   of Christ, as involving a divine and a human essence and even a divine
   and a human consciousness, was, to say the least, awkward in relation
   to Calvin's concern with Christ's role as mediator -- especially with
   Christ as the head of a church engaged in mortal combat with evil. It
   is hardly too much to say that Christ's divinity meant to Calvin above
   all that he, with the Father, was the source of the Christian life and
   its blessings (on 2 Thess. 2:16). He insisted that the Biblical
   statements concerning Christ's relation to God are, as it were, not
   metaphysical but soteriological or "operational." They refer to his
   work, to what he is to us and for us. God himself we know by his saving
   work; and as this saving work is done by Christ, we know him as God.
   [52]

   5. The Christian Life and the Last Things

   About the Christian life we need not say much in this place. We have
   cited Calvin extensively on this subject in our selections. Here we
   shall consider his so-called otherworldliness.

   Calvin's emphasis on self-denial can be understood and interpreted
   rightly only if we keep in mind that there is in fact no victory over
   the power of death without a denial of the self which works by sin and
   despair. A man has to know the death of Christ by his own death, and
   know the resurrection of Christ by the miracle of the victory over
   death within him; and such knowledge is inseparable from the warfare in
   which he is subject to temptation and harassment under the assaults of
   Satan. Calvin speaks of an inner and an outer mortification. The first
   has to do with the struggle against sin or unfaithfulness; the latter
   with the struggle against the powers of this world (on 2 Cor. 4:10). It
   is quite evident that these two go together, since the temptation to
   deny our Lord rises in the midst of fear of the evils to which men
   expose themselves in the hands of men when they set out to obey God and
   cleave to Christ.

   Calvin knew no antidote to defeat and ruin except to raise our minds to
   heaven. To him, a Christian walked on earth, but his life was hid in
   heaven. He spoke with obvious passion against attachment to this world,
   and exhorted Christians to renounce it in favor of heaven. In a sense,
   nothing is so essential to his theology as the opposition between
   heaven and earth, and the insistence that Christians, with their minds
   and hearts, leave the earth and go up to heaven.

   But Calvin wanted Christians to lift their minds to heaven because
   Christ is there, and it is from there that he reigns over the church in
   the world. He says explicitly that heaven, where God is, and Christ is,
   is "above all the heavens." It is not the heaven we see and in which
   the stars shine (on Heb. 9:24). Calvin is not concerned with it except
   as the abode of God and Christ, and the origin of our salvation; so
   that, to turn the mind to heaven means to turn it to Christ at God's
   right hand: to turn to him for strength against tribulation and for
   victory over evil. We must turn to "heaven" for victory on earth.

   On the other hand, to turn away from the earth is to Calvin to mortify
   the sinful flesh which shrinks before warfare with evil and the
   suffering it entails. To renounce the world is to renounce Satan and
   all his evil works. It is hard to be faithful to the gospel while the
   flesh rebels against the privations and oppressions which it would
   avoid at the expense of treachery to Christ and his gospel. In short,
   Calvin's insistence upon self-denial and world renunciation must be
   understood in the context of the Christian warfare and in the light of
   the sheer necessity of dying to sin if one is to live to Christ. It has
   nothing to do with ascetic contempt for the created world, or with an
   otherworldliness which seeks a heaven because it despairs of this world
   in general. Calvin had only love and respect for the world as God's
   creation for the use and enjoyment of man. [53]

   Calvin turns the attention of the Christian not only upward but also
   toward the future. Hope, for Calvin, is at the heart of the Christian
   life. He sets before his readers "the blessed and immortal rest of
   heaven" as the hope that will enable them to suffer death with
   patience, and even to desire eagerly what they fear (on Luke 12:50).
   With Paul, he argues that if there be no resurrection of the dead,
   Christians, who are sheep meant for slaughter, are the most miserable
   of men (on 1 Cor. 15:19). He regards the present life of the
   Christians, with all its travail and groanings, as unfulfilled unless
   our redemption culminates in the resurrection and "eternal felicity."

   But the new life in Christ is itself by a resurrection from the dead
   (on John 5:21). When Paul says that the Spirit of God "shall also
   quicken your mortal bodies," according to Calvin he means "everything
   left in us that is subject to death. . . . From this we gather that
   here he speaks not of the last resurrection which shall be in a moment,
   but of the continuous working of the Spirit, by which he gradually
   destroys the remnants of the flesh and restores a heavenly life in us"
   (on Rom. 8:11). In his comments on Acts 2:19, he identifies the great
   day of the Lord not with the last things, but with "the whole Kingdom
   of Christ" and the trials of the church. He does not postpone the
   destruction of death prophesied by Paul to the end, but speaks of it as
   having already occurred, as already realized in the deliverance of the
   Christians from the power of death (on 1 Cor. 15:26). The Day of
   Judgment is even now anticipated in the present dread and terror deep
   in the lives of the ungodly, and in the present joy and exultation of
   the believers (on Rom. 2:5). The coming of Christ itself is anticipated
   when Christians obey God and "vie one with another in imitating him"
   (on Heb. 10:7); when Christians, in the extremity of their sufferings,
   call upon him, and he comes to them with power and help (on Matt.
   19:23); when he consummates his present reign with a complete
   revelation of his authority in all the earth (on Matt. 25:31). Calvin
   speaks of the last things as a full manifestation of what is now hidden
   or obscure.

   He even, as we say, demythologizes the prophecy "Heaven and earth shall
   pass away," by calling upon Christians to raise their faith "above
   heaven and earth," to Christ in God's heaven (on Matt. 24:35). He calls
   upon them so to meditate upon the last things as to receive patience
   and perseverance in their trials (on 1 John 3:2). Their life is to be a
   waiting, without any clairvoyance as to time and seasons. They are to
   live every day as though it were their last (as it might well have been
   under the cross), in the hope of Christ's coming, by which they are to
   be comforted by Christ (on Heb. 10:25). Calvin was well aware of the
   absurdity of the Christians' situation, and knew very well how foolish
   the Christians' hope looked from the outside. But he also knew that the
   hope which grows within the Christian life, from it and into it, has
   its own peculiar rationale, and flourishes in spite of external
   circumstances, because it is the work of Christ and his Spirit. In this
   way, the eschatological statements of the Bible, with their several
   "metaphors" (on 1 Cor. 15:52, Heb. 10:26-27), illuminate the life of
   the Christians, as well as point to their ultimate destiny with God.
   But here one must remember Calvin's concern with the present
   responsibilities of Christians and his whole ethical concern to which
   we have devoted a long chapter.

  Introductory Selections from Calvin

    THE TEXT

    I. AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH FROM THE DEDICATION OF THE COMMENTARY ON THE
    PSALMS

   If those who read this commentary, which has cost me much labor, derive
   some benefit from it, I should like to have them know how greatly I
   have been helped [in writing it] through those relatively mild
   conflicts by which the Lord has trained me. My own experience not only
   aided me in applying to our present situation the teaching I gathered
   [from the Psalms], but also opened the way to an intimate understanding
   of the mind of those who wrote them. It gave me no little help in
   understanding the complaints of David, the greatest of the psalmists,
   about the evils which the church suffered at the hands of those who
   were supposed to be its members, for I myself had had the same or
   similar experiences with enemies within the church. I differ so much
   from David since I lack the many virtues which distinguished him, and I
   labor so much under the corresponding faults, that I am ashamed to
   compare myself to him. But although as I read the records of his faith,
   endurance, ardor, zeal, and sincerity, the difference between us often
   made me groan, yet I found especial help for myself when I saw in the
   Psalter as in a mirror both the requirements of my calling and how
   ceaselessly [David] fulfilled them. . . .

   It goes without saying that my own position is far below David's. And
   yet, as he was elevated from the sheepfolds to the highest position of
   authority, so God took me also from obscure and small beginnings and
   honored me with the office of herald and minister of the gospel. My
   father intended me as a young boy for theology. But when he saw that
   the science of law made those who cultivate it wealthy, he was led to
   change his mind by the hope of material gain for me. So it happened
   that I was called back from the study of philosophy to learn law. I
   followed my father's wish and attempted to do faithful work in this
   field; but God, by the secret leading of his providence, turned my
   course another way.

   First, when I was too firmly addicted to the papal superstitions to be
   drawn easily out of such a deep mire, by a sudden conversion He brought
   my mind (already more rigid than suited my age) to submission [to him].
   I was so inspired by a taste of true religion and I burned with such a
   desire to carry my study further, that although I did not drop other
   subjects, I had no zeal for them. In less than a year, all who were
   looking for a purer doctrine began to come to learn from me, although I
   was a novice and a beginner.

   Then I, who was by nature a man of the country and a lover of shade and
   leisure, wished to find for myself a quiet hiding place -- a wish which
   has never yet been granted me; for every retreat I found became a
   public lecture room. When the one thing I craved was obscurity and
   leisure, God fastened upon me so many cords of various kinds that he
   never allowed me to remain quiet, and in spite of my reluctance dragged
   me into the limelight.

   I left my own country and departed for Germany to enjoy there, unknown,
   in some corner, the quiet long denied me. But lo, while I was hidden
   unknown at Basel, a great fire of hatred [for France] had been kindled
   in Germany by the exile of many godly men from France. To quench this
   fire, wicked and lying rumors were spread, cruelly calling the exiles
   Anabaptists and seditious men, men who threatened to upset, not only
   religion, but the whole political order with their perverse madness. I
   saw that this was a trick of those in [the French] court, not only to
   cover up with false slanders the shedding of the innocent blood of holy
   martyrs, but also to enable the persecutors to continue with the
   pitiless slaughter. Therefore I felt that I must make a strong
   statement against such charges; for I could not be silent without
   treachery. This was why I published the Institutes -- to defend against
   unjust slander my brothers whose death was precious in the Lord's
   sight. A second reason was my desire to rouse the sympathy and concern
   of people outside, since the same punishment threatened many other poor
   people. And this volume was not a thick and laborious work like the
   present edition; it appeared as a brief Enchiridion. It had no other
   purpose than to bear witness to the faith of those whom I saw
   criminally libeled by wicked and false courtiers.

   I desired no fame for myself from it; I planned to depart shortly, and
   no one knew that I was the writer [of the book]. For I had kept my
   authorship secret and intended to continue to do so. But Wilhaim Farel
   [54] forced me to stay in Geneva not so much by advice or urging as by
   command, which had the power of God's hand laid violently upon me from
   heaven. Since the wars had closed the direct road to Strasbourg, I had
   meant to pass through Geneva quickly and had determined not to be
   delayed there more than one night.

   A short time before, by the work of the same good man [Farel], and of
   Peter Viret, [55] the papacy had been banished from the city; but
   things were still unsettled and the place was divided into evil and
   harmful factions. One man, who has since shamefully gone back to the
   papists, took immediate action to make me known. Then Farel, who was
   working with incredible zeal to promote the gospel, bent all his
   efforts to keep me in the city. And when he realized that I was
   determined to study in privacy in some obscure place, and saw that he
   gained nothing by entreaty, he descended to cursing, and said that God
   would surely curse my peace if I held back from giving help at a time
   of such great need. Terrified by his words, and conscious of my own
   timidity and cowardice, I gave up my journey and attempted to apply
   whatever gift I had in defense of my faith.

   Scarcely four months had passed before we were attacked on the one side
   by the Anabaptists and on the other by a certain rascally apostate who,
   relying upon the secret aid of certain important people, was able to
   give us much trouble. Meanwhile, internal dissensions, coming one upon
   another, caused us dreadful torments.

   I confess that I am by nature timid, mild, and cowardly, and yet I was
   forced from the very beginning to meet these violent storms. Although I
   did not yield to them, yet since I was not very brave, I was more
   pleased than was fitting when I was banished and forcibly expelled from
   the city.

   Then loosed from my vocation and free [to follow my own desire], I
   decided to live quietly as a private individual. But that most
   distinguished minister of Christ, Martin Bucer, [56] dragged me back
   again to a new post with the same curse which Farel had used against
   me. Terrified by the example of Jonah which he had set before me, I
   continued the work of teaching. And although I always consistently
   avoided public notice, somehow I was dragged to the imperial
   assemblies. [57] There, whether I wished it or not, I had to speak
   before large audiences. Afterwards the Lord had pity on the City of
   Geneva and quieted the deadly conflicts there. After he had by his
   wondrous power frustrated both the criminal conspiracies and the bloody
   attempts at force, I was compelled, against my own will, to take again
   my former position. [58] The safety of that church was far too
   important in my mind for me to refuse to meet even death for its sake.
   But my timidity kept suggesting to me excuses of every color for
   refusing to put my shoulder again under so heavy a burden. However, the
   demand of duty and faith at length conquered, and I went back to the
   flock from which I had been driven away. With how much grief, with how
   many tears, and in how great anxiety I went, God is my best witness.
   Many faithful men also understood my reluctance and would have wished
   to see me released from this pain if they had not been constrained by
   the same fear which influenced me.

   It would make too long a story to tell of the conflicts of all sorts in
   which I was active and of the trials by which I was tested. I will
   merely repeat briefly what I said before, so as not to offend
   fastidious readers with unnecessary words. Since David showed me the
   way with his own footsteps, I felt myself greatly comforted. The holy
   king was hurt more seriously by the envy and dishonesty of treacherous
   men at home than he was by the Philistines and other enemies who
   harassed him from the outside. I also have been attacked on all sides
   and have had scarcely a moment's relief from both external and internal
   conflicts. Satan has undertaken all too often in many ways to corrupt
   the fabric of this church. The result has been that I, who am a
   peaceable and timid man, was compelled to break the force of the deadly
   attacks by interposing my own body as a shield.

   In all these five years certain men have had too great an influence,
   and a part of the common people who were corrupted by their alluring
   propaganda have been seeking unrestrained license. We therefore had
   both to oversee discipline and to fight without intermission. For the
   ruin of the church was a matter of no account to profane men and
   despisers of heavenly doctrine who desired and obtained power to gain
   every indulgence they dared. Some were driven mad by famine and hunger,
   and certain others by insatiable ambition or shameful greed for profit;
   and they all were ready to ruin themselves and us by mixing everything
   up rather than to [allow us to] maintain order. They were at it a long
   time, and I think made use of every tool forged in Satan's workshop.
   The only possible way to end their wicked plots was to destroy the men
   themselves by a shameful death -- a spectacle which grieved me very
   much. For although they deserved any possible punishment, I would
   rather have had them live safe and unharmed. And they could have done
   so, if they had not been wholly impervious to wise counsel.

   This five-year trial, hard and burdensome enough to me, was made still
   worse torture by the ill will of those who never ceased to attack me
   and my ministry with vile slanders. Many were so blinded by their
   desire to abuse me that their effrontery became shamefully outspoken.
   Others were saved by their own craft from conviction and ignominious
   exposure. But when anyone repeats an offense of which he has been
   accused a hundred times and acquitted, the indignity of it all is hard
   to bear.

   Because I assert that the world is governed by the hidden providence of
   God, insolent men rise up and say that I make God the author of sin --
   a futile and baseless slander which would come to nothing of itself if
   it did not find eager listeners. Envy or spite or ingratitude or
   wickedness so rules men that they recoil from no lie, however absurd
   and monstrous. Others strive to overturn the eternal predestination by
   which God distinguishes the reprobate from the elect; others undertake
   the defense of free will. And not ignorance so much as a kind of
   perverse zeal brings many adherents to these factions.

   When one suffers trials at the hands of professed enemies, one can bear
   them. But when people who hide under the name of brothers, those who
   not only eat the sacred bread but also serve it to others, and who
   boast loudly that they are heralds of the gospel -- when these carry on
   such wicked warfare, how detestable it is! It is of this kind of thing
   that David most rightly complains, when he says, The man of my peace
   and he who ate bread with me has lifted his heel against me (Ps.
   41:10); and also, My companion and associate who used to go with me to
   the temple of God, with whom I took sweet counsel, he like an enemy has
   handed me over to the wicked (Ps. 55:14).

   Some men have spread frivolous rumors about my treasures; others about
   my enormous power. Others have talked about my sumptuous table. Does a
   man live in the lap of luxury when he is content with meager food and
   plain clothing; when he requires no more frugality from the poorest
   folk than he himself practices? As for my authority, I wish I could
   hand it over to them! They measure my power by the amount of my labor,
   by the weight of work that wears me down. How much money I have, my
   death will show -- if there are any whom I cannot convince while I am
   alive. But I admit that I am not "poor," because I desire nothing
   beyond my actual needs.

   These inventions, although they have no basis in fact, are believed
   among many people because the majority think that the only way to cover
   up their shame is to mix black with white. They think the best
   guarantee of impunity and license would be the end of the authority of
   the servants of Christ. In addition there are the mockers at feasts of
   whom David complains in Ps. 35:16: not only the plate lickers but those
   who hunt the favor of the powerful with false denunciations. I have
   become used to swallowing insults for so long that I am almost
   insensitive; yet as their insolence increased I could not help feeling
   some bitter pricks.

   And as though it were not enough for me to suffer the inhumanity of
   neighbors, a throng of evil-driven men from the frozen sea [Germany]
   stirred up (accenderet) against me a storm I have no words to describe.
   I am still speaking of internal enemies of the church, proud
   proclaimers of the gospel of Christ, who because I do not accept their
   crass explanation of [the Lord's Supper as] devouring the flesh of
   Christ, are roused against me more violently than my open enemies. Here
   also I can associate myself with David, While I seek peace, they rush
   to war (Ps. 120:7). Moreover they all show great ingratitude when they
   attack on the flank and the rear a man who is laboring in defense of
   the common cause, and deserves their support. Certainly, if they
   possessed the slightest human sympathy, their great hatred of me would
   be placated by the fury the papists pour upon me and the way they
   attack me.

   But this also was David's experience. He deserved well of his people,
   yet he was hated by many, as he laments in Ps. 69:4: They hate me
   without a cause. . . . I returned what I did not rob. [59] When I was
   assailed by the undeserved hatred of those whose duty it was to help
   me, I received no small comfort from knowing of the glorious example
   [set by David].

   Now these experiences were a very great help to my understanding of the
   Psalms, since, as I read, I was going through well-known territory. And
   I hope my readers will realize that when I discuss David's thoughts
   more intimately than those of others, I am speaking not as a remote
   spectator but as one who knows all about these things from his own
   experience.

   I have striven faithfully to make the value of this treasury [of the
   Psalms] available to all the faithful. And even though I have not
   accomplished what I had desired, I deserve some thanks for my attempt.
   All I ask is that each reader judge my labor justly and honestly by its
   fruits and the profit he finds in it. Certainly, as I said, when a man
   reads my book, he will see that I did not seek to give pleasure unless
   I also gave help.

   I have kept throughout to a simple method of teaching; and to avoid all
   ostentation, I have refrained for the most part from the refutation of
   others, which readily provides much opportunity for plausible showing
   off. I have not mentioned opinions opposed to mine except where there
   was danger that my silence would leave my readers doubtful or
   perplexed. I realized, of course, that many would have been more
   attracted and tickled if I had included a varied mass of ostentatious
   and glittering material. But nothing meant more to me than to consider
   the upbuilding of the church.

   May God who gave me this purpose also guarantee its success.

   Geneva, August 10, 1557.

   II. Preface to Olivétan's New Testament

    II. PREFACE TO OLIVÉTAN'S NEW TESTAMENT

   Epistle to the Faithful Showing that Christ Is the End of the Law [60]

   To all those who love Christ and his gospel, Greetings. God the
   Creator, the most perfect and excellent Maker of all things, who had
   already shown himself more than admirable in their creation, made man
   as his masterpiece, to surpass all other creatures. Man is endowed with
   a singular excellence, for God formed him in his own image and
   likeness, in which we see a bright refulgence of God's glory.
   Furthermore, man would have been able to continue in the state in which
   he was formed, if he had been willing to bow down in humility before
   the majesty of God, magnifying him with deeds of grace; not to seek his
   glory in himself, but knowing that all good things come from above,
   always to turn his mind on high and to glorify the one and only God to
   whom belongs the praise.

   But the wretched man, wanting to be somebody in himself, began
   incontinently to forget and misunderstand the source of his good; and
   by an act of outrageous ingratitude, he set out to exalt himself in
   pride against his Maker and the Author of all that is excellent in him.
   For this reason, he went down in ruin and lost all the dignity and
   superiority of the state in which he was first created; he was
   despoiled and divested of all his glory and deprived of all the gifts
   which were his; and this, to confound him in his pride and to constrain
   him to understand what he was unwilling to do voluntarily: that he was
   by himself nothing but vanity, and would never have been anything else
   except with the help of the Lord of power.

   Therefore, seeing that God's image and likeness was thus defaced, and
   man was without the graces which God in his goodness had bestowed upon
   him, God began to hold man in abhorrence and disavowed him as his
   handiwork. Since he had put man there and ordained [his life] for his
   own enjoyment and pleasure in him, as a father with his beloved child,
   He now held him in contempt and abomination. Whereas before everything
   in man pleased him, it now gave him displeasure; everything that he
   would have loved, now aroused his wrath; everything that he had
   contemplated with the good will of a father, he began to detest and to
   look at with regret. In short, the whole man with all that he had, his
   deeds, his thoughts, his words, his life, wholly displeased God, as
   though man were a special enemy and adversary of God; so much so that
   God repented of having made him. After having been thrown into such a
   confusion, man was fruitful in his cursed seed, to beget descendants
   like himself; that is, vicious, perverse, corrupt, void, and deprived
   of all good, rich and abundant in evil.

   Still, the Lord of mercy, who not only loves but is himself love and
   kindness, being ready in his infinite goodness to love him who deserved
   no love, did not altogether destroy men, or overwhelm them in the abyss
   of their iniquity. But on the contrary, he sustained and supported them
   gently and patiently, giving them time and opportunity to return to him
   and to apply themselves again to that obedience from which they had
   turned aside. And even though he disguised himself and kept silent, as
   though he wished to hide himself from them, leaving them to go after
   their desires and the yearnings of their lusts, without law, without
   order, without any correction of his Word, he nevertheless has given
   them notice enough [of his presence] to move them to seek, feel, and
   find him, and to know him and honor him as is his due.

   For he has raised everywhere, in all places and in all things, his
   ensigns and emblems, under blazons so clear and intelligible that no
   one can pretend ignorance in not knowing such a sovereign Lord, who has
   so amply exalted his magnificence; who has, in all parts of the world,
   in heaven and on earth, written and as it were engraved the glory of
   his power, goodness, wisdom, and eternity. Saint Paul has therefore
   said quite rightly that the Lord has never left himself without a
   witness; even among those to whom he has not sent any knowledge of his
   Word. It is evident that all creatures, from those in the firmament to
   those which are in the center of the earth, are able to act as
   witnesses and messengers of his glory to all men; to draw them to seek
   God, and after having found him, to meditate upon him and to render him
   the homage befitting his dignity as so good, so mighty, so wise a Lord
   who is eternal; yea, they are even capable of aiding every man wherever
   he is in this quest. For the little birds that sing, sing of God; the
   beasts clamor for him; the elements dread him, the mountains echo him,
   the fountains and flowing waters cast their glances at him, and the
   grass and flowers laugh before him. Truly there is no need for long
   searching, since everyone could find him in himself, because every one
   of us is sustained and preserved by his power which is in us.

   Meanwhile, in order to reveal his infinite goodness and kindness more
   fully among men, he was not content to teach all men as we have just
   described; but he made his voice to be heard especially by a certain
   people, whom he elected, by his good will and free grace, from among
   all the nations of the earth. These were the children of Israel, to
   whom he showed himself clearly by his Word, and declared to them by his
   marvelous works what he intended them to know. For, he drew them away
   from subjection to Pharaoh the king of Egypt, under whom they were held
   down and oppressed, to deliver them and set them at liberty. He
   accompanied them night and day in their flight, as one more fugitive in
   their midst. He fed them in the desert. He made them to possess the
   Promised Land. He gave victories and triumphs to their hands. And as
   though he were nothing to the other nations, he willed expressly to be
   called the God of Israel, and to have Israel called his people, on
   condition that they would recognize no other Lord and receive none else
   as their God. And this alliance (covenant) was confirmed and handed
   down by authentic instruments of testament and testimony given by
   himself.

   Nevertheless, these people, all of whom shared in the experience of
   their cursed race, showed themselves to be true heirs of the wickedness
   of their father Adam. They were unmoved by all these remonstrances [of
   God], and did not listen to the teaching by which God admonished them.
   The creatures that had the glory and magnificence of God stamped upon
   them were of no help to the Gentiles, and failed to make them glorify
   him to whom they testified. And the Law and the Prophets did not have
   the authority to lead the Jews in the right way. All have been blind to
   the light, deaf to admonitions, and hardened against the commandments.

   It is true enough that the Gentiles, astonished and convinced by so
   many goods and benefits which they saw with their own eyes, have been
   forced to recognize the hidden Benefactor from whom came so much
   goodness. But instead of giving the true God the glory which they owed
   him, they forged a god to their own liking, one dreamt up by their
   foolish fantasy in its vanity and deceit; and not one god only, but as
   many as their temerity and conceit enabled them to forge and cast
   (feindre et fondre); so that there was not a people or place which did
   not make new gods as seemed good to them. Thus it is that idolatry,
   that perfidious panderer, was able to exercise dominion, to turn men
   away from God, and to amuse them with a whole crowd of phantoms to
   which they themselves had given shape, name, and being itself.

   As for the Jews, even though they received and accepted the messages
   and commandments which their Lord sent them by his servants, they have
   nonetheless intemperately falsified the faith before him, turned
   carelessly away from him, violated and despised his law, hated it, and
   resisted walking in its ways. They have become strangers to the house
   of God and run as dissolute men after other gods, worshiping idols
   after the manner of the Gentiles, contrary to the will of God.

   Wherefore, if God were to approach his people, whether Jew or Gentile,
   a new covenant was needed: one which would be certain, sure, and
   inviolable. And to establish and confirm it, it was necessary to have a
   Mediator, who would intercede and come between the two parties, to make
   concord between them; for without this, man would have had always to
   live under the ire and indignation of God, and would have had no means
   of relief from the curse, misery, and confusion into which he was
   snared and had fallen. And it was our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, the
   true and only eternal Son of God, who had to be sent and given to
   mankind by the Father, to restore a world otherwise wasted, destroyed,
   and desolate.

   Also from the very beginning, the world was not without the hope of
   recovering the loss suffered in Adam. For even Adam, in spite of his
   incontinency after his ruin, was given the promise that the seed of the
   woman would crush the head of the serpent; which is to say that Jesus
   Christ born of a virgin would strike down and destroy the power of
   Satan.

   After that, this promise was renewed more fully to Abraham, when God
   told him that all the nations of the earth would be blessed in his
   seed. This meant that from his seed would come Jesus Christ according
   to the flesh, by whose blessing all men of every land would be
   sanctified. And the same promise was renewed to Isaac, in the same form
   and in the same words; and after that it was announced often, repeated
   and confirmed by the testimony of the various prophets, so as to state
   plainly, and most reliably, of whom Christ was to be born, at what
   time, in what place; what afflictions and death he was to suffer, and
   with what glory he was to rise from the dead; what was to be his
   Kingdom, and to what salvation he was to bring his own.

   In the first place, it is foretold for us in Isaiah, how he was to be
   born of a virgin, saying: Behold, a virgin shall conceive and shall
   bear a son, and you shall call his name Immanuel (Isa. 7:14). The time
   is described for us in Moses, when good Jacob says, The scepter shall
   not be taken from the line of Judah, nor the government from his hand,
   until the coming of the One who is to be sent; and the same is the
   expectation of the nations (Gen. 49:10). And this was verified when
   Jesus Christ came into the world; for the Romans, after having divested
   the Jews of all government and rule, had, thirty-seven years before
   [the coming of Christ] ordained Herod king over them, whose father was
   Antipater the Edomite and his mother an Arabian; he was therefore a
   foreigner. It had happened sometimes before that the Jews had been
   without a king; but they had never before been left as they were now
   without counselors, rulers, and lawgivers. Another numbering [of the
   time of Christ's birth] is given in Daniel, by the reckoning of the
   seventy weeks (Dan. 9:24). The place of his birth was given us clearly
   by Micah, who said, And thou Bethlehem Ephrata, thou are the least
   among the thousands of Judah; but from thee shall come for me the One
   who shall reign over Israel; and his coming shall be for all the days
   of eternity (Micah 5:2). As for the afflictions he was to bear for our
   deliverance and the death he was to suffer for our redemption, Isaiah
   and Zechariah have spoken of those matters fully and with certainty.
   The glory of his resurrection and the nature of his Kingdom, and the
   grace of the salvation he was to bring to his people -- these things
   were fully treated by Isaiah, Jeremiah, and Zechariah.

   Such promises, declared and testified to by these holy men who were
   filled with the Spirit of God, have been the comfort and consolation of
   the children and elect of God, who have nourished, supported, and
   sustained their hope in these promises, waiting upon the will of the
   Lord to show forth what he had promised. Many kings and prophets among
   them have desired greatly to see its accomplishment, never ceasing all
   the while to understand, in their hearts and spirits by faith, the
   things they could not see with their eyes. And, God has confirmed his
   people in every possible way during their long waiting for the great
   Messiah, by providing them with his written law, containing numerous
   ceremonies, purifications, and sacrifices, which were but the figures
   and shadows of the great blessings to come with Christ, who alone was
   the embodiment and truth of them. For the law was incapable of bringing
   anyone to perfection; it only presented Christ, and like a teacher
   spoke of and led to him, who was, as was said by Saint Paul, the end
   and fulfillment of the law.

   Similarly, many times and in various seasons, God sent his people
   kings, princes, and captains, to deliver them from the power of their
   enemies, to govern them in peace, to recover their losses, to give them
   flourishing reigns, and by great prowess to make them renowned among
   all the other peoples. He did all this to give them a foretaste of the
   great miracles they were to receive from this great Messiah, who was to
   be endowed with all the power and might of the Kingdom of God.

   But when the fullness of time had come and the period foreordained by
   God was ended, this great Messiah, so promised and so awaited, came; he
   was perfect, and accomplished all that was necessary to redeem us and
   save us. He was given not only to the Israelites, but to all men, of
   every people and every land, to the end that by him human nature might
   be reconciled to God. This is what is stated plainly in the next book
   (the New Testament), and set forth there openly. This book we have
   translated as faithfully as we were able according to the truth and the
   style of the Greek language, to enable all Christians, men and women,
   who know the French language, to understand and acknowledge the law
   they ought to obey and the faith they ought to follow. [61]

   It is to declare this thing (reconciliation), that the Lord Jesus, who
   is its foundation and substance, has ordained his apostles, whom he has
   charged and commanded to publish his grace to the whole world. And the
   apostles, in order to discharge their duty properly and plainly, not
   only have taken pains and shown diligence in fulfilling their embassy
   by the preaching of the word by mouth, but they have also followed the
   example of Moses and the prophets, and have left an eternal remembrance
   of their doctrine by reducing it to writing; in which they have first
   told the story of the things the Lord Jesus did and suffered for our
   salvation, and then shown us its value, what profit we gain from it,
   and how we are to receive it. This whole collection is called the yew
   Testament, and is called such in relation to the Old, etc.

   And this book is called the New Testament in relation to the Old,
   which, in so far as it had to be succeeded by and related to the New,
   and was shaky and imperfect in itself, was abolished and abrogated. It
   is the new and the eternal, which will never grow old and fail, because
   Jesus Christ is its Mediator. He has ratified and confirmed it by his
   death, by which he has accomplished full and complete remission of all
   sins (prevarications) which remained under the first testament.

   Scripture is also called gospel, that is, new and joyful news, because
   in it is declared that Christ, the sole true and eternal Son of the
   living God, was made man, to make us children of God his Father, by
   adoption. Thus he is our only Savior, to whom we owe our redemption,
   peace, righteousness, sanctification, salvation, and life; who died for
   our sins and rose again for our justification; who ascended to heaven
   for our entry there and took possession of it for us and [it is] our
   home; to be always our helper before his Father; as our advocate and
   perpetually doing sacrifice for us, he sits at the Father's right hand
   as King, made Lord and Master over all, so that he may restore all that
   is in heaven and on earth; an act which all the angels, patriarchs,
   prophets, apostles did not know how to do and were unable to do,
   because they had not been ordained to that end by God.

   As the Messiah had been promised so often in the Old Testament by the
   many testimonies of the prophets, so also Jesus Christ was by sure and
   certain testimonies declared to be the One, and none other, who was to
   come and was to be waited for. For the Lord God has made us so
   completely certain in this matter, by his Word and his Spirit, by his
   angels, prophets, apostles, and even by all his creatures, that nobody
   is in a position to contradict it without resisting and rebelling
   against God's power. In the first place, the eternal God has testified
   to us by his voice itself (which is without doubt irrevocable truth),
   saying, Behold my well beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased; hear him
   (Matt. 9:7). And as Saint John says, the Holy Spirit himself is our
   great witness in our hearts (1 John 5:1). The angel Gabriel, sent to
   the Virgin Mary, said to her: Behold, you shall conceive in your womb,
   and shall bear a Son, and shall call his name Jesus; for he shall be
   great and shall be called the Son of the Most High. And the Lord God
   shall give him the throne (le siege) of his father David, and he shall
   reign forever in the house of Jacob; and there shall be no end to his
   Kingdom (Luke 1:32-33). This same message was given in substance to
   Joseph; and later also to the shepherds, who were told that the Savior
   was born, who was Christ the Lord (Matt. 1:20-21; Luke 2:10-11). And
   this message was not only brought by an angel, but was confirmed by a
   multitude of angels, who all together glorified the Lord and announced
   peace upon earth. Simeon the Just confessed it nobly in the spirit of
   prophecy: and taking the little child in his arms, he said: Now, O
   Lord, let thy servant depart in peace according to thy word. For my
   eyes have seen thy salvation, which thou hast prepared in the presence
   of all peoples (Luke 2:29-31). John the Baptist also spoke of him as
   was fitting, when he saw him coming to the river of Jordan, and said,
   Behold the lamb of God; behold him who takes away the sins of the world
   (John 1:29). Peter and all the apostles have confessed, testified,
   preached all the things which belong to salvation, of which the
   prophets had foretold that they would be accomplished in Christ the
   true Son of God. And those whom the Lord has ordained to be witnesses
   down to our own age have amply demonstrated the same by their writings,
   as their readers can see well enough.

   All these witnesses come together into a unity so well, and they are of
   one accord among themselves so fully, that it is easy to recognize in
   such agreement most certain truth. For there could not be such harmony
   in lies. Besides, it is not only the Father, the Son, the Holy Spirit,
   the angels, the prophets and apostles that bear witness to Jesus
   Christ; his own wonderful works show forth his most excellent power.
   The sick, the lame, the blind, the deaf, the mute, the paralytic,
   lepers, lunatics, demoniacs, and even the dead raised by him have
   carried the emblems of his power. By his power, he has given life; in
   his name, the works he has had given him to do were sufficient
   witnesses to him (John 10:25). Besides, even the wicked and the enemies
   of his glory were constrained by the very force of truth to confess him
   and to acknowledge something [of his glory]: for instance, Caiaphas,
   Pilate, and his wife. I do not care to bring up the witness of the
   devils and unclean spirits, seeing that Jesus Christ rejected them.

   In short, all the elements and all the creatures have given Jesus
   Christ the glory. At his command, the winds ceased, the raging sea
   subsided, the fish brought two drachmas in his belly, the stones (to
   render him witness) were broken to pieces, the veil of the Temple was
   torn in the middle, the sun was darkened, the graves were opened, the
   many bodies were restored to life. There has been nothing in heaven or
   on earth which has not witnessed that Jesus Christ is God, Lord and
   Master, and the great Ambassador of the Father sent here below to
   accomplish the salvation of mankind. All these things were announced,
   manifested, written, and signed in this Testament, by which Jesus
   Christ has made us his heirs in the Kingdom of God his Father, and
   declares to us his will (like a testator to his heirs) that it [his
   Testament] be put into execution.

   Furthermore, we are called to this inheritance without respect for
   persons; male or female, little or great, servant or lord, master or
   disciple, cleric or lay, Hebrew or Greek, French or Latin -- no one is
   rejected, who with a sure confidence receives him who was sent for him,
   embraces what is presented to him, and in short acknowledges Jesus
   Christ for what he is and as he is given by the Father.

   In the meantime, all we who bear the name of Christians, male or
   female, shall we permit ourselves to dishonor, to conceal, and to
   corrupt this Testament, which is so rightly ours, without which we
   could not pretend any right to the Kingdom of God, without which we
   should be ignorant of the great blessings and promises which Jesus
   Christ has given us, of the glory and beatitude he has prepared for us?
   We do not know what God has commanded or forbidden us; we cannot tell
   good from evil, light from darkness, the commandments of God from the
   ordinances (constitutions) of men. Without the gospel everything is
   useless and vain; without the gospel we are not Christians; without the
   gospel all riches is poverty, all wisdom, folly before God; strength is
   weakness, and all the justice of man is under the condemnation of God.
   But by the knowledge of the gospel we are made children of God,
   brothers of Jesus Christ, fellow townsmen with the saints, citizens of
   the Kingdom of Heaven, heirs of God with Jesus Christ, by whom the poor
   are made rich, the weak strong, the fools wise, the sinners justified,
   the desolate comforted, the doubting sure, and slaves free. The gospel
   is the Word of life and truth. It is the power of God for the salvation
   of all those who believe; and the key to the knowledge of God, which
   opens the door of the Kingdom of Heaven to the faithful by releasing
   them from sins, and closes it to the unbelievers, binding them in their
   sins. Blessed are all they who hear the gospel and keep it; for in this
   way they show that they are children of God. Woe to those who will not
   hear it and follow it; because they are children of the devil.

   O Christians, men and women, hear this and learn. For surely the
   ignorant man shall perish in his ignorance, and the blind who follows
   another blind man will fall into the ditch with him. There is but one
   way to life and salvation, and that is faith and certainty in the
   promises of God which cannot be had without the gospel; for by hearing
   it and knowing it living faith is provided, together with sure hope,
   and perfect love for God and a lively love toward our neighbor. Where
   then is your hope, if you contemn and scorn to hear, see, read, and
   retain this holy gospel? Those who have their affections fixed upon
   this world chase with every means whatever they think will bring them
   happiness, without sparing labor, body, life, or reputation. And all
   this is done in the service of this wretched body, which has a life so
   vain, miserable, and uncertain. When it is a question of life immortal
   and incorruptible, of beatitude eternal and immeasurable, of all the
   treasures of Paradise, shall we not endeavor to pursue them? Those who
   give themselves to the mechanical arts, however low and mean these may
   be, expend pain and labor to learn and know them; and those who aspire
   to a reputation of greatest excellence torment their minds day and
   night, to understand something of the human sciences, which are nothing
   but wind and smoke. Should we not then much more be employed and
   diligent in the study of this divine wisdom, which passes beyond the
   whole world and penetrates as far as the mysteries of God, which it has
   pleased him to make known by his holy Word!

   What then shall estrange and alienate us from this holy gospel? Shall
   injuries, curses, disgrace, and want of worldly honor? But, we know
   well that Jesus Christ has traveled the same road which we have to
   follow, if we would be his disciples; that we must not refuse to be
   despised, mocked, humiliated, and rejected before men. For it is thus
   that we shall be honored, prized, glorified, and exalted in God's
   judgment. Will there be banishments, proscriptions, privation from
   goods and riches? But we know that if we shall be banished from one
   country, the whole earth is the Lord's, and if we be thrown out of the
   earth itself, nonetheless we shall not be outside of his Kingdom. [We
   know] that when we are despoiled and impoverished, we have a Father who
   is rich enough to nourish us; even that Jesus Christ was made poor, so
   that we might follow him in his poverty. Will there be afflictions,
   prisons, tortures, torments? But we know by the example of Jesus Christ
   that this is the way to arrive at glory. Finally, will there be death?
   But death does not do away with a life that is worth having.

   In short, if we have Jesus Christ with us, we shall come upon nothing
   so accursed that he will not turn it into a blessing; nothing so
   execrable that it shall not be made holy; nothing so evil that it shall
   not turn into our good. Let us not lose our comfort when we see all
   earthly powers and forces against us; for the promise cannot fail, that
   the Lord on high will hold in mockery all the assemblings and efforts
   of men who would conspire against him. Let us not be desolate, as
   though all hope were lost, when we see true servants of God die and
   perish before our eyes. For it was said truly by Tertullian, and so it
   has been approved and shall be until the consummation of the age, that
   the blood of the martyrs is the seed of the church.

   And we have a still greater and a more sure consolation, when we turn
   our eyes away from this whole world and set aside all that we can see
   before us, to wait with patience for the great judgment of God, by
   which in one moment all the machinations of men against him shall be
   struck down, brought to nought, and overturned. This shall be when the
   Kingdom of God, which we now see in hope, shall become manifest; when
   Jesus Christ shall appear in majesty with his angels. It shall then be
   that the good and the evil shall be present before the judgment seat of
   this great King. Those who have remained firm in this testament, who
   have followed and kept the will of this good Father, shall be at his
   right hand as his true children, and shall be blessed with the
   fulfillment of their faith, which shall be eternal salvation. And since
   they were not ashamed to own and confess Jesus Christ, when he was
   despised and condemned before men, they shall also share in his glory,
   and shall be crowned with him in eternity. But the perverse,
   rebellious, and condemned, who have despised and rejected this holy
   gospel, and similarly those who for the sake of holding on to their
   honor, riches, and high estate have been unwilling to be humbled and
   made low with Jesus Christ; who for fear of men have cast aside the
   fear of God and like bastard [sons] disobeyed this Father -- these
   shall be on the left hand; they shall be executed and cast out; for the
   reward of their unfaithfulness, they shall receive eternal death.

   Therefore, when you hear that the gospel presents you Jesus Christ in
   whom all the promises and gifts of God have been accomplished; and when
   it declares that he was sent by the Father, has descended to the earth
   and spoken among men perfectly all that concerns our salvation, as it
   was foretold in the Law and to the Prophets -- it ought to be most
   certain and obvious to you that the treasures of Paradise have been
   opened to you in the gospel; that the riches of God have been exhibited
   and eternal life itself revealed. For, this is eternal life; to know
   one, only true God, and Jesus Christ whom he has sent, whom he has
   established as the beginning, the middle, and the end of our salvation.
   He [Christ] is Isaac, the beloved Son of the Father who was offered as
   a sacrifice, but nevertheless did not succumb to the power of death. He
   is Jacob the watchful shepherd, who has such great care for the sheep
   which he guards. He is the good and compassionate brother Joseph, who
   in his glory was not ashamed to acknowledge his brothers, however lowly
   and abject their condition. He is the great sacrificer and bishop
   Melchizedek, who has offered an eternal sacrifice once for all. He is
   the sovereign lawgiver Moses, writing his law on the tables of our
   hearts by his Spirit. He is the faithful captain and guide Joshua, to
   lead us to the Promised Land. He is the victorious and noble king
   David, bringing by his hand all rebellious power to subjection. He is
   the magnificent and triumphant king Solomon, governing his kingdom in
   peace and prosperity. He is the strong and powerful Samson, who by his
   death has overwhelmed all his enemies.

   It follows that every good thing we could think or desire is to be
   found in this same Jesus Christ alone. For, he was sold, to buy us
   back; captive, to deliver us; condemned, to absolve us; he was made a
   curse for our blessing, sin offering for our righteousness; marred that
   we may be made fair; he died for Our life; so that by him fury is made
   gentle, wrath appeased, darkness turned into light, fear reassured,
   despisal despised, debt canceled, labor lightened, sadness made merry,
   misfortune made fortunate, difficulty easy, disorder ordered, division
   united, ignominy ennobled, rebellion subjected, intimidation
   intimidated, ambush uncovered, assaults assailed, force forced back,
   combat combated, war warred against, vengeance avenged, torment
   tormented, damnation damned, the abyss sunk into the abyss, hell
   transfixed, death dead, mortality made immortal. In short, mercy has
   swallowed up all misery, and goodness all misfortune. For all these
   things which were to be the weapons of the devil in his battle against
   us, and the sting of death to pierce us, are turned for us into
   exercises which we can turn to our profit. If we are able to boast with
   the apostle, saying, O hell, where is thy victory? O death, where is
   thy sting? it is because by the Spirit of Christ promised to the elect,
   we live no longer, but Christ lives in us; and we are by the same
   Spirit seated among those who are in heaven, so that for us the world
   is no more, even while our conversation is in it; but we are content in
   all things, whether country, place, condition, clothing, meat, and all
   such things. And we are comforted in tribulation, joyful in sorrow,
   glorying under vituperation, abounding in poverty, warmed in our
   nakedness, patient amongst evils, living in death.

   This [62] is what we should in short seek in the whole of Scripture:
   truly to know Jesus Christ, and the infinite riches that are comprised
   in him and are offered to us by him from God the Father. If one were to
   sift thoroughly the Law and the Prophets, he would not find a single
   word which would not draw and bring us to him. And for a fact, since
   all the treasures of wisdom and understanding are hidden in him, there
   is not the least question of having, or turning toward, another goal;
   not unless we would deliberately turn aside from the light of truth, to
   lose ourselves in the darkness of lies. Therefore, rightly does Saint
   Paul say in another passage that he would know nothing except Jesus
   Christ, and him crucified. And such knowledge although mean and
   contemptible to the mind of the flesh is nevertheless sufficient to
   occupy us all our lives. And we shall not waste our time if we employ
   all our study and apply all our understanding to profit from it. What
   more would we ask for, as spiritual doctrine for our souls, than to
   know God, to be converted (transformez) to him, and to have his
   glorious image imprinted in us, so that we may partake of his
   righteousness, to become heirs of his Kingdom and to possess it in the
   end in full? But the truth is that from the beginning God has given
   himself, and at present gives himself more fully, that we may
   contemplate him in the face of his Christ. It is therefore not lawful
   that we turn away and become diverted even in the smallest degree by
   this or that. On the contrary, our minds ought to come to a halt at the
   point where we learn in Scripture to know Jesus Christ and him alone,
   so that we may be directly led by him to the Father who contains in
   himself all perfection.

   Here, I say once again, is enclosed all the wisdom which men can
   understand, and ought to learn in this life; which no angel, or man,
   dead or living, may add to or take away from. This is where we ought to
   stop and put a limit to our understanding, mixing nothing of our own
   with it and refusing any doctrine whatever which might be added to it.
   For anyone who undertakes to teach one other syllable beyond what is
   taught us in it, ought to be accursed before God and his church.

   And you kings, princes, and Christian lords, who are ordained of God to
   punish the wicked and to uphold the good in peace according to the Word
   of God -- to you it belongs to have this sacred doctrine, so useful and
   needful, published, taught, and understood in all your lands, realms,
   and lordly domains, to the end that God may be magnified by you, and
   his gospel exalted; because by right it is his due that all kings and
   kingdoms obey him in all humility and serve his glory. Remember that
   sovereign Empire, above all kingdoms, principalities, and lordships,
   was given by the Father to the Lord Jesus; and he is to be feared, held
   in awe, and honored by everyone, great or little. Remember [63] what
   was foretold by the prophets: that all the kings of the earth would
   render him homage as their superior, and would adore him as their
   Savior and their God; let this come true in you. And remember that it
   is no dishonor for you to be subject to such a great Lord, as though in
   this way your own majesty and high place would be reduced and become as
   nothing; for it is the greatest honor you may lawfully desire, to be
   known and regarded as the officials and lieutenants of God. It is
   unthinkable that Jesus Christ, in whom God wills to be glorified and
   exalted, should not have dominion over you; and in fact it is
   reasonable enough that you should be the ones to give him this
   preeminence, provided your own power is founded in him alone. Otherwise
   what an ingratitude it would be that you should want to shut out him
   who has established you in the power you possess, and maintains and
   keeps you in it! What is more, you ought to know that there is no
   better foundation, nor one firmer, for keeping your domains in true
   prosperity, than to have him as Chief and Master, and to govern your
   peoples under his hand; and that without him they [your domains] can be
   neither permanent nor endure for long, but shall be accursed of God and
   shall consequently fall down in confusion and ruin. Since God has thus
   given you the sword in hand for governing your subjects in his name and
   by his authority; since he has done you the honor of giving you his
   name and title; since he has sanctified your position above those of
   others, to make a portion of his glory and majesty reflected in it --
   let each one of you engage himself by his own hand to magnify and exalt
   him who is God's true and glorious image, in whom he fully represents
   himself to us. Moreover, to do this, it is not enough merely to confess
   Jesus Christ, and to profess to be his own, so that you have the title
   without the truth and reality of the matter; you must give place to his
   holy gospel and receive it with obedience and humility. This is an
   office every man must fulfill; but it belongs to you especially to see
   to it that the gospel is heard, to have it published in your lands, in
   order that it may be known by the people who have been committed to
   your charge; in order that they may know you as servants and ministers
   of this great King, and may serve and honor him, by obeying you under
   his hand and under his guidance.

   This is what the Lord requires of you through his prophet, when he
   calls you the guardians of his church. For this tutelage and protection
   is not a matter of enlarging the riches, privileges, and honors of the
   clergy, which makes them high and haughty, living in pomp and in all
   dissoluteness, contrary to their proper estate; much less is it a
   matter of maintaining the clergy in their pride and inordinate
   displays; it is rather a matter of seeing to it that the entire
   teaching of the gospel is kept in its purity and truth; that the Holy
   Scriptures are faithfully preached, read, and perused; that God is
   honored according to the rule given us in them, and the church is well
   governed; that all which is contrary to the honor of God, or to the
   good government of the church, be corrected and repressed; so that the
   Kingdom of Jesus Christ may flourish by the power of his Word.

   O you who call yourselves bishops and pastors of the poor people, see
   to it that the sheep of Jesus Christ are not deprived of their proper
   pasture; and that it is not prohibited and forbidden to any Christian
   freely and in his own language to read, handle, and hear this holy
   gospel, seeing that such is the will of God, and Jesus Christ commands
   it; for it is for this cause that he has sent his apostles and servants
   throughout the whole world; giving them the power to speak in all
   tongues, so that they may in every language preach to every creature;
   and he has made them debtors to the Greeks and the barbarians, to the
   wise and the simple, in order that none might be excluded from their
   teaching. Surely, if you are truly their vicars, successors, and
   imitators, it is your office to do the same, watching over the flock
   and seeking every possible means to have everyone instructed in the
   faith of Jesus Christ, by the pure Word of God. Otherwise, the sentence
   is already proclaimed and put down in writing, that God will demand
   their souls at your hands.

   It is the will of the Lord of lights by his Holy Spirit, by means of
   this holy and saving gospel, to teach the ignorant, to strengthen the
   feeble, to illumine the blind, and to make his truth to reign among all
   peoples and nations, to the end that the whole world may know but one
   God and one Savior, Jesus Christ; one faith, and one gospel. So be it.

    III. EPISTLE TO SIMON GRYNAEUS ON THE COMMENTARY ON ROMANS

   John Calvin, to Simon Grynaeus, [64] a most illustrious man.

   I remember that three years ago we had a friendly talk about the best
   way of expounding Scripture. The method which you liked best, I myself
   approved most of all others. We both felt that the chief virtue of an
   interpreter consists in clarity combined with brevity. And indeed,
   since about the only business he has is to lay open the mind of the
   writer he has set out to explain, the more he leads the reader away
   from it, the more he deviates from his own purpose and is sure to
   wander out of bounds.

   We expressed the desire that, from among all those are today engaged in
   aiding [the cause of] theology with this kind of work, someone would
   come forward who would strive for simplicity and would write so as not
   to discourage his readers too much with long-winded expositions. At the
   same time, however, I know that not everybody agrees with us in this
   matter; and that those who do not accept [our views], have good
   arguments on their side. Still, I cannot budge from my love of brevity.
   Of course, since it happens that there is a variety of disposition
   among men, and different people find pleasure in different things, let
   everyone, in this case also, enjoy his own judgment, provided that he
   does not try to make it a law for everybody else. Let us not, on our
   part, repudiate or condemn the labor of those who are more wordy and
   expansive in their expositions of the Sacred Books. But let them in
   return do the same to us, even though they may think our [exposition]
   is too compressed and concise.

   I simply could not resist trying my hand at something along this line,
   which might be of benefit to the church of God. I am not sure that I
   have succeeded in doing what we thought was desirable; nor did I hope
   as much when I began. But I did make the effort to discipline my style,
   so that one could see I was aiming at the ideal we set down. How far I
   have succeeded, it is not for me to decide; I leave it to you and
   others like you to judge.

   I can indeed see that many people will be offended by my undertaking
   and condemn me because of all things I have dared to try [my ability]
   on this epistle of Paul. Since men of excellent learning have already
   labored at expounding it, it is unbelievable that any room is left for
   others to produce something better. And I must say that even though I
   hoped my labor would produce some good results, I was at the beginning
   deterred by this very consideration. I was afraid that, if I set my
   hand to this task after so many excellent workmen, I would incur the
   reputation of temerity.

   There are commentaries on this epistle by many ancient and many modern
   writers. Indeed they could not have labored at a better task; because
   when anyone understands this epistle, the way is open before him to an
   understanding of the whole of Scripture. I do not need to say anything
   about the ancient [interpreters] whose piety, erudition, saintliness,
   and age invest them with such authority that we should not condemn
   anything we have received from them. As to those who are living,
   nothing will be gained by mentioning all of them by name. I will speak
   my mind about those who have labored zealously and done outstanding
   work [in the field]. Philip Melanchthon, [65] by his singular learning
   and industry, and the power of his competence in every kind of
   intellectual discipline has shed much light on this epistle; more than
   all who came before him. But he evidently set himself to examine
   closely only those matters which were worthy of his own attention; he
   stopped with these, and deliberately passed by a great deal which
   cannot but trouble the ordinary mind. Then comes Bullinger, [66] who
   also received much praise; and that rightly, because he has combined
   simplicity with learning, and for this he has been highly approved.
   Finally there is Bucer [67] who, by his tireless labors, has just about
   said the last word. He is a man (one of us) of exceptionally profound
   learning, with an immense knowledge of many subjects, endowed with an
   extraordinarily lucid mind; a great reader, possessor of other
   qualities, many and various, in which nobody today can surpass him, few
   can equal him, and he excels most people; and beyond all this, he
   deserves special praise because I can think of nobody who has turned to
   the exposition of Scripture with equal diligence and [desire for]
   precision. I submit, therefore, it never entered my head to compete
   with such men, as this would have been a most impudent rivalry; nor did
   I want to grab for myself the smallest part of the praise which belongs
   to them. Let them have the blessing, and favor, and authority, which
   all good men acknowledge they deserve. But I hope this much will be
   conceded to me: nothing is so perfect among men that those who come
   after them will find no room for refining and clarifying it, and adding
   to its beauty. As for myself, I do not dare to say anything except that
   I thought my work might perhaps be of some use; and that I undertook it
   for no other purpose than to promote the common good of the church.

   To this end, I hoped that when I wrote in my own way, no [charge of]
   odious rivalry would be pressed against me, as I was at first afraid it
   would be. Philip succeeded in what he set out to do: to clarify to the
   utmost what is essential. He had no intention of preventing others from
   doing what must not be neglected; and he did omit much because he was
   occupied with the things that come first. Bucer is too prolix to keep
   the interest of busy people; his [thoughts] are so high that the lowly
   and those whose attention is not the best are in no position to
   understand him. Whenever he deals with any subject, his unbelievably
   forceful and fecund mind brings up so many things that he does not know
   how to take his hand off the paper (tabula). Therefore, because
   Melanchthon has not dealt with everything, and Bucer has written too
   much to be read through in a short time, my intention does not in the
   least look like rivalry with them.

   And yet, I wondered for some time whether I would do better to make
   some gleanings from these other men, so as to be able to put together
   something to help those of mediocre mentality; or whether I should
   compose a complete commentary, in which I would have had to repeat much
   that has been said before by all or at least by some of them. But these
   men often differ among themselves, which gives much trouble to readers
   who are not very acute, causing them to hesitate with whom they should
   agree. Therefore, I thought I would not regret my labor if I could
   point out the best interpretation, and thus relieve those whose
   judgment is not sufficiently strong from the trouble of judging;
   especially since I was determined to compress and be succinct, so that
   my readers would waste no time, and would learn, by reading my work,
   what is in [the books of] the others. In short, I vowed not to give
   just cause for the complaint that much [of my work] has been
   superfluous.

   As to its usefulness, I shall say nothing. However, men of good will
   who read it have acknowledged having benefited from it more than I dare
   modestly promise in so many words.

   It is only right that I should be excused when I at times disagree with
   others and differ from them. [I know that] we must have such reverence
   for the Word of God that we do not, so far as it is possible, set it
   against itself with our contradictory interpretations. I dare not think
   how much damage is done to its majesty, especially when we do not treat
   it with great discernment and sobriety. And, if to contaminate anything
   dedicated to God involves a great crime, anyone who handles the most
   sacred thing in the world with unclean or incompetent hands ought not
   to be endured.

   Therefore, it is sacrilegious audacity rashly to turn Scripture this
   way and that (as we please), and to fool with it as though it were a
   game; many people have been doing this very thing long enough.

   But we ought always to remind ourselves that even those who have not
   been wanting in zeal for piety, and have handled the mysteries of God
   with conscience and sobriety, have not always agreed among themselves.
   God has in no instance honored his servants with such blessing as to
   endow them with full and perfect knowledge of every subject; and
   doubtless his reason for this has been to keep them humble and desirous
   to keep in communication with their brothers. It is of course highly
   desirable that we should constantly agree in our understanding of
   Scripture passages. But there is no hope for such a thing in this life.
   Therefore, we must do our best neither to be pushed by a desire for
   novelty, nor to deprecate others through envy; neither to be aroused by
   hatred, nor to be goaded by ambition; rather, we should do only what is
   necessary, our aim being nothing else than to make progress,
   disagreeing only for reasons which are honorable. When we follow this
   rule in our interpretation of Scripture, there will be less license
   with regard to the essentials of our religion, in which principally God
   would have his own of one mind. The readers will easily see that I have
   tried to do both [to make progress and to maintain unity].

   But because it is not proper that I state or establish the value of my
   own work, I am happy to leave criticism to you. Since everybody defers
   to your judgment in many things, I also, who have been intimate with
   you and know very well the kind of man you are, owe you deference in
   everything. Familiarity has a way of diminishing respect, but as men of
   learning know very well, in your case, it greatly increases esteem.
   Farewell.

   Strasbourg, November 18, 1539.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [1] Opera, in Corpus Reformatorum, ed. by G. Baum, E. Cunitz, E. Reuss,
   vol. 59, pp. 451-482, contains a list of Calvin's publications during
   his lifetime.

   [2] There was often a desire to include the Hebrew in the publication,
   but to keep the cost of the volumes as reasonable as possible, this was
   not always done. But see the Amsterdam edition of 1667.

   [3] For strong objections to the Vulgate, see Tracts (Edinburgh
   edition), vol. 3, pp. 76 f., or Opera, vol. 7, pp. 411 f.

   [4] King, John. Preface to Genesis, Edinburgh ed., pp. xv-xvi.

   [5] Footnote of an article by Tholuck in the English volume on Joshua,
   Edinburgh ed., p. 348.

   [6] See pp. 157, 310, 365, 396.

   [7] See note 32.

   [8] Opera Omnia, 10 vols., ed. by J. Clericus, Leyden, 1703-1706, vol.
   5, pp. 77-78.

   [9] Ibid., p. 131.

   [10] Ibid., vol. 3, pp. 1026, 1029, 1034.

   [11] Ibid, vol. 6, p. 13, on Matt. 2:7.

   [12] Berger, Samuel, La Bible au seizième siècle, Paris, 1879, p. 78.

   [13] Ibid.

   [14] See. p. 322.

   [15] See pp. 353. f.

   [16] On Ezek. 16:12.

   [17] See p. 80.

   [18] See "Calvin as Historian," pp. 29-31.

   [19] See Epistle to Simon Grynaeus, below.

   [20] 1482-1531. He was born in Weinsberg in the Palatinate. He went to
   Bologna to study law but ended studying theology in Heidelberg. In 1515
   he became cathedral preacher in Basel, and after a period in Germany,
   in 1522 he returned to Basel, after which his name was associated with
   that of Zwingli and with the Protestant Reformation. He was well versed
   in "the new learning" and was respected both as exegete and as
   theologian.

   [21] See p. 54 (and cf. p. 75).

   [22] See Autobiographical Sketch, p. 57.

   [23] Pp. 28f., 107f., 140f., 353, 366f. But see also on Deut. 13:1,
   John 11:58.

   [24] Doumergue, Emile, Jean Calvin, vol. 3, pp. 592 f.

   [25] Opera, vol. 42, pp. 191-192.

   [26] Ibid., vol. 40, proleg. See Edinburgh edition of Ezekiel, p.
   xlvii.

   [27] Ibid., vol. 21, pp. 87-88.

   [28] According to Doumergue, Calvin "often preached twice a day; he
   gave lectures; he spoke before the congregation every week. He spoke
   before the consistory every week. He spoke before the council. How
   often a week?" (Jean Calvin, 6, p. 73). See also F. W. Kampschulte,
   Johann Calvin, 2, p. 375. But this writer is dependent to a large
   extent upon Colladon, whom we have been quoting.

   [29] Opera, vol. 21, p. 66.

   [30] Ibid., pp. 108-110.

   [31] Lorenzo Valla was a learned, boisterous, and fearless scholar. He
   is famous for his exposure of "the Donation of Constantine," which was
   supposed to have established the supremacy of Rome in the church and
   over Italy and Western Europe. He was an accomplished Latinist, a
   rigorous textual and historical critic, and a general nuisance for the
   tradition. But he escaped the inquisition because of powerful friends
   including two popes (Nicholas V and Calixtus III).

   [32] Calvin called Budé "a matchless ornament and crown of literature,
   by whose contribution today our France lays claim to the palm of
   erudition" (O. Breen, John Calvin: A Study on French Humanism, p. 114).
   He refers to Budé often (I Cor. 4:13, II Cor. 1:13, Phil. 2:9, John
   2:5, 6:7, etc.) as an authority on the languages and civilization of
   Greece and Rome. De asse at partibus eius of Budé was held in highest
   esteem as a source book on the subject. He was critical of the church
   and defended the primacy of Scripture and the cross for salvation, but
   he refused to join "the Lutherans." His family later found their way to
   Geneva. (See Josef Bohatec, Budé and Calvin, Graz, 1950, for a classic
   discussion.)

   [33] Erasmus requires no special discussion here. His relation to the
   Reformation has inspired a literature that is copious and readily
   available. See Preserved Smith, Erasmus, 1923; Albert Hyma, The Youth
   of Erasmus, Ann Arbor, 1931; Margaret M. Phillips, Erasmus and the
   Northern Renaissance, London, 1949; Louis Bouyer, Autour d'Erasme,
   Paris, 1955.

   [34] See pp. 107 f., 307 (cf. 327), 311, 334, 370.

   [35] See p. 91.

   [36] Lefèvre d'Étaples (1450-1536) visited Italy (in 1492, 1500) and
   brought to France new zeal for classical learning. In 1512 he published
   a commentary on Paul's epistles, and pleaded for the study of Scripture
   as "the unique means of approaching Him who works all things in all"
   (A. L Herminjard, Correspondence des Reformateurs, col. I, p. 6). In
   1517 he was denounced by the Sorbonne for denying that Mary Magdalene,
   Mary the sister of Lazarus, and "the sinful woman" were the same. After
   1520 he became the center of a lively reform movement including the
   Bishop of Meaux and the king's sister, Marguerite d'Angoulême. In 1523
   he translated Gospels into French, and continued translating the Bible
   until 1530. He died a fugitive at Nérac in 1536.

   [37] See the Preface to the Commentary on Hebrews.

   [38] Cf. Davies, Rupert E., The Problem of Authority in the Continental
   Reformers, London, 1946. Exceptions are Emil Kraeling, The Old
   Testament Since the Reformation, Harpers, 1955, and the section in The
   Interpreter's Bible, vol. 1, pp. 124-126, by John T. McNeill. See also
   Henri Clavier, Étude sur le Calvinism, Paris, 1936, especially pp. 103
   f. Dr. Edward A. Dowey maintains that Calvin assumes the traditional
   views of the inerrancy of the Bible even while he comments upon it as
   the work of human beings (The Knowledge of God in Calvin's Theology,
   1952, pp. 90 f.). This position, which seems correct, has been debated,
   and it does not alter our thesis that the ground of the authority of
   the Bible for Calvin was not inerrancy, but God who speaks by it. For a
   fine discussion of the subject, see "The Reformer's Use of the Bible,"
   by Paul L. Lehmann, in Theology Today, October, 1946. See also Kemper
   Fullerton, Prophecy and Authority, ch. 7.

   [39] But see on Jer. 36:4-6, 28, and Dowey, op. cit., pp. 90 f.

   [40] Institutes, Bk. I, ch 7.

   [41] See pp. 61 f., 93f., 101, 104 f., et al.

   [42] See below, pp. 141, 176.

   [43] See pp. 59-63, 270 ff., 356, 366 ff.

   [44] The first sentence of the Institutes.

   [45] See pp. 127, 131, 279, 313, 341, 389.

   [46] See Letters of John Calvin, ed. by Jules Bonnet, 4 vols. It has an
   excellent index.

   [47] See especially the Autobiographical Sketch, pp. 51, 55-57.

   [48] For the following sections, the reader is referred to the chapter
   corresponding to the following topics.

   [49] See pp. 197 f., the Institutes, Bk. III, chs. 21-24. The position
   of these chapters in the Institutes is itself revealing.

   [50] See especially on Rom. 8:28-30, pp. 306 f.

   [51] City of God, Bk. XII, pars. 9 f., Bk. XXII, pars. 12 f.

   [52] Niesel, Wilhelm, The Theology of Calvin, The Westminster Press,
   1956, tr. by Harold Knight.

   [53] See pp. 124, 347, 349 f., 355, 356.

   [54] Guillaume Farel (1489-1565), was like Calvin, a Frenchman. He was
   one of the circle of Reformers who gathered around Bishop Briconnet at
   Meaux near Paris. When, after much struggle in which Farel was active,
   the Reformed faith was established in Geneva in 1535, he was the leader
   of the church and induced Calvin to work with him. He was ousted with
   Calvin in 1538, and returned with him in 1541, but he left in 1542, and
   in 1544 settled in Neuchatel. He remained Calvin's close friend, and
   died a year after Calvin in 1565 in Metz.

   [55] Pierre Viret (1511-1571), Swiss-born Reformer, helped Farel in
   Geneva and stayed in the city when Farel and Calvin were expelled
   (1538-1541). Thereafter he worked in Lausanne, his birthplace, and also
   lectured on the New Testament in Bern, until he was ousted in 1559 and
   returned to Geneva. After a checkered career in France and much
   controversy with French Catholics, he died at Orthez (south of
   Bordeaux) in 1571. He was an extensive and respected writer as well as
   an effective preacher. Unfortunately he has not been studied fully or
   properly.

   [56] Martin Bucer (1491-1551) was the Protestant Reformer in
   Strasbourg, where Calvin stayed for three years (1538-1541) when he was
   forced out of Geneva. A man zealous for Christian unity, he had
   considerable influence upon Calvin, especially during this early period
   in the latter's activity. He commented extensively upon the Bible, and
   did his best-known work on the Gospels. His commentary on Romans was
   published in Strasbourg in 1536, shortly before Calvin began to work on
   his own. See Henri Strohl, Bucer: humaniste étien.

   [57] At Worms in 1540 and at Regensburg in 1541, where the Catholics
   and the Protestants entered into futile discussions on reunion.

   [58] See John T. McNeill, The History and Character of Calvinism, 1954,
   ch. II.

   [59] Calvin's wording.

   [60] This preface to Pierre Robert Olivétan's translation of the New
   Testament, which has had a lasting influence upon the French versions
   of the Bible, was written in 1534, about a year after Calvin's
   conversion. We have translated it and put it here in the beginning of
   this volume because it is his first statement of faith as a Protestant
   and an eloquent defense of it. Erasmus wrote a similar preface to his
   New Testament, and so did Lèfevre d'Étaples. For the latter, see
   Herminjard, op. cit., vol. 1, pp. 132 ff. (No. 69). See also Nos. 1,
   49, 79, 202 in the same work. We regret that space did not permit us to
   include at least his "Epistle of Exhortation" (No. 69) in this
   selection. For Erasmus' preface see Opera Omnia, 1704, vol. 5, pp. 137
   f. This was translated into English in 1529, 1540. Again we regret
   leaving this preface out! The title at the head of Calvin's preface
   appeared at the beginning of Bibles and New Testaments printed in
   Geneva and elsewhere after 1543. The present text, from the Opera, C.
   R. 9, pp. 791 f., contains additions Calvin made after 1534.

   [61] Instead of this passage, the treatise of 1543 and all the editions
   of the Bible that reproduce it contain the paragraph which follows in
   the text.

   [62] This paragraph is not in the 1535 preface. It appears for the
   first time in the treatise of 1543 (C. R. 9, 815).

   [63] See previous note for this passage and the next paragraph.

   [64] Simon Grynaeus (1493-1541), Swabian scholar, professor of Latin
   and Greek in Heidelberg, left for Basel in 1529 to succeed Erasmus. He
   lectured on Greek and later on the New Testament. He took part in the
   preparation of the First Helvetic Confession and attended the
   Conference of Worms in 1540. As the above dedication and other letters
   make clear, Calvin had a great admiration for this linguist, exegete,
   and theologian.

   [65] 1497-1560. German Reformer and friend of Martin Luther. His
   annotations on Romans were published in 1529 and his commentary in
   1532.

   [66] Heinrich Bullinger (1504-1575), a Swiss Reformer, was the
   successor of Zwingli in Zurich. His commentary on Romans and the other
   epistles of the New Testament was published in 1537.

   [67] See note 3, p. 54.
     __________________________________________________________________

I The Bible

  THE TEXT

  1. THE WORD OF GOD

   I spake not unto your fathers. . . concerning burnt offerings or
   sacrifices. But this thing I commanded them, saying, Obey my voice. Jer
   7:22-23.

   We know that from the beginning God desired spiritual worship, and that
   he has not changed his nature. Today he approves nothing but spiritual
   worship, for he is Spirit. But equally under the law, he wished to be
   worshiped with a sincere heart. . . . That is why the prophets speak
   harshly of sacrifice. This clear statement removes all ambiguity: God
   sets obedience against sacrifice (even though sacrifice was a part of
   obedience).

   Now we can continue with the content of the teaching, holding firmly to
   the principle that true religion is founded upon obedience. Unless God
   sheds light for us from his Word, there is among us not true religion,
   but mere sham and superstition. This is how we can distinguish true
   religion from superstition: when the Word of God directs us, there is
   true religion; but when each man follows his own opinion, or when men
   join together to follow an opinion they hold in common, the result is
   always concocted superstition.

   After we grasp the principle that God cannot be worshiped unless we
   listen to his voice, we must consider, as I said, what God's voice
   prescribes to us. Since he is Spirit, he demands the sincere love of
   the heart. And we know also how he has revealed to us that he desires
   us to put our confidence in his free kindness; that he wishes us to
   depend wholly on his Fatherly compassion; that he wishes us to call
   upon him for help, and to offer to him the sacrifice of praise.

   But his delight is in the law of the Lord; and in his law doth he
   meditate day and night. Ps. 1:2.

   This verse does not simply declare (as I have said elsewhere) that
   those who fear God are blessed; it equates religion with the study of
   the law. It teaches that God is rightly worshiped only if his Word is
   obeyed. Therefore, men are not free to model a religion, each after his
   own idea. The standard for religion must be taken from God's Word.

   The law only is mentioned here: but we are not to suppose that the rest
   of Scripture is ignored, since all of it is really an interpretation of
   the law and so is included under that title. The prophet is commending
   the law with its supplement. Indeed, as I just said, the faithful are
   here urged to read The Psalms.

   But the first thing required of the faithful is delight in the law of
   the Lord. These words show us that compulsory or slavish worship is not
   at all acceptable to God. Only those who come happily to the study of
   the law, who enjoy its teaching, who think nothing more worthwhile or
   pleasanter than to make progress in it, are qualified students of the
   law.

   From this love of the law comes constant meditation on it, as the
   prophet immediately adds. Only those inspired by this love can devote
   themselves to its constant study.

   He will teach us of his ways, and we will walk in his paths. Micah 4:2.

   Here in a few words the prophet defines true worship of God. For it
   would not be enough for the nations to come together to one place to
   confess that they are worshipers of one God if they did not also show
   real obedience. True obedience depends on faith, as faith depends on
   the Word. It is, therefore, especially worthy of note that the prophet
   here sets God's Word in the center to show us that religion is founded
   on obedience in faith, and that God can be worshiped only when he
   himself teaches his people and tells them what they ought to do. When
   God's will is revealed to us, we can truly adore him. When the Word is
   taken away, some form of worship of God remains, but there is no real
   religion which could please God.

   Hence we conclude that the church of God can be established only where
   the Word of God rules, where God shows by his voice the way of
   salvation. Therefore, until true doctrine sheds its light, men cannot
   be gathered in one place to constitute the true body of the church.
   Clearly, then, where the teaching is corrupt or is despised, there is
   no religion approved by God.

   Men can, indeed, take God's name boastfully on their lips; but before
   God, there is no religion except what is measured by the rule of the
   Word. It follows then that there is no church which is not subject to
   God's Word and is not ruled by it. The prophet here defines both true
   religion and the way in which God gathers his church.

   He twill teach us of his ways. Here we have a third point. God is
   robbed of his right and honor when men usurp the power of teaching. For
   it belongs to God alone to teach his people. There were at that time
   priests and prophets. But Micah here reduces both to their proper place
   and shows that the right and the office of teaching belong to God
   alone. It is clear that God claims this work for himself, to prevent us
   from wavering and from being pulled around by different teachers; to
   keep us in simple obedience to his Word, so that he alone may rule over
   us. In a word, God is not God and head of the church, if he is not the
   chief and only teacher.

   Now when the prophet says that God will teach us his ways, this must
   mean that he will show the nature of his ways; he means, "The perfect
   wisdom of the people is to know what pleases God and what his will is."
   This is all I need to say.

   There follows: Let us walk in his ways. By this clause we are warned
   that God's teaching is not theoretical, as they say, but full of
   energizing power. When God speaks, he does not only intend men to know
   that what is announced by him is true; he also requires their
   obedience. We shall be truly taught by God only if we walk in his ways.

   For it is silly for us to wag our ears like assess and confess God with
   mouth and lips only. Men truly progress in God's school when they form
   their lives by his teaching, when they have their feet ready to walk,
   to follow wherever he calls.

   If ye will not hearken to me to walk in my law, which I have set before
   you, to hearken to the words of my servants the prophets whom I sent
   unto you. Jer. 26:4-5.

   The prophet here sums up briefly the teaching which he was commanded to
   bring to the people. There is no doubt that he used many words whenever
   it was necessary; but here he holds a few words to be enough to state
   what he has been told. He declares that unless the Jews begin to listen
   and to follow the law, and unless they obey the prophets, the final
   destruction of the Temple and the city is at hand. This is the sum of
   what he teaches here. But we should note the details.

   By the words unless you hear and walk in my law, God shows that his
   chief demand is for obedience. . . . We see that the one and only
   specific rule for living devoutly, rightly, holily, and perfectly is to
   surrender ourselves to God's piloting. This is his only command.

   But what follows should also be noted: that you walk in my law. For
   here God testifies that his will is not ambiguous, for in his law he
   has stated what is right. If God should descend from heaven a hundred
   times, he would reveal nothing we need to know in addition to what he
   has said. His law is perfect wisdom. If he had said only hear me, men
   could evade by declaring themselves ready to be taught by him. God
   checks these hypocrites by saying that there will be no word from him
   other than that they should follow his law. And for the same purpose he
   adds which I have set before your eyes. This phrase means that there is
   nothing obscure or uncertain about the teaching of the law. As Moses
   said (Deut. 30:19), I call to witness today heaven and earth that I
   have set before your eyes life and death; and in another place (Deut.
   30:14), The word is in your heart and your mouth -- that is, God takes
   every excuse away from you. There is no reason for uncertainty after he
   has spoken plainly to you and explained fully what is necessary.

   Here is the refutation of that impious popish blasphemy which prattles
   that not only the law but even the gospel is obscure. But Paul claims
   that the gospel is plain except to those who are perishing (2 Cor.
   4:3); over them a veil is thrown because they deserve to be blind (2
   Cor. 3:14-15). But, as we see, Jeremiah here affirms that the law, even
   though it is less clear than the gospel, is set plainly before the eyes
   of all, and that all may learn from it exactly what pleases God and
   what is right.

   Now we must consider carefully the statement which follows in the next
   verse; for it unquestionably belongs with the previous one. God demands
   nothing except that men obey his laws, and yet he wishes his servants,
   the prophets, to be heard: That you may hear the words of my prophets
   whom I send to you (he uses the second person, you). Here there seems
   to be a kind of inconsistency. For if the law of God is sufficient, why
   is hearing the prophets added to it? But the two commands are really in
   perfect agreement. The law alone must be heard, and with it the
   prophets who continually interpret it. For God did not send his
   prophets to correct the law, to change something in it, to add to it or
   subtract from it. There was an inviolable decree neither to add nor
   take away (Deut. 12:32). What then was the purpose of prophecy? Truly,
   it was to explain the law more and more fully, and also to fit it to
   the immediate need of the people. Since, then, the prophets do not
   invent any new teaching, but are faithful interpreters of the law, God
   is not combining here two separate commands. He wishes his law and his
   prophets to be heard simultaneously. The majesty of the law does not
   lessen the authority of the prophets. For the prophets uphold the law;
   they in no way subtract anything from it.

   So this passage teaches that all those who reject the daily exercise of
   learning the Scriptures are godless men and quench, so far as it is
   within their power, the grace of the Spirit. In our day there are many
   of the Anabaptists [68] who act in this way, rejecting all teaching.
   They say this [Scripture] is "the letter," and they dream that the Holy
   Spirit is injured when men attend to "the letter." And some dare to
   utter uglier blasphemies. They say that all the Scripture we need is
   the two commands, "Fear God" and "Love your neighbor."

   But as I have already said, we must consider how it is that God has
   spoken through the law, and whether [it is not true that] our way to
   him would have been blocked had he not explained his will more clearly
   through the prophets; for it is through the prophets that God adapts to
   our need whatever might seem to us remote and of no concern to us.
   Surely since God gave his law and then added to it his prophets, it is
   obvious that anyone who rejects God's prophets puts no real confidence
   in God's law. So today those who scorn to go to school to Christ and to
   train themselves in listening to the Word, really mock God himself and
   judge both the law and the prophets -- and even the gospel itself -- as
   without value.

   Therefore, this passage is of the highest importance. God wishes his
   law to be our guide and rule, and he binds it to his prophets.

   But the word of the Lord endured forever. And this is the word which by
   the gospel is preached unto you. 1 Peter 1:25.

   The prophet teaches us, not what the Word of God is in itself, but how
   we are to think of it. Since man has emptied himself of life, he must
   look for it outside of himself. And Peter tells us on the authority of
   the prophet, that God's Word alone possesses the energy and efficacy to
   bestow upon us whatever is solid and eternal. For the prophet knew that
   our lives have no stability except in God, and except as he
   communicates it to us by his Word. Since man's nature is in itself
   perishing, the Word himself invests it with eternal life, and restores
   it by a new creation.

   And this is the word declared to you. Peter first warns us that when
   the Word of God is mentioned, we do wrong to imagine something far
   away, up in the air or in heaven beyond; for the Lord himself has shown
   it to us. What then is the Word of God which gives us life; what but
   the law, the prophets, and the gospel? Anyone who wanders away from
   this revelation will find, instead of God's Word, nothing but Satan's
   impostures and madness. Therefore, we must keep carefully in mind that
   godless and devilish men have a crafty way of pretending to honor God's
   Word, when they turn us away from the Scriptures; like that dirty dog
   Agrippa, [69] who praised the eternity of God's Word to high heaven,
   and at the same time heaped mockery on the prophets and the apostles;
   in his deceitful way, he covered the Word of God with derision.

   In short, as I have already told you, nothing is said here of a Word
   shut up in God's bosom. We have to do with the Word which came forth
   from God's mouth and was given to us. So once again, we are to
   acknowledge that God's will is to speak to us by the mouths of the
   apostles and prophets, and that their mouths are to us as the mouth of
   the only true God.

   Therefore, when Peter says, the word which has been declared to you, he
   means that we must not look for the Word of God anywhere except in the
   preaching of the gospel; and that we cannot know the power of its
   eternity except by faith. But we do not believe unless we know that the
   Word was destined for us.

   And, behold, the Lord stood above it, and said, I am the Lord God of
   Abraham thy father and the God of Isaac. Gen. 28:13.

   Here is the third point which I said must be noted. Silent visions are
   cold, and the Word of God is the breath which gives them life. The
   symbol of the ladder is a less important adjunct, with which the Word
   of God illustrates and embellishes itself for the sake of greater
   clarity -- not for greater authority. Hence we judge the papal
   sacraments to be frivolous, since in them the voice of God is not heard
   for the upbuilding of souls.

   We should note, therefore, that whenever God showed himself to the
   patriarchs, he spoke; for a silent vision would have left them dangling
   in uncertainty.

   By the name YHWH, Jehovah, God proclaims that he alone is the maker of
   the world, and that Jacob must seek for himself no other gods. But
   because in itself God's majesty is incomprehensible, he adds
   immediately, adapting himself to the capacity of his servant, that he
   is the God of Abraham and Isaac. It is necessary to believe that the
   God whom we worship is he who alone is God; but when our minds seek to
   attain his height, they faint at the very start. We need to cultivate
   moderation and sobriety, and we should not attempt to know more of him
   than he reveals to us. He himself, in his great kindness, accommodates
   himself to our little mold, and he leaves out nothing which helps
   toward our salvation.

   When he says that he had made a special covenant with Abraham and
   Isaac, and proclaims himself as their God, he calls his servant Jacob
   back to the real beginning of faith and keeps him within the eternal
   covenant. This is the holy bond of faithfulness by which all the sons
   of God are bound together. They hear the same promise of salvation,
   from the first to the last, and they agree together in one hope.

   All Scripture is given by the inspiration of God, and is profitable for
   doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in
   righteousness; that the man of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished
   unto all good works. 2 Tim. 3:16-17.

   All Scripture, or the whole of it; both phrases mean the same. He now
   continues with his praise of Scripture which had been much too brief.
   He commends first its authority, and then the usefulness which proceeds
   from it. He asserts its authority by teaching that it is inspired by
   God. If this is the case, men should receive it reverently and without
   further argument. Our religion is distinguished from all others in that
   the prophets have spoken not of themselves, but as instruments of the
   Holy Spirit; and what they have brought to us, they received by
   heavenly commission. Any man then who would profit by the Scriptures,
   must hold first of all and firmly that the teaching of the law and the
   prophets came to us not by the will of man, but as dictated by the Holy
   Spirit.

   Somebody may object: But how do we know all this? I answer, the
   self-same Spirit revealed both to the disciples and to the teachers
   (doctorem) that the author of the Scriptures is God. Neither Moses nor
   the prophets brought to us by chance the things we have received at
   their hands; they spoke as moved by God, and testified with confidence
   and courage that God's very mouth had spoken. The same Spirit who made
   Moses and the prophets certain of their calling, has now testified to
   our own hearts that he used them as his servants for our instruction.
   It is not surprising that many have doubts as to the author of
   Scripture. For, even though the majesty of God is displayed by it, only
   those illumined by the Spirit have the eyes to see what should be
   evident to all men, but in fact is seen only by the elect. So, the
   first point is that we treat Scripture with the same reverence that we
   do God, because it is from God alone, and unmixed with anything human.

   And is profitable. The second part of this praise of Scripture follows
   from the first; that it contains the perfect rule of a good and happy
   life. He means that Scripture is useful because it is free from the
   kind of corruption which comes with the abuse of God's Word by sinful
   men. Thus he indirectly rebukes those woolly-headed men who feed the
   people with empty speculations as with wind. For this reason, today, we
   ought to condemn all those who make it their business not to build up
   the people but to arouse them with questions which are as childish as
   they are clever. Whenever men come to us with such clever trifles, we
   must repel them with the principle that the Scripture is for
   upbuilding. Consequently, it is unlawful to handle it as a useless
   thing. God gave us Scripture for our good, and not to satisfy our
   curiosity, or to indulge our desire for showing off, or to give us
   material for babble and fable. Therefore, to use Scripture rightly is
   at all times to profit by it. . . .

   That the man of God may be whole. Whole means perfect, in the sense of
   unmutilated. He asserts simply that Scripture is adequate and
   sufficient for our perfecting. Therefore, anyone who is not satisfied
   with Scripture, hopes to know more than he needs or than is good for
   him. But now comes a serious objection. Since Paul means by Scripture
   the Old Testament, how are we to believe that it makes us perfect? If
   the Old Testament makes us perfect, then the apostolic additions are
   superfluous. I answer that, as to substance, the apostles added
   nothing. The writings of the apostles contain nothing that is not
   simply a natural explanation of the law and the prophets, together with
   a straightforward presentation of what they contain. Therefore, Paul's
   praise of the Old Testament was not wrong. And since its teaching is
   understood more fully and shines more brightly now that the gospel has
   been added to it, must we not hope that the value of Scripture, of
   which Paul speaks, shall be all the more displayed, if only we will try
   living by it and take hold of it?

   Beloved, believe not every spirit, but try spirits whether they are of
   God; because many false prophets are gone out into the world. 1 John
   4:1.

   Many, as I said before, are so troubled by the discords and wranglings
   in the church that, in their dismay, they run away from the gospel. But
   the Spirit prescribes an altogether different way: that believers be
   watchful not to accept any doctrine lightly and without judgment. We
   should be careful not to be offended by the variety of opinion in the
   church; we should rather discriminate between teachers, with the Word
   of God as our only norm. It is enough to make it our rule not to listen
   indiscriminately to everyone that comes along.

   I take the word spirit as a metaphor, as meaning a man who claims the
   gift of the Spirit, so that he may assume the office of a prophet.
   Since nobody ought to speak in his own name, we must not trust those
   who do not speak as instruments of the Spirit. The prophets spoke with
   authority because God himself honored them with this title, and in so
   doing, set them apart from all other men. These men were called spirit
   because they gave utterance to the oracles of the Spirit, and by their
   ministry represented God's own person. They offered nothing out of
   their own heads, neither did they come forth among the people in their
   own names. They were given this high title, in order that their own
   insignificance might not take away from the reverence that is due to
   the Word of God. God has willed it that we always receive his Word from
   the lips of men, as though he himself had appeared from heaven.

   But now Satan interferes. He not only places false teachers among the
   people, so as to corrupt the Word of God, but he also calls them
   prophets, so that the people fall [into error] all the more easily.
   These arrogant pseudoprophetic windbags are in the habit of snatching
   an honor which God bestowed upon his own servants. The apostle uses the
   word spirits purposely, to keep us from being deceived by those who
   pretend falsely to speak in God's name; for in our own day we see many
   who are stupid enough to be so overcome by the mere title of "the
   church," that they take sides with the pope, and would be damned
   forever rather than raise a finger against his authority.

   It should be noticed that the apostle did not deny outright the claim
   of these men to be prophets. He might have said simply that they ought
   not to be believed. When these false teachers lyingly claimed that they
   had the Spirit, he let them have their way; only he warned that their
   claim was both fictitious and foolish unless they could come forth with
   the reality of prophecy. It is silly to be so taken in by a
   high-sounding title that one does not even dare to see if there be
   anything behind it.

   Try the spirits. Since not everyone who calls himself a prophet is one,
   the apostle says here that he should be put to a test; not only by the
   church at large, but also by individual believers. But the question
   arises, Where do we get our discernment? When some say that we should
   judge men's words by the Word of God, they are right so far; but that
   does not settle the matter. I admit readily that men's teachings should
   be tested by the Word of God. But the truth is that without the good
   sense we receive from the Spirit, it helps us little or nothing to have
   the Word of God in our hands; for its meaning is bound to escape us.
   For instance, gold is tested with fire or touchstone; but only by those
   who know how to do it. What use is fire or touchstone to the ignorant?
   In the same way, we are fit to judge only when we receive discretion
   from the Spirit and are guided by him. Since we could not follow the
   apostle's precept, unless the power of judging were added to it,
   certainly the godly shall not be left without the Spirit of sound
   judgment, provided they seek him from the Lord. But it is also true
   that the Spirit will lead us to true discretion only when we bring all
   our thoughts under subjection to the Word of God; for, as we said
   above, it is, so to speak, our touchstone, which should be most
   precious to us, since it is the only source of sound teaching.

   But here comes a difficult question. If everyone has a right to be a
   judge and arbiter in this matter, nothing can be set down as certain;
   and our whole religion will be full of uncertainty. I reply that we
   must test doctrines in a twofold way: private and public. By private
   testing, each one establishes his own faith, and accepts only the
   teaching which he knows to be from God. For our conscience cannot find
   security and peace except in God. Public testing of doctrine has to do
   with the common consent and polity of the church. Since there is a
   danger that fanatical men may rise up and boast rashly that they have
   the Spirit of God, believers should seek a remedy by coming together
   and reasoning their way to an honest and godly agreement. The old
   proverb is right when it says, "So many heads, so many minds."
   Therefore, it is a marvelous work of God that, overcoming all our
   perversity, he makes us of one mind, and unites us together in a pure
   unity of faith.

   Knowing this first, that no prophecy of Scripture is of any private
   interpretation. 2 Peter 1:20.

   Here Peter begins to teach how our minds must be prepared if we would
   make proper progress in Scripture. There is in this verse a word which
   may mean one of two things. If you read it epeluseos, as some do, it
   means an impulsion. But if you read it epiluseos, as I do, it means
   interpretation. In either case, almost all agree that we should not
   rush at reading Scripture rashly, trusting our own wits; because the
   Spirit who has spoken by the prophets is his own interpreter.

   This explanation contains a true, godly, and useful doctrine. The only
   way to read the prophets to advantage is to set aside the mind of the
   flesh and to submit to the authority of the Holy Spirit. It is godless
   profanity to set up our own acumen as capable of understanding
   Scripture, which contains mysteries of God hidden to our flesh and
   sublime treasures of life which are far beyond our powers. This is why
   we say that the light which shines in it comes only to the lowly.

   But the papists are foolish when they conclude that no private
   interpretation by an individual is valid. They abuse Peter's testimony,
   in order to give their councils alone the right to interpret Scripture.
   But this is childish. When Peter speaks of private interpretation, he
   does not refer to individuals; neither does he forbid them to interpret
   Scripture. He means that it is not godly for them to come out with
   something out of their own heads. Even if all men in the world were to
   agree and be of one mind, the outcome would still be private, of their
   own. The word private is here set against divine revelation; for the
   believers, illumined inwardly by the Holy Spirit, know as truth only
   what God says by his Word.

   However, I think the simpler meaning of Peter's statement is that
   Scripture is not of men, or by the initiative of men. You will never
   come to it well prepared to read it, unless you bring reverence,
   obedience, and teachableness with you. But reverence comes from the
   knowledge that it is God who speaks to us and not mortal men.
   Therefore, Peter in the first place urges us to believe without
   doubting that the prophecies are God's oracles; which means that they
   were not set in motion by men's own action.

   What comes next means the same thing. The holy men spoke as they were
   moved by the Spirit of God; that is, they did not babble out fables,
   moved by their own impulse and as they willed. In short, the first step
   in right understanding is that we believe the holy prophets of God as
   we do him. The apostle calls them holy men of God because they
   performed faithfully the task which was laid upon them; and in this
   service, they were surrogates for the person of God. Peter says they
   were moved, not because they were bereft of their own minds (as the
   Gentiles imagined their prophets to have been during their
   "enthusiasm"), but because they did not dare to say anything of their
   own. They followed the Spirit as their guide and obeyed him to such an
   extent that their mouths became his temple, and he ruled in them.

   The Jews answered him, We have a law, and by our law he ought to die,
   because he made himself the Son of God. John 19:7.

   The Jews explain that they are pursuing Christ out of regard for the
   law, and not from passion or hatred. For they realize that they are
   being indirectly held in check by Pilate. Knowing that Pilate is
   ignorant of the law, they as much as say to him: "We have a right to
   live according to our customs. Our religion does not suffer a man to
   give himself airs as the Son of God." Besides, this accusation was not
   groundless; but they were altogether wrong in the deduction they made
   [from the law]. The general thesis was, of course, correct. It was not
   right for any man to assume divine honor; and anyone who took for
   himself what is God's alone, was worthy of death. Their error was that
   they applied the law to Christ; for they did not consider with what
   praise Scripture itself had predicted the Messiah. If they had done so,
   they would have inferred readily that he was the Son of God. Thus it is
   evident that having started with a true principle, they were led by bad
   reasoning to a false conclusion.

   Let us be warned by this example to distinguish carefully between
   general doctrine and the particular inferences we make from it. This we
   should do for the sake of inexperienced and simple people who, when
   deceived by some pretended truth, reject even the fundamental doctrines
   of Scripture; and there is too much of this kind of thing going on in
   our world today. Let us, therefore, be careful to shun fallacies, so
   that truth may remain inviolate and faith in Scripture may be not
   overthrown.

   If I have told you earthly things, and ye believe not, how shall ye
   believe, if I tell you of heavenly things? John 3:12.

   Christ concludes that if Nicodemus and his like do not make progress in
   the knowledge of the gospel, it is their fault. He shows that since he
   has come down to earth itself, he is not to be blamed if not everybody
   learns his doctrine properly. It is too common a vice among men that
   they want to be taught in a subtle and ingenious way: hence most of
   them are very happy with deep and abstruse speculations; for the same
   reason, many do not think much of the gospel: in it they do not find
   the kind of pompous discourse with which they like to fill their ears.
   They do not care to sink so low as to waste their time with the rude
   and lowly teaching of the gospel. But, it is most stupid not to honor
   the Word of God, because he has lowered himself to the level of our
   ignorance. When we find God prattling to us in the Bible in an
   uncultivated and vulgar style, let us remember that he does it for our
   sake. Anyone who presumes or pretends to be offended by the
   condescension of God so that he will not submit to God's Word, is a
   liar. Anyone who cannot bear to lay hold of God as he comes down to him
   will still less soar up to him beyond the clouds.

   Some explain earthly things as the ABC of spiritual truth, and speak of
   self-denial as the first step in godliness. But I prefer the view of
   those who think this phrase has to do with Christ's way of teaching.
   For even though Christ's discourse as a whole was heavenly, he spoke
   plainly, as it were in an earthly way. Furthermore, this is not true of
   one discourse only. In this verse, Christ's habitually simple and
   popular way of teaching is contrasted with ambitious men's addiction to
   speech that is full of pomp and splendor.

   And thou, Bethlehem, in the land of Juda, art not the least among the
   princes of Juda; for out of thee shall come a governor, that shall rule
   my people Israel. Matt. 2:6.

   There is no doubt that the scribes quoted the words of this passage
   (Micah 5:2) in their own tongue, faithfully, as found in the prophet.
   But Matthew was satisfied to refer to it. Because he wrote in Greek, he
   followed the commonly accepted reading of it. From this place and
   others like it, we can readily gather that Matthew did not compose his
   Gospel in Hebrew. Moreover, one must always notice that when the
   apostles quote a Scriptural testimony, they do not give it word for
   word, and sometimes depart quite far from its language; they
   nevertheless accommodate it (accommodare) in a fitting and proper way
   to their own purpose. Let the readers always keep in mind the purpose
   of the Evangelists in bringing forward passages of Scripture, so that
   they will not insist upon dwelling upon mere words, but will be content
   with the fact that the Evangelists never torture Scripture into a false
   meaning, and apply (aptare) it properly to a genuine use. Since the
   latter intended to feed infants and novices in the faith with milk,
   because these were as yet incapable of taking solid food, there is no
   reason why the children of God should have scruples against a diligent
   and exact inquiry into the contents of Scripture, so that the taste
   offered them by the apostles may lead them to the fountain [of God's
   Word].

  2. THE OLD AND THE NEW TESTAMENTS

   Now all these things happened unto them in examples: and they are
   written for our admonition, upon whom the ends of the world are come. 1
   Cor. 10:11.

   Now he repeats that all these things happened to the Israelites to
   serve us as types, examples by which God sets his judgments before our
   eyes. I am aware that others philosophize more subtly over these words;
   but I think I have understood the mind of the apostle when I say that
   by these examples, as by painted pictures, we are taught what judgment
   is waiting for idolaters, fornicators, and others who treat God with
   contempt; they are living images which present God to us as angry with
   such sins. This explanation, besides being simple and valid, has the
   advantage of shutting the mouth of those madmen who twist this passage
   to prove that the people in old times were given nothing but [empty]
   shadows. First they assume that the people of Israel were only a figure
   [form without content] of the church: and from this they conclude that
   everything God promised and did among them, every good, every
   punishment, was a mere figure of that which was to become actual after
   the coming of Christ. This is but a pestilential madness, an atrocious
   injury to the holy fathers, and a more atrocious injury to God. The
   people [of Israel] was a figure of the Christian church; but it was
   itself the true church; its condition was a sketch of our own; but as
   such it had even at that time the proper character of the church. The
   promises made to it anticipated the gospel, so as in fact to include
   it; its sacraments served as figures of our own, but even in that age
   the inherent efficacy of their presence made them true sacraments. In
   short, those who used rightly the doctrines and the signs given them
   were endowed with the same spirit of faith as we ourselves. These words
   of Paul, therefore, give no support to those insane people who would
   have it that the things done at that time were types in the sense of
   unreal and empty shows. Nay, more, as we have explained, they teach us
   plainly that these types are pictures which depict events useful for
   our admonition.

   They were written for our admonition. This second phrase clarifies the
   former. It was not for the sake of the Israelites, but for ours, that
   these things were kept in remembrance. It does not follow that
   punishments they suffered were not real warnings from God and valid for
   their own correction; and yet when God exercised his judgments at that
   time, he intended that there should be a perpetual remembrance of them
   for our instruction. What use is history for those who are dead? And
   what good is it to the living, except as they are warned by the example
   of others, and come to their senses? And now, the apostle confesses the
   principle with which all believers should agree: that there is nothing
   put forth in Scripture which it is not profitable to know.

   Upon whom the ends of the world are come. tele elsewhere means
   mysteries; and perhaps that meaning would not be unsuitable for this
   passage. However, I follow the common rendering, because it is simpler.
   He says that the end of all the ages has come to pass among us and all
   things are fulfilled and come to a head in this age, because it is now
   the fullness of time. For the chief end toward which the law and all
   the prophets looked is the Kingdom of Christ.

   But this statement of Paul contradicts the popular opinion that God,
   under the Old Testament, was more rigid, always armed and ready to
   punish wickedness; that now he has begun to be lenient, and ignores
   [evil] much more readily. Our living under the law of grace is
   interpreted to mean that we have a God who is much more easy to please
   than the God of the ancients. But what does Paul say about all this? If
   God punished them, he will not spare us any more than he did them. Away
   then with the error of those who reason that God is now less strict in
   exacting the punishment of crimes! I must confess that, since the
   coming of Christ, God's goodness has been poured upon men more
   strikingly and in more abundance; but how does this change the impunity
   of the wicked who abuse his grace? Only, we must notice that today God
   punishes differently. For, as formerly God showed his Fatherly love to
   the godly with great outward blessings, he showed his wrath with severe
   bodily punishments; now, on the other hand, in the fuller revelation
   which we have, it is not often that he inflicts visible punishments:
   nor does he send physical punishment immediately even upon the wicked.
   About this matter you will find a great deal in our Institutes. [70]

   Of which salvation the prophets inquired and searched diligently, who
   prophesied of the grace that should come unto you: searching what, or
   in what time, the Spirit of Christ which was in them did signify. 1
   Peter 1:10-11.

   Peter sets high the value of salvation, by referring to the prophets
   who had been intent upon it with all their zeal; since the prophets
   sought for it with burning hearts, he regards it as a thing of great
   and singular excellence. And the goodness of God toward us is all the
   greater and shines all the more brightly, because much more has been
   revealed to us than was sought after by the prophets so long and so
   eagerly.

   At the same time, Peter establishes the certainty of salvation from its
   very antiquity, because from the very beginning of the world it has
   received the true witness of the Holy Spirit.

   These two things must be kept clearly in mind. He affirms that more is
   given to us than to the ancient fathers; and by this comparison, he
   magnifies the grace of the gospel. Further, what is preached to us
   concerning our salvation cannot be suspected of novelty, because the
   Spirit, by the prophets, has borne witness to it through the ages.
   Therefore, when he says that the prophets sought and searched
   ceaselessly, he refers not to their teachings or writings, but to the
   inner yearning which agitated them. He deals with their public activity
   in what follows.

   If we would understand the particulars of the verse more clearly, we
   need to break it down into several parts. First, when the prophets
   prophesied of the grace which Christ exhibited to us by his coming,
   they were anxious to know the time of full revelation. Secondly, the
   Spirit of Christ foretold, through them, the true state of the coming
   reign of Christ, partly as they already discerned it, and partly as
   they looked forward to it in hope; they predicted that both Christ and
   his universal body were destined to enter into glory by way of many
   sufferings. Thirdly, the prophets as they received God's revelation
   ministered to us more than to their own age; because the things of God
   revealed to them by way of obscure images were exhibited in their solid
   reality in Christ alone. In the fourth place, the gospel, in which the
   Spirit himself speaks, contains not only a clear confirmation of
   prophetic teachings, but also a much fuller and plainer explanation of
   them. For the salvation to which he pointed through the prophets from
   afar off, he now presents to us openly and as it were to our very eyes.
   The last statement [in this passage] adequately confirms the marvelous
   glory of the salvation promised us in the gospel, since even the angels
   who enjoyed the vision of God in heaven, burned with the desire to see
   it. And what all this amounts to is that Christians, raised to such a
   height of blessedness, ought to overcome all the obstacles which the
   world sets before them; for what [suffering] is there that is not
   mitigated by such an incomparable blessing?

   Of which salvation. But did not the fathers have the same salvation in
   common with us? Why then does he say that the fathers inquired, as
   though they did not have what is now offered to us? The answer is easy;
   in my view, salvation means the clear and visible manifestation of it
   which we have in the coming of Christ. These words of Peter mean
   nothing else than those spoken by Christ: Many kings and prophets have
   desired to see the things which you see, and have not seen them.
   Blessed therefore are your eyes, etc. (Matt. 13:17). Since the prophets
   had only a small taste of the grace which Christ brought to us, their
   desire turned rightly toward a different manner of revelation. When
   Simeon saw Christ, he made ready for death with a calm and peaceful
   spirit; which shows that he was previously anxious and disquieted. Such
   was the state of all believers [before Christ].

   He indicates how [the fathers] searched, when he adds the phrase, in
   what, or in what manner of time. The difference between the law and the
   gospel is that, under the former, there is a veil interposed, which
   kept the fathers from seeing the nearness of the things which are set
   before the eyes of us [who live under the gospel]. Nor was it indeed
   proper that when Christ, the Son of Righteousness, was yet absent, the
   fullness of light should have shined as at noontime. But though it was
   necessary for the fathers to stay within their prescribed limits, yet
   they were not rash when they sighed with desire for a closer sight of
   salvation. Even while they yearned for the speedy coming of salvation,
   and for a sight of it, their eagerness did not keep them from waiting
   with patience so long as it pleased God to delay it.

   Also we have a more sure word of prophecy; whereunto ye do well that ye
   take heed, as unto a light that shineth in a dark place, until the day
   dawn, and the day-star rise in your hearts. 2 Peter 1:19.

   Also we have. Here he teaches that the truth of the gospel is certain
   because it is founded upon the oracles of the prophets; and he does
   this so that those who embrace the gospel may be free of doubt and
   subject themselves totally to Christ. For anyone who wavers in this
   matter cannot but be lax in his spirit.

   We have may refer to himself and other teachers, as well as to their
   disciples. The apostles regarded the prophets as surety of their own
   teaching; the believers also found the confirmation of the gospel in
   the prophets. So, I am inclined to the view that the apostle is
   speaking of the whole church, and including himself in it. Still, he is
   speaking particularly of the Jews, who were familiar with the doctrine
   of the prophets. In my opinion, this is why he says that the gospel is
   more sure. Those who understand this comparison as establishing the
   superiority of the gospel to the prophets do not pay enough attention
   to its context. It is tortuous to make this phrase mean more sure than
   the words of the prophets, because the gospel is in fact the
   fulfillment of the promises which God made to them concerning his Son.
   It is enough to establish the truth of the gospel in two ways: by God's
   own high and solemn praise and approval of Christ, and by the fact that
   all the prophecies of the prophets were made with regard to Christ.

   On the other hand, anyone can see immediately how absurd it is that the
   word of the prophets should be more sure than any other word spoken by
   the mouth of our Holy God! First, the authority of God's Word is from
   the beginning and always the same. Secondly, the coming of Christ
   established it more firmly than ever, as The Epistle to the Hebrews
   tells us at length. But it is not hard to untie this knot. The apostle
   is speaking to his own people, who were passionately attached to the
   prophets, so that the teaching of the latter was beyond controversy
   among them. Since there was no doubt among the Jews that whatever the
   prophets taught was from the Lord, we should not be surprised at
   Peter's saying that word of the latter was more sure. Therefore, here
   the question is not whether the prophets deserve to be believed more
   than the gospel. Peter was pointing out the great deference the Jews
   paid to the prophets, whom they accepted without question as servants
   of God, and in whose school they had been educated from their very
   childhood. . . . We must remember that Peter was speaking to these
   people. He was not instructing ignorant novices who knew only the
   rudiments [of the faith]. He had previously testified that his hearers
   had already received the precious things of the faith and had been
   confirmed in the truth which he was presenting to them. Surely such a
   people could not have been said to be in the gross darkness of
   ignorance. . . . Therefore, as the context makes it clear, Peter was
   speaking to these men; and this statement was necessarily made to
   believers who had received Christ's name and were made partakers of the
   true light. I, therefore, extend this darkness spoken of by Peter to
   the whole of our lives, and interpret [this statement to mean] that the
   day will shine upon us only when we see face to face what now we see in
   a mirror and darkly. Of course, Christ, the Sun of Righteousness, does
   shine in the gospel. But, until we are brought out of the prison of the
   flesh and taken up to heaven, our minds shall at all times be in part
   occupied by the darkness of death.

   In short, Peter warns that so long as we walk in this world, we need
   the teaching of the prophets for a directing light; because without
   this light we can do nothing but live in darkness and go astray. He is
   not, therefore, separating the prophets from the gospel; he tells us
   that they shine for us to show us the way. His point is that throughout
   the whole course of our life we ought to be directed by the Word of
   God, because otherwise we shall be enveloped on all sides with the
   darkness of ignorance. The Lord does not shine upon us unless we see by
   his Word as our light.

   This passage is significant in that it tells us how God directs us. The
   papists have it always on their tongue that the church cannot err. They
   forget the Word and pretend to be guided by the Spirit. Peter, on the
   contrary, claims that all those who disregard the light of the Word are
   buried in darkness. Therefore, if you do not want, of your own will, to
   lose yourself in a labyrinth, do your very best to avoid rejecting the
   guidance of the Word even in the smallest matter. The church cannot
   follow God as its guide, unless it observes this rule. With this
   statement Peter condemns all the wisdom of men, in order that we may
   learn not to seek the true rule of understanding in our own minds.
   Without the Word, there is nothing left for us but darkness.

   It is worth noting that here he speaks of the clarity of the Scripture.
   For his eulogy would be false, unless Scripture were apt and able to
   show us the way clearly and certainly. Anyone, therefore, who opens his
   eyes with the obedience of faith shall know by experience that
   Scripture has not been called light in vain. It is indeed obscure to
   the unbelievers; but those who are given up to destruction blind
   themselves. The blasphemy of the papists is damnable, when they pretend
   that the light of Scripture merely dazzles the eye. This is their way
   of keeping the simple people from reading it. But, of course, we need
   not wonder that the proud, inflated with the wind of a perverse
   self-confidence, cannot see the light with which the Lord favours only
   those who are humble as a child (Matt. 11:25). David praises the law of
   God in a similar vein (Ps. 19 and 119).

   But the hour cometh, and now is, when the true worshipers shall worship
   the Father in spirit and in truth. . . . John 4:23.

   Now there follows the second part, which has to do with the annulling
   of the cultic laws. When Christ says, the hour is coming, or is come,
   he teaches that the Mosaic order is in no way permanent. When he says,
   the hour now is, he puts an end to the ceremonies, and in this way
   declares that the time of training is now over. Still, he puts his
   approval on the Temple, the priesthood, and all the rites that went
   with them, in so far as these were useful in the past (Heb. 9:10).
   Besides, in order to show that God does not wish to be worshiped
   [exclusively] either in Jerusalem or on Mount Gerizim, he appeals to a
   higher principle: namely, that a true worship of God must be done in
   the spirit; from which it follows that men may call upon him in all
   places.

   But we must first ask why and in what sense the worship of God is
   called spiritual. If we are to understand this, we must know the
   difference between the spirit and external forms as the difference
   between shadow and reality. The worship of God is said to be in the
   spirit, because nothing can take the place of the inward faith of the
   heart, which makes us call on God, or of purity of conscience and
   self-denial, by which we may give ourselves to the obedience of God as
   holy sacrifice.

   From this arises another question: Did not the fathers, while under the
   law, worship God spiritually? I answer that since God is always the
   same, from the very beginning of the world, he could not have approved
   any kind of worship except the spiritual, which alone is compatible
   with his nature. Moses himself bears abundant witness to this, when he
   declares the end of the law to be none other than that his people
   cleave to God in faith and a pure conscience. In fact, the same thing
   is expressed in even a more telling way by the prophets, when they
   inveigh against the hypocrisy of the people who thought they could
   satisfy God by killing their sacrificial beasts and making a big show
   of it. There is no need to produce the many proofs, which are found
   everywhere, the most significant of them being Psalm 50; Isaiah 1, 58,
   66; Micah 5; Amos 7.

   However, even though the worship of God under the law was spiritual,
   since it was hidden under a multitude of external ceremonies it had the
   taste of something carnal and worldly. This is why Paul speaks of
   ceremonies as flesh and beggarly elements of the world (Gal. 4:9). In
   the same way, the writer of The Epistle to the Hebrews says that the
   ancient sanctuary, with its appendages, was earthly (Heb. 9:1). Thus we
   say properly that the cult of the law was spiritual in substance, but
   with respect to its form somewhat carnal and earthly. Therefore, the
   whole apparatus of the cult, the reality of which is now manifest, was
   a thing of shadows.

   Now we see what the Jews had in common with us, and how they differed
   from us. In every age, God desired to be worshiped by faith, prayer,
   acts of thanksgiving, purity of heart, and innocence of life; and at no
   time was he pleased with other sacrifices; but under the law there were
   various additions made, and the Spirit and truth were covered over and
   hidden. Now that the veil of the Temple is torn, nothing is hidden or
   obscure. We also today have some external exercises of piety, which we
   need because of our inaptitude: but they are characterized by sobriety,
   and do not obscure the naked truth of Christ. In short, what was
   shadowy to the fathers, we now have openly and clearly.

   For if the blood of bulls and of goats. . . sanctifieth to the
   purifying of the flesh, how much more shall the blood of Christ, who
   through the eternal Spirit offered himself without spot to God, purge
   our conscience from dead works, to serve the living God? Heb. 9:13-14.

   This passage has led many people astray, because they have forgotten
   that it has to do with sacraments, which have a spiritual meaning. They
   have talked about the cleansing of the flesh, such as was practiced by
   the heathen, who tried to blot out infamous crimes by offering some
   sacrifice of expiation. Such an interpretation of this passage is the
   height of profanity: for it is an insult to God that we should limit
   his promises to merely secular or civic matters. Moses teaches often
   that when sacrifice is offered properly, iniquity itself is expiated.
   Therefore, the doctrine of our faith is spiritual. The ultimate purpose
   of all sacrificial killing was to lead us to Christ; it was a testimony
   to the salvation of our souls in Christ, which alone is eternal.
   Therefore, how could the apostle have spoken of "the purification of
   the flesh" except in a spiritual, or sacramental, sense? If even the
   blood of beasts was a symbol of true purification, so that it did
   cleanse in a sacramental way, how much more shall Christ, who is the
   truth, not merely testify to purification by external rites, but rather
   establish its reality in our consciences! So the argument of this verse
   is from the sign to the reality signified by it; for the effectiveness
   of reality takes precedence by far over the validity of the sign.

   Through the eternal Spirit. Now he shows clearly that the death of
   Christ is to be understood not in terms of outward act, but of the
   power of the Spirit. Christ suffered as a man. If his death has the
   power to save us, it is by the efficacy of the Spirit; for the
   sacrifice which brought us eternal expiation was more than a human act.
   And the apostle calls the Spirit eternal, to teach us that the
   reconciliation which He works is itself eternal. . . .

   By the works of death we may understand either works which produce
   death, or works which are the fruit of death. Since the life of the
   soul is bound to God, those who are by sin alienated from him are to be
   regarded as dead.

   But let us consider the end of our purification, which is the service
   of the living God. We are washed by Christ, not immediately to bury
   ourselves once again in filth, but so that our purity may serve the
   glory of God. Besides, the apostle teaches us that nothing from us will
   please God, unless we are purged by the blood of Christ. Since before
   we are reconciled with God we all are enemies to him, all our works are
   worthless before him. Therefore, the beginning of the true worship of
   God is reconciliation. Besides, since no act of ours is pure, free from
   all spot, it cannot please God; it must, therefore, be purified by the
   blood of Christ which blots out all our spots. And, of course, the
   contrast between dead works and the living God is beautiful.

   Whereupon neither the first testament was dedicated without blood. For
   when Moses had spoken every precept to all the people according to the
   law, he took the blood of calves, and of goats, with water, and scarlet
   wool, and hyssop, and sprinkled both the book and all the people,
   saying, This is the blood of the testament which God hath enjoined unto
   you. Heb. 9:18-20.

   The apostle wants us to attend not to words but to the substance of
   what is being said. He has found the word testament in the Greek
   language in which he is writing. Since the [Hebrew] word for covenant
   often becomes testimony in Greek, he takes advantage of this fact, and
   turns it to his own use. He eulogizes God's covenant as a testimony,
   which is one way of speaking of it; and why not, since angels from
   heaven and so many gifted men on earth, that is, all the holy prophets,
   apostles, and a multitude of martyrs, have been witness to it, and at
   the last, the Son of God himself has sponsored it? Hence there is
   nothing absurd in the apostle's use of the word testament. It is true
   that the Hebrew word toude does not in fact mean covenant; but since
   nothing which the apostle says is inconsistent with it, we must not be
   tied down to the exact meaning of the word.

   The apostle says that the Old Testament was dedicated with blood; this
   he takes as a warning to the people that it was effective and stable
   only by the interposition of death. But he denies that the blood of
   beasts was a valid confirmation of the eternal covenant. This becomes
   clearer when we consider the rite of sprinkling enjoined by Moses, as
   described in our text. The apostle tells us, in the first place, that
   the covenant was sanctified, not because it was in itself profane, but
   because nothing is so sacred that the people would not profane it by
   their own impurities, unless it were restored by God himself.
   Therefore, the dedication was on men's account, and only because they
   were unclean.

   He then adds that the tabernacle with all its vessels, and also the
   Book of the Law itself, were sprinkled. By this rite the people were
   taught that God cannot be sought, or found, for salvation, and neither
   can he be worshiped truly, unless faith at all times uses the requisite
   blood. It is only right that we should find the majesty of God
   dreadful, and the way to it a hopeless labyrinth, unless we know that
   he turns to us with favor through the blood of Christ, and that through
   this same blood we have an easy access to him. Therefore, all worship
   is unclean and wicked unless purified by the sprinkling of the blood of
   Christ.

   The tabernacle stood for a visible image of God. The vessels of the
   ministry set aside for the service of God were symbols of true worship.
   But since they were without blood useless for salvation, it is evident
   that unless Christ himself appears with his blood, we have no part in
   God. Even doctrine itself, in spite of God's constant will [to save
   us], is without power or benefit, unless sanctified with blood. Our
   verse makes this perfectly clear.

   I know that others understand this passage differently. They say that
   the tabernacle is the body of the church; and the vessels, the faithful
   whom God uses in his service. But my view of the matter is far more
   suitable. Whenever the people called on God, they turned to the
   sanctuary; and it was a common saying that when they appeared in the
   Temple, they stood before the face of the Lord.

   This is the blood of the testament. . . . This means that the testament
   is not ratified without blood, and that the blood works no expiation
   without the testament. Therefore, the two must go together. We see that
   the symbol was added after the law was explained: for what is a
   sacrament unless the Word come before it? Therefore, the symbol is an
   accessory to the Word. And mark you, the Word was not murmured as a
   magical incantation, but spoken with a loud and clear voice, because it
   was meant for the people, so that the words of the covenant, which God
   has commanded you, might ring out. Therefore, it is a perverse misuse
   of the sacrament, and an ungodly corruption of it, when no one hears
   the exposition of God's commandment, which is, as it were, the very
   soul of the sacrament. Therefore, the papists who separate the sign
   from a true understanding of its substance have nothing left but the
   dead letter.

   Moreover, this passage warns us that we receive God's promises only
   when they are confirmed by the blood of Christ. All God's promises are
   Yea and Amen, as Paul testifies in 2 Cor. 1:20, only when by the blood
   of Christ they are inscribed on our hearts as a seal; for, we hear God
   speaking to us only when we see Christ offering himself as a pledge in
   what is said to us. If we could only get it into our heads that the
   Word of God we read is written not so much with ink as with the blood
   of the Son of God; or that when the gospel is preached, his own blood
   is poured with the voice we hear -- we would pay far more attention and
   that with far greater reverence. The sprinkling spoken of by Moses was
   a symbol for the reality which we have just explained.

   Of course, all this (which the apostle tells us) is not contained in
   the words of Moses. Moses does not tell us that either the Book or the
   people were sprinkled. He does not tell us that the sprinkling included
   the goats, or the scarlet wool, or the hyssop. We cannot even be sure
   that he sprinkled the Book, even though we may guess that he probably
   did so, since he brought it out before the people after the sacrifice,
   when he bound them to God by a solemn compact. As for the rest (the
   goats, the scarlet wool, the hyssop), it seems to me that the apostle
   has thrown them together as several kinds of offering having the same
   expiatory purpose. And after all, there is nothing absurd in this,
   since he was dealing with the general question of purification under
   the old covenant. What matters is that the whole thing was done with
   blood. As to the sprinkling with hyssop, and scarlet wool, it doubtless
   represented the mystical sprinkling by the Spirit. We know that hyssop
   has a singular power to purify and make clean. Therefore, Christ in
   turn sprinkles us with his Spirit, to wash us with his blood; to
   convert our minds to true repentance; to make us clean of the lusts of
   our depraved flesh; and to make us beautiful with the hues of his own
   wonderful righteousness. Indeed, it was not for nothing that God
   commanded this practice of sprinkling. Let us remember the words of
   David in Ps. 51:7, Sprinkle me, O Lord, with hyssop, and I shall be
   clean. That is enough for anyone who is minded to philosophize soberly.

  3. THE LAW AND THE GOSPEL

   Do not think that I will accuse you to the Father; there is one that
   accuseth you, even Moses, in whom ye trust. John 5:45.

   It is a mistake to think that this verse sets the office of Moses
   against that of Christ; even though it is the peculiar function of the
   law to convict unbelievers of sin. This was not the intention of
   Christ; it was rather to disarm the hypocrites who gloried in Moses
   with a false reverence. It is like telling the papists today that the
   holy doctors of the church, behind whom they hide, are their worst
   opponents. Besides, this verse teaches us that our boasting in
   Scripture does us no good unless we worship the Son with the true
   obedience of faith; for, in the last day, all those whom God shall
   raise as witnesses to Christ shall come forth to accuse us. When Christ
   says that his hearers hope in Moses, he does not accuse them of
   superstition, or of thinking that Moses was their Savior. He is rather
   pointing out the folly of their taking refuge in Moses, as though they
   had his backing in their wicked and arrogant rebellion.

   This is he, that was in the church in the wilderness with an angel
   which spake to him in Mount Sinai, and with our fathers: who received
   the lively oracles to give unto us. Acts 7:38.

   Who received living oracles. Erasmus translates this as "the living
   word" ! But those who know their Greek must agree that I have given a
   better rendition of what Stephen said; for oracles have more majesty
   than words. What I say is words, but what comes out of the mouth of the
   Lord is an oracle. Besides, these words of Stephen are intended to
   establish the authority of Moses' teaching, and to impress upon the
   people that Moses spoke only what was from God; from which it followed
   that in rebelling against Moses, they had rebelled not against him but
   against God; hence, their effrontery was obviously all the more brazen.
   (And, in general, the right way to establish [true] doctrine is for men
   to teach nothing they have not been commanded from God.) For, how could
   any man have dared to look down on Moses, who, as the Spirit says, had
   a right to be believed because he explained to the people faithfully
   the doctrine which he had received from God!

   But someone may ask, Why does he call the law a "living word" ? Such
   praise may seem to fit poorly with Paul's statement that the law is
   minister of death and works wrath, and that it makes us to sin (2 Cor.
   3:7). If anyone understands "the living word" to mean a word that is
   valid and effective in spite of men's contempt for it, I will not
   contradict him, but on my part, I interpret "living" as that which is
   active. Since the law is the perfect rule of a godly and holy life, and
   sets forth the righteousness of God, it is rightly thought of as the
   doctrine of life and salvation; and it is to this that Moses bears
   witness, as he swears by heaven and earth, when he presents the law to
   the people as the way of life and death. In the same way, in Ezekiel,
   chapter 20, God complains that the people have violated his law which
   is good, and his precepts concerning which he had said, Any one who
   does them, shall live in them. The law, therefore, contains life in
   itself. If anyone prefers to interpret "living" as efficacious and full
   of power, I shall not object too strenuously.

   When Paul calls the law the minister of death, he speaks of a
   characteristic which it has contingently, because of the corrupt nature
   of man. The law itself does not produce sin; it finds sin in us. It
   offers life to us; but we, being evil, derive nothing but death from
   it. Hence, the law works death only in relation to man. In this verse,
   Stephen refers to something more than the bare commandments of the law;
   he speaks of the teaching of Moses as a whole, which includes the
   promises God has made freely, and therefore Christ himself, who alone
   is the life and salvation of men.

   And ye have not his word abiding in you: for whom he hath sent, him ye
   believe not. John 5:38.

   We profit from the Word of God only when it takes root in us, and is so
   fixed in our hearts that it remains there. Christ denied that the Jews
   possessed the heavenly doctrine, because they did not receive the Son
   of God who is proclaimed everywhere in it. And he rejected them with
   good reason. God did not speak through Moses and the prophets for
   nothing. His only purpose in speaking to Moses was that he might call
   everyone to Christ. Therefore, it is clear that those who repudiate
   Christ are no disciples of Moses. After all, how can the Word of life
   be and remain in anyone who pushes aside life itself? How does any man
   hold to the teaching of the law when he does his best to extinguish the
   Spirit of the law? For the law without Christ has nothing solid about
   it, and in fact avails us nothing. Therefore, progress in the Word of
   God goes with a right knowledge of Christ.

   Search the Scriptures; for in them ye think ye have eternal life; and
   they are they which testify of me. John 5:39.

   As we have pointed out, Christ's previous statement that the Father is
   his witness in heaven, applies also to Moses and the prophets. Now
   Christ explains the matter more clearly by saying that the Scripture
   itself is his witness. He again attacks the stupidity of those who
   declared loudly that the Scriptures gave them life, while they treated
   them as dead letter. He does not judge them because they sought life in
   the Scriptures; the Scriptures were given to be used for this purpose.
   But the Jews thought the Scriptures gave them life when they had no
   sense of their true meaning, and had even put out the light of life in
   them. How can the law make alive, when Christ alone gives it life?

   Moreover, this passage teaches us that if we would know Christ, we must
   seek him in the Scriptures. Anyone who imagines Christ as he will, gets
   nothing but a mere blur (umbratile spectrum). So, we must first hold
   that Christ is known rightly nowhere but in Scripture. If this be so,
   our chief purpose in reading the Scriptures must be to arrive at a
   right knowledge of Christ. Whoever turns aside from this aim, even
   though he wear himself out with learning all his life, will never
   arrive at truth; for what wisdom can we attain apart from the wisdom of
   God? Moreover, since we are commanded to seek Christ in the Scriptures,
   he declares that our zeal in this matter shall not be in vain; for the
   Father himself testifies that in them he shall certainly reveal his Son
   to us. Many are deprived of this blessing, because they neglect reading
   the Scriptures, or do it cursorily and superficially. But it deserves
   utmost attention that Christ himself commands us to probe deeply into
   this hidden treasure. It was sheer apathy that led the Jews, who had
   the law in their very hands, to abhor Christ. The glory of God shone
   brightly in Moses, but they put up a veil and darkened it. In this
   place, Scripture means obviously the Old Testament. It is not true that
   Christ appears first in the gospel. It is rather that after the witness
   of the Law and the Prophets, he appeared in the gospel for everyone to
   see.

   But if thou wilt enter into life, keep the commandments. Matt. 19:17.

   Some ancients, and the papists after them, have misinterpreted this
   verse so as to make Christ promise that if we observe the law we shall
   have eternal life. Christ was not talking about what man can do; he was
   answering a question as to right conduct or what the law defines as
   righteous. Certainly, God gave his law as the way of a right and holy
   life, which includes righteousness. It is not for nothing that Moses
   made the statement, Anyone who does these things, shall live by them;
   again, I call heaven and earth to witness that today I have put before
   you life. Therefore, it cannot be denied that the keeping of the law is
   righteousness, and that anyone who keeps it perfectly, obtains life.
   But, since we all are destitute of the glory of God [righteousness], in
   the law we find nothing but a curse; there is nothing left for us to do
   but to fly to a righteousness which shall be given us freely.
   Therefore, Paul presents us with two kinds of righteousness: of the law
   and of faith; the former he makes to consist in works, and the latter
   in the mere grace of Christ.

   From this we gather that the reply of Christ was correct. He had first
   to answer the young man who asked about the right thing to do; for no
   man is righteous before God unless he satisfies the law (which is
   impossible). He did this in order that the young man might acknowledge
   his inability, and look to faith for help. Therefore, I admit that
   since God has promised the reward of eternal life to those who keep the
   law, it would be right, if it were not for the weakness of our flesh,
   for us to follow this way [to expect life through our good works]. But
   Scripture itself teaches us that we must be given what we cannot
   acquire through our own merit. If anyone object that it is frustrating
   to be confronted with righteousness through obedience to the law, if
   nobody has it in him to achieve it, I answer that the law is only the
   beginning of this matter, and that it is by no means futile if it leads
   us to pray for righteousness. For this reason, where Paul says that
   those who do the law are justified, he also denies that anyone can be
   justified through the law (Rom. 2:13; 3:9-10).

   This passage abolishes all the fictions which the papists have invented
   in order to obtain salvation. Their error is not merely that by their
   good works they want to bind God, and make him grant them salvation as
   a matter of debt; but also that when they gird themselves to do good,
   they set aside the teaching of the law, and become intent upon fictions
   which they call their "devotions." In this way, they not only repudiate
   the law of God, but also far prefer their human traditions. But what
   else does Christ say, except that God approves only of that worship
   which he himself has prescribed? For, obedience is better to him than
   all slaughtered sacrifice. So then, let the papists be occupied with
   their silly traditions; if anyone would be serious about ordering his
   life so as to live in obedience to Christ, let him devote his whole
   attention to obeying the commandments of the law.

   Who hath also made us able ministers of the new testament, not of the
   letter, but of the spirit; for the letter killeth, but the spirit
   giveth life. But if the ministration of death, written and engraven in
   stones, was glorious, . . . which glory was to be done away, how shall
   not the ministration of the spirit be rather glorious? For if the
   ministration of condemnation be glory, much more doth the ministration
   of righteousness exceed in glory. For even that which was made glorious
   had no glory in this respect, by reason of the glory that excelleth. .
   2 Cor. 3:6-10.

   Paul had before touched upon the comparison between the law and the
   gospel; now he pursues the matter further. However, the occasion for
   this argument is not certain; was it that he saw some Corinthians make
   a perverse use of the law, or was it something else that started him?
   For my part, I see no evidence that false apostles were comparing the
   law with the gospel. I think it is more probable that he had in mind
   chatterboxes whose lifeless rhetoric had the kind of glitter which
   swept the Corinthians off their feet. He wanted to show the latter that
   the chief glory of the gospel and the chief praise of its ministers is
   the power of the Spirit. It seems to me that he embarked upon the
   following comparison of the law with the gospel because it was a good
   way of proving his point.

   However, there is no doubt that by the letter he meant the Old
   Testament, as by the word Spirit he means the gospel; for, when he
   calls himself a minister of the new covenant, he also adds immediately
   that he is a minister of the Spirit; and it is in this connection that
   he contrasts the letter with the Spirit.

   We must now look into the reason for his use of these words. Origen's
   invention in this matter has become well established as truth: that the
   letter means the grammatical and genuine meaning of Scripture, or as
   they say, the literal; and that Spirit means the allegorical meaning,
   which is commonly called the spiritual. Thus, through the centuries, it
   has been commonly accepted and passed around that here Paul has
   provided us with a key for the allegorical interpretation of Scripture.
   But nothing was further from his mind. By the word letter Paul means
   preaching which is external and does not reach the heart; by Spirit he
   means teaching which is alive, which works mightily in the souls of men
   by the grace of the Spirit. Letter, therefore, means literal, that is,
   dead and ineffective preaching, which is heard only by the ear. Spirit,
   on the other hand, means spiritual teaching, which is not merely a
   matter of mouthing words, but rather has the power to penetrate the
   soul and bring it to life. Paul had in mind the verse from Jeremiah
   which I cited before, there the Lord says that his law had been given
   by word of mouth, and that it had neither lasted long, nor had it been
   received by the people with their hearts; therefore, he promises the
   Spirit of regeneration in the reign of Christ, who will write the
   gospel, that is the new covenant, in their hearts (Jer. 31:31). Now, it
   is Paul's boast that this prophecy has been fulfilled in his preaching.
   He would have the Corinthians know that the bombast of the loud mouths
   amounts to nothing, because it lacks the power of the Spirit.

   Now let us consider if, under the Old Testament, God spoke merely with
   an outward voice, or if he did not speak inwardly by his Spirit to the
   hearts of the godly. I answer, in the first place, that Paul here has
   in mind the peculiar function of the law. In so far as God worked by
   his Spirit, he did so not by the ministry of Moses, but by the grace of
   Christ. As we learn from John 1:17, the law was by Moses, but grace and
   truth by Jesus Christ. Of course, all that time, the grace of God was
   not inactive; but also, clearly enough, it did not work by the law.
   Moses' part was done when he gave the way of life, with the threats and
   promises. Paul calls the law letter because in itself it is dead
   preaching; and he calls the gospel "Spirit," because its ministry is
   alive and makes alive.

   Secondly, I answer that Paul is speaking of the law and the gospel not
   in general, but in so far as they are opposed one to the other. Even
   the gospel itself is not always Spirit. Still, when it comes to a
   comparison between the two, one must say truly and properly that the
   nature of the law is such that it teaches the letter, without
   penetrating beyond the ear; on the other hand, it is the nature of the
   gospel to teach spiritually, because it is the instrument of the grace
   of Christ. God has ordained it so, for it has pleased him to reveal the
   power of the Spirit more through the gospel than through the law; and
   it is the Spirit alone that can teach the spirits of men. . . .

   For the letter kills. First Origen, and then others, distorted this
   phrase badly, to give it a corrupted meaning; and so arose the most
   pernicious error that Scripture is not only useless but even harmful
   unless it is turned into elaborate allegories. This error became a
   source of much evil. It not only gave license for corrupting the true
   meaning of Scripture, but also led to the notion that the more
   unprincipled the allegorizer, the more expert he was as interpreter of
   Scripture. So, many of the ancients threw the sacred Word of God around
   as though it were a tennis ball. In this way, the heretics too were
   unbridled and found occasion to trouble the church. Now, anybody could
   do anything, and many did; there was no madness so absurd or so great
   but it could be practiced in the name of some allegory. Even good
   people were caught, and invented many false notions, because they were
   deceived by their fondness for allegory. . . .

   But if the ministration of death. He now magnifies the dignity of the
   gospel so much the more, by insisting that God has conferred great
   honor upon the law, which is as nothing in comparison with the gospel.
   The prestige of the law was established by many miracles. But Paul
   touches upon one: namely, that Moses' face was bright with such
   splendor as to dazzle the eyes of all those around him -- a splendor
   which was a symbol of the glory of the law. So he argues from the
   lesser to the greater, and presents the glory of the gospel as all the
   more magnificent since it is far superior to the law. First, he calls
   the law the ministry of death; secondly, he says that the doctrine of
   the law consisted in letter, and was done with ink; thirdly, that it
   was written on stones; fourthly, that it was not to last forever, but
   was temporary and meant to pass away; in the fifth place, once again he
   calls it the ministry of condemnation.

   To make the antithesis complete, he should have used the same number of
   points on the opposite side with regard to the gospel; but he calls the
   latter simply the ministry of the Spirit, and of righteousness, which
   is to remain valid at all times. In terms of words, the comparison is
   not carried through; but as to the substance of the matter, what he
   says is adequate, for he has already said that the Spirit gives life;
   and further, he has pointed out that now men's hearts take the place of
   stones and inner disposition takes the place of ink.

   Let us now examine briefly the characteristics of the law and the
   gospel. But let us remember that the point at issue is neither the
   whole of the teaching we find in the Law and the Prophets, nor the
   experience of the fathers under the Old Testament; but rather the
   peculiar function of the ministry of Moses [or the law]. The law was
   chiseled upon stones; therefore, its teaching was one of the letter.
   This defect of the law had to be corrected by the gospel, since, the
   law having been consigned to tablets of stone, it could not but be
   breakable. The gospel, therefore, is a holy and inviolable covenant
   because under God it was hewed out by the Spirit. It follows that the
   law was the ministry of condemnation and death; for when men were told
   their duty, they also heard that anyone who does not satisfy God's
   justice is cursed, and ends in sin and death. Therefore, men get
   nothing from the law but condemnation, for in the law God demands his
   due, but does not confer the power to pay it properly. The gospel, on
   the other hand, which regenerates us and reconciles us with God through
   the free forgiveness of sins, is the ministry of righteousness, and
   consequently, of life itself.

   But now arises the question: If the gospel be to some a deadly odor of
   death, and if Christ be the rock of offense and the stone of stumbling
   set for the ruin of many, why is it that the law alone is blamed for
   what it has in common with the gospel (2 Cor. 2:16, Luke 2:34, 1 Peter
   2:8)? If one answers that the gospel does not work death in itself, or
   that it is the occasion rather than the cause of death, since its own
   nature is to save all men, one does not get rid of the difficulty,
   because the same is true of the law. Moses himself argued that he set
   life and death before the people (Deut. 30:15); and Paul also said, in
   Rom. 7:10, that the law is turned into a source of ruin for us, not
   because it is evil but because we are wicked. Therefore, since neither
   the law nor the gospel leads to condemnation in itself, our knot is
   still with us.

   My answer is that, in spite of all this, there is a great difference
   between the law and the gospel. Even though the gospel is an occasion
   for condemnation to many, it is rightly regarded as the doctrine of
   life, because it is the means of regeneration and offers us free
   reconciliation with God. The law, on the other hand, even though it
   prescribes the rule of a good life, does not change the heart for a
   righteous obedience; and in declaring eternal death to sinners, it can
   do nothing but condemn them. To put it another way, it is the function
   of the law to uncover the disease; it gives us no hope of its cure. It
   is the function of the gospel to bring healing to those who are without
   hope. The law, in so far as it leads men to put their confidence in it,
   consigns them necessarily to death. The gospel, on the other hand,
   leads us to Christ and thus opens the gate to life. Thus, in one word,
   the property of the law by which it kills, even though not essential to
   it, is permanent and inseparable from it; for, as the apostle says
   elsewhere, all those who remain under the law are subject to the curse
   (Gal. 3:10). On the other hand, it is not true of the gospel that it
   kills always, because in it the righteousness of God is revealed from
   faith to faith; and, therefore, it is the saving power of God to all
   those who believe (Rom. 1:16-17).

   It remains to consider the last contrast made by the apostle when he
   says that the law was for a time, and to be abolished, whereas the
   gospel is for perpetuity. There are many reasons why the ministry of
   Moses was for a season. Shadows had to cease with the coming of Christ.
   But the statement applies beyond the shadows, to the Law and the
   Prophets until John (Matt. 11:13). It means that Christ put an end to
   the ministry of Moses, in all that was peculiar to it and apart from
   the gospel. Finally, in Jer. 31:31-32, the Lord bears witness to the
   weakness of the old covenant because it was not inscribed upon the
   hearts of men. I interpret the abolition of the law mentioned in this
   place as referring to the whole of the old covenant in so far as it was
   opposed to the gospel; and that includes the Law and the Prophets until
   John. The context of the present statement requires this
   interpretation. Paul is not arguing only about the ceremonies; his
   point is that the Spirit of God exercises his energy far more
   powerfully under the gospel than he did long ago under the law. . . .

   This is no denial of what is said above, but rather a confirmation of
   it; for Paul means that where the gospel appears, the glory of the law
   is extinguished. As the moon and the stars, which have light enough to
   illumine the whole earth, disappear before the splendor of the sun, so
   also the law, whatever glory it might have in itself, is as nothing
   before the refulgence of the gospel. Hence, it follows that we cannot
   magnify enough, or treat with too much reverence, the glory of Christ
   which shines in the gospel, as the brightness of the sun shines in its
   rays. It is in bad taste, and a foolish profanation of the gospel, when
   the power and majesty of the Spirit, which draw the minds and hearts of
   men to heaven, are withheld from the people.

   But their minds were blinded: for until this day remaineth the same
   veil untaken away in the reading of the old testament; which veil is
   done away in Christ. But even unto this day, when Moses is read, the
   veil is upon their heart; nevertheless, when it shall turn to the Lord,
   the veil shall be taken away. Now the Lord is that Spirit; and where
   the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty. 2 Cor. 3:14-17.

   He puts the whole blame upon them [the Jews]; for it was because of
   their blindness that they were unable to benefit from the teaching of
   the law. . . .

   He now gives the reason for their continued blindness in the midst of
   light. The law in itself is a source of light: but we enjoy its
   brightness only when Christ appears to us in it. The Jews do all they
   can to turn their eyes away from Christ: it is therefore not surprising
   that they see nothing, since they will not turn to the Sun. This
   blindness on the part of God's chosen people, especially since it has
   lasted so long, should warn us that we ought to rely upon God's favors
   toward us, and not be lifted up with pride. (On this, see Rom. 11:20.)
   And let the reason for blindness given in this passage keep us from a
   contempt of Christ, which exposes us to the awful vengeance of God. In
   the meantime, we should learn that there is no light in the law, or
   even in the whole Word of God, without Christ who is the Sun of
   Righteousness.

   But when it shall have turned to the Lord. So far, this passage has
   been seriously misunderstood; both the Greek and the Latin interpreters
   [71] have thought that it refers to Israel. But Paul is speaking of
   Moses. He had said that when the Jews read Moses, a veil was thrown
   over their hearts. Now he continues that as soon as their heart is
   turned to the Lord, the veil shall be taken away. Who cannot see, as I
   said, that when he speaks of Moses, he is speaking of the law? Since
   Christ is the end (or fulfillment) of the law, the Jews ought to have
   accepted the truth that the law refers them to Christ; when they shut
   out Christ, they turned the law in another direction. Since in reading
   the law they wandered aimlessly, the law itself has become to them a
   complicated thing, like a labyrinth; and it will remain such until it
   is turned toward its fulfillment, who is Christ. If the Jews seek
   Christ in the law, God's truth will appear to them clearly; while they
   continue to seek wisdom without Christ, they shall lose their way in
   darkness and never arrive at the true meaning of the law. What is said
   of the law applies to the whole of Scripture: when it is not directed
   toward Christ as its one aim, it is tortured badly and twisted.

   The Lord is the Spirit. This passage also has been interpreted badly,
   so as to make Paul mean that Christ is of a spiritual essence; people
   do this by tying it up with John 4:24, where we read God is a Spirit.
   As a matter of fact, this statement has nothing to do with Christ's
   essence; it simply points out his office. It goes with what Paul said
   above: namely, that the teaching of the law is literal, not only dead
   but also a source of death. Conversely, he now calls Christ the Spirit
   of the law, which means that the law is living and life-giving only in
   so far as it receives the breath of Christ. When the soul is united
   with the body, there is a living man, endowed with intelligence and
   perception, competent for living behavior; take the soul away from the
   body, and what do you have but a useless corpse, empty of all
   sensibility?

   This verse is of particular value; for it tells us how we are to
   reconcile the praises with which David commends the law to us (in Ps.
   19:7-8: "the law of the Lord converts the soul, enlightens the eyes,
   and imparts wisdom to babes," and other statements like it) with Paul's
   statements which apparently contradict them: that the law is the
   ministry of sin and death, which only kills (2 Cor. 3:7). When Christ
   gives life to the law, David's praises apply to it; when Christ is
   taken away, the law is altogether as Paul describes it. Therefore,
   Christ is the life of the law.

   Where the Spirit of the Lord. Now Paul describes the way Christ gives
   life to the law, which is, by giving it his Spirit. The meaning of the
   word Spirit here is not the same as it is in the previous verse. There
   it means soul, and is used as a metaphor for Christ; here, it refers to
   the Holy Spirit himself, who is the gift of Christ to us. In
   regenerating us, Christ brings the law itself to life, and reveals
   himself as the fountain of life. He acts like the human soul, which is
   the source of all human vitality. Therefore, Christ is (so to speak)
   the soul of all beings; not as their essence, but by the action of his
   grace. Or, if you prefer it, Christ is the Spirit because he makes us
   alive by the vivifying power of his Spirit.

   And of his fullness have we all received, grace for grace; for the law
   was given by Moses, but grace and truth came by Jesus Christ. John
   1:16-17.

   Now John embarks upon the mission of Christ, which contains the
   abundance of all blessings, for there is not a thing belonging to our
   salvation which we need seek elsewhere. God indeed is the fountain of
   life, and righteousness, and power, and wisdom; but he is a fountain
   hidden and inaccessible to us. All these blessings are presented to us
   in Jesus Christ in all fullness, so that we may look for them in him.
   And he is ready to make them flow upon us, if by faith we build the
   proper pipeline. In short, in every part of this sentence John makes
   but one point, namely, that we must not look for any good outside of
   Christ. First, he makes it clear that we are utterly destitute and
   empty of all spiritual good. For if Christ himself abounds, it is to
   fill our emptiness, to relieve our poverty, and to satisfy us who are
   hungry and thirsty. Secondly, the writer warns us that no sooner do we
   turn away from Christ than we look in vain for a single drop of good;
   because it was God's will that every good should reside in him.
   Therefore, we find men and angels dry, the heaven empty and the earth
   sterile, when we try to have a part in God's gifts by any means but
   Christ. In the third place, he assures us that we shall want nothing
   whatsoever if we draw upon the fullness of Christ, which is in every
   respect so rich that we shall never be able to drain it off. John
   includes himself with all men, not because of modesty, but to make it
   clear that no one is excepted.

   There is some doubt as to whether John speaks of mankind in general or
   only of those who, after Christ's coming in the flesh, have shared more
   fully in his blessings. It is certain that those who lived under the
   law drew from the fullness of Christ. But since John distinguishes
   between the time before the Advent and the time after, he is more
   probably speaking of the new abundance of good which Christ at his
   coming brought with him. We know that when Christ appeared in the
   flesh, the benefits which were enjoyed in a limited way under the law
   were, so to speak, scattered abroad with a full hand; so that we have
   more than enough. This does not mean that each and every one of us is
   superior to Abraham in the grace of the Spirit. I am speaking of the
   greater extent to which God now distributes his gifts, and of the way
   and manner in which he does it. John's purpose in emphasizing all men's
   poverty with regard to the good offered us richly in Christ, was to
   invite his disciples to him the more persuasively. At the same time, it
   would not be absurd to extend the meaning of this statement further. In
   fact, the context itself justifies us in adding that all the fathers,
   since the beginning of the world, have drawn every good they have
   enjoyed from Christ. Since Moses gave them the law, they received grace
   from another hand. But I have already stated the interpretation I
   prefer: which is that John compares us with the fathers, in order to
   impress upon us the riches of the gift we have in Christ Jesus.

   And grace for grace. Augustine's exposition of this verse is well
   known. [72] He says that the continued blessings of God, and finally
   life eternal itself, are not rewards due us because of our merits, but
   acts of divine generosity with which by grace God rewards what we do
   and crowns his own gifts to us. All this is intelligently said; but it
   has nothing to do with this verse. We would get its simple meaning if
   we took anti in a comparative sense, which would give us the statement:
   All the graces alike which God showers upon us come to us from the same
   source (which is Christ). This verse might also be taken to point out
   that grace is given us for salvation, which is the completion of grace.
   But I myself agree with those who believe that it refers to the graces
   which are poured out in Christ, and over us like water upon a dry land.
   But, even while we receive these graces from Christ, he does not act as
   God (who is the source), but rather as the channel through which the
   bountiful Father pours them upon us. So it is that he was anointed for
   our sake, to anoint us all with him: wherefore, he was called Christ
   and we, Christians.

   For the law came by Moses. Here he anticipates a likely objection. The
   Jews had such a high regard for Moses that they would admit nothing as
   true if it differed from his teaching. The Evangelist, therefore, shows
   how inferior the ministry of Moses was to the power of Christ. At the
   same time, this comparison sheds no little light on the authority of
   Christ. Since there was no deference the Jews did not pay Moses, the
   Evangelist points out that what he brought was little when compared
   with the grace of Christ.

   Another difficulty was that the Jews thought they received from the law
   what is not given us except in Christ. Therefore, the Evangelist
   contrasts the law with grace and truth, and implies that both were
   lacking in the law. Truth, in my judgment, indicates a fixed and firm
   stability in things. By grace I understand the spiritual fulfillment of
   the things which the law contains as mere letter. And these two words
   may be said to be figures of speech with the same meaning: namely, that
   the truth of the law consists in the grace which was exhibited in
   Christ. It does not much matter whether these two words are put
   together or separated one from the other, for either way the sense of
   the statement is the same. This much is certain: according to John, the
   law contained the shadowy image of the spiritual goods which we find in
   Christ; from which it follows that when the law is separated from
   Christ, nothing is left but empty forms. This is why Paul said that the
   law is shadows, Christ the substance (Col. 2:17). But we must not
   imagine that the law gives us only falsehood; because even though the
   law in itself is dead, Christ himself is the soul of the law and makes
   it alive. Still the question here has to do with the power of the law
   apart from Christ; and the Evangelist asserts that without Christ the
   law is nothing but a shadow, without substance and without power. This
   truth consists in the fact that through Christ we obtain a grace which
   is not available through the law. By grace in general, I understand the
   free forgiveness of sins and the renewal of the heart. With this word
   John states briefly the distinction between the Old and the New
   Testaments (which was done more fully in Jer. 31:31), and includes in
   it all that has to do with spiritual righteousness. But this
   righteousness consists of two parts: namely, that God is reconciled to
   us freely, not imputing our sins to us; and that he has engraved his
   law within us and renewed us by his Spirit for obedience to it. It
   follows that the law is expounded wrongly and falsely when it keeps us
   to itself and even prevents our access to Christ.

  4. EXAMPLES OF EXEGESIS

   When was fulfilled that which was spoken by Jeremy the prophet, saying,
   In Rama there was a voice heard, lamentation, and weeping, and great
   mourning, Rachel weeping for her children, and would not be comforted,
   because they are not. Matt. 2:17-18.

   It is certain that the prophet was describing the destruction of the
   tribe of Benjamin as it occurred in his time (Jer. 31:15). He had
   already predicted the destruction of Judah, to which had been attached
   half the tribe of Benjamin. He put this mourning in dead Rachel's mouth
   by way of personification (prosopopoeia), which is very effective in
   rousing the feelings. Jeremiah did not use rhetoric merely to embellish
   his speech. He did it because there was no way to correct the stupidity
   and hard-heartedness of the living, except by calling the dead out of
   their graves, to weep over the chastisements of God which most people
   laughed at.

   Since the prediction of the prophet had already been fulfilled, Matthew
   did not take it as a prophecy of what Herod was going to do; rather he
   meant that with the coming of Christ there was to be a recurrence of
   the affliction which the Benjamites suffered many centuries before. He
   wanted to meet an objection which might have troubled and shaken the
   believers' minds: for how could one hope to be saved by a man because
   of whom, and at whose very birth, there had been a massacre of infants?
   It was surely a dark and dreadful omen that the birth of Christ kindled
   a flaming fire of such fury as we do not meet even in wars of greatest
   cruelty! But as Jeremiah promises a restoration after the slaughter of
   the people down to the infants, so Matthew argues that in spite of
   Herod's wholesale murder, Christ would surely come forth as the
   Redeemer of the nation. We know that in the same chapter of Jeremiah
   (31), mourning is followed by tender words of comfort. For immediately
   after the mournful complaint come the words: "Refrain thy voice from
   weeping, and thine eyes from tears; for thy work shall be rewarded, and
   there is hope at the end," etc. Such then was the likeness between the
   former calamity suffered by the tribe of Benjamin and this latter one
   [which occurred under Herod]; and they both were preludes to the
   restoration of well-being which was soon to follow.

   And he came and dwelt in a city called Nazareth: that it might be
   fulfilled which was spoken by the prophets, He shall be called a
   Nazarene. Matt. 2:23.

   Matthew does not derive "Nazarene" from "Nazareth," as though there
   were a real and certain and etymological connection between the two
   words. What we have here is a mere allusion. Nazir means holy and
   devoted to God, and is otherwise derived from nazar, which means to
   separate. It is true that the Hebrews called a certain flower (or
   rather, the insignia of the royal diadem) a nazar. But there is no
   doubt that Matthew used the word as meaning holy. We read nowhere of
   the Nazarenes as flourishing; but we do read, as in Num. 6:4, that they
   were consecrated to God as prescribed by law. We are, therefore, to
   understand Matthew's statement as follows: Although it was fear that
   drove Joseph to a corner of Galilee, God had a higher purpose; for
   Nazareth was ordained to be Christ's home, so that he might bear the
   name of Nazarene which was rightly his.

   But it might be asked what prophet gave this name to Christ; for there
   is in fact no such testimony in Scripture. Some think it is enough to
   answer that Scripture often calls him holy; but this is a poor solution
   of the problem. Matthew, as we have seen, emphasizes the word Nazarene,
   and by it refers to the ancient Nazarenes, who were considered
   especially holy. He as much as says that the holiness foreshadowed in
   the Nazarenes, as selected firstfruits before God, was perfected in the
   person of Christ.

   But we must still face the question as to where the prophets gave this
   name to Christ. Chrysostom, [73] who was unable to unravel the knot,
   settled the matter by saying that many books of the prophets have
   perished. But this is a careless answer. For even though the Lord
   punished his ancient people by depriving them of a part of Scripture,
   or suppressed those parts which were of lesser importance, nothing has
   been lost since the coming of Christ. People have been misled on this
   point by a passage in Josephus, [74] where he says that Ezekiel left
   behind two books. But Josephus may have been referring to Ezekiel's
   prophecy of the new Temple and new Kingdom, which is obviously distinct
   from his former prophecies, and amounts to a new book. In any case, we
   still have safe and sound all the books which were extant in Matthew's
   time, and they are preserved in good condition. Therefore, somewhere we
   should come across his citation from the testimony of the prophets.

   I think Bucer's judgment with regard to this matter is the best. He
   thinks we find the reference we need in Judg. 13:5. [75] This verse has
   to do with Samson, who is called deliverer in so far as he prefigured
   Christ; and the salvation which came by his hand and ministry was a
   shadowy prelude to the fullness of salvation which was exhibited to the
   world in the Son of God. Anything good said about Samson in Scripture
   must by right be transferred to Christ. If anyone prefers it that way,
   Christ is the original exemplar, and Samson is the inferior copy
   (antitype). We must understand that when Samson was invested with the
   honors due to the person of the Savior, the titles which adorn that
   high and truly divine office were intended not for him but for Christ.
   The fathers had only a taste of that grace of redemption which we who
   are in Christ have received in full.

   It is easy to see why Matthew spoke of prophets in the plural: The Book
   of Judges was composed by a number of prophets. But I think that the
   reference to the prophets in this place has a wider significance. For,
   the patriarch Joseph, who was called a Nazarene by his brothers, was a
   temporal savior of the church; he was in many respects a type of
   Christ, and even his living image (Gen. 49:26, Deut. 33:16). God,
   therefore, intended that the high dignity conferred upon Joseph should
   have reappeared in the person of Samson, who therefore received the
   title Nazarene. In all this, it was God's purpose to provide for the
   training of the faithful: to fix their hearts upon the Redeemer to
   come, who was set apart from all men, to be the firstborn among many
   brothers.

   And they crucified him, and parted his garments, casting lots: that it
   might be fulfilled which was spoken by the prophet, They parted my
   garments among them, and upon my vesture did they cast lots. Matt.
   27:35.

   It is quite certain that it was the custom of the soldiers to divide
   the spoils of a condemned man among themselves; even though it was
   perhaps unusual to cast lots for a seamless coat. So, nothing happened
   to Christ that did not happen to all condemned men. And yet this story
   deserves utmost attention. The Evangelists present us with a Christ
   stripped naked of his clothes, to impress upon us that by his nakedness
   we are covered with riches which adorn us before God. The Son was
   stripped by God's will, to clothe us with his righteousness and an
   abundance of all wealth. So it is that whereas before our rags and
   filth made us unfit for heaven, now we all can appear with God's
   angels, in his presence, boldly and without fear. Christ himself let
   the soldiers tear his seamless coat in pieces, like beasts at their
   prey to enrich us with the riches of his victory.

   Moreover, as Matthew says, this happened in fulfillment of David's
   prophecy, They divided my garments among them (Ps. 22:18). This bitter
   complaint is a metaphor, and its language is figurative. But as applied
   to Christ, its meaning is, as we say, literal; for it states a matter
   of fact. By garments, David means his wealth and honor; he means that
   he had been a prey to his enemies, who had in his own lifetime and
   under his very eyes despoiled his house of everything he possessed, and
   gone so far as to ravish his wife. When he writes that his garments
   were divided by lot, he is using a metaphor to express the cruelty of
   his enemies.

   Since David was an image and foreshadowing of Christ, he was endowed
   with the Spirit of prophecy, and predicted the sufferings of Christ. We
   must not forget that when the soldiers robbed Christ of his garment,
   they did this outrage according to signs and tokens indicated a long
   time before. When we see this, we are no longer troubled by the scandal
   Christ's nakedness causes to the carnal mind. We now understand that he
   suffered everything rightly and properly as the Redeemer, and as
   prophesied and declared by the Spirit.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [68] Anabaptists is a loose and derogatory term applied to radical
   sects of the Reformation era. Calvin was especially opposed to them;
   not so much because they opposed infant baptism as because they claimed
   revelation beyond Scripture and because they advocated a complete
   separation of church and state.

   [69] Heinrich Cornelius Agrippa von Nettesheim of Cologne (1486-1535).
   A man in the stereotype Renaissance style. He was a Neoplatonist and
   worked at "occult philosophy." His unorthodoxy and skepticism aroused
   the ire of the Catholics, and the Protestant Reformers regarded him as
   a heretic and a charlatan.

   [70] Bk. II, ch. ii, par. 3.

   [71] When Calvin speaks roundly of Greek and Latin interpreters, he
   means primarily Chrysostom, Jerome, and Augustine, whose works were
   continually before him. But he knew many of the other fathers of the
   ancient church (see Introduction, p. 22).

   [72] The anti-Pelagian writings, De gratia et libero arbitrio, ch. 21,
   and De correptione et gratia, ch. 41. See also his Tractates on the
   Gospel of John, No. 3, Sec. 9.

   [73] John Chrysostom (347-407), the bishop of Constantinople, was a man
   much after Calvin's heart. He was a powerful preacher who aimed at
   reform. He practiced "lucidity and brevity" in his voluminous Biblical
   homilies and commentaries. He was a brave critic of the mighty both in
   the church and in the state. He made many enemies and ended in exile.

   [74] Flavius Josephus (A.D. 37-95?), Jewish antiquarian and historian,
   has put all subsequent historians of the Bible in his debt. His two
   books, On the Jewish War and Jewish Antiquities, have been "primary
   sources" for our knowledge of events, places, parties, etc., having to
   do with the New Testament. Calvin seems to have had his works before
   him as he dictated his New Testament Commentaries at home.

   [75] Bucer's In sacra quatuor evangelia, enarrationes perpetua, 1536,
   on Matt. 2:23.
     __________________________________________________________________

II The Knowledge of God

  THE TEXT

   In the year that king Uzziah died I saw also the Lord sitting upon a
   throne, high and lifted up, and his train filled the temple. Above it
   stood the seraphims: each one had six wings; with twain he covered his
   face, and with twain he covered his feet, and with twain he did fly.
   And one cried unto another, and said, Holy, holy, holy, is the Lord of
   hosts: the whole earth is full of his glory. And the posts of the door
   moved at the voice of him that cried, and the house was filled with
   smoke. Then said I, Woe is me! for I am undone; because I am a man of
   unclean lips, and I dwell in the midst of a people of unclean lips: for
   mine eyes have seen the King, the Lord of hosts. Isa. 6:1-5.

   We may ask how Isaiah could see God who is spirit and is therefore not
   visible to bodily eyes. Since the minds of men are incapable of
   mounting to the infinite height of God, how can man apprehend God under
   any visible form? But we must realize that whenever God revealed
   himself to be seen by the fathers, he never appeared as he is in
   himself but as he could be understood by human minds. Since men crawl
   on the ground, or at least dwell far below the heavens, there is no
   absurdity in the statement that God descends to them in order to turn
   upon them, as though he used a mirror, some reflected rays of his
   glory. Therefore Isaiah was shown a form of a kind which enabled him
   with his own understanding to taste the inconceivable majesty of God.
   This is the reason that he attributes a throne, a robe, and a bodily
   appearance to God.

   From this passage we may derive the valuable assurance that whenever
   God gives any sign whatever of his presence he is in truth present with
   us. He does not play a game with such meaningless shapes as men use
   when they impiously distort him with their inventions. Since the vision
   was in no way a false symbol of the presence of God, Isaiah is right in
   asserting that he saw God. Similarly when John is said to have seen the
   Holy Spirit in the form of a dove, the name Spirit is transferred to
   the symbol and there is nothing false in the statement. John did not
   indeed see the essence of the Spirit, but he did have certain, clear,
   and unambiguous evidence that the Spirit of God dwelt in Christ.

   In the second place we may ask, Who was that Lord? John (ch. 12:41)
   teaches that he was Christ; and this is true because God never revealed
   himself to the fathers except in his eternal Word, his only-begotten
   Son. Yet, in my judgment, it is wrong to restrict this vision to the
   person of Christ, since the prophecy refers rather to God without any
   differentiation. Nor does the use of the name 'adonai (Lord), which may
   seem more appropriate to Christ, support the restriction, for it is
   often used simply for God. Here then God is meant. Yet it is correct to
   say that Isaiah saw the glory of Christ, because Christ was the image
   of the invisible God.

   Sitting upon a throne the prophet could have found no better image than
   that of a judge to impress the Jews with the majesty of God. And later
   we shall hear the severe sentence which the Lord pronounces from his
   judgment seat. But we should not suppose that the prophet deliberated
   about the way in which he should depict God. He described faithfully
   the form which was disclosed and exhibited to him.

   We may wonder whether the prophet was led into the Temple, or whether
   the whole vision appeared to him in his sleep. Many arguments are
   offered on both sides, but they leave us uncertain. If he was not in
   the Temple, the revelation could have been given him at home or in a
   field, where other prophets received their visions.

   His extreme parts (extrema) filled the temple. Almost all interpret as
   "the fringes of his garments," although the word may equally well refer
   to the edges of the throne, to emphasize its great size, which was as
   large as the whole Temple. The purpose of the statement in any case is
   to attribute to God a grandeur beyond any human form.

   The vision had the more authority because it appeared in the Temple.
   God had promised that he would meet his people there, and the people
   expected his voice to come from there, as Solomon had said at the
   dedication. Therefore, in order that the people might know that this
   vision came from the God whom they daily invoked, in whom they were
   boasting without warrant, it was granted to the prophet in the Temple.
   For thus no little assurance was given them that this was not the
   speech of any mortal man but a heavenly oracle pronounced by the God
   whose name they used so presumptuously whenever they wished to obtain
   something more for themselves. . . . The prophetic word was harsh and
   hateful, and it greatly needed confirmation. So it is not unusual for
   the prophets to say that God speaks from his Temple, his sanctuary.

   Seraphim. After the statement that God had appeared to him, full of
   majesty and glory, he adds that angels were standing near God; and he
   calls them seraphim because of their fiery zeal. Although the
   derivation of this word [from saraph, burn] is known, various
   explanations of it are offered. Some say they are called seraphim
   because they burn with the love of God; others, because they are swift
   like fire; others, because they shine. Whatever may be the reason, the
   description shows us the radiant splendor and the boundless majesty of
   God, so that we learn to understand and hold in reverence his matchless
   and immeasurable glory.

   Many think there were two seraphim, corresponding to the two cherubim
   above the Ark of the Covenant. I like this idea, but I do not dare to
   affirm what is not stated in the text. However, in general,
   descriptions like this one use symbols which were familiar and well
   known to religious people; and this may well be the case with this
   prophecy. So I accept the guess of two as probable, leaving open the
   possibility of more; for Daniel saw not two angels but myriads.

   Six wings. This figure has a meaning: the wings so placed represent a
   mystery which God did not wish left wholly hidden.

   The two wings with which the angels fly represent simply the swiftness
   and readiness with which they carry out God's commands. Since this
   analogy is very obvious, only contentious men will raise objections.

   The two wings with which they covered their faces show clearly enough
   that not even angels can endure the full glory of God, and so they
   shade their eyes as we do when we wish to look at the sun. But if
   angels cannot endure God's majesty, how great is the rashness of men
   who try to penetrate it! Let us learn then that we ought to limit our
   inquiries to what is within our capacity and fitting for us, so that
   our understanding may soberly and modestly taste what is beyond our
   powers. The angels do not cover their faces so completely that they
   have no joy in the sight of God (and they can still see to fly without
   deviating from their course). So we also should behold God, but only so
   far as our nature can bear.

   It is more difficult to interpret the two lower wings. Some think the
   feet of the angels were covered so as not to touch the earth and become
   unclean as human feet do. For whenever we walk we pick up dirt and
   filth, and so long as we wander on earth we are always contracting some
   contagion or other. The believing are then warned that they will have
   no dealings with angels until they have risen and are no longer tied to
   earth. Some give this explanation, but I agree more with others who
   think that the purpose of these wings is the opposite of the upper
   ones. As with the upper wings the angels cover their faces lest they be
   annihilated by the splendor of God, so also they have the lower wings
   by which they themselves are hidden from our sight. But if it is true
   that the faint beams of divine glory shining out from the angels cannot
   be seen by us without destroying us, how can we behold God's most
   glorious and splendid majesty which overwhelms all sense? Let men learn
   that since they cannot even look at the angels, they are very far from
   the perfect knowledge of God. This seems to me the better
   interpretation, but I do not exclude the others.

   They were crying. When we read that the angels are busy proclaiming the
   glory of God, we know that their example is presented for our
   imitation. For the holiest service of all that we can offer God is to
   occupy ourselves in praising his name. Such adoration links us with the
   angels, so that even while we sojourn on the earth we are yet joined to
   the citizens of heaven and somewhat resemble them. But if there is to
   be true harmony between all the chords of the angels and our own, we
   must strive earnestly that there may be a correspondence between the
   praise of God with our tongues and all the actions of our lives. This
   aim will be achieved at the last if we keep our eyes fixed as steadily
   as possible on the glory of God.

   Holy, holy, holy. The ancients used this passage when they wished to
   prove against the Arians that there are three persons in the one divine
   essence. I do not reject this interpretation, although if I were
   dealing with heretics I should prefer to use clearer evidence. . . .
   And although I do not doubt that the one God in three Persons is here
   meant by the angels (for certainly God cannot be praised without
   honoring Father, Son, and Holy Spirit together), yet I think clearer
   passages should be used in defending our faith, lest we incur the
   ridicule of heretics. Surely the repetition proves rather the unwearied
   zeal of the seraphim; the prophet meant that the angelic song has no
   end, for God's holiness furnishes to them and to us an inexhaustible
   theme.

   The whole earth is full. The fullness could refer to the fruits and the
   living creatures with which God so abundantly fills the earth, and the
   meaning would then be that the glory of God shines out in the enticing
   variety of the beauty of the earth, which is evidence of his Fatherly
   love. But a simpler and truer interpretation is that the glory of God
   fills the whole world or extends to all the quarters of the earth.
   Here, in my judgment, is an implied contradiction to the foolish
   self-conceit of the Jews who thought that the glory of God did not
   exist apart from them, and wished to confine it to the Temple. This
   latter meaning is consistent with the prophecy of the destruction of
   the Jews which follows. For access to the church of God was open to the
   Gentiles who were to take the place left empty by the Jews.

   And the posts shook. This tremor is a sign that it was not a human
   voice which the prophet heard. For no human voice can shake foundations
   and pillars. God did not intend that the authority of his words should
   have been recognized by the prophet alone; he meant it to be sanctified
   to all posterity, for all generations, and without ceasing. By this
   trembling we are led to realize that this voice of God is valid for us
   today; when he speaks we tremble. For if inanimate objects and dumb
   creatures are shaken by it, what must we do, who have feeling, smell,
   taste, and understanding, in order to obey his word devoutly and
   reverently?

   Woe is me: for mine eyes have seen. The prophet's reaction is not
   surprising. The whole carnal man must be reduced to nothingness that he
   may be renewed by God. For how does it happen that men live, or rather
   think they live, and are puffed up with vain confidence in their
   shrewdness and power? Only because they do not know God. Before he
   reveals himself to us we think ourselves to be not men, but rather
   gods. But when the Lord appears to us, then we begin to sense and
   realize what sort of beings we are. Humility arises from and consists
   in this: that man claim nothing more for himself and depend wholly on
   God.

   This passage and others like it must be carefully considered. It was
   customary for the ancients, whenever they saw God, to speak in this
   way: "I am undone. It's all up with me." Before our minds seriously
   approach God, our life is an empty sham. We walk in shadows in which it
   is hard to distinguish true from false. But when we come into light,
   the difference is clear and easy to know. When God comes to us, he
   brings light with him, and we see our emptiness. . . . But does the
   sight of God really bring death to men? It seems absurd that the sight
   or nearness of God should destroy life of which he is origin and giver.
   I answer that it does this contingently, since death results from our
   fault and not from the nature of God. For death is already in us, but
   we do not perceive it except when it is contrasted with the life of
   God. This truth the prophet clearly and certainly knows.

   Thus saith the Lord, Let not the wise man glory in his wisdom, neither
   let the mighty man glory in his might, let not the rich man glory in
   his riches. But let him that glorieth glory in this, that he
   understandeth and knoweth me, that I am the Lord which exercise
   loving-kindness, judgment and righteousness, in the earth: for in these
   things I delight, saith the Lord. Jer. 9:23-24.

   From the second part of this passage we learn that men are stripped of
   all their glory, not to leave them groveling in their own shame, but to
   clothe them with another that is better. For God does not take pleasure
   in men's shame. But since men claim for themselves more than is good
   for them, and even intoxicate themselves with self-flattery, God takes
   away from them their false glory. After they have learned that whatever
   they think they possess, either by nature, or their own efforts, or
   through other creatures, is a mere phantom, then they may seek true
   glory.

   In understanding and knowing me. Although the prophet means the same
   thing by both verbs, he does not use the two without a reason. When men
   belittle the knowledge of God, they must be warned that to know God is
   the sum of perfect wisdom. Jeremiah wishes to correct a perverse error
   under which the whole world suffers. Today all sorts of subjects are
   eagerly pursued; but the knowledge of God is neglected. We see with
   what zeal everyone follows his own interests, while scarcely one man in
   a hundred deigns to devote half an hour a day to the knowledge of God.
   And from pride arises men's second mistake: they think the knowledge of
   God to be a common possession. So we see why the prophet used two verbs
   to name the same thing: he wanted to arouse greater zeal in men, since
   he saw that all were so lazy in the pursuit of this knowledge. Yet to
   know God is man's chief end, and justifies his existence. Even if a
   hundred lives were ours, this one aim would be sufficient for them all.
   But, as I said, men despise the thing which should be preferred above
   all else.

   Afterwards he adds that I am the Lord doing mercy and judgment and
   justice. God wishes to be so known. He alone is exalted; yet he comes
   down, so to speak, within our sight. The words which follow must be
   carefully considered. If God had said only, that I am the Lord, this
   would have been a complete doctrine; but it would not have been
   sufficiently clear. . . for men would think it enough to confess that
   there is one God. Therefore we must carefully note these words: God
   does mercy, judgment, and justice. We see today among the papists the
   name of God rashly flaunted aloft. There is no one of them who will not
   reiterate again and again that he worships God. But meanwhile they all
   profane the name of God. They rob God of his honor and distribute the
   spoil to the dead. This passage shows that the name of God by itself is
   of no importance when it is emptied of its true content.

   The true knowledge of God is not only to know him as the maker of the
   world, but also to be persuaded that the world is directed by him, and
   further to know the nature of that direction. He does mercy and
   judgment and justice.

   Moreover, the first thing to know about God is that he is kind and
   forbearing. For without God's forbearance, what would become of us? It
   is true and right that the knowledge of God should begin with the
   assurance that he is merciful towards us. For what use would it be to
   us to know that God is just unless we already know his mercy and his
   free kindness? But we know God by also knowing ourselves, for these two
   things are bound together; and if anyone scrutinizes himself, what will
   he find but reason for despair? As often as the thought of God's
   justice comes into our minds, we should shudder and despair. Truly all
   would flee from God unless he attract them by the sweetness of his
   grace. Therefore it is with good reason that Jeremiah, when he ordered
   men to glory in the knowledge of God, gave the highest place to God's
   compassion, and then added judgment and justice.

   The Lord God is truth (Those who translate God of truth do not attend
   to the syntax of the Hebrew, for that would need to read 'elohe
   'emeth); God himself is life and the king of the ages. Jer. 10:10
   (Calvin's wording).

   Here the prophet exalts and triumphs in God's name, and speaks of him
   as having overthrown and destroyed the falsehoods of the nations. He
   exposes their gross errors and shows up the wisdom of the world as
   absolutely worthless, because they stupefy themselves with [the worship
   of] wood and stone.

   He exalts the glory of God magnificently, by saying: For the Lord is
   God; that is, the nations worship their gods by telling fables about
   their powers and falsely inventing many miracles. For, when we examine
   everything honestly, it becomes certain that there is only one God; and
   all the gods of the nations vanish of themselves. This is what the
   prophet means: God is sufficient to destroy all the falsehoods of the
   nations. When his majesty comes forth, its splendor is such that all
   others which receive the admiration of the world are reduced to
   nothingness. After this, he speaks of truth; then he opposes truth with
   vanity. Before he had said that wood is vanity; now he says, Eternal
   God is truth; which means that He has no need to take on colors. The
   idols of the nations are painted, dressed up, decorated; but all such
   images are empty show. Jehovah, on the other hand, is Lord; that is, he
   does not in any way change; he desires nothing which he does not
   possess, and his own perfection carries all authority.

   God, then, is truth; and God is life. After the prophet has declared
   that in the essence of the one God there is true and substantial glory,
   he adds another certitude which he derives from the experience of men:
   God is life. For although God is in himself incomprehensible to us, he
   not only sets his glory before our eyes, but even offers himself to our
   touch, as Paul says (Acts 14:17). For Paul knew that God can be found
   by touch, even by men who are blind. Although the blind are deprived of
   sight, yet when they walk around a hall, they find the way out by
   touch, or they locate by touch the door out of a room, and when they
   wish to go in again they find the door. And Paul says that we have no
   need to go outside of ourselves, for whoever searches himself will find
   God within. For, in him we live, move, and exist (Acts 17:28). Hence if
   we raise the objection that God is beyond our comprehension, and that
   we cannot rise to the height of his glory, yet certainly life is in us.
   If life is in us, then so is evidence for God. Who is foolish enough to
   say that he lives of himself? Since men do not create their own life
   but obtain life precariously from another, it follows that God dwells
   in them.

   Now the prophet, after he has spoken of the essence of God, comes down
   to his activity. And surely this is the true knowledge of God -- not to
   speculate in the air as the philosophers do when they argue, but to
   know by experience that there is one God. How do we know? Because we
   exist; not, strictly, exist, but subsist (live in). And if we live in,
   truly that in which we live must be taken into account. And, to speak
   accurately, our subsisting will be found to be within the one God.
   Whence it follows that the life of man is an excellent index to the
   only God.

   God therefore is life and the king of the ages. First the earth was
   founded, and since then the years follow one another; in this cycle,
   there is great variation from one year to another yet there is regular
   and right order in their procession. Who will not recognize the glory
   of God in this ordering of the world? Therefore the prophet called God
   king of the ages.

   And ye shall know that I am the Lord, when I have wrought with you for
   my name's sake, not according to your wicked ways, nor according to
   your corrupt doings, O ye house of Israel, saith the Lord God. Ezek.
   20:44.

   Here God declares that his glory will be especially manifest when,
   solely for his name's sake, he has compassion freely upon the desperate
   and lost. And Paul, in the first chapter of Ephesians, especially
   praises God's gracious kindness when he calls the compassion with which
   God honors his elect, the glory of God kat' exochen. [76]

   Now the glory of God includes more than his compassion. As thy name, so
   is thy praise through all the countries of the earth (Ps. 48:10). God
   deserves no less to be glorified when he destroys the wicked than when
   he takes pity on his people. But Paul calls God's especial glory the
   undeserved kindness with which he embraces his chosen whom he has
   adopted. So God says here, You will know that I am the Lord when I deal
   with you for my name's sake, and not according to your crimes.

   Moreover, since God wishes his glory to shine pre-eminently in his free
   mercy, we must conclude that those who obscure his compassion or
   minimize it, or attempt to reduce its greatness to nothing, are the
   most hardened and open enemies of his glory.

   And we know that the teaching of the papacy aims in that direction. For
   in it, God's free kindness lies buried, or is hidden in a fog, or has
   wholly vanished. For they set forth merits of various sorts which they
   oppose to God's grace. And they divide merits into preparations, good
   works by which they gain God's favor; and satisfactions, by which they
   escape the penalties they would otherwise pay; and finally they add the
   interposition of the saints (as they call them). They invent for
   themselves a host of patrons and then devise countless other things for
   no other purpose than to keep the glory of God from being seen by men,
   or at most to allow only a few sparks to glow dimly. When we see the
   whole papal organization moving in this direction, we know that they
   are openly opposing God's glory, and that all who defend those
   abominations are worse than sworn enemies of God's glory.

   As for ourselves, let us learn that God cannot be known as Savior
   unless we accept from him what is essential to our salvation. For if we
   wish to keep accounts of what we give and what we receive, or to make
   any claim whatever, we reduce his glory. And so far as in us lies, we
   throw away the inestimable privilege which the prophet here extols.

   Therefore let us strive to know God through this Word. He deals with us
   according to his great mercy and compassion, that is, for his name's
   sake, and not according to our wrongdoing. But if these words were
   spoken to the ancient people because they had returned to the Land of
   Canaan, how much more today, when the Kingdom of Heaven lies open,
   God's free kindness deserves to be praised! Today, when he openly calls
   us to himself, to heaven, to the hope of the blessed immortality which
   is given us through Christ!

   [This was Calvin's last lecture. His closing prayer was:]

   Grant, Almighty God, since we have already entered in hope upon the
   threshold of our eternal inheritance, and know that there is a mansion
   for us in heaven since Christ, our head and the first fruits of our
   salvation, has been received there, grant that we may proceed more and
   more in the way of thy holy calling until at length we reach the goal,
   and so enjoy that eternal glory of which thou givest us a taste in this
   world by the same Christ, our Lord. Amen.

   And he built there an altar, and he called the place El Beth-el. . . .
   And God went up from him in the place where he talked with him. Gen.
   35:7, 13.

   Now we know why the holy fathers had to have their own altar, distinct
   from those of other nations. It was to bear witness that they worshiped
   not the various gods who were recognized everywhere in the world, but a
   God of their own.

   For although God is worshiped in the heart, yet external confession is
   the inseparable accompaniment of faith. And there is no one who does
   not know how helpful it is to us to be roused to the worship of God by
   external aids.

   If anyone objects that this altar looked no different from the others,
   I answer that the actual difference was very great. Others built
   altars, rashly and with thoughtless zeal, to unknown gods. Jacob bound
   himself always to the Word of God. No altar is legitimate unless it is
   consecrated by God's Word. Jacob's worship excelled that of others
   simply because he did nothing without the command of God.

   In calling the place God of Bethel, he may seem to be too bold; and yet
   the faith of the holy man is praiseworthy at this point also, and that
   rightly, since he keeps himself within the limits set by God. The
   papists are stupid when they claim to honor humility by exhibiting dull
   moderation. Humility deserves praise truly when it does not seek to
   know more than the Lord permits. But when he descends to us, adapting
   himself to us and prattling to us, he wishes us also to prattle back to
   him. And true wisdom is to embrace God exactly as he adapts himself to
   our little measure. Thus Jacob does not dispute with learned arguments
   about God's essence, but according to the oracle he has received he
   brings God near and makes him accessible to himself. Because he opens
   his mind to the revelation his prattling and his simplicity are, as I
   said, pleasing to God.

   Today, when the knowledge of God shines clearer, and when God in the
   gospel has undertaken the role of nurse, let us learn to yield our
   minds to him. Let us remember that he came down to us to raise us up to
   him. He does not adopt an earthly fashion of speech to keep us at a
   distance from heaven, but rather as a means of raising us up to heaven.

   Meanwhile we must keep to this rule of interpreting [Jacob's action]:
   since the altar was commanded by a heavenly oracle, the building of it
   was truly and duly a work of faith. Where the living voice of God does
   not sound, pomp and ceremony, however elaborately observed, are like
   empty phantoms. So, we should see that papacy is so much wind.

   God's ascent is like his descent. For God who fills heaven and earth
   does not change location. He is said to come down to us when he shows
   us a sign of his presence suited to our littleness. He ascended from
   Jacob when he disappeared from his sight or when the vision ended.

   By this way of speaking, God shows us the value of his Word which is
   always near us, as witness to his grace. Because of the great distance
   between us and his heavenly glory, he himself came down to us through
   the Word. This he did wholly and finally in the person of Christ; and
   Christ by his ascent into heaven has so elevated our faith that by the
   power of his Spirit he dwells always with us.

   And the light shineth in darkness: and the darkness comprehended it
   not. John 1:5.

   It may be objected that Scripture in many places calls men blind, and
   that the blindness to which they are condemned is a matter of common
   knowledge -- that all men's reasoning is a miserable business and comes
   to nothing. Where do all the labyrinths of error in the world come from
   [the objector will continue], if not from the fact that when men follow
   their own minds they land in vanity and lies? So long as men are
   without the light, the knowledge of Christ's divinity, mentioned above
   by the Evangelist, is extinct among them.

   The Evangelist anticipates this objection, and cautions us first that
   we must not judge the light given to man in the beginning by his
   present condition, because in man's present corrupted and degenerate
   nature, light has been turned into darkness. Nevertheless, he denies
   emphatically that the light of intelligence is entirely extinct,
   because some sparkling bits of light keep darting out of the deep and
   heavy darkness of the human mind.

   And the darkness comprehended it not. Even though, through the feeble
   bit of light left in men, the Son of God has always invited them to
   himself, the Evangelist tells us that this has not done any good,
   because "they saw but did not see." After man was alienated from God,
   his mind was oppressed by such ignorance that any light left in him was
   quenched and useless. This is proven daily by our experience. Still,
   even those who are not regenerated by the Spirit of God enjoy some
   rationality; which shows that man was made not only to breathe but also
   to understand. But it is none the less true that men do not come to God
   by way of their own reason; neither do they in this way get near to
   him, because all their intelligence is but vanity. Whence it follows
   that the salvation of men is hopeless unless God come to their aid with
   a new help. For even while the Son of God pours out his light upon
   them, they are so dull that they do not know the source of it; on the
   contrary, carried away by their own sickly and depraved imaginations,
   they only become insane.

   The chief parts of the light which remain in our corrupt natures are
   two: first, everyone has a certain seed of religion implanted in him;
   and secondly, every man's conscience is capable of distinguishing good
   from evil. But then, what happens except that religion degenerates into
   a thousand chimeras of superstition; and consciences pervert every act
   of judgment, so that one cannot tell vice from virtue? In short,
   natural reason can never guide men to Christ. Even though prudence
   teaches men to regulate their lives, and though they are born capable
   of the arts and sciences, the whole thing vanishes and leaves nothing
   behind.

   Further, it ought to be clear that the Evangelist is speaking only of
   man's natural endowments, and does not touch upon regenerating grace.
   The Son of God possesses two distinct powers: the first is known from
   the structure of the world and the order of nature; the second is the
   power by which he renews and restores our fallen nature. Since he is
   the eternal Word of God, the world was created by him and it is by his
   power that all retain the life they have received. By him also, man was
   adorned with the gift of the singular imprint of intelligence; and
   although by his defection he lost the light of intelligence, he still
   sees and understands, so that what he has naturally by the grace of the
   Son of God is not completely abolished. But since he has darkened the
   light which he retains by his stupidity and wickedness, it is necessary
   that the Son of God take on a new office, that of mediator, and restore
   the ruined man by the Spirit of regeneration. Therefore, those who
   confuse the light of which the Evangelist speaks with the gospel and
   the doctrine which deals with our salvation, philosophize absurdly and
   in an irrelevant manner.

   That was the true Light, which lighteth every man that cometh into the
   world. He was in the world, and the world was made by him, and the
   world knew him not. John 1:9-10.

   The true light here is not opposed to the false. The Evangelist meant
   to distinguish Christ from all others, so that no one would think He
   has the light in common with men and angels. The distinction is made to
   point out that whatever is bright in heaven and on earth derives its
   splendor from another; Christ on the other hand is himself light, and
   his brightness is his own, filling the whole world with his radiance;
   and there is no other source or cause of light. He is called the true
   light because it is his nature to illumine.

   Which lighteth every man. The Evangelist insists on this chiefly
   because he wants to base his teaching that Christ is the light upon the
   effects which he produces in us and in our experience. He might have
   argued more subtly by saying that since Christ is the eternal light,
   his radiance is inborn and not derived from another. But he turns our
   attention to our common experience. The argument is that since Christ
   makes all of us to share in his light, we should honor him alone as the
   Light.

   Now this passage is usually explained in two ways. Some restrict every
   man to those who, having been regenerated by the Spirit, partake of the
   life-giving light. Augustine gives the example of a schoolmaster who,
   if he has the only school in a town, is said to be everybody's teacher,
   even though many may not go to his school. Some people understand the
   statement that Christ enlightens everyone in the sense that no one can
   boast of having received the grace of the light of life otherwise than
   from him. But since the Evangelist speaks in general of all those who
   have come into the world, the next explanation pleases me better:
   namely, that rays from this light are diffused in all of mankind, as I
   have already said. We know that men, above all other living beings,
   have the singular superiority of having been endowed with reason and
   intelligence, and that they have engraved in their consciences the
   ability to discriminate between right and wrong. There is therefore no
   one who is without some intuition of the eternal light. But there are
   fanatics who are somehow insane enough to twist and torture this
   passage, and to infer from it that the grace of illumination is offered
   equally to all. But let us remember that this statement has to do with
   the common light of nature which is far inferior to faith. For no man
   will ever, with all the sharpness and perspicacity of his mind,
   penetrate to the Kingdom of God. It is the Spirit of God alone who
   opens the gate of heaven to the elect. Further, let us remember that
   the light of reason which God gave men is obscured by sin; so that in
   the deep darkness of dreadful ignorance and the abyss of errors there
   are hardly any sparks which are not utterly put out.

   He was in the world. He accuses men of ingratitude because they had so
   blinded themselves as not to know the cause of the light they enjoyed.
   This is true of every age. For even before Christ appeared in the
   flesh, he displayed his power everywhere. Therefore those daily effects
   he produces ought to shake people out of their torpor. What is more
   absurd than to draw water from a running river, and not to think of the
   fountain from which the river flows? Wherefore, there is no just excuse
   for the world's ignorance of Christ before he appeared in the flesh; it
   was due to their apathy and wickedness, because he has always been
   present among them with his power. In short, Christ was at no time so
   absent from the world that men might not have been aroused by his light
   and have raised their eyes to him. It follows that the blame is theirs.

   Let not your heart be troubled: Ye believe in God, believe also in me.
   John 14:1.

   This might be taken as imperative: "Believe in God, and also believe in
   me." But the other reading is more exact, and has been more generally
   accepted, as I have pointed out. Here we find that the way to stand
   fast is to let our faith rest in Christ and to recognize that he is all
   ready to come to our help with outstretched arms. One might wonder,
   however, why he puts faith in God first. Maybe he should have told his
   disciples that having believed in him, they should believe in God: for
   Christ is the very image of the Father, and we should fix our eyes
   first on him. Besides, he descended to us so that our faith, starting
   with him, might ascend to the Father. But Christ has something else in
   mind. All confess that we ought to believe in God. This is a fixed
   axiom to which all subscribe without controversy. Yet there is hardly
   one in a hundred who really believes it; not so much because the sheer
   majesty of God is too distant from us, but because Satan puts every
   kind of cloud between us and God, so as to keep us from the vision of
   God. So it is that our faith vanishes even while it seeks our God in
   his heavenly glory and inaccessible light. Our own flesh comes up
   spontaneously with a thousand fancies which turn us away from a right
   apprehension of God.

   Christ therefore presents himself to us as the proper object of our
   faith. If we direct our faith to him, it will immediately find
   certainty and rest. He is Immanuel, who responds within us to our
   inquiring faith. It is a basic article of our faith that if we do not
   wish to go around and around endlessly, we must direct our faith to
   Christ alone. If our faith is not to waver in the midst of temptations,
   it must be fixed on him. And this is the evidence of faith that we
   never allow ourselves to be torn away from Christ and the promises we
   have in him. The papal theologians dispute, or rather chatter a great
   deal, about the object of faith; but they leave Christ out, and mention
   only God. Those whose knowledge comes from their writings must needs
   waver with the least breath of a breeze. Proud men are ashamed of the
   lowliness of Christ; therefore they fly to the incomprehensible deity
   of God. But faith seeks to attain heaven only by submission to Christ,
   whose countenance seems to reveal a lowly God; and it finds no
   stability unless it find support in the weakness of Christ.

   If ye had known me, ye should have known my Father also; and hence
   forth ye know him, and have seen him. John 14:7.

   This confirms what we have already said; namely, that the curiosity by
   which people, not content with Christ, seek God in devious byways is at
   once stupid and harmful. They admit that there is nothing better than
   the knowledge of God. But when he is near them and speaks to them as a
   friend, they wander around looking high and low, and search for him
   beyond the clouds because they are too proud to see him nearby. Christ
   therefore reproaches his disciples because they do not know that God
   has been revealed to them fully in him. "I see," he says, "that so far
   you have not known me rightly because you have not seen the living
   image of God in me."

   And henceforth. He adds this not only to tone down his reproach, but
   also to accuse them of ingratitude and apathy because they have not
   done justice to the Father's gift through him. He says it in praise of
   his teaching rather than of their faith. What he means, therefore, is
   that they would even now see God, if they would only open their eyes.
   But by " see," he means the certainty of faith.

   Then they said unto him, Where is thy Father? Jesus answered, Ye
   neither know me, nor my Father: if ye had known me, ye should have
   known my Father also. John 8:19.

   Instead of doing them the honor of a direct reply, he reproaches them
   briefly for their ignorance and their complacency. They asked about the
   Father; and yet, here was the Son before their eyes, and they, seeing,
   did not see. It was, therefore, the just punishment of their pride and
   impious in gratitude that when they despised the Son of God who was
   there for everyone to see, they had no access to the Father. How can
   any mortal being rise to the height of God except he be raised there by
   the Son's own hand? Moreover, God has lowered himself in Christ to the
   mean condition of man, so as to stretch out his hand to him; and do not
   those who reject God's approach to them deserve to be excluded of
   heaven?

   Let us then know that it was said to us all: anyone who does not begin
   his way to God with Christ, must wander, as it were, in a labyrinth. It
   is not for nothing that, as we read elsewhere, he is called the image
   of the Father. Besides, all those who storm heaven like giants, without
   Christ's help, are deprived of any right knowledge of God. Anyone, on
   the other hand, who turns his mind and all his senses to Christ is led
   directly to the Father. The Apostle therefore is not deceiving us when
   he says that in the mirror of the gospel we see God clearly in the
   person of Christ (2 Cor. 3:18). And certainly the priceless reward of
   the obedience of faith is that a man who humbles himself before Christ
   rises above all heavens and penetrates the mysteries which the angels
   witness and adore.

   Now they have known that all things whatsoever thou hast given me are
   of thee. For I have given unto them the words which thou gavest me, and
   they have received them, and have known surely that I come out from
   thee, and they have believed that thou didst send me. John 17:7-8.

   Here we are told the chief thing about faith: which is, so to believe
   in Christ that our belief rests not in an apprehension of the flesh,
   but rather in the contemplation of his divine power. When he says, "
   They knew whatever thou gavest me as from thee," he means that
   believers recognize all they have as divine and from heaven. And
   certainly, unless we apprehend God in Christ, we are bound to be always
   wavering.

   He now declares that men have this knowledge when they receive what he
   teaches them. But anyone who thinks that his doctrine is from man, or
   that it is from this earth, will not acknowledge that its author is
   God. Hence he says, The words which thou gavest me, I gave them. And
   when he says that he taught as he received from God, he speaks as the
   mediator or the servant of God. He refers to God as his Father because
   he is in the lowly state of the flesh, and has concealed his divine
   majesty under the form of a servant. At the same time, we must hold on
   to John's initial testimony that, in so far as Christ was the eternal
   Word of God, he had always been one God with the Father. The point
   here, therefore, is that Christ was to his disciples a faithful witness
   to the Father; that, since the Father himself had spoken in the Son,
   their faith had its foundation in the sole truth of God. Moreover, he
   points out that if they accepted his words, it is because he has given
   them an effective revelation of the name of the Father by the power of
   the Spirit.

   And have known surely. He repeats with other words what he has already
   touched upon. The statement that Christ came from the Father and was
   sent by him means the same thing as that whatever he has is from the
   Father. In short, faith ought to look at Christ rightly, not to know
   him in his flesh and humiliation, but to rise to a knowledge of his
   divine power; for thus it becomes established that he has in himself
   God and whatever is God's. It is important to notice that in the former
   clause the Evangelist uses the word to know. In the latter, to believe
   takes its place. We are thus warned that we can know nothing of God
   rightly except by faith. But there is such certainty in faith as to
   justify our calling it knowledge.

   But if I do, though ye believe not me, believe the works; that ye may
   know, and believe, that the Father is in me, and I in him. John 10:38.

   He puts faith after knowledge, as though it were of a lower order,
   because he has to do with unbelieving and wrong headed men, who will
   not yield unless they are overcome and forced by experience. Such
   rebels insist that they must know before they believe. And our God
   indulges us to the extent of preparing us for faith through a knowledge
   of his works. However, true knowledge of God and of the secret of his
   wisdom comes from faith, because the obedience of faith opens to us the
   gate of the Kingdom of Heaven.

   And this is life eternal, that they might know thee the only true God,
   and Jesus Christ, whom thou hast sent. John 17:3.

   He now enlightens the elect in the true knowledge of God; and in so
   doing, he declares the way in which we receive life. He does not here
   deal with the ultimate enjoyment of life which is our hope, but rather
   with the way men attain life. If we are to understand this statement
   rightly, we must first realize that unless God, who alone is life,
   illumine us, we are all dead. Where, therefore, he has shone, we
   possess him by faith; and at the same time enter into the possession of
   life. This is why the knowledge of him is truly and properly said to be
   saving. Almost every word of Christ in this place is weighty. We are
   not concerned here with just any kind of knowledge of God, but with the
   knowledge which transforms us into the image of God, and the beginning
   and the end of it is faith; rather it is the same as that faith by
   which, ingrafted into the body of Christ, we are made to partake of the
   divine adoption and are made heirs of heaven.

   And Jesus answered and said unto him, Verily, verily I say unto thee,
   except a man be born again, he cannot see the kingdom of God. John 3:3.

   By this statement, he means, "So long as you lack what is first in
   God's Kingdom, it does not impress me that you call me Master. For the
   first step into the Kingdom of God is that you become a new man." This
   sentence is so weighty that we must look into each part of it
   separately. To see the Kingdom of God is to enter it, as we shall soon
   see from the context. But those who identify the Kingdom of God with
   heaven are mistaken; the Kingdom means rather the spiritual life, which
   begins in this life by faith, and in which we grow daily as we progress
   in a constant faith. This statement means that no one truly belongs to
   the church and is counted among God's children, unless he first becomes
   a new man. This verse shows briefly how one begins the Christian life.
   It also teaches us that we are born exiles and complete strangers to
   the Kingdom of God and that we are perpetually at war with it, until he
   makes us other than we are by a new birth. This verse therefore applies
   universally to the whole human race. If Christ had said to one man or
   to a few that they could not enter heaven except by being born again,
   we might imagine that he referred only to certain people. But this is
   not the case. He was speaking of all men, without excepting any. The
   wording conveys no impression of limitation. It is a universal
   statement which means that all those who are not born again, cannot
   enter the Kingdom of God.

   Moreover, being born again means not the improvement of a part but the
   renewal of the whole of one's nature. It follows that there is nothing
   in us that is not corrupted. If we must be renewed part and whole, it
   follows that this corruption is spread throughout our being. Of this we
   shall soon speak more fully. Erasmus, following Cyril's [77] opinion,
   has translated the adverb anothen incorrectly as "from above." I
   confess that the meaning of this word in Greek is unclear. But we must
   remember that Christ spoke with Nicodemus in Hebrew; and in Hebrew,
   this word is not ambiguous. There was no reason why Nicodemus should
   have been deceived and shrunk from the prospect of a physical second
   birth. Therefore, he understood Christ's words well enough as meaning
   that, unless a man be born again he is not reckoned as belonging to
   God's Kingdom.

   For I desired mercy and not sacrifice, and the knowledge of God more
   than burnt offerings. Hos. 6:6.

   This passage is especially important because it was cited twice by the
   Son of God (Matt. 9:13 and 12:17). . . . For a better understanding of
   the prophet's meaning, we must first notice that under the terms
   sacrifice and burnt offerings the outward worship of God and all formal
   ceremonies are included. The part is put for the whole (synecdoche).
   The same is true of the word chesed, mercy or kindness. There is no
   doubt that the prophet is setting faith or devotion to God and love of
   neighbor in opposition to all external ceremonies.

   I desire mercy (or "compassion pleases me") more than sacrifice, and
   the knowledge of God more than burnt offerings. Here the knowledge of
   God is certainly to be understood as faith or devotion to God. Since
   hypocrites think that they worship God properly when they use many
   rites, both clauses must be read together. It is faith with kindness
   that pleases God. Faith by itself cannot please him, since without love
   of neighbor there is no faith. And kindness alone would not be enough.
   If a man refrains from doing injury to others and does not harm his
   brothers, but is blasphemous and despises God, certainly his
   humanitarianism would be of no account.

   So we see that these two clauses cannot be divided, for to give the
   right sense to the prophet's words love of God must be joined with love
   of neighbor. . . .

   Further, it is important to notice that faith is called knowledge of
   God. This makes it clear that faith is not some cold and empty formula.
   When God's will is revealed to us and we so far accept it that we can
   honor and serve him as Father -- that is faith. The knowledge of God is
   a necessity of faith.

   Then spoke Jesus again unto them, saying, I am the light of the world:
   he that followeth me shall not walk in darkness, but shall have the
   light of life. John 8:12.

   It is a most beautiful praise of Christ that he is called the light of
   the world. With this statement, we who are by nature blind are offered
   a remedy, by which we are snatched and freed from darkness and made to
   share in the true light. This blessing is not offered to this or that
   individual only; Christ declares himself the light of the whole world.
   By this universal statement, he takes away the distinction not only
   between the Jew and the Greek, but also between the learned and the
   ignorant, the distinguished and the common people.

   But first we must inquire as to why it is needful to seek after this
   light. Men will not turn to Christ for light until they know this world
   as darkness and themselves so profoundly blind. Let us know, therefore,
   that when our minds see the way we obtain this light in Christ, we are
   all condemned as blind, and whatever light we have from elsewhere is
   judged as darkness and a deep night. Christ here refers not to what he
   has in common with others, but to that which is his own and his alone.
   Whence it follows that apart from him there is not a spark of true
   light. Every other brilliance is like lightning which merely dazzles
   the eye.

   In the beginning God created the heaven and the earth. Gen. 1:1.

   In the beginning. To interpret the beginning as meaning Christ is too
   frivolous. Moses meant simply to say that the world at its beginning
   was not the finished product we see today, but was created an empty
   chaos of sky and earth. . . .

   By the word create, he shows that something was made which did not
   before exist. For he does not use the verb yatsar which means shape or
   form, but bara'. What he means is that the world was created from
   nothing.

   This refutes the futility of those who imagine that formless matter was
   always in existence and who get nothing more from Moses' statement than
   that the world was fitted with a new look, clothed with form which it
   had previously lacked. This is the general opinion of unbelievers to
   whom only an obscure report of God's truth has come. Men usually mix
   God's truth with alien inventions. But it is absurd and most
   intolerable that Christians should labor to adopt this stinking error
   (as Steuchus [78] does). Therefore, the first article of the creed is:
   The world is not eternal, but was created by God. . . .

   God. The word Elohim, which Moses uses, is plural, and it is customary
   to conclude that here the three Persons in the Godhead are specified.
   But this does not seem a solid proof for so great a truth, and I do not
   agree with it. Rather readers should be warned to be on their guard
   against false glosses of this kind.

   They think that here they have evidence to prove against the Arians
   [79] the divinity of the Son and Spirit. But meanwhile they involve
   themselves in Sabellianism. [80] For immediately afterwards Moses adds
   that God (Elohim) spoke, and that the Spirit of God brooded upon the
   waters. If you would see three Persons [in this verse, you will not
   succeed, because] you will find here no distinction between them. . . .

   It seems to me sufficient to understand the plural as expressing the
   powers of God which he exercised in creating the world. I recognize
   that although the Scripture often recounts many divine powers, it
   always calls us back to the Father, his Word, and the Spirit. But those
   who twist what Moses is saying of God himself into a reference to the
   three Persons are presenting us with absurdities. I set it down as
   indisputable from the context that this passage names God and includes
   by implication the power of his eternal essence.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [76] The phrase kat' exochen; occurs in the New Testament only once,
   Acts 25:23, but the sense agrees with the emphasis in Eph., ch. 1. This
   is one example among many to prove that Calvin relied largely on his
   prodigious memory to provide him with the material needed for his
   Commentaries. The mistake here illustrates both the extraordinary range
   of his memory and its occasional fallibility.

   [77] Cyril of Jerusalem (ca. 315-386) tried vainly to keep to a middle
   way in the Arian controversy. After a career of conflicts, of exile and
   return, he enjoyed four years of peace until his death. He is most
   famous for his Catechetical Lectures to the Illumined (The Library of
   Christian Classics, The Westminster Press, Vol. IV). See Lecture II, 4
   f.

   [78] Augustinus Steuchus or Agostino Steucho (1496-1549) was an
   influential Roman churchman and director of the Vatican Library. He was
   a philosopher and a scholar. He wrote De perennia philosophia and many
   works on Biblical antiquities and literary exegesis.

   [79] Arius of Alexandria in the fourth century denied that the Son was
   of the same essence as the Father. He made of Christ a divine being of
   secondary rank. The term "Arian" was later used loosely to include
   Unitarians who asserted that Jesus was man only.

   [80] The Sabellians declared that Father, Son, and Holy Spirit
   represent aspects or functions of God. They thus denied the three
   Persons of the Trinity and consequently the reality of the humanity of
   Jesus. Both Arianism and Sabellianism are recurrent under various
   labels in Western Christianity.
     __________________________________________________________________

III Jesus Christ

  THE TEXT

  1. THE MEDIATOR

   Jesus Christ the same yesterday, and today, and for ever. Heb. 13:8.

   The only way to continue in the right faith is to keep to the
   foundation and not to turn away from it a single inch. If a man does
   not hold on to Christ, his wisdom is mere folly, even though he
   comprehend heaven and earth; for all the treasures of heavenly wisdom
   are contained in Christ. Therefore, this is a remarkable verse, because
   from it we see that there is no other rule of true wisdom except to set
   our whole minds on Christ alone. And, since the writer had to do with
   the Jews, he teaches that Christ has at all times in the past reigned
   as he does today, and that he will reign till the end of the world as
   he has reigned to the present time. Yesterday he says, today, and the
   same also forever; by these words he means that Christ, who is now
   manifested to the world, has reigned from the beginning of the world,
   and that, when we come to him, we must go no further. Yesterday
   therefore, includes the whole duration of the Old Testament. The word
   is used to establish that, even though the gospel has been preached but
   recently, this does not justify jumping to the conclusion that it will
   soon disappear; in fact, Christ has been revealed recently for the very
   purpose that men might know him from that time on and ever after. From
   this it is evident that the apostle is speaking not of Christ as he is
   in eternity, but of our knowledge of him, which the godly have always
   had, and which is at all times the foundation of the church. Of course
   it is true that Christ was, before he revealed his power. But about
   what is the apostle speaking? I say that in this verse he is speaking
   not of Christ's being but, so to say, of his quality (or of how he acts
   towards us); the question is not his eternal presence before the
   Father, but what men have known of him. Moreover, even though, with
   regard to external form and manner, Christ was manifested differently
   under the law and in our time, the apostle nonetheless speaks truly and
   properly when he says that the faithful have always had their eyes
   fixed upon Christ.

   The sun of righteousness shall rise to you who fear my name, and with
   healing in his wings; and you will go forth and leap like well-fed (or
   fattened) young bulls. Mal. 4:2. (Calvin's wording.)

   Now the prophet directs his words to the faithful. Up to this point, he
   had been threatening the hypocrites who arrogantly claimed holiness for
   themselves alone, although they had never ceased to provoke God's
   anger. Now, as I said before, he is addressing the others when he says
   shall rise to you. He distinguishes those who fear God or worship him
   purely from the multitude with which he has so far been disputing.

   The antithesis is important. Although the people as a whole had been
   infected with the general disgrace, God had kept a few untouched by it.
   He had been contending with the majority of the people; now he gathers
   the chosen apart by themselves and promises that for them Christ will
   be the author of true salvation. We know that the faithful would be
   terrified at God's threats of punishment and would almost cease to
   breathe, if God did not soften the severity of his condemnation.
   Whenever he announces punishment to sinners, most of them either laugh,
   or become angry, or else pay no attention at all. So it happens that
   the wicked continue securely in their crimes, while God thunders. But
   the faithful are terrified at one word from him and would be wholly
   discouraged if God did not bring some remedy.

   Therefore the prophet softens the harshness of the preceding threat, as
   if to say that he had not proclaimed the terror of Christ's coming with
   the purpose of filling their hearts with fear. Its dreadfulness did not
   concern them; he had described it only to frighten the wicked.

   This, then, is what he means: "Come near, you who fear the Lord, for I
   have a different word for you. The Sun of Righteousness will rise and
   will bring healing in his wings. Let those perish who despise God, who
   even fight against him and wish to hold him in subjection to
   themselves. But you, lift up your heads and wait patiently for that
   day. In the hope of it, endure all misfortunes calmly."

   Now we come to the high point of the verse. There is no doubt that
   Malachi here calls Christ the Sun of Righteousness, and the words
   appear especially appropriate when we consider how the situation of the
   fathers differed from our own. God always gave light to his church, but
   the full light was brought by Christ; as Isaiah also taught (60:1 ff.),
   The Lord will shine upon you and the glory of God will be seen among
   you. This is fulfilled only in the person of Christ. Then behold
   shadows will cover the earth. . . and the Lord will shine upon thee;
   and also, There will be no sun and moon by day or night, but God alone
   will shine. All these passages show that the name of sun is appropriate
   to Christ because God the Father shines upon us so much more brightly
   in his person than formerly in the law and all the additions to the
   law.

   For the same reason Christ calls himself the light of the world. Not
   that the fathers wandered like blind men in a mist, but that they had
   to be content with the light of early dawn or with the moon and stars.
   We know how obscure the teaching of the law was, so that it is truly
   called a "shadow." But when the heavens were finally opened by the
   gospel, then indeed did the sun rise; and when the risen sun gives
   light the full day comes. It is Christ's true office to give light.
   Therefore John begins by saying that the true light was from the
   beginning and lights every man coming into the world; and that the
   light itself shines in darkness. For some sparks of reason remain in
   men even when they have become blind by Adam's Fall and the corruption
   of their nature.

   But Christ is fittingly called light in relation to the faithful whom
   he has rescued from their natural blindness and has raised up to be
   ruled by his Spirit. This is the meaning of sun when the name is given
   metaphorically to Christ. He is called sun because without him we can
   only wander and go wrong, but when He leads us we keep on the right
   road; as he says, Who follows me does not walk in darkness.

   It must be noted that this promise is not restricted to the physical
   presence of Christ, but refers also to the gospel; as Paul says, Wake,
   you who sleep, and rise from darkness and Christ will give you light
   (Eph. 5:14). Every day, Christ enlightens us by his teaching and his
   Spirit; and although we do not see him with our eyes we know by
   experience that he is our sun.

   Further, he is called in the Hebrew sun of righteousness, that is
   perfection of justice, either because in him nothing will be incomplete
   or because the righteousness of God will be seen in him. But in order
   to comprehend the light which we enjoy through him and which comes to
   us from him to shine upon us, we must keep our eyes not on temporary
   advantages but on the spiritual life. This is the one requirement.
   Christ acts as our sun, not to direct our hands and feet in earthly
   actions, but to bring to us the light which shows the road to heaven
   and the direction by which we come to a happy and eternal life.

   Also we must note that this spiritual light cannot be separated from
   righteousness. In what sense is Christ our sun? Because he rescues us
   from the shame of the world and transforms us to the image of God. This
   is the force of the word righteousness.

   The prophet adds healing in his wings, calling the rays of the sun
   wings. This metaphor has much charm, because it is taken from nature
   itself and is beautifully suited to Christ. For we know that nothing is
   more health-giving than the sun's rays. We should be overcome in a
   short time -- even in one day -- by evil smells, if the sun did not
   cleanse the earth of its refuse. Without the sun, we could not breathe.

   Also we feel a lift of the spirit at sunrise. For night is like a
   burden to us, and when the sun sets we feel a heaviness in all our
   limbs. But in the morning, even the sick are encouraged and feel some
   change just from the effect of the sun's nearness, because it does
   indeed bring healing in its wings.

   But the prophet is here saying more than that a bright sun in a clear
   sky brings health. There is also an implicit contrast between storm
   clouds and fair, clear weather. In good weather we feel much more alive
   -- I mean all men, both sick and well. There is no one who does not get
   some sense of revival from a clear sky; but when the weather is cloudy
   even the strongest of us feel some discomfort. In this sense, Malachi
   says that healing will be in the wings of Christ, although we must
   still bear many ills.

   If we think back to the history of those times, we realize that the
   condition of the people was most miserable. The prophet now promises
   them a change, [a time] when the restoration of the church will bring
   them joy. We see then how he understands the healing in Christ's wings.
   Christ will disperse the darkness, and bring back from behind the
   clouds a serene sky, giving courage to the minds of the faithful.

   To call the faithful those who fear God is an ordinary usage in
   Scripture; for, as we have said, the center of righteousness and
   holiness is the worship of God. But here something new is expressed. It
   is the mark of true religion that men submit themselves to God although
   he is not seen, and although he does not speak face to face, and does
   not openly show his hand holding the scourge. When men willingly honor
   God's glory and acknowledge the world to be ruled by him and themselves
   to be under his authority, then they give true evidence of religion.
   This is what the prophet means by fear my name. Those who fear the name
   of God, do not desire to bring him out of heaven, nor do they demand
   obvious signs of his presence; they are content to show their faith by
   adoring and serving God, although they do not see him face to face, but
   only in a mirror or a riddle, or through his righteous and powerful
   judgments and the other great acts which he presents to our eyes.

   After saying that the sun of righteousness will rise for the Jews,
   Malachi adds that this will give them joy. As sadness oppresses the
   faithful when they are without Christ, or think him to be far away, so
   his favor is their greatest happiness and a solid delight. Therefore
   the angels proclaiming Christ's birth to the shepherds began, Behold I
   give you tidings of great joy. And although the metaphor may seem
   harsh, the prophet has a good reason for saying that the Jews will be
   like fattened calves. He is describing an unbelievable change and he
   must put it before them in vivid terms, to give them the greater hope.

   A contrast is implied in the verb go out. Their anxiety had long held
   them captive; now there would be freedom to go out. When things change
   for the better with us, we show the joy of our hearts openly to others,
   and seek a stage on which to express our feelings. Now we can see why
   the prophet says the Jews will go out. They have before been shut in by
   hard times. Now God will grant them room for lively rejoicing. So Paul
   says (2 Cor. 3:17), Where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty.

   And he dreamed, and behold, a ladder was set up on the earth, and the
   top of it reached to heaven: and behold, the angels of God were
   ascending and descending on it. Gen. 28:12.

   Behold a ladder. Here we have the description of a vision in which form
   and content are closely related. God showed himself perched upon a
   ladder, the ends of which touched heaven and earth. And angels were
   using it to go back and forth between heaven and earth.

   The ladder is taken by some Jewish commentators as a symbol of divine
   Providence which includes both heaven and earth under its direction.
   This interpretation is not satisfactory, for God would have given a
   more suitable symbol.

   But for us who hold the truth that the covenant of God was founded on
   Christ and that Christ was always the same eternal image of the Father
   and revealed himself to the holy patriarchs, nothing in this vision is
   perplexing or ambiguous. For men are separated from God by sin,
   although his power fills and sustains all things; and we do not see the
   line of communication which draws us towards him. Rather there is
   between us such a gulf that we flee from him, believing him to be
   hostile to us. The angels who are assigned the guardianship of the
   human race do not deal with us in a way which makes us familiar with
   their nearness and reveals it to our senses.

   It is Christ alone who joins heaven to earth. He alone is Mediator,
   reaching from heaven to the earth. He it is through whom the fullness
   of all heavenly gifts flows down to us and through whom we on our part
   may ascend to God. . . . Therefore, if we say that the ladder is a
   symbol of Christ, the interpretation is not forced. For the metaphor of
   a ladder is most suited to a Mediator through whom the service of
   angels, righteousness, and truth, and all the spirits of holy grace
   descend to us step by step. We, on our part, who are firmly fixed not
   only upon the earth but in the abyss of the curse, and are submerged in
   hell itself, through him climb up to God.

   Moreover the God of hosts tops the ladder because the divine fullness
   dwells in Christ, who therefore reaches heaven. For although all power
   was given by the Father to Christ's human nature, yet he would not be
   the support of our faith if he were not God manifest in the flesh. The
   fact that the body of Christ is finite in no way prevents his filling
   the heavens, since his grace and power is spread over all. To this Paul
   bears witness when he says that Christ ascended to heaven to fill all
   things.

   Those who translate 'al as near wholly distort the meaning [of this
   verse], for Moses wished to say that full deity dwelt in Christ. In
   fact, Christ does not so much come to us as become encumbered with our
   nature to make us one with him.

   Confirmation of the ladder as a symbol of Christ is found also in this
   consideration (and nothing has been more fully agreed by all): God
   sanctified his eternal covenant with his servant Jacob in his Son. And
   incalculable joy comes to us when we hear that Christ who excels all
   creation is joined to us. Indeed the majesty of God, plainly shown in
   his Son, must inspire terror so that every knee bows to Christ, all
   creatures pray to him and adore him, and all flesh is silent before
   him. Yet at the same time Christ shows himself to us as friendly and
   gentle, and he makes known to us by his descent that heaven is open to
   us and the angels are made our companions; with them we have a
   brotherly communion, because our common Head took his place on earth.

   The angel which redeemed me from all evil, bless the lads. Gen. 48:16.

   Jacob joins the angel to God as an equal. He worships him and asks from
   him the same things he asked from God (v. 15). If you take this verse
   as a reference to an ordinary angel, the words are absurd. . . . It is
   necessary to understand them of Christ, who is intentionally given the
   title of angel because he has been the perpetual Mediator. Paul
   testifies that He was the leader and guide of the journey of his
   ancient people [through the wilderness].

   Christ had not yet been sent by the Father to take on our flesh that he
   might come nearer to us; but he was always the link joining men to God,
   and God did not reveal himself otherwise than through him. Therefore he
   is rightly called angel, messenger. . . . For there has always been
   between God and man a distance too great for any communication to be
   possible without a mediator.

   But although Christ has appeared in the form of an angel, we must hold
   to what is said in Heb. 2:16; he did not put on the nature of an angel
   and become one of the angels, as he did become true man. When the
   angels are clothed with a human body, they do not become men.

   Moreover we are taught by these words that the true gift of Christ to
   us is that he guards us and rescues us from all evils. And we must
   therefore take heed that our faithless forgetfulness does not bury this
   gift, which has been shown to us more clearly than it was formerly to
   the saints under the law. For Christ proclaimed openly that the
   faithful are given into his custody and that no one of them will
   perish. Therefore trust in his guardianship ought to flourish better in
   our hearts, and we ought to celebrate it with fitting praise. And also
   we should be roused to seek primarily the help of our best Guardian.

   His help is indeed especially necessary for us today. For if we think
   over all the dangers which surround us, we can find scarcely a day on
   which we were not rescued from a thousand deaths. And how does this
   happen except that we are under the care of God's Son, who took us over
   from his father's hand to watch over us.

   . . . The first tabernacle was yet standing, which was a figure for the
   times then present, in which were offered both gifts and sacrifices,
   that could not make him that did the service perfect, as pertaining to
   the conscience. . . . But Christ being come as a high priest of good
   things to come, by a greater and more perfect tabernacle, not made with
   hands, that is to say, not of this building; neither by the blood of
   goats and calves, but by his own blood he entered in once into the holy
   place, having obtained eternal redemption for us. Heb. 9:8-9,11-12.

   The Greek word for figure is parabole which in my judgment is about the
   same as antitupon. The apostle means that the Tabernacle was a
   secondary exemplar which corresponded to the original; as the picture
   of a man ought to correspond to himself, so that when we see it we are
   immediately reminded of him.

   Besides, when he says that the first Tabernacle was a likeness for that
   time, he means that it was valid so long as the external observances
   were in force. In this way, he restricts its use to the period of
   ancient law. This is almost the same as what he says soon after: that
   the ceremonies were in effect until the time of reformation (under the
   gospel). . . .

   As pertaining to conscience. This means that the ancient gifts and
   sacrifices could not penetrate the soul so as to make it truly holy.
   Some use here the word perfect, which I do not reject; but I think
   sanctify fits the context better. [81] But, if the reader is to
   understand the words of the apostle, he had better watch the contrast
   between the flesh and the conscience. What the apostle does is to deny
   that the legal sacrifices cleansed inwardly and spiritually those who
   performed them; and the reason he gives for his denial is that all the
   rites of the first Tabernacle were of the flesh or carnal. Then what
   good were they? There is a common notion that they were intended to
   teach people honesty and good manners. But those who think this way
   forget the promises which were added to these observances. Therefore we
   must reject their invention. It is all wrong and absurd to think that
   the flesh itself was justified by these rites, as though they were good
   only for the cleansing and purity of the body! The apostle's judgment
   is that they were earthly symbols which failed to penetrate to the
   soul. They were testimonies to perfect holiness, even though they
   neither contained it nor could confer it on men. They were helps given
   to the faithful, which laid hold of their hands and led them to Christ,
   to seek in him what was lacking in the symbols.

   But, someone will ask, Why did the apostle show so little respect for
   sacraments instituted by God, treating them with contempt, and going
   even so far as to rob them of all power? He did so, because he was
   thinking of them as they are when separated from Christ. We know that
   considered in themselves, they are niggardly elements of this world, as
   Paul himself called them (Gal 4:9). . . .

   But Christ being come an high priest of good things to come, by a
   greater and more perfect tabernacle, not made with hands. . .

   He now presents us with the reality behind the symbols of the law, in
   order to turn our eyes to it. For, anyone who believes that the things
   foreshadowed [in the law] have been revealed truly in Christ, will no
   longer hold on to the shadows. He will embrace the substance in all its
   solid reality.

   Nevertheless, we must see carefully and in detail how he compares
   Christ with the ancient high priest. He has already said that the high
   priest alone entered the sanctuary once a year, carrying blood with
   which to expiate sins. Christ is like the ancient high priest, in that
   He alone is honored with this dignity and office; but he is different
   in that he brings with him gifts which are eternal and establish his
   priesthood forever. Secondly, the ancient high priest and our own are
   alike in that they both entered the Holy of Holies through the
   sanctuary; but they differ in that Christ alone entered heaven by way
   of the temple of his own body. Even though the Holy of Holies was
   opened to the high priest once a year for a solemn performance of
   expiation, this was only a poor figure for the matchless [self-]
   offering of Christ. Indeed, they both went in. But the one entered into
   an earthly place; the other, into heaven, forever, even to the end of
   the world. Both offered blood, but there is all the difference in the
   world between blood and blood; the ancient high priest offered the
   blood of cattle, Christ offered his own. They both made expiation; but
   the one made under the law was ineffectual and had to be repeated each
   year; Christ's expiation kept its vigor forever, and is the source of
   our salvation in eternity. Hence, every word of the apostle is heavily
   weighted. Some change Christ being come to "Christ being nearby." But
   this does no justice to the apostle's thought. What he means is that
   after the Levitical priests had performed their office, at a fixed time
   they were removed, and Christ was chosen in their place. But this is
   obvious from ch. 7 of this epistle.

   Of good things to come means of things eternal. As mellon kairos is set
   against ton enestekoti, so future goods are opposed to the present. In
   short, the priestly work of Christ brings us to the heavenly Kingdom of
   God, and makes us to partake in spiritual righteousness and eternal
   life: therefore, no good comes from looking for something better. We
   need not go beyond Christ, because he himself possesses all that we
   need, and he will fill us.

   And for this cause he is the mediator of the new testament, that by
   means of death, for the redemption of the transgressions that were
   under the first testament, they which were called might receive the
   promise of eternal inheritance. Heb. 9:15.

   He concludes that there is no further need for another priest, because
   Christ himself fulfills this function under the New Testament. Besides,
   he does not claim the title of Mediator for Christ to let others share
   it with him; on the contrary, he contends that when this office was
   attached to Christ, all other mediators were repudiated. . . . He
   confirms this more fully when he states specifically how Christ
   discharged the office of the Mediator by the intercession of his death.
   If this happened only in Christ, and in no one else, it follows that he
   alone is the true Mediator. . . .

   Now, if anyone asks whether the sins of the fathers were forgiven under
   the law, the answer is the same as I gave before: they were forgiven,
   but through the benefit of Christ; in terms of the physical acts of
   expiation, we must always hold and maintain that they remained guilty.
   For this reason, Paul says that the law is a handwriting against us
   (Col. 2:14). When a sinner came forward, confessing openly that he had
   done evil before God and killed an innocent animal, he admitted that he
   was worthy of eternal death. And what did his victim do for him except
   that by it he sealed his own death as it were by his own handwriting?
   In short, only those who looked at Christ found peace in the
   forgiveness of sins. If looking to Christ only takes away sins, those
   who remain under the law do not find freedom. David himself declares,
   Blessed is the man to whom sins are not imputed (Ps. 32:2); but if a
   man is to share in this blessing, he must, setting aside the law, fix
   his eyes on Christ; for if he stays with the law, he is not set free
   from guilt.

   For he shall grow up before him as a tender plant, and as a root out of
   a dry ground; he hath no form nor comeliness, and when we shall see
   him, there is no beauty that we should desire him. Isa. 53:2.

   This statement turns our minds to what we said before: namely, that
   Christ at the beginning [of his life on earth] is to show neither
   splendor nor beauty before men, but before God he will nonetheless be
   highly exalted and beloved. Hence we see that the glory of Christ must
   not be judged by human eyes. What the holy books teach about him must
   be understood by faith. Therefore, the phrase before him is to be
   contrasted with the human senses which cannot grasp the wonder of
   Christ.

   The prophet used a similar metaphor in ch. 11:1: a branch will come
   from the trunk of Jesse. He compared the house of David to a dry trunk
   with no strength in it and no beauty; and he did not name the royal
   house, but Jesse whose name by itself was obscure. Here he adds in
   desert ground, by which he means that Christ's strength will come not
   like a tree from the humidity of the soil, but from outside the
   ordinary course of nature.

   Those who philosophize from this passage about the Virgin Mary,
   supposing that she was called desert ground because she conceived from
   the Holy Spirit and not from man's seed, are beside the point. For the
   passage deals not with the birth of Christ but with his whole reign. It
   states that he will be like a branch growing from dry ground, which is
   not expected to reach the right size.

   We should think of the whole history of his planting, of the men whose
   work he has used, of the small beginnings of the church and of the many
   adversaries who oppose it. Then we can easily see that all things
   happened as predicted. What kind of men were the apostles who could
   subdue so many kings and nations by the sword of the Word? Are they not
   deservedly compared to branches in a desert? The prophet is describing
   the ways by which the Kingdom of Christ was founded and established, so
   that all men may not judge it by human reason.

   The ugliness which he next mentions ought also to be understood not
   only of the person of Christ who was despised by the world and
   condemned to a shameful death, but of his whole reign. For that reign
   has had, in men's eyes, neither beauty nor splendor nor magnificence.
   In fact, it has nothing which could by its appearance attract men or
   charm their eyes. And although Christ rose from the dead, the Jews
   think of him always as crucified and dishonored, and look on him with
   disgust and contempt.

   But he was wounded for our transgressions, he was bruised for our
   iniquities: the chastisement of our peace was upon him; and with his
   stripes we are healed. Isa. 53:5.

   In order to counteract the offense which people might take, the prophet
   repeats the reason for Christ's great suffering. The sight of the cross
   of Christ offends many so long as they consider only what their eyes
   see, and pay no attention to the purpose. But all offense is certainly
   taken away when we understand that by this death our sins are atoned
   for, and salvation is won for us.

   Chastisement of our peace. Some think this is called chastisement of
   our peace because men feel so secure and remain so stupefied in their
   evil ways that Christ's suffering was required to move them. Others
   apply peace to conscience. Christ suffered that we might have a quiet
   conscience; as Paul said (Rom. 5:1), We, justified through Christ by
   faith, have peace with God.

   But I take it simply as reconciliation. Christ paid the price of our
   chastisement, that is, the chastisement due to us. By him, God's anger,
   which was inflamed against us, was appeased. The peace in which we are
   reconciled came from him who is the Mediator. Thus we have the general
   doctrine that we are freely reconciled to God because Christ paid the
   price of our peace.

   This doctrine, indeed, the papists confess, but then they restrict it
   to original sin; as if after baptism there were no more place for free
   reconciliation, and satisfaction were to be made by our merits and
   works. But the prophet here is not treating of a single aspect of
   forgiveness; he extends God's forgiving kindness through the whole
   course of our lives. Therefore the doctrine cannot be attenuated or
   restricted to any specific time without great sacrilege. . . . Our
   prophet teaches plainly that the penalty for our sins was transferred
   to Christ. What then are the papists claiming for themselves but
   equality with Christ and a share in his authority as his partners?

   With his stripes. Again we are recalled to Christ, called to flee to
   his wounds if we wish to regain life. Here he is set in contrast to us.
   In us are only destruction and death; in Christ alone is life and
   safety. He alone brings us a remedy. He provides health for us by his
   weakness, and wins our life by his death. He alone satisfies the
   Father; he alone reconciles us to him.

   We could say many things here about the fruit of Christ's suffering,
   but our task is to interpret, not to preach; and we must be content to
   state the plain meaning [of the verse]. Let each one of you take
   comfort for himself from this passage and fit its use to his own need.
   For these words were spoken not only publicly to all, but to each man
   individually.

   All we like sheep have gone astray; we have turned every one to his own
   way, and the Lord hath laid on him the iniquity of us all. Isa. 53:6.

   In order to impress on our minds the greatness of the blessing given us
   in Christ's death, he shows us how great is our need for healing. For
   unless we realize our own helpless misery, we shall never know how much
   we need the remedy which Christ brings, nor come to him with the
   fervent love we owe him. But as soon as we know ourselves to be lost
   and realize our own wretchedness, we rush eagerly to seize the remedy,
   which otherwise we should hold in contempt. To know the true flavor of
   Christ, we must each of us carefully examine ourselves, and each must
   know himself condemned until he is vindicated by Christ. No one is
   exempt. The prophet includes all. If Christ had not brought help, the
   whole human race would perish. . . .

   The prophet makes the comparison with sheep, not to lighten our guilt,
   as if straying were a minor misdemeanor; but to teach more plainly that
   it was the work of Christ to gather those who were scattered like
   foolish animals.

   By adding each to the general statement including all men, he appeals
   to every individual to ponder whether this is not true of himself. For
   we are little moved by a generalization unless each one of us
   separately feels that it applies to him. Therefore let every one of us
   rouse his own conscience and take his place before God's tribunal. Then
   will each one of us know his own bankruptcy.

   Next the prophet declares more plainly what this wandering is: every
   one has followed the way of his own choice; he has chosen to live as it
   pleased him. This means that there is only one way of living rightly;
   and if any man turn away from it, he can find nothing but ways which
   send him in the wrong direction. He is not speaking so much of actions
   as of our nature itself, which always sends us wandering. For if by
   natural instinct or wisdom we could bring ourselves back to the road
   and escape from error, we would have no need for Christ. But we all by
   ourselves perish unless we are freed by Christ our Savior. The more we
   trust our own wisdom and industry, the more quickly we rush to ruin.
   Here the prophet has shown us what sort of creatures we should be if
   Christ had not redeemed us. And all are included in the same
   condemnation. There is no one who is righteous; no one who understands;
   no one who inquires of God. All have gone astray and become
   unprofitable. There is none who does well, not one, as Paul said more
   at length (Rom. 3:10).

   And the Lord hath laid on him. Here we have a beautiful antithesis. In
   ourselves we are scattered, in Christ we are collected; by nature we go
   astray and are driven headlong to destruction, in Christ we find the
   road by which we are led to the gate of salvation. Our sins overwhelm
   us; but they are transferred to Christ, in whom we are acquitted. When
   we were perishing, separated from God and hastening to hell, Christ
   took upon himself the filth of our iniquities and rescued us from
   eternal destruction. (This refers of course only to the punishment of
   sin, for he was free from all guilt.) Let each one of us weigh his own
   sins carefully, that he may truly taste the grace [of Christ] and begin
   to see the fruit of his death.

   He shall see the travail of his soul, and shall be satisfied: by his
   knowledge shall my righteous servant justify many; for he shall bear
   their iniquities. Isa. 53:11.

   Isaiah continues the same theme. Now he declares that Christ, after he
   has suffered, will see the reward of his death in the salvation of men.
   For, to He will see, we must add the "fruit" or the "result" [of his
   labor]. These words are full of comfort. For Isaiah could not have
   expressed better the greatness of Christ's love for us than by saying
   that his delight will be in our safety; that he will be content with
   the fruit of his labor, like a man whose one wish and longing has been
   fulfilled. No man is satisfied except when he obtains the one thing he
   has most desired; then he disregards all else and is content with it
   alone.

   Afterwards the prophet shows the way or method by which we may rightly
   appreciate the force and efficiency of Christ's death and realize its
   fruit. The way he shows is the knowledge of him. I admit that the word
   da'ath can be read passively or actively, as knowledge of him or his
   knowledge. Whichever way we take it, it is easy to see what the prophet
   means. However insolently the Jews may quibble and in spite of their
   objections, we need not twist the meaning of what is here said plainly:
   that Christ alone is both master and author of man's justification.

   The work of Christ is stated in the words He will justify many; which
   mean that in the school of Christ, men are not merely taught about
   justification; they are made just by what he has done for them. And
   this is the difference between justification by law and justification
   by faith. For although the law shows what it is to be righteous, as
   Paul says, it cannot produce righteousness; and experience shows the
   same thing. The law is for us a mirror showing us our own
   unrighteousness. But the way to obtain righteousness, as taught by
   Christ, is simply to know him; and this is faith. In faith we lay hold
   on the benefit of his death and find full rest in him.

   The philosophers have given many excellent rules by which they think
   righteousness may be established; but they cannot give righteousness to
   anyone. For who by their rules has achieved the good life? And it is of
   little help to know what righteousness is, if we remain without it.

   But let us leave the philosophers aside. The law itself, which contains
   the most perfect rule of life, could not, as we said, confer
   righteousness. Not that there was anything lacking in the law; Moses
   declared that he set before the people good and evil, life and death.
   But because of the corruption of our nature the law was not enough to
   insure righteousness. Even as Paul taught (Rom. 8:3), the defect was in
   our flesh, not in the law. When the law speaks, nature drives us in the
   opposite direction, and our desires break out with the greater force,
   like untamed wild elephants, against God's command. Thus the law works
   wrath rather than righteousness. The law holds all guilty, and by
   exposing sin takes away from men every excuse. Therefore we must seek
   another way to righteousness: the way which is in Christ, whom the law
   itself set forth as its fulfillment.

   The righteousness of the law said, Who does these commandments, shall
   live in them (Lev. 18:5). But none did them. Therefore there had to be
   another righteousness; one that Paul taught, from Moses himself: The
   word is near, in your mouth and in your heart; this is the word of
   faith which we preach (Rom. 10:8). It is this doctrine that justifies
   us -- not the bare doctrine, but because it offers us the fruit of
   Christ's death, by which our sins are forgiven and we are reconciled to
   God. For if by faith we grasp this gift, we are counted as righteous
   before God.

   The prophet expresses this teaching clearly and shows its meaning. For
   these two clauses belong together: He will justify by his doctrine or
   by the knowledge of him, and He will bear our iniquities. He made
   atonement for us once for all; but now, by the teaching of the gospel,
   he is inviting us to accept the fruit of his death. Therefore the death
   of Christ is the substance of the doctrine that he justifies us. Paul
   adhered closely to the prophet's word when he taught that Christ was
   offered as sacrifice for us, so that in him we might become the
   righteousness of God; to which he added that Christ is our advocate,
   and urged us to be reconciled to God (2 Cor. 5:20).

   My righteous servant. The prophet teaches that Christ justifies us not
   only as God, but also as man, since he won righteousness for us in his
   flesh. For the words are not my son but my servant. Therefore, let us
   not think of Christ only as God, but let us study his human nature in
   which he practiced the obedience by which we are forgiven before God.
   For this, the sacrifice of himself which he offered, is the foundation
   of our salvation. As he himself said, I consecrated myself for them
   that they themselves might be holy (John 17:19).

   Therefore will I divide for him a portion with the great, and he shall
   divide the spoil with the strong; because he has poured out his soul
   unto death: and he was numbered with the transgressors; and he bore the
   sin of many, and made intercession for the transgressor. Isa. 53:12.

   Here the figure is changed to one drawn from the customary celebration
   of military triumphs, where the leaders are generally received and
   honored with a magnificent exhibition of the spoils of victory. So
   Christ like a strong and noble general triumphs over his conquered
   enemies. The second clause has the same meaning as the first, for such
   repetition is usual in Hebrew. Those whom he first calls great he next
   calls powerful or strong. Those who translate rabbim as "many" in my
   opinion misinterpret the prophet's meaning. There is only this
   difference between the two clauses: in the first, God states what he
   will give to Christ; the second adds that Christ will rejoice in the
   gift. Christ rejoices not for his own sake but for ours, since he gives
   the fruits of his victory to us. For us, Christ conquered death, the
   world, and the devil.

   He prayed for the transgressors. It is Christ's prayer to the Father in
   our behalf which ratifies the forgiveness won for us by his death.
   Therefore this addition is essential. In the old law the priest, who
   did not come to the altar without the blood of sacrifice, prayed there
   for the people; and so he foreshadowed what was fulfilled in Christ.
   For first Christ offered the sacrifice of his body, and poured out his
   blood to pay the penalty which we owed. Then to make the atonement
   effective, he performed the work of advocate and made intercession for
   all who in faith accepted for themselves his sacrifice. To this he
   testified in the words written for us by the hand of John: I pray not
   for these only, but for all who believe in me by their word (John
   17:20). If we are to be numbered with the faithful, let us not doubt
   that Christ suffered for us and that even now we receive the fruits of
   his death.

  2. THE PERSON OF CHRIST

   And thou, Lord, in the beginning hast laid the foundation of the earth:
   and the heavens are the works of thine hands; they shall perish, but
   thou remainest. . . . Heb. 1:10-11.

   At first this testimony may seem not to fit the case of Christ, since
   it has to do with the creation of heaven and earth. But this whole
   passage has to do with the glory not of God but of Christ. It is true
   that the psalm is a celebration of God's majesty, and makes no mention
   of Christ. I admit this. At the same time, it is clearly a public
   praise of God's Kingdom, and everything that is said in it fits Christ
   very well. For, where are the following prophecies fulfilled except in
   Christ: "Thou shalt arise and have mercy on Zion, that the nations may
   fear thy name, and all the kings of the earth thy glory" ; or again,
   "When the people shall be gathered together, and the kingdom, to serve
   the Lord." Where except in Christ are we to look for this God by whom
   the whole world shall be united in one faith and worship of God? All
   the rest of the psalm fits the person of Christ; among other things,
   because he is the eternal God, the Creator of heaven and earth,
   everlasting and changeless; therefore, high and lifted up in majesty,
   and set apart from all that has been created. David declares that the
   heavens shall pass away; but some get around this statement by making
   him say, "should the heavens pass away," as though he had made no
   positive assertion. But what reason is there for such a strained
   exposition? After all, we know that everything comes to an end. And why
   do even the heavens yearn and travail with hope for a renewal, unless
   they are marked for destruction? Besides, the eternity of Christ
   affords no small comfort to the believers who, according to the psalm,
   shall participate in it as Christ communicates himself and all his
   riches to his body.

   And now, Father, glorify thou me with thine own self with the glory
   which I had with thee before the world was. John 17:5.

   He declares that he has no desire except for what is his own; that he
   only wants to be seen in the flesh with the glory which was his before
   the world was made; or, more plainly, that the divine majesty which was
   eternally his might shine in the person of the Mediator and in the
   human flesh he has put on. This is a striking passage which teaches us
   that Christ is not an upstart and temporary God. For as his glory was
   eternal, so he himself always was. Add to this that there is here a
   distinction made between him and the Father; which means that he is not
   only God eternal but also the eternal Word of God begotten of the
   Father before all ages.

   Philip findeth Nathanael, and saith unto him, We have found him, of
   whom Moses in the law, and the prophets, did write, Jesus of Nazareth,
   the son of Joseph. John 1:45.

   Many argue deeply about Christ, but they get so subtle and involved
   that they can never find him. So it is with the papists who refuse to
   call Christ the son of Joseph. They are particular about his name: but
   yet they so empty him of his power, that in Christ's place they have a
   ghost. Were it not better to babble crudely with Philip and hold on to
   the real Christ, rather than with clever and high-sounding talk end up
   with only a fiction? There are many poor dunces today who, even though
   they speak as rude and ignorant men, teach Christ much more faithfully
   than the theologians of the pope, with their deep speculations. So we
   are warned that when we hear simple and ignorant men speak inaptly, we
   should not take offense and reject them, provided they lead us to
   Christ. However, we must seek pure knowledge from the Law and the
   Prophets, in order that we may not be driven away from Christ by
   falsehoods invented by men.

   Labor not for the meat which perisheth, but for that meat which
   endureth unto everlasting life, which the Son of Man shall give unto
   you; for him hath the Father sealed. John 6:27.

   He confirms the first part of this verse by saying that the Father has
   appointed him for this end (to give us an imperishable food). The
   ancient fathers tortured and misused this verse in order to prove the
   divine essence of Christ; as though sealed here meant that Christ bore
   the stamp of the Father. But he speaks here, not subtly of his eternal
   essence, but of his mandate and mission in our behalf, and of what we
   are to hope and expect from him. By an apt metaphor, he refers to the
   ancient custom of sealing with a ring, which made an agreement
   authoritative and binding. Christ's intention is to declare that his
   task was imposed upon him by the Father, and that the appointment of
   the Father is as a seal engraved upon him. In this way, he emphasizes
   that all he has is from the Father. In short, it is not for everybody
   to feed souls with incorruptible food, when Christ comes forth with the
   promise of so great a blessing. He adds that he has God's approval and
   has been sent to us with God's own seal as the mark of his mission.

   I and my Father are one. John 10:30.

   He sets out to meet the mockery of the wicked, who claimed that he was
   in no position to protect his disciples, since he did not possess God's
   power. He, therefore, testifies that his business and the Father's are
   one; which means that the Father will never deny his help to him or to
   his sheep. The ancient fathers misused this verse when they brought it
   up as proof that Christ is homoousios (of one essence) with the Father.
   Christ is not here arguing that he is one substance with the Father,
   but that he is of one mind with him; which means that whatever Christ
   does has behind it the power of God.

   Believest thou not that I am in the Father, and the Father in me? The
   words that I speak unto you I speak not of myself. John 14:10.

   These words refer not to Christ's divine essence, but to the manner of
   revelation. For, as to his secret deity, Christ is known to us no
   better than the Father. He is rightly called the express image of God,
   for the Father revealed himself totally in the Son: but in the sense
   that God's unbounded goodness, wisdom, and power appeared in him.
   Therefore, the fathers were not wrong when they found in this verse a
   basis for asserting the divinity of Christ. Still, since Christ is here
   speaking not of what he is in himself, but of what he is toward us, it
   is a question of power rather than of essence. The Father therefore is
   said to be in Christ because the fullness of Divinity dwells in him,
   and manifests his power in him. On the other hand, Christ is said to be
   in the Father, because by his divine power he shows that he is one with
   the Father.

   The words which I speak to you. He proves by the effects of his words
   that we should seek God nowhere but in him. He contends that his
   teaching, which is heavenly and truly divine, is evidence and the
   brilliant reflection of God's own presence. If anyone objects that the
   prophets also were sons of God, because, inspired by the Spirit, they
   spoke in a divine manner, so that God was the author also of their
   teaching -- the answer is easy. We should consider the content of their
   teaching: the prophets send their disciples to someone else; Christ on
   the other hand holds them as his own. We must keep in mind what the
   apostle says in the first chapter of Hebrews: namely, that God spoke by
   the mouth of his Son from heaven; whereas he spoke by Moses, as it
   were, from the earth.

   Ye have heard how I said unto you, I go away and come again unto you.
   If ye loved me, you would rejoice, because I said, I go unto the
   Father; for my Father is greater than I. John 14:28.

   This passage has been variously distorted. The Arians, in order to
   prove that Christ is beneath (second to) God, objected that he is less
   than the Father. The orthodox fathers, in order to cut such calumny
   short, said that this statement refers to Christ's human nature. Even
   though the Arians abused this statement wickedly, the answer given by
   the fathers was neither right nor relevant. It is a question neither of
   the human nature of Christ nor of his eternal divinity, but of
   mediation between us and God because of our own weakness. Since it is
   not given to us to go up to the height of God, Christ came down to us
   in order to raise us there. Rejoice, he says, because I return to the
   Father; because this is the ultimate destination at which you
   yourselves ought to aim. With these words he does not show how he
   differs from the Father; he tells us that he descended to us, to unite
   us with God. Unless we arrive at this point, we remain stranded midway.
   Unless he lead us to God, we only imagine a mutilated Christ, cut into
   half.

   Of a similar import is 1 Cor. 15:24, where Paul says that Christ will
   turn over the Kingdom to God and the Father, that he be all in all.
   Obviously, Christ does reign not only in his human nature, but as God
   manifest in the flesh. How then will he put aside his Kingship?
   Plainly, the divinity which we now discern only on the face of Christ
   will then be seen openly and conspicuously in him as his. The only
   difference is that Paul is here referring to the ultimate and perfect
   manifestation of divine brightness, whose rays began to shine when
   Christ ascended to heaven. To make the matter more plain, let us speak
   more bluntly. Here Christ does not compare the divinity of the Father
   with his own; neither does he compare his human nature with the divine
   essence of the Father. But rather, he contrasts his present state with
   the glory of heaven where he was soon to be received again. What he
   means is, "You want to keep me in this world, but it is better that I
   ascend to heaven." So therefore let us see Christ emptied of the flesh,
   that he may lead us to the fountainhead of blessed immortality. He is
   our leader, not in order to raise us to the sun or to the moon, but to
   unite us with God the Father.

   Jesus answered, and said unto them, Though I bear record of myself, yet
   my record is true: for I know whence I came, and whither I go: but ye
   cannot tell whence I come, and whither I go. John 8:14.

   Though I testify. Christ answers that the authority of his witness is
   sufficient as the ground for faith, because the status (persona) he
   bears is very different from that of a private man picked out of a
   crowd of common people. He sets himself apart from the common run of
   men by saying that he knows where he comes from and where he is going.
   What he means is that although we must suspect an ordinary man who
   pleads his own cause, and although our own laws warn us not to believe
   a man who speaks on his own behalf, we are not to apply such
   reservations to the Son of God who has a pre-eminence above the whole
   world. Christ, who has the privilege from the Father to bring all men
   in line (ordo) by his mere word, must not be reckoned as of the order
   (ordino) of men.

   I know whence I came. By these words he discloses that he is not of
   this world, but has come from the Father; and that for this reason it
   is foolish and wicked to subject his teaching, which is from God, to
   human standards. These people treated him with contempt because he had
   put on our lowly flesh and was among them in the form of a servant;
   therefore, he turns their attention to the future glory of his
   resurrection, in which his divinity, now hidden and unknown, was to
   shine forth in all its proper glory. The lowly position of Christ among
   them should not have prevented the Jews from submitting to the unique
   Ambassador of God, who had been promised shortly before in the law
   itself.

   When he says that he knows and they do not know, he means that their
   unbelief does not in the least take away from his glory. Besides, since
   he has given the same testimony to us, faith ought to despise all the
   chicaneries and vicious outcries of wicked men; for, if it is founded
   upon God, it is far above the loftiness of the world. Moreover, if the
   majesty of his gospel is to remain before us, we need to see him always
   in his heavenly glory; we need so to hear him speaking in the world
   that we may keep in mind where he came from and what sovereignty he has
   obtained, now that his work as ambassador is finished. For, as he
   humbled himself for a season, so he now sits at the right hand of the
   Father, that every knee may bow to him.

   And the word which ye hear is not mine, but the Father's which sent me.
   John 14:24.

   No matter how great, therefore, the mad insolence of the world, let us
   follow the teaching of Christ which rises high above heaven and earth.
   When Christ denies that the word is his own, it is for his disciples'
   sake. He means that the Word is not from man, and that he teaches by
   the authority of the Father. Still we know that since he is the eternal
   wisdom of God, he is the foundation of all doctrine; and all prophets
   since the beginning have spoken by his Spirit.

   And the Word was made flesh. John 1:14.

   The Evangelist has already spoken of Christ's coming. He now tells us
   he came putting on our flesh and showing himself openly to the world.
   He touches briefly upon the ineffable mystery that the Son of God put
   on human nature. Even though brief, he is astonishingly clear. At this
   point, some mad people amuse themselves with frivolous subtleties and
   make fools of themselves. They say, The Word is said to have been made
   flesh in the sense that God conceived the Son in his own mind and then
   sent him into the world as a man; as though the Word were I do not know
   what sort of shadowy image. But we have shown that the statement refers
   to a real hypostasis in the essence of God.

   By saying "flesh," the writer expresses himself more forcibly than if
   he had said He was made man. He means to state that the Son of God, for
   our sakes, left the height of his heavenly glory and humbled himself to
   a state at once low and abject. When Scripture speaks of man with
   contempt, it calls him flesh. In spite of the vast distance between the
   spiritual glory of the Word of God and the stink of our filthy flesh,
   the Son of God stooped so low as to take upon himself this same flesh
   which is subject to so many miseries. Flesh here means not, as so often
   with Paul, our nature corrupted by sin, but mortal men in general.
   Still, it refers to our nature with disdain as frail and perishing; so
   we read in Scripture in Ps. 78:39, Thou art mindful that they are
   flesh, and in Isa. 40:6, All flesh is grass. (There are other passages
   of this kind.) At the same time, however, we must notice that this is a
   figure of speech: [flesh] which is one part of man, stands for him as a
   whole. Therefore Apollinaris [82] was foolish to fancy that Christ put
   on a human body without the soul.

   Now my soul is troubled. . . . John 12:27.

   At first this verse seems to differ greatly from the preceding
   discourse. There he showed more than heroic courage in exhorting his
   disciples not only to undergo death, but to face it willingly and
   eagerly whenever needful. But now he shrinks from death and seems to go
   soft. However, here we do not read anything that does not agree with
   the believers' own experience. If scoffers laugh at this, it is no
   wonder; one cannot understand it except by experience.

   Besides, it was necessary for our salvation that the Son of God should
   have been affected in this way. In his death, we must first consider
   the work of expiation which appeased the wrath and curse of God; this
   he certainly could not have done unless our sin had been transferred to
   him. The death, therefore, to which he was subjected had to be dreadful
   even to him, because he could not have made satisfaction for us unless
   he had known God's dreadful judgment; we know better the enormity of
   sin because the Heavenly Father exacted such a dire punishment of his
   only-begotten Son. Therefore, we must realize that death was not a
   pleasure or a game for Christ, and that he suffered excruciation to the
   utmost for our sakes.

   And it was not absurd that the Son of God should have been thus
   troubled. In the act of expiation, the secret divinity of the Son was
   quiescent and did not exercise its power. Christ in fact put on not
   only our flesh but also our human feeling; and this he did voluntarily.
   He was afraid not by constraint, but because he willingly subjected
   himself to fear. It must be firmly held that his fear was real and not
   fictitious. But he was unlike the rest of mankind in that, as we have
   said elsewhere, his feelings were tempered by obedience to the
   righteous God.

   Christ's humanity in feeling has a further value for us. If Christ had
   not been troubled by the fear of death, which of us would take his
   example seriously? It is not given to us that we should face death
   without a troubled mind; so, when we hear that he was not made of iron,
   we gather our forces and set out to follow him; and the weakness of our
   flesh which troubles us at death does not hinder us from joining our
   Leader in battle.

   Then the devil taketh him up into the holy city, and setteth him on a
   pinnacle of the temple, and saith unto him, If thou be the Son of God,
   cast thyself down; for it is written, He shall give his angels charge
   concerning thee; and in their hands they shall bear thee up, lest at
   any time thou dash thy foot against a stone. Jesus said unto him, It is
   written again, Thou shalt not tempt the Lord thy God.

   Again the devil taketh him up into an exceeding high mountain, and
   showeth him all the kingdoms of the world, and the glory of them. . . .
   Matt. 4:5-8.

   It is no great matter that Luke puts this temptation second, while
   Matthew puts it last. The Evangelists did not arrange their stories
   exactly in time, but so as to put together, as in a mirror or picture,
   the main events which are most useful for our knowledge of Christ. It
   is enough to learn that there were three temptations of Christ. It is
   foolish to worry our heads over which came second and which third. In
   this exposition, I shall follow Matthew's text.

   It is said that Christ was placed on the pinnacle of the Temple. But
   the question is whether he was actually lifted up there, or whether
   this happened in a vision. There are many who assert obstinately that
   Christ was taken up there, as we say, really and truly; because, they
   say, it was unworthy of Christ that he should have been subject to
   delusion at the hand of Satan. This objection is easily disposed of,
   since it would by no means have been absurd for Christ to have been
   tempted with God's permission and his own willing subjection [to God's
   will], provided he did not yield inside himself, that is, in his mind
   and spirit. And what is said further, namely, that he was shown all the
   kingdoms of the world, or, as Luke has it, that in the twinkling of an
   eye he was carried to faraway places, fits best the supposition that
   all this happened in visions. In a doubtful matter like this, where
   ignorance does no harm, I prefer to pass no judgment, rather than to
   provide contentious people with something to quarrel about. It is in
   fact probable that the second temptation was not continuous with the
   first, or the third with the second. It may well be that some time
   elapsed between the first temptation and the second, and the second and
   the third. This may be so in spite of Luke's saying that Christ rested
   awhile, which suggests that the time in question was short.

   He will charge his angels concerning thee. Satan's malice should not
   escape us. He misuses the testimony of Scripture, to make the life
   (Scripture) deadly for Christ, or to turn bread itself into poison. He
   does not cease using the same trick daily. When the Son of God chose to
   submit to this trial in his own person, he became an example to all
   believers, so that they may carefully avoid falling into Satan's snares
   by a wrong use of Scripture. And without a doubt, the Lord gives our
   enemy so much leeway, not to put us at our ease and make us lazy, but
   that we may rather be on our guard. We must be especially careful not
   to be like those preposterous people who, just because Satan corrupts
   Scripture, throw it aside as much too doubtful. According to this rule
   we should stop eating, since there is always danger of being poisoned.
   Satan does profane the Word of God and twist it around for our undoing;
   but still Scripture was ordained for our salvation. Shall God's purpose
   become invalid, just because our own indolence keeps us from using it
   for our good?

   There is no need to argue this point at length. Let us only see what
   Christ prescribes by his example, which is the rule we are to follow.
   Does he yield when Satan gives Scripture a wicked twist? Seeing that
   Satan had armed himself with Scripture, does he let him hold on to it
   and make away with it? On the contrary, he in turn takes up Scripture,
   and with it refutes the wicked calumnies which Satan had thrown at him.
   In the same way, when Satan hides his deceptions under Scripture, or
   when godless men attack us and try to subvert our faith under the
   pretext of using Scripture, we should borrow our arms from Scripture
   alone, and so defend our faith.

   Now, even though the promise, He shall charge his angels concerning
   thee, belongs to all the faithful, it applies peculiarly to Christ;
   because as the head of the church, he has authority over the angels,
   and they watch over us by his command. Satan was not wrong in using
   this text to show that the angels were given to Christ as his servants,
   to protect him and bear him upon their hands. He was wrong in
   presenting angelic protection as something vague and haphazard; on the
   contrary, it is promised to the children of God only as they keep to
   the way which leads to the fulfillment of God's purpose for them.
   Whatever the force of the phrase in all thy ways (Ps. 91:11), Satan
   wickedly corrupts and mutilates the prophet's words, and both tortures
   and confuses them when he makes them include any kind of way, however
   wrong and errant. God commands us to walk in the ways he has set before
   us, and in this connection declares that his angels shall protect us.
   When Satan brings up the matter of angelic protection, his intention is
   to make Christ walk into any danger that comes along; what he says
   amounts to this: "If you throw yourself at death in defiance of God,
   his angels will defend your life!"

   It is written, Thou shalt not tempt the Lord thy God. Christ answered
   most aptly that believers cannot hope to receive the promise of God's
   help except as they humbly let him guide them. We are in no position to
   rely upon God's promises unless we obey his commandments. Now, we tempt
   God in many ways. But here to tempt is to neglect the means he puts in
   our hands. This is what men do when they make trial of God's power and
   prowess, at the same time that they set aside the means provided by
   God; this is like cutting off a man's hand and arms, and then telling
   him to do something! In short, whoever desires to experiment with God's
   power unnecessarily, tempts God by subjecting his promises to unlawful
   scrutiny.

   The devil takes him to a high mountain. As I have said before, we must
   remember that Satan had this power over Christ's eyes not because of a
   weakness in his nature, but by a free purpose and permission. Even
   though Christ's senses were affected and moved by the glory of the
   kingdoms presented to him, no inward lustful desire pierced his soul;
   quite otherwise the lusts of the flesh lay hold of us like powerful
   beasts, and drag us to the things that give us pleasure. Christ had our
   feelings, but not our unruly appetites. Now, the temptation put before
   Christ was to seek the inheritance God has promised his children
   elsewhere than in God. And the daring sacrilege of the devil appears in
   his seeking to rob God of his empire and to usurp it for himself. "All
   these things," he said, "are mine; and no one can have them except by
   my power."

   We ourselves have to struggle with the same imposture, which every
   believer knows within himself, and which we see even more clearly in
   the whole life of the ungodly. For, even though we know that we owe our
   security, goods, and comforts to the blessing of God, our senses
   flatter and bewitch us into seeking Satan's help, as though God were
   not enough for us. Therefore, the greater part of mankind deny God's
   authority and sovereignty over the whole world, and imagine that the
   giver of every good thing is Satan. For, how does it come about that
   men are universally addicted to evil machinations, to rapine and fraud,
   if not because they credit Satan with what God alone can do; namely,
   enriching us by his benediction and according to his good pleasure.
   They say with their mouth that God gives them their daily bread; but
   with their mouth only. In fact, they set Satan up as one who dispenses
   all the riches of the world.

  3. ASCENSION: EXAMPLES OF EXEGESIS

   Then the disciples went away again unto their own homes. But Mary stood
   without at the sepulcher, weeping: and as she wept, she stooped down,
   and looked into the sepulcher, and seeth two angels in white sitting,
   the one at the head, and the other at the feet, where the body of Jesus
   had lain. John 20:10-12.

   It may well be that when the disciples returned home, they were full of
   doubt and hesitation. Although John says that they believed, it is
   evident that their faith was not firm. They had a confused feeling that
   a miracle had happened; but they went about as it were in a trance,
   until something better confirmed them in their faith. It is evident
   that the sight they saw was not enough in itself to produce solid
   faith. What is more, Christ did not reveal himself to them until they
   were aroused from the stupidity of the flesh. When they ran to the
   sepulcher, they did indeed give a praiseworthy evidence of their zeal;
   still, Christ hid himself from them because their search for him was
   much too superstitious.

   But Mary stood. Now the Evangelist begins to tell the story of how,
   when Christ testified to his resurrection, he appeared to the women as
   well as to the disciples. Even though here Mary alone is mentioned, it
   seems to me probable that the other women were with her. It is not
   rational to suppose that these other women had fainted out of fear. The
   writers who take this view try to escape a contradiction in our story
   which, as I have shown, does not exist.

   We need not praise the women because they remained at the sepulcher,
   while the disciples returned home; for the latter went home comforted
   and full of joy, whereas the women indulged themselves in stupid and
   pointless weeping. What kept them at the grave was mere superstition,
   together with the feelings of the flesh.

   And seeth two angels. What wonderful forbearance our Lord shows toward
   Mary and her companions in putting up with their many faults! He does
   them no small honor by sending them his angels and then by showing
   himself to them -- an honor which was denied even to the disciples.
   Even while the apostles and the women labored with the same disease,
   the stupidity of the former was the less excusable because they had
   learned so little from the careful and exact teaching of Christ.
   Certainly, it was to shame them that Christ chose to show himself first
   to the women.

   It is not certain whether Mary recognized the angel or took him for a
   man. We know that white garments symbolize heavenly glory. When Christ
   revealed his majesty to his three disciples on top of the mountain,
   there he also was clothed in such white garments. Luke says the same
   thing of the angel who appeared to Cornelius. I do not deny that Mary
   might have taken the angel for a man, because Eastern peoples often
   wore white garments. But the garments with which God adorned his angels
   were peculiar to them; they were marks by which men might see and
   recognize them. Besides, Matthew compares to lightning the countenance
   of the angel who spoke to the women. But still, probably the women's
   wonder worked only fear; they seem to have stood there struck with
   stupor and beside themselves.

   Moreover, when we read that angels appeared in the visible form of men
   and clothed in garments, we must remember that this was done to offset
   human weakness. I have no doubt angels were at times clothed with a
   body; but as to whether these particular two angels merely appeared to
   have bodies, that is not the main question, and I shall not settle it.
   For me it is enough that the Lord gave them a human form, so that they
   might be seen and heard by the women. They were covered with uncommon
   splendor, so that they might be distinguished from human beings and
   show forth what is heavenly and from God.

   One at the head, and the other at the foot. The fact that Matthew
   mentions only one angel does not contradict John's story. Both angels
   did not speak to Mary at once; this was done by the one who was
   commissioned for it. There is not much to Augustine's allegory that the
   position of these angels indicates the course of the future preaching
   of the gospel, from the place where the sun rises to the place where it
   goes under. In this place, it is more worth-while to notice the
   auspices under which Christ ushered in the glory of his Kingdom. When
   the angels honored Christ's grave [with their presence], they exhibited
   his celestial majesty. But they did so without abolishing the ignominy
   of the cross.

   Jesus saith unto her, Touch me not; for I am not ascended to my Father:
   but go to my brethren, and say unto them, I ascend unto my Father, and
   your Father; and to my God, and your God. John 20:17.

   This does not seem to agree with the account in Matthew (28:9): for he
   writes openly that the women embraced the feet of Christ. Now, since
   Christ allowed himself to be touched by his disciples, why did he
   forbid Mary? The answer is easy, if we only remember that Jesus did not
   repel them until they overdid their desire to touch him. When it was a
   matter of removing doubt, then surely he did not forbid them. But when
   he saw that they held on to his feet, he calmed their excessive zeal,
   and corrected it. They clung to his bodily presence, because they knew
   only an earthly way of enjoying him. The truth is that Jesus did not
   forbid them to touch him until he saw their stupid and excited desire
   to keep him here on earth. Let us note therefore the reason he gave for
   the prohibition: for I am not yet ascended to the Father. By these
   words, he commanded the women to control themselves until he was
   received into heavenly glory. Finally, in this way, he pointed out that
   the purpose of his resurrection was quite different from their fancy
   about it. He was come to life again not to triumph in the world, but
   rather to ascend to heaven and to take possession of the Kingdom which
   had been promised to him; to reign over the church at the right hand of
   God, by the power of his Spirit. . . .

   I ascend unto my Father. With the word ascend, he confirms what I have
   said before. For certainly he rose from the dead not to linger awhile
   longer on earth, but so that, having entered the heavenly life, he
   might draw the faithful to him. In short, with this word the apostle
   forbids us merely to stop with resurrection. He bids us to go forward
   until we arrive at the spiritual Kingdom, at heavenly glory, at God
   himself. Therefore this word, ascend, is very emphatic; Christ
   stretches out his hand to his own, so that they may seek their
   happiness nowhere but in heaven. For where our treasure is, there also
   must our heart be (Matt. 6:21). Now, Christ declares that he is about
   to ascend on high; therefore, let us also rise with him, if we would
   not be separated from him. Furthermore, when he adds that he will
   ascend, he quickly dispels the sadness and anxiety of his disciples
   because he was to leave them behind. He wants them to know that by his
   divine power he will always be with them. Ascend indeed implies distant
   places; but even though Christ is absent bodily, because he is with
   God, his spiritual power, which works everywhere, shows clearly that he
   is present with us. Why indeed did he ascend to the Father, except,
   seated at his right hand, to reign in heaven and on earth? Finally,
   with this statement Jesus intended to commend the divine power of his
   reign, so that his bodily absence might not trouble his disciples.

   And declared to be the Son of God with power, according to the Spirit
   of holiness, by the resurrection from the dead. Rom. 1:4.

   If you prefer, "designated" to be the Son, etc. (definitus). He means
   that the power of the resurrection, by which he was pronounced the Son
   of God, was as it were a decree; as in Ps. 2:7, I have this day
   begotten thee. "Begotten" in this verse means actually "made known."
   Some find in this verse three evidences of the divinity of Christ: his
   power for working miracles, the witness of the Spirit, and his
   resurrection from the dead. I prefer to put the three together into one
   as follows: Christ was designated the Son of God when he rose from the
   dead, by an open exercise of true heavenly power, which was the power
   of the Spirit; but the knowledge of this power is sealed in our hearts
   by the same Spirit. The language of the apostle agrees well with this
   interpretation. The power with which he was declared, or the power
   which shone forth in Christ, that is, in his resurrection, was God's
   own power; and this proves that he was God. The same point becomes
   clear in another place where Paul confesses that Christ's death
   revealed him as subject to the infirmity of the flesh, and extols the
   power of the Spirit in his resurrection (2 Cor. 13:4). But this
   glorious work cannot be known by us unless the Spirit himself impresses
   it upon our hearts. The very fact that Paul calls the Spirit the Spirit
   of holiness, shows that in his mind the same wonderful efficacy of the
   Spirit revealed in the resurrection of Christ from the dead is to be
   seen in the witness which individual believers know in their hearts. He
   means that as the Spirit sanctifies, he shows and ratifies the power
   which he exercised once before in raising Christ from the dead. The
   various titles which Scripture gives to the Spirit fortify the present
   argument. For instance, our Lord calls him the Spirit of truth, because
   he effects truth in believers (John 14:17).

   Besides, the power shown forth in Christ's resurrection was his own as
   well as God's; as is evident from the sayings: Destroy this temple, and
   in three days I will raise it up (John 2:19); and, No one takes my
   life; of myself, etc. (John 10:18). For he did not beg his victory over
   death (to which he yielded by the infirmity of the flesh) from another,
   but achieved it by the working of his own Spirit.

   Wherefore he saith, When he ascended up on high, he led captivity
   captive, and gave gifts unto men. (Now that he ascended, what is it but
   that he also descended first into the lower parts of the earth? He that
   descended is the same also that ascended up far above all heavens, that
   he might fill all things.) Eph. 4:8-10.

   Because Paul makes this testimony fit his purpose by turning it aside
   from its original meaning, the wicked accuse him of abusing Scripture.
   And the Jews go further. They are malicious enough to pervert the
   natural meaning of this verse, so as to lend color to their calumny
   that what is said here of God, applies to David and the people of
   Israel! David, they say, or the people, ascended up on high, when,
   elated by many victories, they were set high above their enemies. But
   when one weighs carefully what the psalm as a whole says, it becomes
   clear that the above words apply only to God. The whole psalm is as it
   were an epinicion, a song of triumph, which David sings to God,
   celebrating the victories given him by God. He makes the recital of his
   own exploits in this psalm an occasion for commemorating God's own
   wonderful acts in the deliverance of his people. His aim is to open the
   eyes of the people to God's glorious power and goodness in the Church.
   And so, among other things, he says, He ascended up on high. When God
   does not exercise his judgment in an obvious way, the mind of the flesh
   thinks that he is idle or gone to sleep. So, according to the judgment
   of men, when the church is oppressed, God himself is brought low. But
   when he stretches out his arm in vengeance, he is said to arise and
   ascend to his judgment seat. This way of speaking is common and well
   known; so the deliverance of the church is called the ascension of God.

   When Paul saw that in this psalm David celebrated the triumphs of God
   with which he wrought salvation in the church, he rightly applied this
   verse about the ascension of God to the person of Christ. The greatest
   victory of God took place when Christ, having overcome sin, conquered
   death, and put Satan to flight, was lifted up to heaven in majesty,
   that he might reign gloriously over the church. Therefore, there is no
   reason why anyone should object that Paul's use of this prophecy was
   contrary to the mind of the psalmist. Since David saw the glory of God
   in the continuance of the church, it is evident that no ascent of God
   shall be more victorious and memorable than that which occurred when
   Christ ascended to the right hand of the Father, to bring to subjection
   all principalities and dominations, and then to become in eternity the
   defender and protector of the church.

   He led captivity captive. Captivity here is a collective noun for
   captive enemies. It means simply that the mighty God has overcome his
   enemies; but this was done more thoroughly in Christ than in any other
   way. He has overthrown not only the devil, sin, death, and all hell,
   but also the lust of our flesh, thus by his word making us rebels into
   an obedient people. On the other hand, he binds his enemies, that is,
   all the wicked, with chains of iron, and restrains their fury by his
   power, so that they can do no more than he permits.

   The next phrase, and gave gifts to men, is especially difficult.
   According to the psalmist, God receives gifts. Paul speaks of giving
   gifts, which seems to be quite the opposite of what the psalmist says.
   Still, this is not absurd. Paul is not interested in quoting Scripture
   word for word. All he wants to do is get at the real meaning of the
   passage he mentions. Certainly God received the gifts David speaks of,
   not for himself but for his people, A little before, the psalm itself
   had said that the spoils of war had been divided among the families of
   Israel. Since God received in order to give, even though Paul altered
   the wording of the psalm he did not depart from its meaning.

   At the same time, I am inclined towards another opinion; namely, that
   Paul changed the word received intentionally. When he did this, he
   intended not to misquote the psalm but to coin an expression of his own
   which would serve his present purpose. Having quoted a few words from
   the psalm, with regard to Christ's exaltation, he added that he gave
   gifts. He wanted to show that God's ascent in Christ's person was more
   excellent than his victories in the ancient church [Israel]. What he
   does is to compare the lesser with the greater; for after all, when a
   victor gives freely and bountifully to all his men the spoil taken from
   his vanquished enemies, his glory is greater than if he gathered it up
   for himself. The view of others who say that Christ gave us what he
   received from the Father is forced and has nothing to do with this
   verse. Thus, in my judgment, the most natural explanation of this
   passage is that, after quoting the psalm briefly, Paul takes the
   liberty of adding a phrase of his own, because it is suitable for
   Christ. The point is that the ascension of Christ is more excellent and
   wonderful than God's glorious deeds as recounted by David.

   Now that he ascended. Now the false accusers belabor Paul again,
   saying, What frivolous and childish argument is this that forces a
   figure of speech about the manifestation of divine glory, to apply to
   the real ascension of Christ! Who does not know, they say, that the
   word ascended is a metaphor? And why infer that he must have first
   descended? My answer is this. Paul does not here argue like a logician
   about what follows necessarily or what we may infer from the words of
   the prophet. He knew very well that what David said of God's ascension
   was metaphorical. But still, it cannot be denied that God's exaltation
   indicates a previous humiliation. Paul has a good reason for inferring
   the descent from the ascent. And when did God come down lower than he
   did when Christ emptied himself? If God was ever brought down
   ingloriously, and then ascended with glory, it was when Christ, from
   the depths of our condition, was received to the glory of heaven.

   In short, here we must not look for a careful and literal
   interpretation of the psalm. What we have is a mere allusion to the
   word of the prophet. Paul does the same thing in Rom. 10:6, when he
   turns a passage from Moses to his own use (Deut. 30:12). If there be
   any doubt about the rightness and propriety of Paul's application of
   this passage to the person of Christ, it is removed by the evidence of
   the psalm itself, which is a song in celebration of his Kingdom;
   because, for one thing, it contains a distinct prophecy of the calling
   of the nations.

   Into the lower parts of the earth. There is no sense in torturing this
   phrase to make it mean purgatory, or hell. Paul is speaking simply
   about our condition in the present life. The argument from the
   comparative lower is very weak. What we have here is not a comparison
   of one part of the earth with another, but of the whole earth with
   heaven. He means that Christ left his exalted seat and came all the way
   down into our own deep abyss.

   He . . . ascended up above all heavens: that is, beyond the created
   world. When we say Christ is in heaven, we must not imagine that he is
   somewhere among the cosmic spheres, counting the stars! Heaven means a
   place far beyond all the spheres, destined for the Son of God after his
   resurrection. When we speak of it as another place outside the
   universe, we do so because we must speak of the Kingdom of God using
   the only language which we have. There are those who claim that no
   space separates Christ from us, because, they say, above all heavens
   and ascended into heaven amount to the same thing! But they forget that
   whether he be above heavens or in heaven, he is beyond everything under
   the sun and stars, beyond all the spheres which surround the earth,
   beyond the whole machinery of the visible world.

   That he might fill all things. Since to fill often means to accomplish,
   we may so understand it in this place. When Christ ascended to heaven,
   he came into possession of the dominion given him by the Father, to
   rule and direct all things by his power. I think we might arrive at an
   even more beautiful conception if we put together two ideas which,
   contradictory though they seem, are in fact perfectly congruous one
   with the other. So soon as we hear that Christ is ascended, we fancy
   that he is far away from us; as he indeed is in his humanity or in the
   body. But Paul reminds us that although he is absent from us bodily, he
   nevertheless fills all things by the power of his Spirit. Whenever the
   right hand of God, which embraces heaven and earth, is revealed,
   Christ's spiritual presence fills all things with the exercise of his
   boundless power. And this is so, even though, according to Peter, his
   body is and remains in heaven (Acts 3:21).

   Thus, we see that Paul, by indulging in an apparent contradiction,
   added not a little to the grace of his exposition. Christ, who was
   before enclosed in a narrow space, ascended to fill heaven and earth.
   But, did he not do this before? Yes, I admit, he did it before in his
   divinity. But, after he took possession of his Kingdom, he began to
   exercise the power of his Spirit in a new way; and in the same Spirit,
   he revealed his presence among us. As John says: The Holy Ghost was not
   yet given, because that Jesus was not yet glorified (7:39); and again,
   It is expedient for you that I go away; for, if I go not away, the
   Comforter will not come to you (16:7). In short, when he began to sit
   at the right hand of the Father, he began also to fill all things.

   But he, being full of the Holy Ghost, looked up steadfastly into
   heaven, and saw the glory of God, and Jesus standing at the right hand
   of God, and said, Behold, I see the heavens opened and the Son of Man
   standing at the right hand of God. Acts 7:55-56.

   He saw the glory of God. As I said before, Luke means that when Stephen
   raised his eyes to heaven, immediately Christ appeared to him. But
   before that he tells us that Stephen was given other than earthly eyes,
   whose vision enabled him to rise as far as the glory of God. From this
   we receive the general consolation that God shall be no less with us,
   provided, leaving the world behind, all our senses seek after him; not
   that he will appear to us in an external vision as he did to Stephen,
   but that he will so reveal himself within us as to give us a true
   knowledge of his presence. And this way of seeing should be enough for
   us, since, by his grace and power, God not only shows that he is near
   us, but also proves that he lives in us.

   Behold, I see the heavens. God did not intend to have only private
   dealings with his servant. He wanted to trouble and vex his enemies.
   For, when Stephen declares openly that he was given this miracle, he
   offers them a powerful insult. But it may be asked, How were the
   heavens opened? So far as I am concerned, I judge that nothing was
   changed as to the nature of the heavens, but that Stephen was given a
   new sharpness of vision which, overcoming all obstacles, penetrated to
   the invisible Kingdom of Heaven. For, even if heaven had been torn
   apart, no human eye could have reached so high as to see it. Therefore,
   only Stephen saw the glory of God. As to the wicked who stood there,
   not only was this spectacle hidden from them, but also they were so
   blinded within themselves as not to perceive the open light of truth.
   Therefore, he says that the heavens were opened to him, because nothing
   prevented him from seeing the glory of God. From this it follows that
   the miracle was wrought not in the sky, but in his eyes. Therefore, we
   should not dispute about a physical vision, because certainly Christ
   did not appear to him in a way and order that is natural, but in a new
   and singular fashion. And, pray tell me, what were the colors of God's
   glory that they might have affected naturally the eyes of flesh?
   Therefore in this vision we should consider nothing but what belongs to
   God. Besides, it is very much worth noting that the glory of God
   appeared to Stephen not strictly as it was but in so far as a man is
   capable of seeing it. For the immeasurableness of God's glory cannot be
   comprehended by the measure of the creature.

  4. CHRIST THE KING AND THE KINGDOM OF CHRIST

   Nathanael answered and saith unto him, Rabbi, thou art the Son of God;
   thou art the King of Israel. John 1:49.

   It is not surprising that Nathanael knows Jesus as the Son of God
   because of his divine power. But why does he call him the King of
   Israel? For, these two things do not seem to be related. But Nathanael
   is looking deeper. He had heard that Christ is the Messiah; and now he
   confirms this doctrine which was given [by the prophets], with the
   further statement that He is the Son of God. Moreover, he reminds
   himself of the self-evident truth that the Son of God shall appear to
   become King over God's people. He is therefore right in confessing that
   the Son of God is also the King of Israel. Faith not only should be
   fixed upon the essence of Christ (as they say), but should also attend
   to his mission and power. It avails little to know who Christ is,
   without knowing also what his will for us was to be and to what end he
   was sent by the Father. This is why the papists have but the shadow of
   Christ; they care only to know his bare essence, and neglect his
   Kingship which consists in his power to save us.

   Moreover, when Nathanael calls him the King of Israel, he shows that he
   is of little faith; because the Kingship of Christ extends to the ends
   of the world. His faith had not made enough progress for him to realize
   that Christ was destined to be the King of the whole world, or that the
   children of Abraham would be gathered together from all parts, so that
   the whole world might be the Israel of God.

   For unto which of the angels said he at any time, Thou art my Son, this
   day I have begotten thee? And again, I will be to him a Father, and he
   shall be to me a Son? Heb. 1:5.

   Thou art my Son. It cannot be denied that this was spoken of David, but
   in so far as Christ was in him; [83] therefore, the things we find in
   this psalm were foreshadowed in David, but manifested in Christ. When
   David conquered the many enemies surrounding his kingdom and enlarged
   its borders, there was a foreshadowing of the fulfillment of the
   promise, I shall give the nations for thine inheritance. But how little
   this was compared with the Kingdom of Christ, which extends from East
   to West! Again, David was called the Son of God because he was called
   to do great things. But his glory was a mere spark compared with that
   which shone forth in Christ, who bore the very image of the Father.
   Christ alone deserves the singular honor of bearing the name Son
   because the Father has sealed him alone, and no one else, with his
   image. Therefore, it is blasphemous to give the title Son to anyone but
   Christ.

   But the argument of the apostle does not seem to be very strong. He
   claims that Christ is superior to the angels because he is called the
   Son. But Christ has this name in common with the princes and all those
   who are high in power, of whom it is written: Ye are gods, and the sons
   of the most high. Besides, the prophet conferred a greater honor upon
   the whole people of Israel when he called them the first-born of God
   (Jer. 31:9). In fact, in Scripture they are often called sons. Again,
   elsewhere, David calls the angels also sons of God; as when he says, in
   Ps. 89:6, Who is like the Lord among the sons of God? But, the answer
   to all this is not difficult. The princes are given this name because
   of their peculiar position; Israel, because by God's grace they were
   his chosen people; the angels are called sons of the gods figuratively,
   because they are heavenly spirits and taste of divinity in their
   blessed immortality. But when David, representing Christ's Person,
   calls himself without qualification the Son of God, he means something
   unique, an honor far above that of the princes, or of the angels, or of
   the whole people of Israel. But it were most inapt and improper to set
   Christ above all others as the Son of God, if he had nothing more than
   they. For the expression Son of God sets him apart from the class and
   number of all other beings. Since thou art my Son is spoken to Christ
   alone, it follows that no angel shares this honor with him.

   If again someone takes exception to this argument and says that it
   raises David above the angels, I reply: It is not absurd that David
   should be set above the angels, in so far as he is the image of Christ;
   just as it was not an insult to the angels that the high priest who
   expiated sins was called a mediator. Neither David nor the high priest
   received the title for himself; but in pointing to the Kingdom of
   Christ, each derived his title from Him. The sacraments also, which are
   in themselves without life, are honored with titles which even the
   angels cannot claim without blasphemy. Hence it is clear that the
   argument from the use of the word Son is valid.

   As to Christ's being begotten, briefly speaking, I take it that in this
   verse it has to do with his relationship to us. Augustine's subtle
   reasoning, according to which today means in eternity or perpetuity, is
   frivolous. Of course, Christ is the eternal Son of God, because he is
   the wisdom of God begotten before time. But this has nothing to do with
   our verse, which expresses the truth that men know Christ as the Son of
   God because the Father has revealed him as his Son. Similarly, the
   declaration mentioned by Paul in Rom. 1:4, was, so to speak, a kind of
   outward begetting. The secret and inward begetting which went before,
   was beyond human knowledge; it was above our understanding, until God
   gave us visible evidence of it.

   I will be to him a Father. The same is true with regard to this second
   testimony, which refers to Solomon. Although Solomon was inferior to
   the angels, yet when God promises to be his Father, he was set apart
   from the commonality of men. God was to be a Father to him, not as to
   one of the sons of Abraham, or to one of the princes, but as to one who
   had pre-eminence over all the rest. The same preference which made him
   a Son, excluded all others from an equal honor. But now, the context of
   this verse makes it clear that Solomon is declared the Son, not in
   himself but as a figure, an exemplar of Christ. The universal kingship
   here mentioned as destined for the Son, is also said to be a kingdom
   without end. The kingdom of Solomon, on the contrary, was narrowly
   bounded; and it was far from being perpetual, since it was divided soon
   after his death; and a little while after it fell. Besides, in that
   psalm, the Lord makes a vow, with the sun and moon as witnesses, that
   so long as they shall shine in the heavens, his Kingdom shall stand.
   But this does not apply to David's kingdom which collapsed in a short
   while and finally was utterly destroyed. Further, we may gather readily
   from many passages in the prophets, that such promises belong to no one
   but Christ. And let nobody cavil that this is a new invention of ours.
   For, the Jews called Christ, commonly and usually, the Son of David.

   But to which of his angels said he at any time, Sit on my right hand,
   until I make thine enemies thy footstool? Heb. 1:13.

   Again, he exalts the superiority of Christ by another testimony, in
   order to show the pre-eminence of Christ over the angels.

   This verse is taken from Ps. 110, which can be made to apply only to
   Christ. We know very well from the story of Uzziah's leprosy, that even
   the kings had no right to act as priests (2 Chron. 26:18). Since it is
   clear that neither David nor the kings who followed him were ordained
   to be priests, it follows that here we have a prophecy of a new
   kingship and a new priesthood, in which king and priest were to be one.
   Besides, the eternal priesthood spoken of in this psalm fits the case
   of Christ alone.

   Now, at the beginning of the psalm, he is put at God's right hand;
   which means, as I have said, that he is given a position second only to
   the Father. What we have here is a metaphor which signifies that Christ
   is the Father's agent and his head ambassador who exercises his power,
   so that the Father reigns by his hand. No angel was ever honored in
   this way. Christ therefore is exalted far above the host of angels.

   Until I make. Since there never is any dearth of Christ's enemies who
   set themselves against his Kingdom, the church is always in peril;
   especially because his foes, who seek to overthrow it, are among the
   great men of this world; men who both resort to artifice and attack
   repeatedly with fury and violence. When we look at what is before our
   eyes, we cannot but conclude that the Kingdom of Christ is about to
   fall in ruin. But the promise made in this psalm takes away all our
   fear, because Christ shall not leave his seat [at the Father's right
   hand] until he has prostrated his last enemy to the ground. There are
   two things to keep in mind. First, there shall never be quietness for
   the Kingdom of Christ in this world, because it will always be infested
   and troubled by its enemies. Secondly, no matter what evils they
   perpetrate, the enemies of Christ shall not prevail, because Christ
   sits at God's right hand, not for a time but in eternity. Therefore,
   all those who do not submit to his sovereignty shall be thrown down and
   trodden under his feet.

   That I may lead forth a people, blind who have eyes and deaf who have
   ears. Isa. 43:8. (Calvin's wording.)

   The brevity of this verse makes its meaning unclear. There are some who
   translate "I will bring forth the blind and him who has eyes" ; that
   is, both the blind and the seeing, both the deaf and the hearing.
   Others explain blind as those who have eyes, but eyes which are too dim
   to be able to perceive the secrets of heavenly wisdom. But taking
   everything into consideration, I prefer to separate the two parts. "I
   will lead forth the blind, and restore sight to them; I will free the
   deaf, and they will regain their ears." So the words run: lead forth
   the blind, and they will have eyes; the deaf, and they will have ears.

   The content of this verse requires careful consideration. First the
   people are freed; then eyes and ears are restored to them. The Lord
   fulfilled this promise when he led his people from Babylon, but the
   prophecy certainly extends beyond that to the Kingdom of Christ. For in
   his Kingdom the faithful have been gathered not only from Chaldea, but
   also from all parts of the earth. This began conspicuously long ago at
   the time of Peter's first speech (Acts 2:41), when great numbers from
   different countries joined in one confession of faith. But later
   others, who seemed wholly alien, joined with the same body and showed
   themselves sons of Abraham.

   Therefore if we seek the full truth of this prophecy we must come to
   Christ, by whom alone we are delivered from slavery to the devil and
   confirmed in liberty. He restores eyes and ears to us who were formerly
   by nature both blind and deaf.

   Further we must remember, as I have emphasized rather often, that the
   return of the people from exile is connected with the restoration of
   the church accomplished by Christ. For what God began when he brought
   the people out of exile, he continued and fulfilled in the coming of
   Christ. So the redemption is one. And hence it follows that the
   blessing here described cannot be limited to any one short period of
   time.

   And in mercy shall the throne be established; and he shall sit upon it
   securely in the tabernacle of David, judging, and seeking judgment, and
   hasting righteousness. Isa. 16:5.

   The Hebrews apply the whole verse to Hezekiah, but this interpretation
   is by no means acceptable. The prophet is describing a greater
   restoration of the church. (Besides, the Moabites did not suffer
   punishment in the time of Hezekiah, nor did God's blessing then begin
   to shine among the Judeans.) What he means is: All the enemies of the
   chosen people are planning the destruction of the Kingdom which God had
   promised would be firm forever. But the faithful must not lose courage
   when they are miserably scattered; they must remember this well-known
   oracle which attests the continuance of God's Kingdom. And this passage
   can be interpreted as referring to none other than Christ; although I
   admit that Hezekiah stands as a symbol of Christ, as did David and his
   other successors. But all these [men] point us to Christ himself, who
   alone redeems and leads his people, who alone gathers his scattered
   remnant.

   In this way the prophet recalls the faithful to Christ; it is as if he
   said: "You know the God whom you serve. He declares himself the
   guardian of your safety to keep you always secure and unharmed under
   his protection. And if all things have slid down to disaster, he has
   promised you a Redeemer under whom a wholly new happiness will rise and
   prevail. At the very moment of despair the Redeemer of the church will
   come and restore you to the full flower of freedom. Therefore be
   perfectly calm and wait for him, even when you see the church poor and
   scattered."

   We must note these words carefully. All other comforts are temporary
   and illusory unless we depend wholly upon Christ. Therefore if we wish
   to be blessed and happy let our eyes be fixed upon him. He has promised
   that we shall be blessed even under the cross; that crucifixion and
   torture will be the door to a blessed life; that whatever hardships we
   suffer will end for us with the fullness of felicity.

   In mercy. As Isaiah shows, this is no human achievement, but results
   from the goodness of God who is its sole architect. Therefore we must
   acknowledge his free favor, and accent the establishment of this holy
   throne among us as his gift. This the prophet asserts plainly. We
   should seek no other reason for God's kindness to us except his pure
   compassion; and truly there is no other cause for it.

   Neither honor nor merits (of which surely there are none) can be
   brought forward as a reason for God's raising again the throne which
   had fallen through the guilt and the crimes of the people. Quite
   otherwise, when he saw that those whom he had chosen were lost, he
   willed to give an example of his infinite goodness. If God is the maker
   of this throne, by whom can it be overturned? Are the wicked stronger
   than he?

   He will sit firmly in the tent of David. Almost every separate word has
   its own force, and this little clause is worth careful study. I like
   the allusion to the tent here because Christ was certainly a man of the
   common people before he was called to his throne. Also the prophet
   wishes to give a picture of the church which bears no resemblance to
   the thrones of kings and princes, and does not glitter with gold and
   gems. And in addition to presenting the spiritual rule of Christ under
   a humble and inglorious aspect, he declares at the same time that it
   will be revealed on earth and among men. For if he had said only that
   the throne of Christ would be erected, we could wonder if it would be
   located in heaven or on earth. When he says in the tent of David, he
   shows that Christ reigns not only among angels but also among men.
   Therefore, we should not think that we must penetrate the heavens to
   seek him.

   The ungodly think that what we proclaim about the reign of Christ is
   ridiculous; as if it were some phantasm of our own imagination. They
   wish to see with their eyes something open to their senses. But we have
   no need to receive any physical sign from him, and are content with his
   power and goodness.

   In firmness (firmly). 'emeth means sometimes certainty, sometimes
   truth. Here the prophet means that Christ's Kingdom will be firm and
   enduring, even as Daniel (2:44; 7:14) bore witness, and the Evangelist
   also: Of his kingdom there will be no end (Luke 1:33). This permanence
   distinguishes it from the ordinary kingdoms. For although they are
   established with great and plentiful resources, they totter or sink by
   their own weight, so that they are no firmer than images of melting
   wax.

   But Isaiah declares that the empire of Christ, although threatened
   often by destruction, will endure forever because it will be upheld by
   God's hand. We must keep his testimony on hand as a weapon against the
   temptations which arise when Christ's Kingdom is attacked by so many
   mighty enemies that it seems about to fall. For although the world
   plots [against it] in every way, and hell itself pours out fire and
   flame against it, the promise stands.

   Who will judge. I take judge (shaphat) as "govern" ; as if the line ran
   "who will govern." We often see a magnificent throne without an
   occupant; and it often happens that kings are either figureheads or
   cattle, so that they are without good judgment, or prudence, or wisdom.
   But on this throne, the prophet says, will sit one who truly fulfills
   the office of Governor. Then he makes a further addition to assure us
   that Christ will be our protector. For when he attributes justice and
   righteousness to him, he displays the royal banner under the protection
   of which Christ receives us and which he will not allow to be violated.
   And so long as we give ourselves to faith in him, with calm and quiet
   minds, he will not permit the wicked to injure us with impunity.

   The word hasten is used to teach us that our reward will be swift and
   prompt; and this speed must be set against our impatience. For he never
   seems to us to bring aid quickly enough. But when we are tormented with
   fervent longing, let us remember that we suffer from impatience because
   we do not give room enough to his Providence. When to our carnal mind
   he seems slow, he is really fitting his acts of judgment to the time
   which he best knows. Let us then submit to his will.

   He will judge among many peoples and accuse (or blame) strong nations
   afar off; and they will beat their swords into plowshares and their
   lances into sickles. They shall not lift the sword, nation against
   nation, and they will no more be accustomed to war. Micah. 4:3.
   (Calvin's wording.)

   Here the prophet describes the fruits of the teaching of God's word.
   God will recall all peoples to gentleness, so that they will strive to
   promote brotherly peace among themselves and will lay aside all desire
   to inflict injuries. As he said before, the church of God can be
   established in no other way than by the Word. True service of God
   cannot be begun, nor can it endure, except where God is served by the
   obedience of faith. Now he shows the goal to which the teaching leads.
   Those who once lived in mutual hostility and burned with the desire to
   hurt one another, now, with character transformed, are wholly intent on
   mutual kindness.

   But before the prophet comes to this point, he says he will Judge among
   many peoples and accuse strong nations. The word judge, shaphat, in
   Hebrew also means govern. God is certainly the subject of the sentence.
   The prophet is saying that although formerly men did not obey God, they
   will in the future know him as King and concede supreme power to him.
   God indeed has always governed the world by his hidden providence and
   so governs it now. However much the devil and wicked men may rage,
   however much they boil with their own unrestrained anger, there is no
   doubt that God checks and curbs their madness with a hidden bridle.

   The Scripture speaks in two ways of God's rule. God governs the devil
   and all the wicked, but not by his Word nor by the Spirit's
   sanctification. They obey God against their wish and will. God's
   special rule applies to his church alone, where God by his Word and
   Spirit turns the hearts of men to obedience, so that they follow him
   freely and voluntarily. They are thoroughly taught within and without;
   within, by the inspiration of the Spirit, without, by the preaching of
   the Word. Then, as Ps. 110:3 says, your willing people will assemble.
   Such is the Kingdom of God, which the prophet here describes.

   God will judge, not as he now governs the whole world, but in a special
   way he will subject the faithful to himself so that they desire nothing
   so much as to surrender themselves wholly to him.

   But because men must be subjugated before they offer such submission to
   God, the prophet has added in plain terms He will convict (or accuse)
   many people. And this addition must be carefully noted, because from it
   we learn that our inborn pride is too great for anyone, unless mastered
   by force, to be ready to be God's pupil. The teaching by itself would
   congeal in the great corruption of our nature, if God did not convict
   us, that is, unless he prepared us beforehand by force and violence.
   Now we see the prophet's wisdom in including correction in God's rule.
   The verb yakach means sometimes "remonstrate with," "accuse," sometimes
   "convict." In any case, it here implies the wickedness and perversity
   of our flesh, since even the best of men never surrender themselves to
   God until they are subdued. Subdued how? Truly by God's use of force in
   their correction.

   Such are the beginnings of the reign of Christ. The prophet speaks here
   of strong peoples to glorify that reign and to illuminate it by his
   words. We see here the power of the teaching of the Word, because,
   after receiving its correction, strong men offer themselves without any
   hesitation to be ruled by God. The correction is very necessary, but
   God does not use external force nor any armed soldiers when he wishes
   to subdue his church. And yet he gathers in it strong men. The power of
   the teaching is therefore undeniable. For among men, where there is
   strength, there also is assurance and pride, and afterwards rebellion.
   But the Word, without any external aid, corrects men's obstinacy, and
   we see that God works in an unbelievable way when he gathers his
   church.

   There is certainly no doubt that this passage must refer to the Person
   of Christ. Micah speaks of God without specific mention of Christ,
   because Christ had not yet been manifested in the flesh. But we know
   that God's rule of the world and the submission of the peoples of the
   whole earth to him had its fulfillment in Christ. Also we have affirmed
   that Christ is true God, for he was not called his Father's servant
   like Moses or the other prophets. He was supreme King of his church.

   But before I come to the fruits of Christ's reign, the phrase inserted
   here, 'ad rachoq, must be noted. Both length of time and distance of
   place can be so expressed. The Targum of Jonathan [84] takes it as
   length of time, because God accuses people through the ages. But I have
   no doubt that the prophet wished to include far-separated regions; as
   if he said, God would be King not of one people only: his Kingdom would
   be extended to the farthest ends of the earth. Therefore he will
   convict nations afar off.

   Then the prophet describes the consummation: They will beat their
   swords into plowshares and their lances into sickles. I have already
   stated briefly his meaning. He speaks of the great change which will
   come when the nations have been taught the Word of God. Then all will
   strive to devote their work and their kindly acts to their neighbors.
   When he talks of swords and lances, he shows with few words that men
   have always been prone to unjust violence until they were tamed by the
   Word of God. Such a change would be impossible while every man followed
   his own nature. There is no one who does not want his own private
   comforts; so insatiable is man's greed. Therefore, when all are so
   intent on gain, when each one is blinded by his self-love, cruelty
   bursts out from this evil source. Men cannot cultivate peace among
   themselves, because each one wishes to be first, and snatches
   everything for himself. No one yields willingly. Thence come
   disagreements, and from disagreements, wars. This the prophet knows.
   Yet he adds that as the result of Christ's teaching those who had
   before then been bristling brutes would become tame. Therefore they
   will beat their swords into plowshares and their lances into sickles.
   They will not, he says, draw sword, nation against nation, and they
   will practice war no more.

   This puts more clearly what I said before. The gospel of Christ will be
   like a signal of peace for the nations. When a battle standard is
   displayed, the soldiers gather for the fight and their ardor is
   kindled. Micah ascribes the opposite result to the gospel of Christ. It
   will recall men, formerly bent on evil-doing, to a desire for peace and
   concord. When he says they will not draw swords, nation against nation,
   he shows, as I have said, that where Christ does not reign men are
   wolves to men. Each one would gladly devour all the others.

   By nature, men rush blindly to attack one another, and the prophet says
   this madness can be corrected, so that wars cease and men refrain from
   doing injury, only when Christ is made their teacher. For by the word
   lamad, he means that in general men are always struggling with one
   another and are always ready to inflict injuries unless they change
   their natures. Whence is gentleness born? Truly from the teaching of
   the gospel. This passage is memorable because we learn from it that the
   truth of the gospel has not reached us, unless mutual love and
   friendliness prevail among us, and the desire to do kindness.

   And although today the pure gospel is preached among us, yet if we
   consider how little each one of us practices brotherly love, we shall
   rightly be ashamed of our negligence. Daily God declares himself
   reconciled to us in his Son. Christ bears witness in this law of love
   that he is [the giver of] peace with God. He offers himself for us, so
   that we may willingly and quickly be brothers to one another. And we
   desire indeed to be enrolled as sons of God; we desire to enjoy the
   reconciliation won for us by the blood of Christ. But meanwhile we tear
   at one another; we sharpen our teeth; our minds are wholly ruthless. If
   we wish to prove ourselves disciples of Christ we must heed this part
   of his teaching and each one of us strive to help his neighbors.

   Now this cannot be done without opposition from the flesh; for we are
   prone to love ourselves and to seek too much our own private advantage.
   We must shed these immoderate and hurtful emotions of self-interest, if
   brotherly love is to take their place. We are warned here that it is
   not enough to refrain from doing injury; a man must be helpful to his
   brothers. The prophet could have said simply "they will break their
   swords and lances and refrain from inflicting further damage." But he
   does not say merely this; he adds, They will turn (or beat) their
   swords into plowshares and lances into sickles. That is: when they have
   ceased doing evil, they will desire to concern themselves with acts of
   kindness. So Paul (Eph. 4:28) urges those who steal to steal no more
   and also to work with their hands to serve others Therefore unless we
   want to help our brothers' need and to offer them our aid, we are only
   half converted. Many people are not cruel, they rob nobody, they give
   nobody reason to complain; but they live for themselves and enjoy a
   useless leisure. This idleness the prophet indirectly condemns when he
   speaks of plows and sickles.

   But the question may be raised: How has this been fulfilled by Christ's
   coming? The prophet is not describing here the state of the church at
   any time; he is showing what Christ's Kingdom will be like at the end.
   Moreover we know that when the gospel was first preached, the whole
   world was more savagely embroiled in war than ever before; and now,
   although in many places the pure gospel is preached, disagreements and
   quarrels do not cease. We see greed, ambition, covetousness
   flourishing; and from them arise both dissensions and bloody wars. Yet
   it would seem to be an absurdity for the prophet to speak this way
   about the reign of Christ, if God did not mean to execute in reality
   what was predicted. I answer, the reign of Christ had already begun
   when God wished the gospel to be preached everywhere, and today it is
   still in progress and not yet complete. Consequently what the prophet
   describes here does not yet appear before our eyes. And because the
   number of the faithful is small and the majority of men despise and
   reject the gospel, robbery and evil deeds do not cease in the world. Do
   you ask why?

   The prophet speaks of Christ's followers. He shows the fruit of the
   teaching. And truly it bears fruit wherever it takes good root. But the
   teaching of the gospel takes root in hardly one out of a hundred. We
   must look at the amount of progress. For in so far as any man has taken
   hold of the teaching of the gospel he becomes gentle and desires to
   help his neighbors. But since we still carry around with us in our
   flesh the remains of sin, and a perfect knowledge of the gospel does
   not exist in us, it is not strange that no one has rid himself wholly
   of the unrighteous and stupid desires of his flesh.

   Hence it is easy to see how limited is the imagination of those who on
   the basis of the gospel wish to remove the use of the sword from the
   world. We know how the Anabaptists have clamored that the whole
   political order is the enemy of Christ's Kingdom; as if the Kingdom of
   Christ were bound up in one doctrine -- there shall be no use of force.
   This teaching would indeed hold, if in this world we were angels. But
   as I have said the number of the faithful is small and therefore it is
   necessary that the rest of the crowd be restrained by a forcible curb.
   For the sons of God are intermingled with great, savage beasts, or with
   wolves and false men. For some are openly rebellious against God and
   others are hypocrites. Therefore the use of the sword will continue
   until the end of the world.

   Now we must notice under what circumstances our prophet was speaking.
   Isaiah used the same words, and it is probable that Micah was Isaiah's
   disciple. For although they held their prophetic office at the same
   time, Isaiah was the elder. But Micah was not ashamed to follow Isaiah
   and to borrow words from him. Nor was he so concerned for his own
   importance that he had to produce everything himself. He conformed to
   what Isaiah had done, and repeated his words exactly, showing the
   agreement between himself and God's illustrious servant, in order to
   give the teaching greater authority. We recognize his humility when he
   gave no thought to ill-natured and spiteful men who might say: "What!
   He's only repeating somebody else's words." He cared nothing for such
   slander, and was content to affirm faithfully what God commanded.

   The words afar off are not in Isaiah, but otherwise the two passages
   agree.

   Behold the days will come, saith the Lord, and I will raise up for
   David a righteous Branch, and he will reign as king and act wisely (or
   prosper). He will do judgment and righteousness on the earth. Jer.
   23:5. (Calvin's wording.)

   The prophet confirms what he has just said about the restoration of the
   church. For it would not have been enough to promise shepherds who
   would faithfully perform their duty, if that one Shepherd on whom God's
   covenant was founded had not been assured to them. For, the fulfillment
   of every good for which men can hope must be sought in him.

   It is usual for all the prophets, whenever they want to give the people
   hope of a happy future, to declare the coming Messiah. For in him have
   always been all the promises of God, now and forever, amen. This
   appears more clearly in the gospel; but the faith of the fathers could
   be complete only when they turned their thoughts to the Messiah. For
   apart from Christ, the fathers could not have had assurance of the love
   of God, or sure evidence of his kindness and fatherly goodness. This is
   the reason the prophets set Christ before men's eyes when they wish to
   inspire good hope in the distressed, who would otherwise be overcome by
   their sorrow and yield to despair.

   We should notice how often the prophets do this, so that we may realize
   how cold God's promises would be to us, how they would hang in the air
   or vanish completely if we do not turn our minds to Christ, and seek in
   him the answer we shall find nowhere else.

   There follows: He will act wisely (or prosper), and will establish
   righteousness and judgment on the earth. Shakal has both meanings, "act
   wisely" and "prosper," but the prophet seems to be speaking of just
   judgment rather than of good success, because the two clauses should be
   read together: "The Messiah will act wisely and then establish
   righteous judgment." He apparently means that Christ will be endowed
   with both wisdom and a spirit of right and justice, and so will fulfill
   all the requirements for a good and perfect king. And the first
   necessity is wisdom; for honesty is not enough in a king (indeed even
   among private citizens it gets only moderate praise); if he lacks
   intelligence, his honesty is of little use. Therefore the prophet here
   praises Christ for his true wisdom and then speaks of his love for
   justice and right.

   These words are not adequate for honoring Christ. But the figure is
   taken from human experience; and it is true that the first gift of
   kings is wisdom, the second integrity. We know that Christ is often
   compared to earthly kings, or the picture of an earthly king is drawn
   for us to help us see Christ. For God adapts himself to our dull
   capacity. Since we cannot comprehend the unthinkable justice or wisdom
   of Christ, God brings us by easy steps to the knowledge of him by
   giving us a shadow of him in these similes. . . .

   But the difference between the justice of Christ and the justice of
   other kings must be thoroughly understood. Those who rule well among
   men can exercise justice and judgment when they try to gave every man
   his just due, by restraining the boldness of the wicked and protecting
   the good and harmless. This is all that can be asked of earthly kings.

   But Christ is altogether different. Not only is he wise to perceive
   what is best and right, but also he endows his servants with wisdom and
   insight. He not only does judgment and justice by defending the
   harmless and aiding the oppressed, by helping the poor and checking the
   wicked; but also he establishes justice in regenerating us by his
   Spirit. And, he establishes justice further by putting a bridle on the
   devil.

   Now we see what I meant when I said that we must attend to both
   Christ's unlikeness and his likeness to earthly kings. His unlikeness
   is exceedingly great; yet the comparison has value for us.

   And on that day, Israel will be, with Egypt and Assyria, a third
   blessing in the midst of the earth. For the Lord of hosts will bless
   saying, Blessed be my people Egypt, and Assyria the work of my hand,
   and Israel my inheritance. Isa. 19:24-25. (Calvin's wording.)

   Isaiah ends the promise with the addition that there will certainly be
   a blessing for Egypt and Assyria as well as for Israel. Earlier God's
   grace was in a sense limited to Israel, because with them the Lord had
   entered into a covenant. For the Lord had extended his cord to Jacob,
   as Moses and David say (Deut. 32:9; Ps. 147:20). He hath not so dealt
   with every nation and revealed to them his judgments. The blessing of
   God dwelt in Judea alone.

   But the prophet says this blessing would in the future belong also to
   the Egyptians and the Assyrians. Under these names he includes all
   nations. He specifies these two, not to honor them, but because, since
   they had been continual enemies of God, they seemed the most alien and
   the farthest from hope of favor. God had earlier adopted only the sons
   of Abraham; he now wished to be called the Father of all nations
   without distinction.

   The third. The interpretation of some that Israel will have third place
   does not please me. For since the Hebrew word is feminine, it ought to
   be joined to barakah, blessing. This blessing is to be understood as an
   example or mirror of all blessings.

   Because he will bless. The repetition serves to explain the preceding.
   The prophet teaches that by God's free kindness, Assyria and Egypt will
   be united and associated with the chosen people. He means, "Although
   this title belonged only to Israel, it will be given also to other
   nations whom the Lord shall adopt for his own." There is a mutual
   relation between God and his people. They whom God by his own mouth
   names a holy people rightly call him their God. And this public naming
   is now extended to Egyptians and Assyrians.

   But although the prophet meant to unite distant nations with the Jews,
   he differentiates their appropriate positions with suitable labels. By
   calling the Egyptians the people of God, he means that they will share
   the distinction with which God had formerly honored the Jews alone. By
   calling the Assyrians the work of his hands, he distinguishes them by
   the praise suited to God's church. We have said elsewhere that the
   church is called to poiema of God (Eph. 2:10), or his work, because the
   faithful are remade by the spirit of regeneration and bear the image of
   God. The prophet means by the work of God's hands, not that we were
   first created by God, but that we who are separated from the world and
   are made new creatures, are transformed for a new life. As we well
   know, nothing in that new life is to be ascribed to us; for we know it
   all to be God's work.

   Israel he honors with its own unique privilege. Because it is God's
   inheritance, it keeps the right and honor of the first-born among its
   new brethren. Certainly God's covenant, which he first made with them,
   gave to them a priority which not even their own ingratitude could
   erase.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [81] Notice the contrast with the King James Version.

   [82] Apollinaris (d. 392) taught that Christ had a human body and the
   life of a man, but that in him the rational soul or mind was replaced
   by the logos. Thus he represented Christ as neither God nor man, but a
   mixture (mi/jic) of the two. He was repudiated, but orthodoxy was
   permanently infected by him.

   [83] Literally, he bare the Person of Christ.

   [84] The Targums are Aramaic translations of the Hebrew Old Testament.
   Such translations were first made orally in the synagogues to convey
   the meaning of the Hebrew text to the Aramaic-speaking congregations
   (cf. Ezra 4:7; Neh. 8:7). Later, written translations were made. That
   of Onkelos on the Pentateuch is a very literal and exact translation;
   but the Targum of Jonathan on the Prophets is an edifying paraphrase
   rather than a translation. It was probably written in the first century
   A.D., although the tradition of interpretation which it represents is
   much older.
     __________________________________________________________________

IV The Christian Life

  THE TEXT

  1. SALVATION

   For God so loved the world that he gave his only-begotten Son, that
   whosoever believeth in him should not perish but have everlasting life.
   John 3:16.

   Here Christ presents us with the cause and as it were the fountain of
   our salvation, so as to remove all doubt; for our minds cannot come to
   rest in tranquillity unless they arrive at the free love of God. Since
   we are not to seek the ground of our salvation anywhere but in Christ,
   we must try to find out where he came to us from and why he was offered
   up to be our Savior. This verse distinctly teaches both truths: faith
   in Christ means life to all men, and Christ had this life because God
   loved mankind and would not let it perish. This sequence must be
   carefully noted. When it is a question of the source of our salvation,
   we must consider the inborn and wicked ambition of our nature, which
   traps us into the devilish fancy that we deserve to be saved. Therefore
   we imagine that God is good to us because he judges us worthy of his
   favor. But Scripture praises everywhere his pure and unmixed mercy,
   which does away with all merit.

   By this text, Christ means to do nothing else than establish the love
   of God as the ground of our salvation. When we try to go beyond this,
   the Spirit himself slams the door in our face; he teaches us by Paul's
   mouth that God's love is founded in his own will and purpose (Eph.
   1:5). And it is obvious that Christ spoke as he did so as to turn men's
   attention from themselves to the mercy of God alone. God does not
   declare that he was led to deliver us because he found us worthy of
   such a blessing. On the contrary, he attributes the glory of our
   deliverance solely to his love. This appears more clearly from the
   added statement: the Son was given to men that they may not perish.
   Therefore, unless Christ rescues the lost, all are doomed to eternal
   ruin. Paul expresses the same thing in terms of temporal sequence: We
   were loved while we were enemies because of sin (Rom. 5:10). For
   surely, where sin reigns, there is only the wrath of God which carries
   death with it. It follows that mercy alone reconciles us to God and, in
   so doing, restores us to life.

   The above may seem to conflict with many testimonies of Scriptures that
   Christ is the ground of God's love for us, since apart from him they
   present God as hating us. We must remember what was said before: the
   secret love with which our Heavenly Father embraces us, being his
   eternal purpose for us, takes precedence over all other reasons for our
   deliverance. But it is true that the grace which God wanted to show us,
   and by which we are moved to the hope of salvation, appeared with the
   reconciling work of Christ. Since sins are of necessity odious to God,
   how can we maintain that God loves us freely, unless an offering has
   been made for these same sins which are offensive to him? Hence, before
   we receive any knowledge of God's Fatherly good will for us, the blood
   of Christ must intercede for us and restore us to God's favor. Besides,
   as we were formerly told that God so loved us as to give up his Son to
   die for us, so it is immediately added that in a strict sense faith
   should look to Christ alone.

   He gave his only-begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in him should
   not perish. Faith looks to Christ rightly when it sees in him the heart
   of God overflowing with love. Faith rests upon the death of Christ as
   upon a firm and solid support, and finds in it the only surety of
   salvation. Only-begotten is emphatic, commending to us God's love in
   all its fervor. And because it is hard for men to be persuaded of God's
   love, he removes all doubt by saying, We are so dear to God that for
   our salvation he did not spare his only-begotten Son. Since, therefore,
   God has testified to his love for us so sufficiently and abundantly,
   anyone who is not content and still doubts offers no small insult to
   Christ, as though he were someone who was killed by accident. Rather,
   we ought to reconsider that since God had the highest regard for his
   only-begotten Son, our salvation must be very precious to him, because
   he was willing to pay for it with the Son's death.

   That whosoever believeth in him may not perish. What a praise of faith,
   that it delivers us from eternal destruction! Christ means clearly that
   even though we are born for death, by faith in him we are offered a
   sure deliverance from it; therefore, we ought not to fear the death
   which still awaits us. And now he adds a universal call, inviting all
   men without exception to share in life, and leaving unbelievers without
   an excuse. The word world, in the previous phrase, has the same
   significance. Even though there is nothing in the world worthy of God's
   favor, he shows himself gracious toward the whole world, and he invites
   all men without exception to faith in Christ, which is nothing less
   than entering into Life.

   On the other hand, let us remember that while life is promised in
   Christ to all who believe, only a small part of the people are
   believers. Christ is indeed presented to all, but God opens the eyes of
   the elect alone, and enables them by faith to seek after him. The
   wonderful effect of faith is also seen in our receiving Christ from the
   Father, who has in Christ truly freed us from the punishment of eternal
   death, and made us heirs of eternal life; for by the sacrifice of his
   death, Christ has expiated our sins; and now nothing keeps God from
   acknowledging us as his sons. Since therefore faith embraces Christ,
   together with the efficacy of his death and the fruit of his
   resurrection, it is no wonder that by faith likewise we obtain the very
   Life of Christ.

   It is not yet quite clear as to why and how faith gives us life. Is it
   because Christ himself regenerates us by his Spirit, so that the
   righteousness of God may live and flourish in us; or is it because,
   purged by his blood, by God's free forgiveness, we are accounted
   righteous before him? Of course these two go together. Still, when it
   comes to the certainty of salvation, we must hold to it that we live
   because God loves us, and that freely; this he shows by not imputing
   our sins to us. Sacrifice is here mentioned because by it sin, curse,
   and death have been abolished. As I have already explained, the two
   clauses put together in this verse mean that, having lost life, we
   recover it in Christ. In this wretched state of mankind, ransom comes
   before salvation.

   As the Father hath loved me, so have I loved you: continue ye in my
   love. John 15:9.

   There is much more in this verse than is commonly believed. Those who
   think that he is here speaking of the eternal and secret love of the
   Father, philosophize beside the point. It was rather Christ's purpose,
   in effect, to deposit in our laps a sure pledge of God's love toward
   us. The abstruse question of how God in eternity loved himself in the
   Son has nothing to do with this verse. The love in question here has to
   do with us, because it is as the Head of the church that Christ
   testifies to God's love for him. Any man who tries to find out how God
   loved Christ, apart from his office as Mediator, gets caught in a
   labyrinth, without path or exit. Let us therefore fix our eyes on
   Christ, because it is in him that we see the pledge of God's love
   clearly exhibited. For, God poured his love upon him, so that it might
   flow from him to the members of his body. This is also the significance
   of the title, the beloved Son, in whom the will of the Father is
   satisfied; and we must consider the purpose of this love, which is that
   God in Christ may be well pleased with us. Therefore, we must not look
   at God's love from afar off or in a mirror. Christ was loved by the
   Father not in and for himself alone, but that he might with himself
   unite us with the Father.

   Continue ye in my love. Some explain these words to mean that Christ
   enjoined his disciples to love one another. Others explain it better
   when they say that they refer to the love with which Christ loves us.
   He in fact bids us live always in the joy of the love with which he
   once and for all loved us, warning us not to deprive ourselves of it.
   For many reject the grace offered them, and many throw away what they
   have in their hands. So then, once we are beneficiaries of the grace of
   Christ, let us see to it that we do not fall away from it through our
   own fault.

   It is foolish to infer from the above words that, without the help of
   our constancy, God's grace avails nothing. I do not concede that the
   Spirit asks no more from us than what is within our ability. Rather, he
   shows us where we must turn when we lack the strength to obey him. When
   we hear Christ, in this verse, exhort us to perseverance, we must not
   rely on our own energy and industry; we must rather pray him who
   commands us to confirm us in his love.

   For the Holy Ghost was not yet given, because that Jesus was not yet
   glorified. John 7:39.

   We know that the Spirit is eternal. But the Evangelist denies that the
   grace of the Spirit which was poured upon men after the resurrection of
   Christ was manifested in public while Christ was in the world in the
   form of a humble servant. He draws a similar contrast between the New
   Testament and the Old. In the New Testament, God promises his Spirit to
   believers as though he had never given him to the fathers. But of
   course the disciples had already received the first fruits of the
   Spirit; for where is faith from except from the Spirit? The Evangelist
   does not deny the presence of the Spirit among the godly before
   Christ's death; he only says that it was not so conspicuous and
   striking as after [the resurrection]. This then is the highest
   adornment of the Kingdom of Christ, that he rules over his church by
   his Spirit. He came to a proper and solemn possession of his Kingdom
   when he ascended to the right hand of the Father. No wonder then that
   the full revelation of the Spirit was deferred until that time.

   But there is one question left. Does the Evangelist mean here the
   visible graces of the Spirit, or that true regeneration which is the
   fruit of adoption? I answer that the Spirit, which was promised with
   the coming of Christ, was seen in visible gifts as in a mirror; but
   here we have to do with the power of the Spirit by which we are born
   again in Christ and become new creatures. If now we are left on earth,
   poor, dry, and almost empty of spiritual goods, while Christ sits on
   the right hand of the Father glorious with the majesty of empire, it is
   because our faith is too puny and we are too slow [to rise to him].

   He who heareth my word, and believeth in him who sent me, hath eternal
   life . . . hath passed from death to life. John 5:24.

   Certain later Latin copies have changed passed into shall pass. But
   they have done this out of ignorance and rashness; not knowing what the
   Evangelist meant, they have presumed to do more than what was right.
   The Greek word is not in the least unclear. There is nothing wrong
   about saying has passed from death, because the children of God even
   now have in them the incorruptible seed of life, by which they are
   called and sit with Christ, by faith, in heavenly glory. Thus they have
   the Kingdom of God established firmly within them (Luke 17:21; Col.
   3:3). Even while their life is hid, they nevertheless by faith do not
   fail to possess it. Even while they are besieged by death, they have
   peace because they know that Christ defends them adequately, and that
   they are safe. The state of the believers in this life is such that
   they always carry about the stuff of death in themselves. But the
   Spirit who lives in them is Life itself, and will at the end destroy
   what is left of death. Paul was right in saying that death shall be the
   last enemy to be destroyed (1 Cor. 15:26). But obviously this verse has
   nothing to do with the coming full destruction of death, or with the
   ultimate complete manifestation of Life. The point here is that though
   life in us is only begun, Christ announces it to the believers as their
   sure possession. Thus he removes the fear of death from them. And this
   is not surprising, since they are united with (insiti sint) him who is
   the inexhaustible Fountain of Life.

   Jesus said to her, I am the resurrection and the life; he that
   believeth in me, though he were dead, yet shall he live. John 11:25.

   This is the exposition of the second clause. It tells us that Christ is
   the Life, because he will never let the Life he has given us be
   destroyed, and will on the contrary preserve it till the end. What
   would happen to us if we, who are flesh and weak, having received the
   Life, should be left to our own strength? Therefore, if Christ is to
   finish what he has begun, it needs be that we continue in Life through
   the power of Christ himself. Believers are said never to die because
   their souls, born again of an incorruptible seed, enjoy the indwelling
   of the Spirit of Christ, who gives them Life without ceasing. While the
   body is subject to death because of sin, the Spirit is Life because of
   righteousness (Rom. 8:10). The fact that the outer man decays from day
   to day does not hurt the believers' true Life. It even helps its
   growth, because the inner man in turn is renewed day by day (2 Cor.
   4:16). What is more, death itself is in its way an emancipation from
   bondage to death.

   And I give unto them eternal life, and they shall never perish, neither
   shall any man pluck them out of my hand. John 10:28.

   We have this matchless fruit of faith that, by Christ's command, we
   live with confidence and safety when we are gathered in his fold. At
   the same time let us keep in mind the support which makes this
   confidence firm; for he testifies that he has our salvation in his hand
   and will remain its faithful guardian. And as though this were not
   enough, Christ says that his disciples shall be defended by God's
   power. This is a striking passage. We are taught that the salvation of
   all the elect is as certain as that God's power is invincible. Besides,
   Christ was not beating the air. He wanted to give them a word of
   promise and to fix it deeply in their minds. Therefore, we must
   understand this statement of Christ as showing that the salvation of
   the elect is sure and firmly established. We are besieged by powerful
   foes; and we are so weak that every moment might well be our last. But
   because our salvation is in the hands of One who is greater, who is
   mightier, than all, we ought not to tremble as though our very life
   were in peril.

   From this we gather further how insane is the trust of the papists
   which rests on free will, on one's own virtue and the merit of works.
   Far differently, Christ teaches his own that they must think of
   themselves as in a forest, surrounded by a host of robbers, knowing not
   only that they are unarmed and open prey, but also that they carry the
   stuff of death around with them. Hence, if they would live in safety,
   they can do it only by confidence in God's protection. The only reason
   for security is that our salvation is in God's hand. Our own faith is
   unfirm and we ourselves tend greatly to waver. But God who has taken
   our salvation into his hands is mighty enough to scatter all the
   weapons of our foes with one puff of his breath. The most important
   thing we can do is to turn our eyes to this [power of God], if we are
   not to be overcome by the fear of temptations. For Christ wanted to
   show us how the sheep are enjoying peace and quiet even while they
   wander among wolves.

   And he said unto them, Ye are from beneath, I am from above; ye are of
   this world, I am not of this world. I said therefore unto you that ye
   shall die in your sins, for if ye believe not that I am he, ye shall
   die in your sins. John 8:23-24.

   Since they did not deserve instruction, he wanted to confound them with
   a curt reproof. So, in this place, he declares that they reject his
   teaching because they absolutely abhor the Kingdom of God. Under world
   and below he includes whatever men have by nature, and brings out the
   difference between his gospel and the sharpness and penetration of the
   human mind: the gospel is heavenly wisdom, but our minds are of the
   earth. No one, therefore, is fit to be Christ's disciple unless he is
   refashioned by his Spirit. And faith itself is so rare in the world
   because by nature all men, except those he lifts up by a special grace
   of his Spirit, are turned against Christ and estranged from him. If ye
   believe not that I am he, ye shall die in your sins.

   The lost have no way of recovering salvation except by going to Christ.
   That I am here is emphatic, because it includes all that Scripture says
   of the Messiah and all that it bids us to hope in him. He is talking
   primarily about [his work in] the restoration of the church, which
   exists by the light of faith, and the righteousness and new life which
   grow from it. Some of the ancients have interpreted this passage as
   having to do with the divine essence of Christ. But in this they are
   wrong, because he is speaking of his office [or work] in our behalf.
   This statement is worthy of special notice. Men are always ignoring the
   evils which surround them. Even when they have to admit their peril,
   they neglect Christ and look all around for some other useless remedy.
   The fact is that unless we are extricated by the grace of Christ, we
   remain subject to the violence of a whole mass of innumerable evils.

   For me to live is Christ, and to die is gain. Phil. 1:21.

   In my Judgment, interpreters so far have given a wrong translation and
   exposition of this passage; for the distinction they make is that, to
   Paul, Christ was life, and death gain. I, on the other hand, take
   Christ to be the subject of both the phrases in this statement, so that
   he is said to be gain in life and in death. (It is common in Greek to
   imply the word pros without using it.) This interpretation, besides
   being less forced, goes better with what went before and expresses our
   faith more fully. Paul affirms that it makes no difference to him, and
   is the same thing, whether he lives or he dies, because having Christ,
   he is the gainer either way. And certainly, it is Christ alone who
   makes both our life and our death blessed; otherwise, if death be
   misery, life is no better. Hence without Christ, there is little to
   choose between life and death. On the other hand, if Christ be with us,
   he will bless our death equally with our life; and we shall look ahead
   to both with hope and gladness.

   Which he wrought in Christ when he raised him from the dead and set him
   at his own right hand in the heavenly places. Eph. 1:20.

   The Greek word is energesen, whence comes energeia. In Latin you might
   say: According to the efficacy which he effected. My translation means
   the same, and is not as awkward.

   However, here Paul rightly enjoins us to consider the power of Christ;
   for, so far, its presence in us is hidden, and God's power is perfected
   in our weakness (2 Cor. 12:9). How are we ahead of the children of this
   world, except that our situation seems to be worse than theirs? Even
   though sin does not reign in us, it is still there. Since death itself
   is working in us, the blessedness we have by hope is totally hidden
   from the world; for the power of the Spirit is something flesh and
   blood knows nothing about. Meanwhile, we are exposed to a thousand
   distresses, and more than all other men are become objects of derision.

   Hence, Christ alone is the mirror in whom we are able to see the glory
   which is altogether blurred in us who live in weakness under the cross
   we ourselves bear. Since it behooves us to raise our minds on high, to
   believe in righteousness, blessedness, and glory, let us learn to turn
   them to Christ. For we now live subject to the dominion of death; but
   he, having been made alive again by power from heaven, even now has
   life and dominion. We labor in servitude to sin; and besieged by a
   thousand afflictions, we are engaged in a dreadful warfare (1 Tim.
   1:18); he on the other hand, being seated at the right hand of God, has
   received all government in heaven and on earth, and triumphs wondrously
   over his foes as he defeats and overthrows them. We bite the dust,
   covered with contempt and ignominy; to him is given a name which fills
   men and angels with reverence, and makes devils and godless men grovel
   in fright. Here we are impoverished, so poor that we lack everything we
   need; he on the other hand has been appointed by the Father to possess
   all blessings and to dispense them according to his good pleasure. In
   view of all this, we shall be the gainers if we turn our minds to
   Christ, so that in him, as in a mirror, we may contemplate the
   wonderful treasures of divine grace and the infinite greatness of God's
   power, all of which we can hardly discern at present in our own lives.

   Yet a little while, and the world shall see me no more; but ye see me:
   because I live, ye shall live also. John 14:19.

   He continues to speak to his disciples of his special favor toward
   them, which should have been enough to mitigate and even take away
   their sorrow. "When I go away," he says, "and the world no longer sees
   me, I shall no less be still with you." If we are to rejoice in such
   secret vision of Christ, we must not judge his presence or absence with
   the eyes of the flesh. We must rather be intent upon discerning his
   power with the eyes of faith. Thus it is that Christ is always present
   to the believers and seen by them in the Spirit, even though they are
   bodily far from him.

   Because I live. This may be taken in two ways. It may simply confirm
   what went before, or it may go with the next phrase, which says that
   the believers shall live because Christ lives. I accept the former
   alternative, even though we may also learn from it that we live because
   Christ lives. Christ points out why it is that his disciples shall see
   him, while the world shall not: Christ cannot be seen except in the
   spiritual life which the world does not possess. No wonder the world
   does not see Christ, for it is blind because of death. But no sooner
   does a man begin to live by the Spirit than he is given eyes with which
   to see Christ, because our life flows from the life of Christ as from
   its source. Otherwise, we have no life. We in ourselves are dead, and
   the life we boast is a most awful death. Therefore, when it comes to
   obtaining life, our eyes must be upon Christ, and his life must be
   given us by faith. So it is that we receive confidence that, while
   Christ lives, we are safe from the peril of destruction. For it remains
   an immovable truth that while he is alive the members cannot be dead.

   Then said the Jews unto him, Now we know that thou hast a devil.
   Abraham is dead, and the prophets; and thou sayest, If any man keep my
   saying, he shall never taste of death. John 8:52.

   The reprobate who keep on with their stupidity are not touched by
   promises, whether small or great. Hence they can neither be led nor
   drawn to Christ. Some think that the Jews slandered Jesus and twisted
   his words around when they spoke of tasting death, because they had not
   heard him saying anything of the sort. But I think this objection is
   flimsy. I rather think that the Hebrews meant the same thing by tasting
   death and seeing death. Both expressions meant simply "to die." Of
   course, to apply the spiritual teaching of Jesus to the body is to
   interpret it falsely. No believer shall see death, for he is born again
   of an incorruptible seed. Even though believers die, being united with
   Christ their head, they shall be not snuffed out by death. Their death
   is simply a transition to the Heavenly Kingdom; the Spirit dwelling in
   them is Life because of righteousness, and what is left of death in
   them is consumed. Those who are carnal know nothing about freedom from
   death except in an obviously physical sense. And this disease is much
   too common in this world, since many have only contempt for the grace
   of Christ, which they judge merely by the senses of their flesh. If we
   do not wish the same blindness to affect us, let us arouse our minds,
   so that they may discern spiritual life in the midst of death.

   And when all things shall be subdued unto him, then shall the Son also
   himself be subject unto him that put all things under him, that God may
   be all in all. 1 Cor. 15:28.

   Will God be all in all also in the devil and the ungodly? Far from it,
   unless perhaps we choose to accept "to be" as meaning to be known and
   openly be seen. If so, the statement would mean: "Since now the devil
   is at war with God, since the wicked confound and confuse the order
   established by him, since we see an infinity of scandalous deeds with
   our own eyes, it is by no means clear that God is all in all. But when
   Christ executes the judgment commanded him by God, and overthrows Satan
   and all the wicked, then in their destruction the glory of God shall be
   revealed. The same may be said of powers which are sacred and
   legitimate in themselves, for they now prevent, in their way, God's
   appearing to us rightly and as he is in himself. But then, God shall be
   all in the sense that he shall reign alone and directly in heaven and
   earth, and will therefore be in all; not only in all persons, but in
   all creatures."

   Now, this is a pious interpretation, and since it agrees well enough
   with the apostle's purpose, I am willing to accept it. However, there
   would be nothing wrong in taking this verse as having to do with
   believers, in whom God has already begun his Kingdom and shall then
   perfect it, so that they shall cleave to him completely.

   Both these interpretations in themselves are sufficient refutation of
   those who pretend that this verse proves their wicked deliriums. Some
   imagine that God shall be all in all, in that all things shall vanish
   and become nothing. But Paul's words mean only that all things shall be
   brought back to God as their only beginning and end, and shall thus be
   bound firmly to him. Others infer from this verse that the devil and
   all the wicked shall be saved, as though the fullness of God would not
   be more striking in the destruction of the devil than if he made him
   his associate and equal. We see therefore with what impudence such
   madmen torture Paul's statement when they use it to establish their
   blasphemies.

  2. THE CHRISTIAN WARFARE

   But let us, who are of the day, be sober, putting on the breastplate of
   faith and love, and for a helmet the hope of salvation. 1 Thess. 5:8.

   Paul adds this in order that he may shake us the better out of our
   torpor. He calls us as it were to arms, to impress upon us that it is
   no time for sleep. He does not, indeed, mention war. But when he bids
   us to arm with a breastplate and a helmet, he is in fact calling us to
   warfare. It goes without saying that anyone who expects a surprise
   attack must rouse himself and keep watching. Having warned us to be
   watchful while we have the truth of the gospel for light, he now stirs
   us up with the argument that we have a battle to fight with the enemy,
   and that it is much too dangerous to be doing nothing. We know that
   soldiers, who may ordinarily be rather loose-living fellows, when they
   are near the enemy and in danger of being killed, avoid getting drunk
   or any other way of "having fun" so that they may watch and be wary.
   So, since Satan is always breathing down our necks, and is ready and
   scheming to plunge us into a thousand perils, we ought to be no less
   watchful and on our guard.

   Some interpreters are much too clever in their handling of the pieces
   of armor mentioned by the apostle. This verse is quite different from
   Eph. 6:14, where Paul by "breastplate" means "righteousness." Here it
   is enough to understand that the whole life of Christians is like a
   perpetual warfare, since Satan never stops attacking and troubling
   them. It is therefore necessary to be prepared for resistance; and of
   course we are warned that we had better be well armed against such a
   powerful enemy. However, Paul does not in this place go into detail
   about the armor we must have; he merely mentions two pieces, the
   breastplate and the helmet. But he leaves out nothing a man needs for
   this spiritual warfare. For anyone who is provided with faith, hope,
   and love has all the weapons he needs.

   Stand fast in one spirit, with one mind striving together for the faith
   of the gospel, and in nothing terrified by your adversaries: which is
   to them an evident token of perdition, but to you of salvation, and
   that of God. Phil. 1:27-28.

   In the second place, he commends to the Philippians an indomitable
   spirit, that they may not be confounded by the fury of their enemies.
   At that time the fires of savage persecution blazed almost everywhere,
   because Satan fought with all his force to prevent the inauguration of
   the gospel; and the more Christ exercised the grace of his Spirit, the
   greater was the impotent rage of Satan. The apostle, therefore, enjoins
   the Philippians to stand firm and not to be perturbed.

   Which is to them an evident token of perdition. This is the proper
   meaning of the Greek, and those who translate as "cause" have no good
   reason for doing so. When the wicked strive against the Lord, they
   engage in a preliminary battle which anticipates their ultimate ruin;
   and the greater the outrage they do against the godly, the more they
   are bent on their own perdition. Of course, Scripture does not teach us
   anywhere that the afflictions which the godly suffer at the hands of
   the godless become the cause of their salvation. Paul calls afflictions
   evidences or proofs [of salvation] in another place also (2 Thess.
   1:5). Instead of the word endeixin, which we have here, there he uses
   the word endeigma. It is, therefore, a singular comfort that the
   attacks and troubles we suffer at the hands of our enemies are visible
   evidences of our salvation. Persecutions are for God's children the
   seals of their adoption if they bear them with courage and a calm
   spirit. The ungodly, on the other hand, produce a token of their
   condemnation; they hit their foot against a stone which shall be their
   downfall.

   And that from God. This is put here as the last clause, so that it may,
   with God's grace, mitigate the bitter taste of the cross. It goes
   against nature to see in the cross a sign or proof of salvation. In
   fact, the cross and salvation seem to be contraries. Therefore, Paul
   asks the Philippians to consider that God turns those things which make
   for our misery into occasions of well-being. In this way, he shows that
   enduring the cross is a gift of God; for it is certain that everything
   which is for our good is God's gift to us. "To you," he says, "it is
   given not only to believe in Christ, but also to suffer for him.
   Therefore your very sufferings are witnesses to the goodness of God,
   because in them you have a real evidence of your salvation." If only we
   were convinced deep in our hearts that persecutions are among God's
   blessings, what progress we should make in the knowledge of divine
   truth! What is more certain than that the highest honor which grace
   bestows upon us is that we suffer reproach, or prison, or troubles, or
   tortures, or even death itself, in his name? For so it is that he
   decorates us with his medals. And yet there are many who would tell God
   to take such gifts away, rather than embrace with grateful hearts the
   cross offered to them. But so much the worse for our stupidity!

   For unto you is given in behalf of Christ not only to believe on him
   but also to suffer for his sake. Phil. 1:29.

   He is wise to join faith inseparably with the cross, for in this way
   the Philippians are taught that they have been called to faith in
   Christ to the end that they may endure persecution in his name. In
   other words, their adoption could no more be separated from the cross
   than Christ could be severed from himself.

   Thou therefore endure hardship as a good soldier of Christ. No man that
   warreth entangleth himself with the affairs of this life: that he may
   please him who hath chosen him to be a soldier. 2 Tim. 2:3-4.

   It was very necessary to add this second warning. For, anyone who
   offers to obey Christ, must be ready to endure hardship; there is no
   perseverance without patience in enduring evil. Therefore he adds, As
   becomes a soldier of Christ: which means that anyone who is in the
   service of Christ is a soldier, and that such soldiering consists not
   in doing evil but in patiently bearing it.

   It is absolutely necessary for us to think these things over. How many
   people we see every day who throw their spears away, people who had
   passed themselves off as good soldiers! And why does this happen,
   except because they cannot get used to the cross? In the first place,
   they are so soft that they cannot stand the thought of battle.
   Secondly, their idea of the warfare is to get into an [immediate] fight
   with their enemies. They cannot bear to learn what it is to possess
   their souls in patience.

   He continues with the simile from warfare. Strictly speaking, at first
   he spoke of a "soldier of Christ" in a metaphorical sense. Now he
   definitely compares military warfare with the spiritual warfare of the
   Christian man. Military discipline requires that, as soon as a soldier
   puts himself at the disposal of a general, he leaves his home and every
   business behind, and thinks of nothing except the warfare to which he
   is committed. So also we, if we are to give ourselves wholly to Christ,
   must break away from all the entanglements of this world.

   By the affairs of this life he means the care of maintaining a home and
   other ordinary occupations. The farmers leave their farming, and the
   merchants their shops and their business until they have served their
   term as soldiers. So also, whoever wants to fight under Christ must lay
   aside all the involvements and preoccupations of the world, so that he
   may apply himself wholly to the warfare. In short, let us keep in mind
   the old proverb, Hoc age; this do: which means that in doing our holy
   duty nothing should hinder our zeal and attention. The common
   translation, "No one who fights for God," etc., corrupts the whole
   meaning of what Paul has in mind.

   Then answered Peter and said unto him, Behold, we have forsaken all,
   and followed thee; what shall we have therefore? And Jesus said unto
   them. . . . Every one that hath forsaken houses, or brethren, or
   sisters, or father, or mother, or wife, or children, or lands, for my
   name's sake, shall receive a hundredfold, and shall inherit everlasting
   life. Matt. 19:27-29.

   Peter tacitly contrasts himself and the other disciples with the rich
   man whom the world had turned away from Christ. Since they led a life
   of privation and wandering, and suffered insults and sundry vexations,
   without hope of a better future, he asks rightly whether it was for
   nothing that they had left behind everything they had and had devoted
   themselves to Christ. It was absurd that when they had been despoiled
   by the Lord, they should not receive back more than they had lost.

   But then, what were all those things they had left behind? Being poor
   and low-class folk, they did not even have a house to leave behind;
   hence, their boasting was nothing less than ridiculous. Our own
   experience shows that people commonly overestimate the things they do
   in the way of duty before God. There are people who were hardly more
   than beggars under the papacy; and now they go around arrogantly,
   complaining that they have made great sacrifices for the sake of the
   gospel. However, there was some excuse for the disciples who, although
   they did not possess splendid fortunes, lived by the labor of their
   hands, and were no less happy in their homes than people of great
   riches. And we know that humble people, who are used to a quiet and
   decent life, find it harder to be torn away from their wives and
   children than those who are driven by ambition, or thrown this way and
   that by the winds of prosperous fortune. Of course, unless there was
   some reward waiting for the disciples, they had been foolish to change
   their way of life. Still, although one might excuse them on that
   ground, they were wrong to demand a taste of triumph before their
   warfare was finished. When annoyance at the delay of our reward creeps
   upon us, and lures us to impatience, let us first learn to consider the
   consolations with which the Lord reduces the bitterness of the cross in
   this world, and then let us raise our spirits to the hope of heavenly
   life. Christ's answers make these very two points.

   And whosoever shall leave. After having raised their minds to the hope
   of the future life, he offers them comforts for the present life, and
   fortifies them for bearing the cross. God does not allow his people to
   be grievously afflicted, at times even to the point of forsaking them,
   without making up for their sufferings with his help. Jesus does not
   say this to the apostles only; he takes the occasion to address his
   words to all believers in general. The point is that those who
   willingly give up all for the sake of Christ, have their chief reward
   in heaven; and yet, even in this life, they are happier than if they
   had kept everything.

   However, it does seem that the hundredfold compensation provided them
   is not in line with the facts. For in most cases, those who have been
   deprived of their parents, or children, or other relatives, wives who
   are widowed and those stripped of their fortunes, all because they have
   borne testimony to Christ, do not recover their losses; on the
   contrary, in exile, lowly and forgotten, they struggle bitterly with
   poverty and hardship. To all this I answer: When we consider God's
   grace with which he relieves the miseries of his own, we must confess
   that it is to be preferred to all the riches of the world. For while
   the unbelievers flourish, they do not know what is waiting for them on
   the next day; therefore, they must always live in turmoil because of
   perplexity and fear; neither can they enjoy the smile of fortune
   without, one way or another, stupefying themselves. Meanwhile, God
   gives his own a glad heart, so that to them the little they enjoy is
   worth much more than if without Christ they were affluent with an
   abundance of riches. I interpret with persecutions added by Mark as
   follows: Christ means that even though the godly are always persecuted
   in this world, and live as though the cross were tied to their back,
   still, the condiment of God's grace is so sweet that it exhilarates
   them, and makes their condition more desirable than the luxuries of
   kings.

   [I] now rejoice in my sufferings for you, and complete that which is
   behind in the afflictions of Christ in my flesh for his body's sake,
   which is the church. Col. 1:24.

   The apostle had previously claimed for himself the authority which was
   his by virtue of his calling. Now he is concerned that the Colossians
   do not detract from the honor due him as an apostle because he had been
   in bonds and was persecuted for the sake of the gospel. For, Satan uses
   these occasions to bring contempt upon the servants of God. Further,
   the apostle encourages them by his example not to be terrified by
   persecutions; and he reminds them of his zeal, so that his words may
   carry more weight. Nay more, he settles the matter with an appeal to
   his love for them, and asserts that he is joyful and only too willing
   to suffer affliction for their sakes. Someone will ask, "But where is
   this joy from?" It is from the fruits which [his labors] have produced.
   "It is pleasant for me to be afflicted for you, because I do not suffer
   in vain." In the same way, in a former letter to the Thessalonians, he
   says that, having heard of their faith, he rejoices in all privations
   and afflictions.

   And fill up that which is behind, etc. I take and to mean because; he
   says that he is joyful because in suffering he is associated with
   Christ. He desires nothing more blessed than such fellowship with
   Christ. He presents all believers in common with the comfort that in
   all tribulations, especially in those they suffer for the gospel, they
   share the cross of Christ, to the end that they may rejoice in sharing
   his blessed resurrection. Nay more, he affirms that in this way what is
   lacking in Christ's own afflictions is completed. Romans 8:29 says the
   same thing: "Whom God has chosen, them he has predestined that they may
   conform to the image of Christ, who is the first-born among the
   brethren." [85] Moreover, we know that since the Head and the members
   are united, the name Christ sometimes includes the whole body. This is
   evident from 1 Cor. 12:12, where, speaking of the church, the apostle
   finally concludes that being in Christ is like being [a member] in the
   human body. Therefore, as Christ suffered once in himself, so he now
   suffers every day in his members; and the sufferings which the Father
   decreed and appointed for his body are completed [in the church].

   There is a second consideration, which ought to encourage and comfort
   our spirits in affliction: God himself has fixed and appointed by his
   providence that we be conformed to Christ by enduring the cross, and
   that our communion with him extend to this very point.

   To this, he adds a third reason: that the sufferings of Christ bear
   fruit not only for the few, but for the church as a whole. He had
   before said that he suffered in behalf of the Colossians; now he
   declares more inclusively that the fruit of his sufferings extends to
   the whole church. Philippians 1:12 also speaks of this same fruit. What
   other explanation of this verse is clearer, simpler, and less forced?
   Paul rejoices in tribulation because, as he writes elsewhere, he
   considers that if Christ's life is to be manifest in us, we must carry
   about his death in our own bodies (2 Cor. 4:10). He says the same in
   the letter to Timothy: "If we suffer with him, we shall also reign with
   him: if we die with him, we shall also live with him" (2 Tim. 2:1). All
   will end in joy and glory. Hence, if the members of Christ are to have
   a symmetry with the Head, they must not reject the state which God
   himself has appointed for his church. The third point is this,
   afflictions must be borne to the end willingly, because they are useful
   to all the godly and promote the well-being of the whole church, by
   giving a peculiar beauty to the truth of the gospel.

   Then they shall deliver you up to be afflicted, and shall kill you: and
   ye shall be hated by all nations for my name's sake. Matt. 24:9.

   Now Christ predicts for his disciples another kind of temptation which
   shall try their faith; namely, that besides the common afflictions [of
   man] they shall be hated and detested by the entire world. It is hard
   enough and sad enough for the children of God to be afflicted without
   distinction from and together with the wicked and despisers of God, and
   to be subjected to the same punishments which come upon the latter
   because of their crimes. It appears the height of injustice that they
   should be oppressed with the hardship of greater evils which do not
   touch the ungodly. Just as wheat, after being beaten with a flail
   together with the tares, is ground under a millstone and crushed, so
   also God not only afflicts his own with the wicked, but in addition
   subjects them to a cross which goes beyond what others [have to endure]
   so that they appear to suffer far greater misery than all the rest of
   the human race.

   Christ here is speaking of the afflictions which the disciples were to
   suffer for the gospel. What Paul says in Rom. 8:29 is of course true.
   Those whom God elects, he destines to bear a cross, so that they may
   conform to the image of the Son. But there Paul means more than
   persecution at the hands of the enemies of the gospel. Here, on the
   other hand, Christ is speaking of the kind of cross which the faithful
   have to carry because of their witness to the gospel; for this makes it
   necessary for them to incur the hatred of the ungodly, to face their
   insults and provoke them to fury. He wants to warn his disciples that,
   as he had explained to them before, the doctrine of the gospel, of
   which they were to become witnesses and heralds, would at no time
   please the world or receive its applause. So he prophesies that they
   will not be fighting with only a few enemies, but that, everywhere they
   go, nations shall rise against them.

   It was monstrous and incredible, calculated to amaze and trouble the
   strongest minds, that the name of the Son of God should become so
   infamous and hateful as to create hatred everywhere toward those who
   honored it. Therefore, Mark says, take heed to yourselves; and in this
   way he brings out the purpose and use of the above warning that they be
   prepared to endure, lest, being incautious, they be overcome by
   temptation. It is added further by the same Mark that when the
   disciples of Christ shall be brought before kings and rulers, it will
   be a testimony against them. Luke puts it a little differently: This
   will happen to you in testimony; but it means the same thing. For
   Christ says that, where his gospel is defended at the peril of death,
   there the testimony for it shall be all the greater.

   Yea, for thy sake are we killed all the day long; we are counted as
   sheep for the slaughter. Ps. 44:22.

   The faithful here plead for God's mercy, not because they are punished
   for their own evil deeds, but because they are hated by unbelievers for
   the name of God.

   At first sight, this seems a foolish complaint, and Socrates' answer
   seems the more admirable when, in answer to his wife's reproach, he
   said that it was better to die innocent than for his own wrongdoing.
   Furthermore, the consolation which Christ offered (Happy are those who
   are persecuted for righteousness' sake, Matt. 5:10) appears very
   different from the words of the psalm. Peter also said the same thing:
   Anyone who suffers for Christ's name has all the more reason for joy
   and thankfulness (1 Peter 4:14).

   But I answer that although the best comfort for our sorrow is that its
   cause is connected with Christ, yet the faithful do not complain to God
   in vain or wrongly when they say that they are suffering unjustly for
   his sake. For in this way, they want him to come forward with more
   vigor as their defender, since it is right that he himself take care of
   his own glory, when the impious insult and deal cruelly with his
   worshipers. . . .

   It is also right to remind ourselves that the faithful have not been so
   pure of all stain that God would be unjust in exacting punishment for
   their sins. But, by his incomparable indulgence, he does bury our sins
   and subject us to unjust persecution, so that we may glory in bearing
   the cross of Christ and may therefore be sharers and companions of his
   blessed resurrection.

   This doctrine we must take for our own use. First, we must be ready,
   after the example of the fathers, to bear calmly any suffering by which
   our loyalty to the confession of our faith is validated. Secondly, in
   the deepest shadows of death we must constantly call on the name of
   God, and we must stand fast in fear of him.

   Paul (Rom. 8:23) goes further and asserts that this passage does not
   merely offer us an example, but describes the perpetual situation of
   the church. Therefore we are assigned, by God's decree, the perpetual
   warfare of bearing the cross. At times God spares our weakness by
   allowing a truce, or a relaxation [of the warfare]. But although swords
   are not always drawn against us we must, because we are members of
   Christ, be always ready to share his cross. Let us not then be
   terrified by the bitterness of the cross, and let us keep this picture
   of the persecuted church always before us. So long as we are adopted by
   God in Christ, we are destined for slaughter. If we are to prevent the
   wearisome weight of the cross or our fear of it from turning us away
   from our faith, we must keep this thought continually in our hearts.
   The cup which God pours for us we must drink; no man can be a Christian
   who does not offer himself in sacrifice to God.

   Ye have not yet resisted unto blood, striving against sin. . . . For
   whom the Lord loveth he chasteneth, and scourgeth every son whom he
   receiveth. Heb. 12:4, 6.

   The apostle goes further and reminds us once again that, even while the
   wicked persecute us in Christ's name, our warfare is with sin. Christ
   himself was free from this struggle, because he was clean and unspotted
   by any sin. In this respect we are unlike him, for sin dwells in us at
   all times; and our afflictions serve to overcome and rout it.

   In the first place, we know that all the evils in the world come from
   sin; and so came in the beginning death itself. But this is not what
   concerns the apostle. His point is that the persecutions we suffer are
   useful to us, because they are medicine for destroying sin. For in this
   way, God keeps us under the yoke of his discipline, so that our flesh
   may not play loose with sin. At times he checks our hot blood; at other
   times he punishes our misdeeds in order that we may afterwards become
   more careful. Therefore, whether he sets out to heal our vices, or to
   prevent us from doing evil, as the apostle says, he is training us for
   the struggle against sin. And when we suffer for his gospel, the Son of
   God himself honors us with his favor, and does not count our sufferings
   as punishment of sin. Still we must acknowledge the validity of what
   the apostle says: When we act against the ungodly in defense of the
   cause of Christ, we at the same time battle against sin which is the
   enemy within us. Thus the grace of God is double; he converts the
   remedy he uses for curing us from our vices into a means of defending
   his gospel.

   Let us remember that the apostle is speaking to people who had thrown
   away their possessions and suffered many indignities; and had done all
   that willingly and with joy. And yet, he charges them with indolence
   because, exhausted while the battle was still in progress, they had not
   kept up the strenuous march to the end. It is not for us to ask the
   Lord to discharge us from his army, no matter what fighting we have
   done. For Christ will have no discharged soldiers, except those who
   have overcome death itself. . . .

   For whom the Lord loveth. The reasoning of this verse seems rather
   shaky. The Lord afflicts the elect and the reprobate without
   distinction, and his scourges are evidence of his wrath more often than
   of his love. So says Scripture, and experience confirms it. And yet,
   with regard to the believers, it is not surprising that the apostle
   refers only to the benefit they derive from the troubles they
   experience. When God punishes the reprobate he shows himself as a
   severe and wrathful judge; with his elect, he has no other purpose
   except to promote their salvation; and this is a demonstration of his
   Fatherly love. Moreover, since the ungodly do not know that they are
   governed by God's hand, they think that most of their troubles happen
   by chance. The ungodly are like a wrongheaded young man, who leaves his
   father's house and wanders far away; when he all but perishes from
   hunger and cold and other evils, he admits that he has met the just
   punishment of his stupidity; by his sufferings he sees the value of
   being docile and obedient, but he does not understand that his troubles
   are the chastisement of his father. So also the ungodly, having
   alienated themselves from God and his household, do not understand that
   they are still within the reach of God's hand. Therefore, let us keep
   in mind that we cannot taste the love of God in our afflictions, unless
   we are persuaded that they are rods with which our Father chastises us
   for our sins. Nothing like this occurs to the reprobate, who have the
   mentality of fugitives from God. This is why it is proper that judgment
   should begin at the house of God.

   Wherefore, even though God's hand falls upon those in his house and
   those outside, it falls upon the former to show his peculiar care for
   them. The true solution of our problem is as follows: anyone who knows
   and is persuaded that he is castigated by God must promptly go on to
   consider that God afflicts him because he loves him. Since the godly
   know that God intervenes in their punishment, they have a sure pledge
   of his good will towards them; for if he did not love them, he would
   not care about their salvation. Hence the apostle concludes that God
   offers himself as a Father to all those who endure correction. Those
   who would rather kick like wild horses, or harden themselves and fight
   back, are a different sort. In short then, the apostle teaches us that,
   when God corrects us, he does so only as our Father, provided we yield
   and obey.

  3. THE CROSS AND PERSECUTION

   And when forty years were expired, there appeared unto him in the
   wilderness of Mount Sinai an angel of the Lord in aflame of fire in a
   bush. Acts 7:30.

   It remains to say something of the burning bush. God frequently makes
   use of a certain similarity among things for giving us signs; and this
   is the common reason for the sacraments. Besides, nothing could have
   been more appropriate for confirming the faith of Moses in God's
   present business with him. Moses knew in what state he had left his
   people. Although they were a great multitude, they were not unlike a
   bush. For the denser a bush and the more twigs it has, compactly put
   together, the more likely it is to burst into flame and the fire
   spreads most easily to all its parts. Similarly, the band of Israelites
   was weak and exposed to every kind of harm. This unwarlike multitude,
   kept down by its own dead weight, inflamed the fury of the Pharaoh
   until it could burst out with success. A people oppressed by a cursed
   tyranny is like a pile of wood which has caught fire on all sides.
   Nothing keeps it from being quickly reduced to ashes, unless the Lord
   himself sit in the midst of it. Although this story refers to the
   unusual persecution which was aflame at that time, it nevertheless in a
   way depicts the perpetual state of the church which is never, in this
   world, safe and free from affliction. For what are we but food for
   fire? Countless burning torches of Satan fly around constantly, and set
   souls as well as bodies on fire; but the Lord himself, by his wonderful
   and matchless grace, guards and defends us. The fire, therefore, must
   needs so burn that in this life it reduce us to nothing. But since God
   dwells in our midst, he keeps us from harm in the midst of our
   tribulation, as we read also in Ps. 46:5.

   And the multitude rose up together against them; and the magistrates
   rent off their [the apostles'] clothes, and commanded to beat them.
   Acts 6:22.

   When Luke tells us how a crowd gathered together, how some nobodies --
   in fact jugglers and those who put their bodies on sale, whose sordid
   ways everybody knows -- raised a hue and cry, he reminds us of the
   world's fury against Christ. Although folly and levity are ever present
   among the whole population, the amazing power of Satan appears when
   those who are otherwise reserved and stable suddenly get excited over
   nothing and join the company of worthless people in resisting the truth
   of God. Nor did the magistrates themselves show any more restraint. By
   their gravity, they should have appeased the fury of the populace. They
   should have opposed violence with energy, and, with their resources,
   taken the side of the innocent. Instead, they make a disorderly and
   noisy arrest; and before hearing the truth of the matter, they have the
   apostles stripped of their clothes and whipped with green rods. Such is
   the deplorable depravity of mankind that almost all the tribunals of
   this world, which should be sanctuaries of justice, have been polluted
   by an impious and unholy assault upon the gospel.

   One might also ask, Why were the apostles thrown in prison, when they
   had already received their punishment? For prisons were established for
   keeping people in custody, partly for punishment and partly that more
   might be learned about their case. But it is evident that the servants
   of Christ are treated with less humanity than adulterers, robbers, and
   other malefactors of their kind. This gives us a clearer insight into
   the power of Satan, who incites the spirits of men so that they observe
   no kind of justice when they persecute the gospel. Still, though the
   lot of the godly in defense of the gospel is harder than that of the
   godless in their wickedness, yet theirs is the brighter, because in all
   the evils which they undergo, they triumph gloriously before God and
   his angels. They indeed suffer insult and ignominy, but because they
   know that the wounds of Christ are more precious and carry more dignity
   in heaven than all the vain and smoky pomps of the earth the more they
   are wronged and slandered by the world, the more abundant reason they
   have for glorying. For, if Themistocles [86] used to be so honored by
   profane writers that they preferred his prison to the seats and courts
   of magistrates, how much more we should honor the Son of God in whose
   cause the faithful at all times suffer persecution for the gospel's
   sake. Besides, even though the Lord allowed Paul and Silas to be
   inflicted with scourging at the hands of godless magistrates, yet he
   did not let them suffer shame without turning it into a greater glory.
   Since the persecutions which go with bearing witness to the gospel are
   left over for us from the passion of Christ, as our Prince himself
   converted the curse of the cross to a chariot of triumph, so also he
   shall adorn the prisons and gibbets of his servants, and there they
   shall triumph over Satan and all the sons of wickedness.

   Rending their garments. Since the ancient interpreter [87] had
   translated this phrase rightly, it was wrong of Erasmus to change it to
   mean that the magistrates tore their own garments. Luke simply meant to
   say that when the holy men were beaten, the order of lawful judgment
   was neglected and that those who laid hands upon them were so violent
   that their clothes were torn. For it was most alien to Roman custom for
   magistrates to tear their clothes to pieces publicly in the market
   place, especially when the matter on hand had to do with an unknown
   religion, whose protection was no great concern of theirs. But I will
   not dispute at length about such an obvious matter.

   Wherein ye greatly rejoice, though now for a season, if need be, ye are
   in heaviness through manifold temptations, that the trial of your
   faith, being more precious than of gold that perisheth though it be
   tried with fire, might be found unto praise and honor and glory at the
   appearing of Jesus Christ. 1 Peter 1:6-7.

   Even though the ending of the Greek verb is unclear, the sense of the
   passage requires that we read you exult rather than exult! The phrase
   in which refers to the manifold hope of salvation set down in heaven.
   But Peter does not so much praise as exhort them. His purpose is to
   teach the benefit we receive when we hope that we shall be saved;
   namely, the spiritual joy which not only mitigates the bitterness in
   all evil, but also conquers all melancholy. So, there is more to exult
   than to rejoice.

   But it appears rather contradictory that the faithful who exult with
   joy should at the same time be sorrowful, for these are opposite
   feelings. But they know by experience what words can hardly express:
   that joy and sorrow go together. However, to settle the matter with few
   words, the faithful are not blocks of wood that they should be bereft
   of human sensibility when they meet sorrow, or that they should not be
   afraid when in peril, or be troubled by poverty, or by the hardships
   they have to endure under persecution. Therefore, evil does indeed make
   them unhappy. But faith sweetens their sorrow, so that there is no lack
   of joy in them because of it. Their sorrow yields to their rejoicing,
   rather than preventing it. Again, even though joy overcomes sorrow,
   still it does not abolish it, because it does not deprive us of our
   humanity. Thus we learn true patience; for its beginning and, as it
   were, its very root is the knowledge of God's favor, especially the
   awareness of the honor he has done us by his free adoption. Anybody who
   keeps this grace of God in mind has little trouble in absorbing the
   evils which he endures. For, why is it that we are oppressed by a
   melancholy spirit if not because we have no taste for the good which is
   spiritual? Anybody who realizes that the troubles he undergoes have
   their proper use as trials expedient for his salvation, not only rises
   above them, but also turns them into occasions of joy.

   Ye are in heaviness. Since the reprobate in their turn are not immune
   to evil, do they not also experience sorrow? Yes, they do. But Peter
   recognizes that the faithful suffer sorrow willingly, whereas the
   godless murmur and are perverse enough to battle against God. The godly
   man suffers as a tame ox bears his yoke or as a horse that is broken
   submits to the bridle even when put on by a child. God visits the
   wicked with trouble, even as people bridle a fierce and ornery horse
   with violent hands: the horse kicks and fights back; but it is no use.
   Hence, Peter praises the believers because they bear their troubles
   willingly, and not under compulsion.

   He says now for a season by way of consoling his readers. For the
   shortness of time is a mitigation of the evils we suffer no matter how
   hard they hit us. And we must remember that this present life lasts
   only a moment.

   If need be. The reason for our sufferings is here taken for their
   cause. The apostle wants to make it clear that God does not make a
   trial of his people without reason. If God afflicted us without a
   reason, our burden would be too heavy to bear. Therefore, Peter argues
   for our comfort on the ground of God's purpose, not that we can always
   see the reason for our afflictions, but that they occur rightly (so we
   ought to be persuaded), since they occur at God's pleasure. . . .

   More precious than gold. He argues from the lesser to the greater. For,
   if we prize a corruptible metal like gold so much that, to prove its
   value, we test it with fire, is it any wonder that God should want to
   prove our faith, which he prizes much more highly, in the same way?
   Even though the words of the apostle suggest another interpretation (in
   that he seems to set no value on gold), he nevertheless compares faith
   to gold so as to present it as the more precious of the two, and to
   imply that it is worth the trial to which God subjects it. Besides, the
   full extent of the meanings of dokimazesthai (tried) and dokimion
   (trial) is not certain. One cannot be sure whether he is speaking of a
   double testing of gold with fire: once when it is purified of its
   dross; and then, when it is tested for judging its quality. Both of
   these tests apply to faith very well. Much of the impurity of unbelief
   remains in us. When we are, as it were, purified in God's furnace by
   various afflictions, the dross in our faith is purged, and the faith
   becomes pure and clean before God. At the same time it is tested to
   show whether it be a true or false faith. I accept willingly both these
   views of the matter, which seem to be justified by what follows
   immediately in our text. For, since silver is worthless before it is
   purified, so also our faith receives the honor of a crown before God
   when it is proved in the proper way.

   At the appearing of Jesus Christ. This is added to teach the faithful
   to keep their spirits high until the end. For now our life is hidden in
   Christ; and it will remain hidden, and as it were buried, until Christ
   appears from heaven. The whole course of our lives moves toward the
   destruction of the outer man; and all the things we suffer are so many
   anticipations of death. Therefore, if we want to see glory and praise
   in the midst of our afflictions, we had better fix our eyes on Christ.
   For the trials, which are so full of reproach and shame for us, are in
   Christ full of glory. But such glory in Christ is not as yet seen
   clearly because the day of our consolation has not as yet arrived.

   Searching what, or what manner of time, the Spirit of Christ which was
   in them did signify, when it testified beforehand the sufferings of
   Christ, and the glory that should follow. 1 Peter 1:11.

   Peter tells his readers that their sufferings had been foretold long
   before by the Spirit, so that they may endure them with a calm spirit.
   But there is much more to this statement. He means that from the very
   beginning God has so ordained and governed the Christian church that
   the cross has been the preparation for victory, and death the way to
   life. Such is the clear testimony of Scripture. Therefore, there is no
   reason why we should be unduly depressed by our troubles, as though
   they meant our misery, when the Spirit of God himself calls us blessed.

   But notice the order. He puts sufferings first, and the glories which
   are to follow second; and he makes it clear that this order can be
   neither changed nor reversed. The afflictions come first; and then
   comes glory. There are two striking thoughts expressed in this
   sentence: Christians must first suffer many tribulations that they may
   know the joy of glory; secondly, their sufferings are not evil, because
   they are bound closely with the glory to come. Since God himself has
   ordained this conjunction, it is not for us to tear one part away from
   the other. But it is a rare comfort to us that this situation of ours
   has been predicted so many ages ago, from which we gather that our
   coming deliverance from it is no empty promise. Hence we also know that
   we suffer not by chance but by the solid providence of God. And
   furthermore, we acknowledge that the prophecies are as mirrors, which
   in our very tribulations present us with an image of heavenly glory.

   Of course, Peter says that it is Christ's own sufferings that were
   foretold by the Spirit; but he does not separate Christ from his body.
   Therefore, we must not limit the sufferings in question to Christ's own
   person. We must rather begin with the Head, that the members may follow
   him in their order. As Paul says, we must conform to him who is the
   first-born among his brethren (Rom. 8:29). Hence, Peter is speaking not
   of something peculiar to Christ, but of the universal situation of the
   church. We have a better confirmation of our faith in that he invites
   us to consider our own sufferings in relation to Christ: because in
   this way, in our relationship to him, we discern better the connection
   between death and life. It certainly is right and fitting that in this
   sacred union, the Head should suffer daily in his members. For in this
   way his sufferings are completed in us, and his glory in turn is
   fulfilled in his members. More is said about this in Col. 3 and 1 Tim.
   4.

   Beloved, think it not strange concerning the fiery trial which is to
   try you, as though some strange thing happened unto you; but rejoice,
   inasmuch as ye are partakers of Christ's sufferings, that, when his
   glory shall be revealed, ye may be glad also with exceeding joy. 1
   Peter 4:12-13.

   There is a great deal said about afflictions in this epistle. We have
   explained the reason for this elsewhere. However, we must notice that
   sometimes when he calls the believers to patience, he speaks in general
   of the common ills which infest human life; here, on the other hand, he
   speaks of the evils which the faithful suffer for Christ's name. In the
   first place, he reminds them that they must not be surprised [by
   affliction], as by something sudden and unexpected; that they must
   meditate upon the cross for a long time, in order to be prepared to
   bear it when the occasion arises. Anyone who has chosen to go to war
   under Christ will not become panicky when he meets persecution; he will
   rather bear it with patience as one who knows all about it. Therefore,
   if we would have presence of mind when persecutions rush upon us and
   overtake us, we need to be accustomed in good time to diligent
   meditation upon the cross. Moreover, he makes two statements to show
   that the trial of the cross serves a useful end: by it God proves our
   faith, and we thus become companions of Christ. In the first place, let
   us keep in mind that the trial which proves our faith is most
   necessary. We should therefore be only too glad to obey God when he
   provides for our own salvation. But our chief comfort should be sought
   in the society of Christ. Therefore, Peter not only forbids us to be
   surprised when he puts the cross before us, but also bids us to be
   joyful. It is indeed a matter for joy that by means of persecution God
   makes proof of our faith. But it is a far surpassing joy that the Son
   of God puts us in a class with himself, to lead us with himself to a
   blessed participation in the glory of heaven. We must take it as
   axiomatic that if we bear the dying of Christ in our flesh, his own
   life shall appear in us. The wicked also have their many troubles; but
   because they are separated from Christ, they get nothing in return
   except the wrath and execration of God. So it is that they are soon
   swallowed up by melancholy and terror.

   This then is the whole comfort of the men of faith: they are Christ's
   associates, that they may in time come to have a share in his glory.
   So, we must always consider that the way is from the cross to the
   resurrection. But since this world is a labyrinth where no escape from
   evil is in sight, Peter turns our eyes to the future when the glory of
   Christ shall be revealed. What he means is that we must not spurn the
   day of his revelation because it is now hidden, but we must live in
   expectation of it. He sets before us a double joy: one which we now
   have in hope, and another which shall be complete at the coming of
   Christ. Because the first is mixed with sorrow and sadness, it is the
   latter which he connects with exultation. It is not good sense to be
   dreaming in the midst of tribulation of a joy which shall rid us of all
   trouble. But the consolations of God do temper our experience of evil
   so that, while we suffer, we have joy.

   For the eyes of the Lord are over the righteous, and his ears are open
   unto their prayers; but the face of the Lord is against them that do
   evil. And who is he that will harm you, if ye be followers of that
   which is good? But and if ye suffer for righteousness' sake, happy are
   ye, and be not afraid of their terror, neither be troubled. 1 Peter
   3:12-14.

   It ought to be enough to take the sting out of whatever evil we suffer
   that we are under the eyes of the Lord and that in his own good time he
   will come to our help. The sum of the matter, therefore, is that the
   well-being which he speaks of depends upon God's protection. For, if
   the Lord did not keep watch upon his own, they would be like sheep
   exposed in advance to wolves for destruction. And if the slightest
   trouble makes us cry out, or if we are kindled so quickly to fury and
   burn with a desire for vengeance, it is doubtless because we neither
   take to heart that we are under God's care, nor acquiesce in his help.
   We are taught patience in vain, unless our spirits be first imbued with
   the teaching that God cares for us and will come to our aid in his good
   time. If we are persuaded that God wills to defend the cause of the
   righteous as a Father, our first and single-minded concern becomes to
   be innocent of evil; and then, when we become beset and troubled by the
   unjust, we flee to God's protection. The apostle's purpose in telling
   us that the ears of the Lord are open to our petitions is to move us to
   persevere in prayer.

   But the face of the Lord. With this phrase Peter points out that since
   the Lord is our vindicator, the godless shall not be permitted to
   flourish forever in their insolence. At the same time, he threatens
   that if we take it upon ourselves to defend our lives against the
   wicked, we shall have God himself against us. But, it may be objected,
   experience teaches us far otherwise; for the more just a man is, and
   the more he loves peace, the more he is vexed by the wicked. To this I
   answer, No one follows justice and peace so far that he does not
   sometimes, some way, sin in this matter. But we must observe above all
   that in this life we are promised nothing beyond what we need for doing
   our duty. Hence, our peace with the world is often turned into trouble,
   in order that our flesh may be subdued for obedience to God; hence,
   whatever causes us trouble, nothing should be a loss to us [but it
   should contribute to the same end of obedience].

   And who is he, etc. He again confirms the above with an argument
   derived from common experience. It happens often that the wicked pick a
   quarrel with us, or that they are cut to the quick by us. We may fail
   to put ourselves out to win their favor; for the truth is that anyone
   who keeps being kind is able to soften hearts which are otherwise like
   iron. This same truth is set forth by Plato in the First Book of The
   Republic: staseis gar pou e ge adikia kai machas en allelois parechei.
   e de dikaiosu [omegaeat]e houonoian kai philian . . "Injustice provokes
   seditions and hatreds and quarrels; but justice, concord and
   friendship." However, even though this happens commonly, it is not
   always so. No matter how much the children of God try to pacify the
   wicked with goodness, and to show kindness toward all, they are
   nevertheless often attacked without any just cause. Therefore, Peter
   adds: If ye suffer for righteousness' sake. . . . His point in short is
   that the believers try to obtain in this life a state of tranquillity,
   more by being good than by being violent and quick to avenge. And then,
   if having left nothing undone toward peace, they still suffer, even in
   this they are happy, for they suffer for righteousness' sake. This last
   phrase is a far cry from the judgment of the flesh. But it is not a
   rash statement of Christ; and Peter himself does not repeat it rashly
   when he takes it from the mouth of the Master. For God will ultimately
   come forth as our liberator; and he will establish openly what at
   present seems unbelievable: that the miseries which the godly bear with
   patience are in truth rich with happiness. To suffer for righteousness'
   sake means not only to be subject to some privation or discomfort in
   espousing a good cause, but also to suffer injustice, as happens when a
   man who fears God and does no evil finds that those around have turned
   against him.

   For it is better, if the will of God be so, that ye suffer for
   well-doing, than for evil-doing. For Christ also hath once suffered for
   sins, the just for the unjust, that he might bring us to God. . . . 1
   Peter 3:17-18.

   For it is better. This phrase qualifies not only the next sentence, but
   also the whole passage. Peter has spoken of the confession of faith,
   which at that time was a perilous affair. He now adds that it is much
   better for them to bear privation in defense of a good cause, and so to
   suffer unjustly, than to be chastised for their own infamy. But this
   encouragement is understood when we ponder it inwardly, rather than by
   much talk around it. We read often in profane writers that, when we
   suffer evil and must needs go through with it, a good conscience is
   help enough. This sounds very courageous. But it still is true that the
   spirit is strong only when it looks to God. Therefore he adds the
   conditional phrase if it be God's will. By these words he tells us that
   when we suffer any evil unjustly it comes about not by accident, but
   rather, and surely, by the will of God. And he assumes and confesses
   that God neither wills nor appoints anything except for the best of
   reasons. Hence, the believers have this comfort in their miseries, that
   God knows all about it; they know that it is God who leads them to the
   scene of contest, in order that under his auspices they may show forth
   their faith.

   For Christ also. It is another comfort that, if in our afflictions we
   have a good conscience, we suffer after the example of Christ: and in
   so doing, we are blessed. And at the same time the apostle proves, from
   the purpose for which Christ died, that it is not fitting for us to be
   chastised for doing evil. He reminds us that Christ suffered to lead us
   to God: and what does he mean except that by the death of Christ we
   have been so consecrated to God that we are to live and die to him!
   There are then two parts to this statement. The first is that we are to
   bear persecution with equanimity, since the son of God himself shows us
   the way; the other is that, since by the death of Christ we have been
   set aside for obedience to God, we are to suffer not because of our
   misdoings, but for righteousness' sake.

   But now someone may bring up the question, is it not true God chastises
   believers when he allows them in some way to be afflicted? I answer
   that God often inflicts upon believers the punishment they deserve. And
   this Peter himself does not deny. But he reminds us what a great
   comfort it is to have our cause bound up with God! We shall see in the
   next chapter that those who are persecuted for righteousness' sake are
   not being punished by God for their sins. We shall also consider in
   what sense they are called innocent.

   Yet if any man suffer as a Christian, let him not be ashamed: but let
   him glorify God on this behalf. 1 Peter 4:16.

   After having forbidden Christians to hurt or do any harm so that they
   may not, like the unbelievers, arouse the world's hatred by their
   evil-doing, he now bids them to thank God when they suffer persecution
   in the name of Christ. Certainly, it is no ordinary kindness on God's
   part that he not only has freed us and exempted us from the common
   punishment of sins, but also calls us to an honorable warfare, in which
   we may suffer exile or privation, or insults, or even death itself. It
   is therefore plain ingratitude to God that, when persecutions come upon
   us, we murmur or cry out, as though some grave injustice were being
   done to us; we ought rather to count it gain and favor from God.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [85] Calvin's citation is not correct. He has elegit for proe/gnw.

   [86] Themistocles (ca. 514-449 B.C.), the Athenian leader in the naval
   battle of Salamis against Xerxes, was a forceful and imaginative
   statesman. His checkered career ended in ostracism, and he went to Asia
   Minor where he was received by the Persians and lived in Magnesia until
   his death. He was a strong man, but he does not appear to have been a
   model of virtue. (See Plutarch's Lives.)

   [87] Jerome.
     __________________________________________________________________

V Faith

  THE TEXT

  1. Aspects of faith

   Behold the elation (or, as others translates,whoever fortifies
   himself), his soul is not upright within him; but the just shall live
   by his faith. Hab. 2:4.

   This verse is to be connected with the previous one. The prophet wants
   to emphasize that when all sorts of temptations beset our minds, we can
   do no better than rely upon the word of God. He does not present us
   with a new teaching; he tells us once again that our only solid and
   certain security lies in the promise of God, and that we must seek no
   other door to safety when we suffer under all the attacks of Satan and
   the world.

   The two clauses present opposites. All who try to provide their own
   security will always be turning anxiously in all directions, and can
   have no peace of mind. The second clause is the logical consequence of
   this: we shall find quiet nowhere except in faith.

   The first clause is interpreted in different ways. Some think that
   'uppelah is a noun and take it as "loftiness." This meaning does not
   fit badly, and I do not hesitate to accept it as the more correct. The
   Hebrews called the citadel 'ophel, and those who say that the name is
   derived from the verb 'aphal "to go up" are correct. (Those who think
   the root means "strength" are wrong.) Others misinterpret the verse as
   meaning that the unbelieving are seeking a citadel where they may
   defend themselves. But this makes little difference to the main point.

   However, some interpreters differ more seriously and disagree as to
   substance. They put the predicate for subject and the subject for
   predicate, and get from the prophet's words: "whoever lacks peace of
   mind seeks a citadel for himself in which he may rest safely or make
   himself strong." Others take it: "Whoever is proud and thinks himself
   well fortified will always have a troubled mind." This latter
   interpretation pleases me more, but I myself keep to the meaning of the
   word 'uppelah, and I think the prophet said, "Where there is elation of
   mind, there will be no tranquillity."

   However, we must first see what those who interpret differently are
   aiming at. They say that the unbelieving, who are perverse and
   refractory, are always seeking a place to loiter safely, because they
   are suspicious of everyone; and further that they do not look to God,
   but try to find in this world some way of warding off all calamities
   and dangers. That is what they think.

   But as I said, the prophet is rather stating the penalty of all
   unbelievers; he means that, when they torment themselves, they only get
   what they deserve. This gives us a better antithesis. And the prophet's
   teaching is more suggestive when we say that God imposes a due penalty
   on unbelievers by allowing them to be pulled in all directions and by
   letting their minds be troubled with hidden torments. When the prophet
   says that no peace of mind exists among those who think they have
   protected themselves well [by their own efforts] he knows that they are
   their own torturers, because they heap upon themselves many troubles,
   griefs, and anxieties, and are always upset and confused by their many
   different schemes. They decide first on one thing; then they prefer
   another. The Hebrews used the term "right-minded" to describe those who
   agree on some one thing and stand quiet. When uneasy thoughts drive
   people in various directions, then they say "the mind is not right in
   us." We should keep to the plain sense of the prophet's words. . . .

   Then follows but the just will live in faith. I have no doubt that the
   prophet here sets faith over against all the safeguards with which men
   blind themselves in order to neglect God himself and to avoid asking
   aid from him. Because men put themselves in subjection to earthly
   things, and rely upon the falsehoods in which they trust, the prophet
   here ties life to faith. But faith, as we know and as I shall later
   explain more fully, depends upon God alone. Therefore, to live by faith
   means to abandon voluntarily all the defenses which so often fail us.
   One who know himself destitute of all protection will live in his faith
   if he seek whatever he needs from God alone; if he disregards the world
   and fixes his mind on heaven.

   Since 'amunah in Hebrew is "truth," some take it here a "integrity" ;
   as though the prophet had said that a righteous man had more protection
   in his own honesty and clear conscience than the sons of this world
   have in all the fortifications in which they take such pride. But these
   interpreters chill and dilute the prophet's meaning because they do not
   understand the power of justification, which is free and by faith,
   which alone gives us our security. It is certain that the prophet meant
   here by the word 'amunah the faith which takes from us all arrogance
   and sets us naked and helpless before God, to ask from him alone the
   safety which otherwise would be beyond our reach. . . .

   All unbelievers desire to make themselves secure, and they strengthen
   themselves with whatever they think can help them. But what does the
   just man do? He brings God nothing of his own, for man takes hold of
   faith by prayer alone; faith is not in our own hands. He who lives by
   faith does not have life in himself; he flees to God because he does
   not possess it. The verb here is in the future tense to show that life
   in faith will be lasting.

   Now we must come to Paul who used this prophet's witness to teach that
   salvation is not from works but solely from God's mercy and therefore
   from faith (Rom. 1:17). Paul seems to have twisted the words to his own
   purpose, and even beyond what their sense will bear. For the prophet
   was here speaking of the present life, and he made no mention of
   heavenly life. As we have said, he was testifying to the faithful that
   God would be their liberator, and so he was encouraging them to be
   patient. Then he added that the just will live by his faith, even
   though he have no other help, and seem to be completely exposed to all
   the blows of fortune, of the wicked, and even of the devil. Anyone may
   well ask what this has to do with the eternal salvation of the soul.
   Paul seems too subtle when he drags this passage into a discussion of
   free justification by faith.

   But we must keep firmly to this principle: All the benefits God confers
   upon the faithful in this life are for the strengthening of their hope
   that they shall inherit eternal life. However freely God acts in our
   behalf, our situation will still be miserable if our hope is restricted
   to earthly life. Therefore, as often as God aids us in this world and
   declares himself our Father, he wishes to turn our minds to the hope of
   eternal salvation. Equally, when the prophet says that men of faith
   shall live, he does not shut that life within narrow limits; he does
   not say that God will watch over us for two or three days (that is, for
   a few years); he goes much further and declares that we shall be truly
   and solidly blessed. Even if this whole world perishes or keeps
   changing for the worse, men of faith shall yet endure in firm and real
   safety. When Habakkuk promises life to the faithful in the future
   tense, there is no doubt that he goes beyond the bounds of this earth
   and promises them a life which shall be better than the one they had in
   this world where it is beset with so many calamities. Besides, the
   brevity of life here shows that too much of it is not desirable.

   We conclude therefore that Paul used the words of the prophet wisely
   and properly as support for his own teaching. Surely the just live by
   faith alone, and there is no salvation for the soul apart from God's
   mercy. . . .

   Yesterday we compared Habakkuk's statement that we shall live by faith
   with the teaching of Paul who inferred from it that we are justified by
   faith apart from works. The purpose of life and of righteousness is the
   same. Our life can be sought nowhere except in the Fatherly kindness of
   God. Therefore, for us, to live is to be bound to God. And there can be
   no hope of communion with God when our sins are charged to us. For
   since God is just, and cannot renounce himself, sin must always be
   hateful to him. Therefore, so long as he accounts us sinners, we are
   necessarily hated; and where God's enmity is, there is death and
   destruction. It follows that no hope of life is left us unless we are
   reconciled to God. And there is no other way for God to bring us back
   to his favor except by accounting us righteous. Therefore Paul's
   reasoning is excellent when he takes us from life to justification. The
   two are bound together, and are inseparable.

   And he believed the Lord, and he counted it to him for righteousness.
   Gen. 15:6.

   None of us would guess, if Paul had not showed it to us, how rich and
   profound a doctrine this verse contains. It is a strange thing, almost
   a prodigy, that when the Spirit of God kindles so bright a light, most
   interpreters grope around with closed eyes, as if in the darkness of
   night. (I am not counting the Jews whose blindness is obvious.) Even
   those who have in Paul a most lucid interpreter corrupt this passage so
   insipidly that, as I said, it must be counted a prodigy. Indeed in all
   ages Satan seems to have fought more violently against free
   justification by faith than against any other teaching, striving to
   extinguish it and smother it.

   The words of Moses are, he believed God, and he counted it to him for
   righteousness. First, Moses commends the faith of Abraham by which he
   embraced the promise of God. Secondly, he adds a eulogy of that faith,
   saying that because of it Abraham acquired (adeptus sit) righteousness
   before God, and that by imputation. For the verb hashab, which Moses
   uses, stands in relation to God's judgment; so also it is used in Ps.
   106:31 where we read that the zeal of Phineas was counted to him for
   righteousness. The exact meaning of the word appears more clearly with
   the negative. In Lev. 7:18, it is said that iniquity will not be
   imputed to a man when expiation has been made. See also Lev. 17:4; 2
   Sam. 19:19; 2 Kings 12:15.

   We know that there exist criminals before God to whom iniquity is
   imputed. Exactly in the same way, God approves as righteous those to
   whom he imputes righteousness. Therefore Abram was received into the
   number and rank of the righteous by imputation of righteousness. In
   order to show distinctly the force and nature of this righteousness,
   Paul brings us before the heavenly tribunal of God.

   Therefore those who twist this passage and interpret it as a
   description of righteousness, as if it said that Abram was a righteous
   and upright man, are talking insipid nonsense. The meaning of the text
   is corrupted no less by those who say ignorantly that Abram attributed
   to God the glory of righteousness and therefore dared confidently to
   credit God's promises knowing him to be faithful and true. Although
   Moses does not expressly name God in the second clause, the usual mode
   of speaking in Scripture leaves no ambiguity. Certainly it is no less
   stupid than presumptuous to give to the words counted for righteousness
   any other meaning than that Abram's faith was accepted by God instead
   of righteousness.

   Yet it seems absurd that Abram was justified because he believed that
   his offspring would be as numerous as the stars of heaven. For
   believing in one such promise could not make the whole man righteous.
   Besides, what earthly and temporal promise could be valid ground for
   eternal salvation? I answer that the faith which Moses records here is
   not restricted to one point, but includes the whole promise of God. The
   promise of seed to Abram was not limited to this verse; it is given
   also in others where a special blessing is added. Hence we conclude
   that Abram did not in the ordinary fashion hope merely for descendants,
   but for offspring in which the world was to be blessed.

   Now if anyone stubbornly insists that what was said of the children of
   Abram in general is distorted when applied to Christ, in the first
   place, it cannot be denied that God's earlier promise, to his servant,
   is now repeated over again in answer to Abram's complaint. But we have
   said before, and the account as a whole plainly shows, that it was his
   knowledge of the promised blessing which led Abram to desire seed so
   greatly. Hence it follows that the promise in this passage cannot be
   taken by itself, separated from the other promises. To conclude the
   whole matter, I say that if we are to judge the faith of Abram
   properly, we must consider all that is involved [in the stories about
   Abram].

   God does not promise to give this or that good thing to his servant, in
   the way that he scatters benefits upon unbelievers who have no taste of
   his Fatherly love. He assures Abram that he himself will be gracious to
   him, and he promises him the enjoyment of his own protection and grace,
   and the confidence of salvation. A man whose heritage is God does not
   rejoice in flimsy pleasures, but as though already raised to heaven, he
   delights in the solid joy of eternal life. Certainly it must be held as
   self-evident that all God's promises, which are destined for the
   faithful, flow from God's gracious mercy and are proofs of his Fatherly
   love and free adoption on which their safety is founded. Therefore we
   say that Abram was justified not because he snatched at one little word
   about producing offspring, but because he embraced God the Father.
   Truly, faith justifies us for no other reason than that it reconciles
   us to God, and this not by its own merit, but only because as we
   receive the grace offered to us in the promises and are certainly
   persuaded that we are loved by God as sons, we also come to possess the
   assurance of life eternal.

   Therefore Paul argues further that he to whom faith is reckoned for
   righteousness is not justified by works. For the merits of anyone who
   seeks justification by works are measured by God [before whom they are
   worthy of condemnation]. We comprehend the meaning of justification by
   faith when we know that God reconciles us to himself freely. Hence it
   follows that [concern with] the merit of works ends when justification
   is sought through faith. For if anyone is to possess righteousness by
   faith, it must necessarily be given by God and proffered to us by his
   Word.

   To make this more clearly understood, when Moses says that faith was
   counted to Abram for righteousness, this does not mean that faith was
   the first cause (what is called the efficient cause) of righteousness;
   it was only the formal cause. [88] The words of Moses mean: "Abram was
   justified because relying on the Fatherly kindness of God, he had
   confidence in God's goodness alone, and not in himself and his merits."
   We need especially to understand that faith obtains (mutuari) from
   elsewhere a righteousness which we do not possess. Otherwise Paul would
   not oppose faith to works as a way of obtaining righteousness. And the
   mutual relation between free promise and faith leaves no room for
   doubt.

   The sequence of time must now be noted. Abram was justified by faith
   many years after he had been called by God, after he had left his
   native land and had become a voluntary exile, after he had been a
   conspicuous mirror of endurance and self-control, after he had devoted
   himself wholly to holiness, after he had practiced himself in the
   spiritual and the external worship of God and had led an almost angelic
   life. So it follows that, even at the end of life, we are brought into
   God's eternal Kingdom by justification by faith.

   At this point many are grossly deceived. They admit indeed that the
   righteousness which is given freely to sinners and offered to the
   undeserving is received by faith alone. But they limit this
   justification by faith to a moment of time, so that a man, once at the
   beginning having obtained righteousness by faith is afterwards made
   righteous by good works. Faith is merely the beginning of
   righteousness, and as life continues righteousness consists in works.
   Those who so interpret the teaching must be insane. For if the angelic
   integrity of Abram, exercised faithfully and consistently for so many
   years, did not prevent the necessity of fleeing to faith to find
   righteousness, where in the world will be found a perfection which can
   meet God's scrutiny? Therefore we conclude from the time sequence
   [which I previously mentioned] that justification of works is not to be
   substituted for justification of faith as if the latter began and the
   former completed justification; but that the saints, so long as they
   live in the world, are justified by faith. If anyone objects that Abram
   had formerly believed God when he followed his call and committed
   himself to his instruction and guardianship, the answer is easy. No
   statement is made as to when Abram first began to be justified by
   believing God; but this one passage does show in what way he was
   justified in his whole life. If Moses had spoken thus about Abram's
   first calling the objection I have just mentioned (that initial
   righteousness, but not perpetual, is of faith) would have more color.
   But when Abram is said to become righteous by faith after having gone
   through so much, it easily appears that the saints are justified by
   grace until they die.

   I admit indeed that after those who believe are born again, in the
   Spirit of God, the mode of their justification differs somewhat. For
   those born of the flesh only, God reconciles to himself while they are
   empty of all good. When he finds in them nothing except a filthy heap
   of dreadful evils, he holds them righteous by imputation. But those to
   whom he has given the Spirit of holiness and righteousness, he clothes
   with his gifts. But even then, if their good works please God, this
   must be by his gracious imputation, because something of sin always
   remains in them.

   This truth holds: men are justified by believing, not by what they do.
   It is by faith they obtain grace: and grace cannot be earned as a
   payment for works. Since Abram, with all his preeminence in virtue,
   after a long life of unique service of God, was yet justified by faith,
   the righteousness of each perfected man consists in faith alone. It is
   important to say plainly that what is here told of one man must be
   applied to all men. For Abram was called "father of the faithful" with
   good reason, and there are not diverse ways of seeking salvation. Paul
   rightly teaches that what is here described is not the righteousness of
   an individual man, but true righteousness as such.

   Verily, verily, I say unto you, He that heareth my word, and believeth
   on him that sent me, hath everlasting life, and shall not come into
   condemnation; but is passed from death unto life. John 5:24.

   It is not enough to know his teaching that he came to raise the dead,
   unless we also know how he liberates us from death. He declares that we
   obtain life by hearing his doctrine, but as he soon adds by hearing he
   means faith. And faith has its seat not in the ears but in the heart;
   which gives faith its great power, as we have explained before. But let
   us always keep in mind what the gospel offers us. It is no wonder that
   anyone who receives Christ with all his merits is both reconciled with
   God and freed from condemnation of death; for he who receives the Holy
   Spirit puts on a heavenly righteousness and walks in newness of life
   (Rom. 6:4).

   That I may know him, and the power of his resurrection, and the
   fellowship of his sufferings, being made conformable unto his death.
   Phil. 3:10.

   Here the apostle describes the nature and efficacy of faith, which is
   the knowledge of Christ; not a general and vague faith, but the faith
   we have in the power of his resurrection. Since resurrection completes
   the work of redemption, it presupposes death. But it is not enough to
   know that Christ was crucified and rose from the dead, unless we know
   these things in our lives. This is why Paul speaks explicitly of the
   power of his resurrection. We know Christ in the right way when we
   experience the meaning of his death and resurrection within us and as
   they become effective in us. The expiation and obliteration of sins,
   freedom from condemnation, satisfaction, victory over death, the
   attainment of righteousness, and the hope of a blessed immortality --
   all these are ours by the power of his resurrection.

   And the fellowship of his sufferings. After he speaks of the
   righteousness which was received freely by partaking in the
   resurrection of Christ, he speaks in addition of the actions of the
   Godly, so as not to seem to have advocated an idle faith, having no
   fruits in our life. And, since the false apostles were so aggressive
   with their empty ceremonials, he indicates the kind of exercises which
   God requires his people to pursue. Let, therefore, everyone who has
   shared in all the benefits which Christ has conferred upon us know that
   his whole life ought to conform to the death of Christ.

   Moreover, we participate in the death of Christ and associate with him
   in it in a twofold way. The one way is inward, which Scripture usually
   calls the mortification of the flesh, or the crucifixion of the old
   man. It is of this that Paul speaks in Romans 6. The other is outward,
   which is called the mortification of the outward man. Of this, he
   speaks in the eighth chapter of that epistle, and, if I am not
   mistaken, also in this place. After the all-inclusive power of the
   resurrection, he sets before us Christ crucified, so that we may be his
   followers through tribulations and sufferings. When he speaks of the
   resurrection of the dead in particular, it is to teach us that before
   we live, we must die. The faithful ought to meditate upon this, so long
   as they sojourn upon this earth.

   It is our singular consolation that, as members of his body, in all our
   sufferings we are associated in the cross of Christ; that, as he says
   elsewhere, through afflictions we are shown a way to eternal
   blessedness. If we die, we shall live. If we suffer, we shall reign (2
   Tim. 2:11-12). We must, therefore, be ready to let our whole life be in
   the image of death, until it issues in death itself, just as the life
   of Christ was nothing else than an anticipation of death. In the
   meantime, we have joy in the consolation that the end is eternal
   blessedness. The death of Christ, therefore, is joined with his
   resurrection. This is why Paul says that he was conformed to Christ's
   death, that he might attain a glorious resurrection. The phrase by any
   means, indicates not doubt but difficulty. It is meant to arouse our
   zeal, because ours is no light skirmish, but a battle against many and
   great obstacles.

   For the Father himself loveth you, because ye have loved me, and have
   believed that I came out from God. John 16:27.

   These words remind us that the only bond which unites us with God is
   union with Christ. But the faith which unites us with Christ is not
   something contrived; it grows out of a genuine feeling which is here
   called love. Such faith does not merely believe about Christ; it
   embraces him with the soul. Therefore, love expresses well the power
   and the nature of faith. Truly, if God begins to love us only when we
   already love Christ, it follows that our love comes before God's grace,
   and that the beginning of our salvation is in us. But many passages in
   Scripture cry out against such a statement. The promise of God is, "I
   shall make them to love me," and John says, "It is not that we first
   loved him" (1 John 4:10). It is unnecessary to cite many passages.
   There is nothing more certain than the teaching that the Lord calls a
   people who are not; that he revives the dead, unites to himself those
   who are strangers, turns hearts of stone into flesh, and appears to
   those who do not even seek after him. I reply that the elect, before
   they are called, are secretly loved by God who loves his own before
   they exist. But before they are reconciled to God, they are rightly
   regarded as his enemies, as we read in Paul and elsewhere (Rom. 5:10).
   We are here said to be loved of God when we love Christ; because when
   we love Christ, we receive a pledge that God loves us as Father;
   whereas, before we love Christ, he terrifies us as a hostile judge.

   And keep my Sabbaths holy, and they will be for a sign between one and
   you, for understanding (that is, that you may understand or know) that
   I am the Lord your God. Ezek. 20:20. (Calvin's wording.)

   The way to keep the Sabbath holy had already been explained. Mere
   idleness was unimportant. Therefore he repeats and they shall be for a
   sign between me and you, that you may know that I am the Lord your God.
   God bears witness in these words that if the Jews kept the Sabbath
   rightly, they would experience the working of his grace, which he
   wished his Sabbath to represent. For we have said that God wished the
   Sabbath to be a sacrament of the new birth. He promises the people that
   his Spirit will work among them if only they do not close the door to
   him by their own impiety and contempt.

   Hence we see that sacraments are never without the power of the Spirit
   except when men make themselves unfit to receive the grace offered. The
   papists say of the sacraments that they are effective if we do not
   interpose the barrier of a mortal sin. They make no mention of faith.
   For example, if someone without a single drop of faith pushes up to the
   Lord's Supper, they say he will receive not only Christ's body and
   blood but also the fruit of his death and resurrection, on the sole
   condition that he has not committed a mortal sin; that is, if he cannot
   be convicted of theft or murder. We see in what blindness they are
   sunk; and this by the just judgment of God.

   But by us the mutual relation between faith and sacrament must be
   steadily maintained. The sacraments become effective through faith; and
   men's unworthiness does not lessen their effect.

   Sacraments always retain their own character. Baptism is the water of
   rebirth, though the whole world disbelieve. The Table of Christ is the
   communion of his body and blood, even if there were not the tiniest
   spark of faith in the world. But we do not perceive [without faith] the
   grace which is offered to us. And although the spiritual content
   remains always the same, we neither obtain the effect nor feel the
   power of the sacraments unless we are careful that our lack of faith
   does not profane what God has sanctified for our salvation.

   But continue thou in those things which thou hast learned and hast been
   assured of, knowing of whom thou hast learned them. 2 Tim. 3:14.

   He commands Timothy to stay put, even when evil is on the rampage and
   scatters destruction very far and wide. And surely this is the real
   proof of faith, that we resist all the machinations of the devil with a
   tireless constancy; that we be not deflected from the right course by
   every wind that blows, but remain fixed on God's truth as on a sacred
   anchor.

   Now with the phrase knowing from whom thou hast learned them, he tells
   us we can be certain that the doctrine is true. No one who has been
   taught a wrong doctrine should hold on to it. On the contrary, if we
   would be Christ's disciples, we ought to unlearn any doctrine which
   ignores Christ; wherefore, the beginning of sound instruction in the
   faith is to reject and forget the whole doctrine of the papacy. In
   fact, the apostle enjoins Timothy not to keep every doctrine handed
   down to him, but to use discrimination, and to retain that which he has
   confirmed as true. Besides, he does not claim that what he himself has
   taught as a private person should be received as an oracle. He
   confronts Timothy confidently with his own authority, which was already
   recognized as evident from the apostle's calling and his faithfulness.
   Since Timothy was convinced that he was taught by an ambassador of
   Christ, he understood that the teaching he had received belonged not to
   men but to Christ.

   This passage warns us that as we must be zealous to avoid obstinacy in
   matters where no certainty is to be had (and to this class belong all
   the teachings of men): we must be adamant in our constancy only in
   holding on to God's truth. Besides, we learn here that faith needs to
   be combined with good sense, to distinguish the word of God from the
   word of men, so that we may not grab at everything that happens to be
   within our reach. Nothing is further from faith than lightheaded
   credulity which embraces and champions senselessly everything, no
   matter what it is and where it comes from. Above all, the foundation of
   faith is the knowledge that its author is God.

   Then spake Joshua to the Lord in the day when the Lord delivered up the
   Amorites before the children of Israel, and said in the sight of
   Israel, Sun, stand thou still upon Gibeon; and thou, Moon, in the
   valley of Ajalon. Josh. 10:12.

   Joshua spoke to the Lord is the literal translation. But some explain
   this as before the Lord, because to speak to the Lord whom reverence
   teaches us to petition humbly seems inconsistent with the humility of
   faith, and also because Joshua immediately afterwards addressed his
   words to the sun. However, I have no doubt that in the first clause a
   vow or prayer is meant, and that the second clause gives evidence of
   Joshua's faith after he has been heard by God. It would certainly have
   been an act of rash pride to order the sun to stand still, if God had
   not granted the favor.

   Joshua consults God and petitions him, and when he has been answered,
   he boldly orders the sun to do what he knows God approves. Such is the
   strength of the privilege of faith, praised by Christ, which subjugates
   mountains and seas to its power (Matt. 17:20; Luke 17:6). The more the
   strength of the faithful is exhausted, the more generously does God
   transfer his power to them, revealing his own power through that faith
   which is bound to the Word. Briefly, faith founded upon the Word is
   transmuted into confident power. So Elijah closed heaven and opened it
   at his command and brought fire down from heaven (1 Kings 17-18). So
   Christ endowed his disciples with heavenly power so that the elements
   were subject to them.

   Only, it is necessary to be on guard against bursting out with rash
   commands at one's own will. For this reason, Joshua did not begin to
   delay and hold back the course of the sun until he was duly informed of
   God's plan. When it is said that Joshua spoke with God, the words do
   not properly express the meekness and submission with which a servant
   of God ought to begin his prayers. Yet they serve to show us that
   Joshua asked of God the thing he desired and then, after he had prayed,
   he was the free and brave herald of an incredible miracle which had not
   yet occurred. He never would have given a command to the sun so
   confidently in front of all Israel unless he had been sure of his own
   vocation. Otherwise he would only have exposed himself to shame and
   humiliation.

   Unhesitatingly he shouts his order to the sun and moon to turn aside
   from the perpetual law of nature. He knows that he is commanding them
   by the power of God which has been given to him.

   For I know whom I have believed, and am persuaded that he is able to
   keep that which I have committed unto him against that day. 2 Tim.
   1:12.

   This is the only refuge of the godly; whenever the world counts them
   condemned and without hope; it is enough that God approves of them.
   For, what would be the end if they depended upon men?

   This shows how different faith is from opinion. When Paul says, I know
   whom I have believed, he means that it is far from enough for you to
   believe unless [your belief rest] on the authority of God, and unless
   you be certain of what you believe. Faith therefore does not lean upon
   the authority of men; and as it leans upon God, it knows no wavering.
   Thus, faith must be joined with knowledge, otherwise it would have no
   firmness against the countless assaults of Satan. Anyone who possesses
   this knowledge with Paul knows by experience that it is not for nothing
   that our faith has been called the victory that overcometh the world;
   or that Christ said, The gates of hell shall not prevail against it
   (Matt. 16:18). I say, The man who remains tranquil in the midst of
   storms and tempests is one who has the firm knowledge that God has
   spoken, and will not lie; that he will not deceive, but will certainly
   perform what he has promised. On the contrary, anyone in whom this
   truth has not been sealed is swayed endlessly back and forth like a
   reed.

   This passage deserves special attention as a superb statement of the
   power of faith; it teaches us to glorify God, even in the most
   desperate situations, by not doubting that he is true and faithful; it
   also teaches us to be content with the Word, as though God himself
   appeared to us from heaven. Anyone who is not thus persuaded
   understands nothing. Besides, let us always remember that Paul does not
   philosophize in the dark, but testifies to the power of confident hope
   in eternal life as one who, even at present, knows it.

   And I am persuaded that he is able. Since the perils which assail us
   are at once great and powerful, and often tempt our spirits to
   distrust, it is necessary for us to go about with the shield that God
   has power enough to protect us. In the same way, when Christ bids us to
   be confident, he argues, saying, "The Father, who gave you to me is
   greater than all" (John 10:29). He thus declares that we are above the
   reach of peril, because the Lord who has taken us under his protection,
   abounds in power and is able to repel every assault. Satan does not
   dare to suggest directly that God is powerless, or that he can be
   prevented from doing whatever he promises, because our minds abhor such
   blasphemy against God. But he does deprive us of all sense of God's
   power, by preoccupying our eyes and our minds with other things. The
   soul of man, therefore, needs to be purified, not only to taste the
   power of God, but also to keep tasting it under sundry temptations.

   Besides, whenever Paul speaks of God's power we must conceive it as, so
   to speak, active, or energoumenen, as he calls it elsewhere (Col.
   1:29). Faith always connects the power of God with the Word, and does
   not imagine it as something distant, but conceives and possesses it in
   the inner man. So, Rom. 4:20 says of Abram, "He did not hesitate, or
   dispute, but gave God the glory, being fully convinced that what he had
   promised, he was able to perform." And it was life eternal that the
   apostle trusted in God: which means that we are to put our well-being
   in God's hand as we put our possessions in the hand of a trustee whom
   we trust as a faithful man. If our well-being depended upon ourselves,
   it would be endlessly exposed to peril: it is well, therefore, that we
   turn it over to such a protector; for then it is safely beyond all
   peril.

   Paul, a servant of God, and an apostle of Jesus Christ, according to
   the faith of God's elect, and the acknowledging of the truth which is
   after godliness. Titus 1:1.

   I believe we shall interpret this verse rightly if we take the word and
   in the latter half of the sentence as meaning that is. Thus the last
   clause of the verse explains the nature of the faith of God's elect,
   even though what we have here is not a full definition of faith but a
   characterization of it adapted to the apostle's present purpose. He
   sets his apostleship apart from error and imposture, by asserting that
   it contains nothing except truth which is at once evident and certain,
   and which instructs men in a pure worship of God. But since every word
   in this verse is weighty, we would benefit greatly if we looked at the
   whole mosaic, section by section.

   In the first place, faith is called knowledge, not as against opinion,
   but as against the hazy affair invented by the papists: for they have
   contrived an "implicit faith" with no understanding in it. But when
   Paul makes this knowledge of truth a proper function of faith, he makes
   it clear that there is no such thing as faith without knowledge.

   And the word truth expresses even more clearly the certainty that is
   essential to faith. For faith is not content with the probabilities
   provided by our reasonings. Its proper object is the truth itself.
   Besides, we are concerned not with any truth, but with that truth from
   heaven which stands in contrast to the vanities proposed by the human
   mind. Since it is this truth which reveals God himself to us, it alone
   deserves to go by that name; and so it is honored commonly in
   Scripture: John 16:13: And the Spirit shall lead you unto all truth;
   John 17:17: Thy word is truth; Gal. 3:1: Who hath bewitched you that
   you do not obey the truth; Col. 1:5: Having heard the word of truth,
   the gospel of the Son of God; 1 Tim. 2:4: He would have all come to the
   knowledge of the truth; 1 Tim. 3:15: The church is the pillar and
   foundation of the truth. In short, truth is that right and sincere
   knowledge of God which frees us from all lies and error. And surely
   such knowledge should be very precious to us, since there is nothing
   more miserable than for us to wander around all our lives like dumb
   cattle.

   According to godliness, which follows, puts a special restriction upon
   the meaning of truth; at the same time, it commends the teaching of
   Paul by its fruit and end, which tends toward nothing else than the
   right worship of God and the flourishing of pure religion among men. It
   is thus that he defends his teaching as free from every mark of godless
   curiosity, as he had done before Felix (Acts 24:10) and then before
   Agrippa (Acts 26:1). Therefore, it is only right that the godly should
   be suspicious of and detest all empty questioning which does not make
   for the building up of the church. The only legitimate recommendation
   that can be given to doctrine is that it teaches reverence and the fear
   of God. Thus we are reminded that the best disciple of Christ is one
   who has made the greatest progress in reverence; and he alone is to be
   considered a true theologian who builds up the consciences of men in
   the fear of God.

   Which hope we have as an anchor of the soul, both sure and steadfast,
   and which entered into that within the veil. Heb. 6:19.

   This is an eloquent comparison between an anchor and faith resting upon
   the Word of God. It is obvious that while we wander in this world, we
   do not stand on firm ground; on the contrary, we are as in the middle
   of the sea, tossed about by turbulent waves. The devil does not cease
   stirring up innumerable storms, which almost overturn and sink our
   ship, unless we throw our anchor deep in the sea. Our eyes see no
   harbor anywhere. In whatever direction we look, we see only water, and
   the waves keep rising with deadly threat. Just as the anchor is thrown
   into the midst of the waters to some dark and secret place, and while
   it remains there, it keeps the ship from being broken up by the waves
   surrounding it -- so our hope needs to hold fast to the invisible God.
   But there is a difference between the anchor and our hope; the former
   is thrown down into the sea because the earth is at the bottom of it;
   the latter, on the other hand, is lifted up and soars on high because
   it finds nothing to hold on to on this earth. For our hope must not
   cling to the creature, but must find its quietness in God. As the cable
   tied to the anchor connects the vessel with the earth at a long
   distance through the dark waters, so God's truth is a bond which
   connects us with himself; and no distance, or foggy darkness, can keep
   us from clinging to him. When we are thus tied to God, even when we
   struggle constantly with storms, we remain beyond the danger of
   shipwreck. This is why he says that the anchor is sure and firm. It
   can, of course, be that the rush of the waters will pull the anchor
   off, or break the cable, and tear the beaten ship to pieces. Such a
   thing can happen in the sea. But the power of God which sustains us is
   different; different is the fortitude of hope, and different the
   firmness of his Word.

   Which entered into that. As we have said, unless faith reaches God, it
   finds nothing except what is unstable and in flux. Therefore, it needs
   to penetrate as far as heaven. But since the apostle was dealing with
   the Jews, he refers to the old tabernacle, and says that they should
   not tarry with the things visible, but should rather penetrate into the
   inmost holy places hidden behind the veil: the old and external copies
   are to be set aside in order that faith may rest in Christ alone.

   But let him ask in faith, nothing wavering; for he that wavereth is
   like a wave of the sea driven with the wind and tossed. James 1:6.

   Here he teaches first the right way to pray. Since we can pray only as
   we are led by the Word of God, it follows that faith comes before
   prayer. When we pray, we testify to the grace which is the promise of
   God to us: and so testifying, we have hope. Thus, anyone who does not
   believe the promises, has only the semblance of prayer. Thus also we
   learn what true prayer is; for as James bids us to ask in faith, he
   explains in addition that we are to hesitate at nothing. Faith,
   therefore, rests upon God's promises and gives us the certainty that
   what we ask for we shall receive; whence it follows that a confident
   trust in us goes with the love of God toward us. The word diakrinethai
   used in this place means properly to inquire into both sides of a
   controversy. He would have us be persuaded that once God has made a
   promise there is no room left for doubt as to whether we shall or shall
   not be heard

   He who wavers. By an elegant simile, he tells us how God punishes the
   infidelity of those who doubt his promises. Such people are tortured by
   their own inquietude, for there is no such thing as tranquillity for
   our spirits unless they lean upon the truth of God. He concludes
   finally that those who doubt God do not deserve anything from him. This
   is an excellent passage with which to refute the impious dogma,
   accepted as an oracle throughout papal lands, that we should pray in a
   state of doubt, hardly knowing what will come out of our praying. On
   the contrary, we hold the principle that the Lord will not hear our
   prayers unless there is the confident expectation that what we ask for
   we shall receive. But considering the weakness of the flesh, it is all
   too true that we are agitated by various temptations, which are engines
   for the shattering of our confidence in God. Hence, we find no one who
   is not in fact led by the feelings of his flesh to waver and shake in
   his boots. But it is the business of faith finally to overcome
   temptations of this kind; for faith is like a tree which has sunk deep
   roots; indeed, when the winds blow, it sways and bends, but it is not
   heaved out of the ground; on the contrary, it remains standing and firm
   where it belongs.

  2. FAITH AS FAITHFULNESS AND COURAGE

   Jesus saith to him, Because thou hast seen me, Thomas, thou hast
   believed; blessed are they who have not seen and have believed. John
   20:29.

   Here Christ commends faith on the ground that it does not in the least
   depend upon sense and carnal reason, but acquiesces in the mere Word of
   God. Therefore, in this brief definition, he brings together both the
   power and the essence of faith; namely, that it does not consist in
   seeing what is before us, but penetrates to the very heavens, so as to
   believe the things which are hidden from the human senses. For surely
   we ought so to know God that his truth may be to us autopistos (to be
   believed simply because it is his Word). Faith indeed has its own
   sight, but it is not fixed on things upon this world and earth. For
   this reason, it is said to be a demonstration of things invisible and
   not seen (Heb. 15:1). Paul, also, who contrasts it with sight (2 Cor.
   5:7) points out that faith, without holding to a consideration of the
   state of things present, or looking about at things visible in this
   world, hangs on to the mouth of God; and putting its confidence in the
   Word of God, it rises above the whole world and casts its anchor in
   heaven.

   Shadrach, Meshach and Abednego answered the king and said: O
   Nebuchadnezer, we are not anxious with what words we are to answer thee
   (or negotiate with thee). (Others translate it, "It is not right that
   we should answer thee in this matter" ; they say l is here, as often,
   superfluous.) Lo, God whom we serve is able to (that is, can) deliver
   us from the furnaces of raging fire and will snatch us from thy hand, O
   king. But if not, be it known to thee, O king, that we shall not
   worship thy Gods, and we shall not adore the images which thou hast set
   up. Dan. 3:16-18. (Calvin's wording.)

   The chief emphasis in this account is upon the unbroken spirit of the
   three holy and God-fearing men, when they knew that they were in
   imminent danger of death. Although a horrible death was before their
   eyes, they did not swerve from the right path but set the glory of God
   above their own life -- even above a hundred lives if they had had so
   many and such a sacrifice were required.

   Daniel does not report all their words but selects only a few in which
   glows the unconquerable power of the Holy Spirit who instructed them.
   The king's threat, be hurled into the furnace of fire, was certainly
   horrible, and terror before his rage would have been very natural. For
   we know how dear life is to us and what dread of death fills our minds.
   Daniel has described the whole situation to make it clear to us that
   God's servants, when they are led by the Spirit, have too much courage
   to yield to any threats or give way to any fears. They say to the king,
   "We need not deliberate." When they say that they are not anxious, they
   mean "the matter is settled; we have no desire to hold a consultation
   about what is expedient or helpful. Not at all. . . . In so holy a
   matter no deliberation is possible. We have already decided that we
   must not depart in any way from the pure worship of God." Clearly, the
   fear of death, however closely it hangs over them, and however deeply
   it is ingrained in their hearts, does not make them deviate a hair's
   breadth from the true and right worship of God.

   They give two reasons for rejecting the king's proposal. They say that
   God has sufficient power and might to rescue them; and then they add
   that even if they must die, life is not so precious that they would
   deny God to prolong it. They declare themselves ready for death if the
   king still insists that they worship the statue.

   This passage is especially worth our study. We should note the first
   answer which shows us that when we are urged to deny the true God we
   must close our ears and do no deliberating. For we begin to dishonor
   God when we debate whether it be allowable for any reason whatever to
   depart from his pure worship. How I wish that all men would become so
   conscious of the supreme excellence of the glory of God that they would
   disregard all else whenever there is any attempt to lessen or hide
   God's glory!

   But many today have accepted a fallacy. They think either that they
   have a right to sit on the fence or that at times it may be better to
   swerve temporarily from the true worship of God. They reason: "There is
   some good on both sides. . . . Or if I did not compromise, I might harm
   others as well as myself. If our ruler had no advisers to counsel
   moderation, the wicked could go to extremes and urge him, without
   restraint, to all kinds of cruelty. Therefore, it is better to have
   some middle-of-the roaders, who humor the wicked and who keep a watch
   on their schemes, so that without open opposition they may by
   underground means avert danger from the heads of good men." So they
   convince themselves that they are doing their bit for God.

   Could not Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego have given the same kind of
   excuse? Could they not have thought: "We have some power to help our
   brothers. How much greater barbarities and cruelties would follow if
   open enemies of religion replace us! For they would try their best to
   destroy from the earth both our race and the memory of our religion.
   Isn't it better for us to yield temporarily to tyranny and the king's
   harsh decree than to leave our office to be occupied by raging men who
   will totally destroy our poor people who are already in enough
   trouble?" They could have found plenty of excuses for their
   faithlessness if, to avoid danger, they had bent their knees before the
   golden image. But they did not.

   As I have said, God's right remains unviolated only when we adhere
   unquestioningly to his service and are convinced that no consideration
   is important enough to permit us to make it lawful for us to deviate in
   the slightest degree from that course of action which he commands by
   his word and which he requires of us. . . . Why do we live except to
   serve God's glory? If we lose our purpose in living for the sake of
   life -- that is, if we desire too much to live in the world -- we set
   aside the purpose of life.

   When the three declare that God is able to save them, but if not, they
   are ready for death -- they reveal a truth which ought to raise our
   hearts above all temptations. Since our life is dear to God, he
   himself, if he wishes, can rescue us. Since, then, we have in God a
   sufficient protection, let us not try to imagine any better way of
   preserving our life than by surrendering ourselves wholly to his
   direction and casting all our anxieties upon him. And we must also
   consider the second clause. Even if God wishes to make his glory shine
   by our death, this would be a rightful sacrifice, and it should be
   offered to him. True religion does not flourish in us unless we take
   our life in our hand, that is, unless we hold it always ready for
   sacrifice. (I wanted to present briefly today what, if God permits, I
   shall treat more at length tomorrow.)

   By faith, Noah, being warned of God of things not seen as yet, moved
   with fear, prepared an ark to the saving of his house: by the which he
   condemned the world, and became heir of the righteousness which is by
   faith. Heb. 11:7.

   It was a wonderful example of courage that, while the whole world did
   as they pleased, and gave themselves up to pleasure, without fear and
   without restraint, Noah alone kept his eyes on God's judgment, although
   it was delayed for a time; and for one hundred and twenty years he went
   through the weariness and misery of building an ark. All this time he
   remained adamant, while the godless crowds jeered at him; he never
   doubted that the world would perish and he would be saved. Yea, he
   lived in the ark as in the grave. But I need not say more about this;
   let someone else who can do better expand on it. [It is enough to say
   that] the apostle attributes this marvelous courage to faith. So far he
   had been speaking of the faith of the fathers who lived in the first
   age of the world. But when Noah and his family came out of the Flood,
   faith became a kind of regeneration. The case of Noah shows that in all
   ages men neither have been approved by God, nor have deserved his
   praise, except by faith.

   Now, the story of Noah leads to the following considerations: first,
   that warned of things to come, which he still could not see, he was
   filled with awe and fear; secondly, that thereupon he built an ark;
   thirdly, that by building it he condemned the world; fourthly, that he
   inherited the righteousness which is according to faith. My first point
   brings out the power of faith best. It always recalls us to the primary
   truth that faith is the evidence of things not seen; for it is surely
   the property of faith to see in God's Word the things which are hidden
   and far beyond the competence of our senses. When Noah was told that
   after one hundred and twenty years there would be a flood, the length
   of time involved might have taken away all his fear. Besides, the whole
   thing was incredible. He saw the unbelievers going ahead, safe and
   secure, with their life of pleasure. He might have thought that the
   dreadful news of a flood was an empty threat to terrify the people. But
   Noah held such respect for the Word of God that he turned his eyes away
   from the things present, and feared the destruction threatened by God
   as though it were already happening. The faith he had in God's Word was
   turned into the obedience to God which was demonstrated in his building
   the ark.

   Now, somebody will raise the question, Why does the apostle say that
   faith produced fear if it be true that faith is bound to promises
   rather than to threatenings? It is the gospel, in which the
   righteousness of God is offered to us for our salvation, that Paul
   calls the word of faith (Rom. 10:8). It seems therefore wrong to say
   that by faith Noah was led to fear. I answer, Faith grows properly out
   of the promises; it is founded in them and rests upon them. Therefore,
   we say that Christ is the true end of faith, since it is in him that
   the Heavenly Father has been reconciled to us, and in him all the
   promises of salvation have been sealed and ratified. However, nothing
   keeps faith from being fixed upon God and accepting from him every word
   he speaks. Or, if you would have it put more briefly, it is the
   function of faith to hear God as he speaks, and to embrace without
   doubt whatever proceeds from his holy mouth. Thus, faith acknowledges
   precepts and threats, as well as God's free promises. But since no one
   manages to obey God's precepts properly and sufficiently, no one is
   moved to pray that he may be delivered from his wrath, unless he has
   laid hold of God's gracious promises and knows him as a good Father and
   the Author of salvation. Therefore, the gospel is called the Word of
   faith, for it is the principal part of the Word of God; and this is how
   faith and the promises are related one to the other. Faith attends to
   the promises of God; but is no less intent upon his threatenings, in so
   far as it needs to be taught to fear God and to submit to him.

   Prepared the ark. Here the apostle points out the obedience which flows
   out of faith as water from a fountain. The work of building the ark was
   long and laborious. It might have been hindered by the scoffings of the
   ungodly, and thus interrupted a thousand times; for there is no doubt
   that the holy man was pelted with insults on all sides. The very fact
   that he bore their derision with an unbroken spirit shows the uncommon
   zeal of Noah's submission to God. But what was the source of this
   constancy of obedience if not that he rested in the promise of God,
   which gave him the hope of salvation, and led him to believe in God to
   the very end? For he would not have had the courage to meet willingly
   so many troubles, or to overcome so many obstacles, or to stand firm at
   his task so long, if he had not already trusted in God. Faith alone
   therefore is the teacher of obedience, while unbelief keeps us from
   obeying God. And in our own day, the world's unbelief shows itself in a
   frightful way, for there are few who obey God.

   By which he condemned the world. It would be strange to say that Noah
   by faith condemned the world. The context of this verse hardly bears
   this out. Therefore, the reference is to the ark. The world is said to
   have been condemned by the ark in a double sense. Since the building of
   the ark took so long, it left the wicked without any excuse. Besides,
   what followed the building of it showed that the condemnation of the
   world was just. Why indeed did the ark become the means of salvation to
   one family, if not because by his righteousness one man was spared the
   wrath of the Lord, and did not perish with the wicked? Had he not been
   left as a remnant, the condemnation of the world would not have been so
   conspicuous. By the very example of his obedience to God's command,
   Noah condemned the perversity of the world. The very fact that Noah was
   snatched away so marvelously from the jaws of death is proof enough
   that the condemnation of the whole world was just; for certainly God
   would have saved it had it not been unworthy of salvation.

   Of the righteousness which is by faith. This is the last thing about
   Noah which the apostle brings to our attention. Moses says that Noah
   was a righteous man. History does not tell us that the root and reason
   of Noah's righteousness was in faith. But the apostle testifies to this
   as a fair inference from the facts of the case; not only because no one
   obeys God with sincerity unless, after receiving the promises of his
   Fatherly goodness, he trusts him with his very life; but also because
   no one can please God without his forgiveness, no matter how righteous
   his life is according to the rule of God's law. Therefore, it is
   necessary that our righteousness rest in faith.

   By faith, Abraham, when he was tried, offered up Isaac: and he that had
   received the promises offered up his only begotten son. . . . Heb.
   11:17.

   The author goes on with the rest of the story of Abraham, and tells of
   his offering up of Isaac. Here we have an example of singular courage,
   and we are not likely to find anything like it anywhere. . . .

   And he that received the promises. All that was said so far, how ever
   deeply it may have wounded Abraham, was a mere prick compared with this
   trial in which, after he had received the promise, he was commanded to
   kill his son Isaac. For all the promises were founded upon this: In
   Isaac shall thy seed be called (Gen. 21:12); and without him no hope
   remained of any good or blessing whatever. Besides, what was at stake
   here was nothing earthly. It had to do with the everlasting salvation
   of Abraham; yea, even of the whole world. We can imagine what anguish
   took hold of the holy man when he realized that in the person of his
   son the very hope of eternal life was to be extinguished! And yet by
   faith he escaped such dark thoughts, and did as he was commanded. What
   a wonderful power it was that enabled him to overcome so many and so
   arduous obstacles! No wonder that faith deserves the highest praise,
   since it alone made it possible for Abraham to persevere without
   defeat.

   But here we meet a difficulty which is no small matter. How is it that
   Abraham's faith is praiseworthy if it was separated from the promise?
   For, as obedience is from faith, so faith is from promise. Therefore,
   when Abraham was deprived of the promise, his faith also must have
   failed. Now, the death of Isaac, as we have said, would have been as it
   were the collapse of all the promises; since Isaac was no ordinary man,
   but one who included Christ. This difficulty, which would otherwise not
   have been easy to deal with, is resolved by the apostle when he adds
   soon after that Abraham honored God by believing that he could raise
   his son from the dead. Therefore, he did not reject the promise made to
   him, but extended its truth and God's power beyond the life of his son;
   because he did not set the power of God within narrow limits, as though
   it were tied up to Isaac's death and would become void with it. He held
   on to the promise, because he did not bind God's power merely to
   Isaac's lifetime. He was persuaded that it would be active and
   efficacious in the ashes of a dead Isaac, as it was when he was alive
   and breathing.

   By faith he forsook Egypt, not fearing the wrath of the king; for he
   endured, as seeing him who is invisible. Heb. 11:27.

   This may be said of the first time Moses left Egypt as well as of the
   second, when he took the people with him; for, he did leave Egypt in a
   real sense when he ran away from the Pharaoh's house. When the apostle
   says that Moses left Egypt before the celebration of the Passover, he
   means the first flight. His adding that Moses did not fear the wrath of
   the king does not invalidate this view, though Moses himself says that
   he fled because of terror.

   Still, when we consider the early career of Moses, we see that it was
   when he came out as the champion of the people that he was not afraid.
   When I consider all the circumstances, I prefer to think that here we
   have to do with Moses' second departure. It was then that he scorned
   the wrath of the king, and was so armed with the power of God's Spirit
   that he often excited the fury of that beast. Such certainly was the
   energy of his faith that, taking along with him a multitude untrained
   in warfare, and bearing the burden of many obstacles, he went with the
   hope that God by his own hand would open a way through the countless
   difficulties which beset him. He saw a most potent king seized by
   impotent rage, and knew that he would do his utmost to the very end.
   But since he knew that he was departing by God's power, he commended
   the situation to God, and did not doubt that God would in time bring
   the assault of all the Egyptians to a dead stop.

   As seeing him who is invisible. But Moses did see God in the burning
   bush; besides, it looks as though this point is introduced here
   improperly and without relevance to the matter on hand. I admit readily
   that Moses was fortified by his vision, as he set out for the glorious
   task of delivering his people. But I deny that his vision of God
   divested him of his bodily senses and put him beyond the perils of this
   world. Strictly speaking, God gave him a sign of his presence; but he
   was very far from having seen God as he really is. What the apostle
   means to say is that Moses endured as though he were lifted to heaven
   and saw God alone; as though he were beyond intercourse with men,
   beyond the reach of this life's perils and the struggle with Pharaoh.
   And yet, he was certainly beset with so many difficulties that he could
   not but imagine sometimes that God was far away from him; or, at least,
   that the obstinacy of the king, supported by overwhelming arms, would
   be impossible to resist effectively. In short, God presented himself to
   Moses as living, but not so that faith became superfluous. Moses
   himself, beset by terrors on all sides, turned his whole mind to God.
   As we have said, his vision helped him to do this; but he saw more in
   God than was visible by the sign of the bush. His apprehension of God's
   power absorbed all fear and every peril; leaning upon God's promise, he
   saw his people, even while they were being oppressed under the tyranny
   of the Egyptians, as already lords in the Promised Land.

   So, we learn first that the true nature of faith is to set God always
   before our eyes; secondly, that faith has insight into things higher
   and deeper than those which fall within the scope of our senses;
   thirdly, that only a sight of God is sufficient to remove our softness
   and to make us as rocks against the assaults of Satan. It follows that
   the more indolent and the weaker a man is, the less faith he has.

   By faith the walls of Jericho fell down, after they were compassed
   about seven days. Heb. 11:30.

   Before this, he taught us that the yoke of bondage was broken by faith;
   he now reminds us that by that same faith the people took possession of
   their inheritance. As they entered the land, they first came up against
   the city of Jericho; fortified and almost impregnable, it forbade
   further progress, since they had no means for assaulting it. The Lord
   ordered that all the fighting men go around it once every day for six
   days, and seven times on the seventh day. All this going around was
   childish and extremely ridiculous. Nevertheless, they obeyed God's
   command; and their labor was not in vain. It ended happily, according
   to the promise of God. Surely the walls fell down, not because the
   people shouted and made a big noise, nor because of the din and the
   clamor of the trumpets, but because the people believed that God would
   do as he had promised.

   The Lord your God, he is God in heaven above and in earth beneath. Now,
   therefore, I pray you, swear unto me by the Lord. . . . Josh. 2:11-12.

   The image of the faith of Rahab shines clear as in a mirror when,
   throwing away all idols, she ascribes the rule of heaven and earth to
   the God of Israel alone. Without question, when [men acknowledge that]
   heaven and earth are subject to the God of Israel, the fictitious gods
   of the nations amongst which they distribute the majesty and the power
   and the glory of God are wholly repudiated. Therefore Rahab was not too
   highly honored when two apostles referred to her faith.

   Certain arrogant and over-punctilious men make a face at this. I wish
   that they could weigh fairly what it really involves to distinguish the
   one true God from all fictions and at the same time to exalt his power
   so highly as to declare that he by his will rules the whole world.
   Rahab speaks without hesitation and asserts unequivocally that all
   existing power belongs to the God of Israel alone, that he rules all
   elements, orders all things above and below, determines all human
   affairs.

   However, I do not deny that Rahab's faith was not full-grown. Indeed, I
   freely admit that it was only a germ of faith, not yet sufficient for
   her eternal salvation. Nonetheless we must recognize that, however
   small and frail was this woman's knowledge of God, yet when she
   submitted herself to God's rule, she produced the certificate of her
   election; and from such submission as from a seed springs the faith
   which grows to full measure.

   Now, swear. Here is another evidence of her faith. She is convinced,
   relying on no evidence except the promise of God of which she had
   heard, that the sons of Abraham are the sure possessors of the land of
   Canaan. She did not think that God favored robbers who were bursting
   with unjust violence and unbridled lust into the territory of others.
   She declared rather that the Israelites were coming into the land of
   Canaan because God has assigned them the rule over it. . . .

   The words of Rahab illuminate what the author of the epistle to the
   Hebrews says of faith: that it is the vision of things unseen. For
   Rahab lived among her own people in a fortified city; and yet she
   trusted her own life to half-dead foreigners as if they were already in
   possession of the land and could kill or save alive whomever they
   chose. Certainly this willing offering of herself was truly a laying
   hold of God's promise and a surrender of herself to God's Fatherly
   care.

   By faith the harlot Rahab perished not with them that believed not,
   when she had received the spies with peace. Heb. 11:31.

   Even though at first sight this example, because of the ignoble
   character of the person involved, may seem less striking and hardly
   worth mentioning in this series, the apostle used it fittingly and with
   good reason. So far he had shown that the patriarchs, whom the Jews
   regarded with honor and reverence, did nothing praiseworthy except by
   faith; that the most memorable benefits which God bestowed upon them,
   were the effects of the same faith. Now he teaches that a woman of
   alien origin, among the dregs of her own people, and even a harlot, was
   by faith placed within the very body of the church. From this it
   follows that even those who are placed highest among us have no worth
   before God except as they are valued according to their faith; that on
   the contrary those who are hardly given a place among the godless and
   the reprobate are by faith taken into the company of angels.

   And what shall I more say? For the time would fail me to tell of
   Gideon, and of Barak, and of Samson, and of Jephthah; of David also,
   and Samuel, and of the prophets. Heb. 11:32.

   The apostle was afraid that by giving a few examples, he would be taken
   to limit the praises of faith to a small number of people. He
   anticipates this objection and adds that, if he were to mention
   everybody one by one, there would be no end to his recital. His point
   is that what he said of the few applied to the whole church of God. He
   turns first to the period between Joshua and David, when God raised up
   Judges to govern the people. He mentions four: Gideon, Barak, Samson,
   and Jephthah.

   It was ridiculous of Gideon to go and attack a host of enemies with
   three hundred men; to make his men shake the pitchers in their hands
   and engage in an empty ghost play. As for Barak, he was no match for
   his enemies, and ruled by the counsel of a woman. Samson was a mere
   farmer, and was used only to the tools of a farmer. What could he have
   done against proud conquerors whose power had brought the whole
   populace to subjection? And who would not at first thought condemn the
   foolhardiness of Jephthah who set himself up as the champion of a
   people who were already lost? But because they all followed God's
   leading and, inspired by his promises, took hold of the task enjoined
   upon them, the Spirit glorified them by his witness.

   Therefore, the apostle attributes their every praiseworthy deed to
   faith, even though there was not one of them whose faith was not lame!
   Gideon was too slow in taking up arms, and had trouble in daring to
   commit himself to God. Barak at first shook in his boots, and was
   forced into battle by Deborah's insults. Samson was so overcome by the
   coaxings of his concubine that he was senseless enough to betray the
   safety of the whole people as well as his own. Jephthah, having let
   himself in for a stupid vow, and being stubborn enough to perform it,
   cruelly spoiled a splendid victory with the death of his own daughter.
   So, in every one of these saints, we meet something which deserves
   censure. And yet, faith, however deformed and imperfect, is approved by
   God. Therefore, the wrongs which burden us should neither dishearten us
   nor break us down, provided only that we follow our calling by faith.

   Women received their dead raised to life again: and others were
   tortured, not accepting deliverance, that they might obtain a better
   resurrection. Heb. 11:35.

   Having recounted instances where God rewarded the faith of the saints
   with a happy ending, he now presents us with a different situation, in
   which the godly, reduced to extreme misery, carried on by faith and
   remained indomitable even to the death. At first it looks as though
   there were a great difference between these two outcomes of faith. Some
   enjoyed magnificent victories over their beaten enemies. They were
   preserved by the Lord through various miracles, and were rescued from
   death itself in new and uncommon ways. Others, on the contrary, were
   subjected to outrage. They were spit upon by almost the whole world;
   were poor and needy, and so hated by everyone that they had to hide in
   the holes of wild beasts; and in the end they were dragged out and
   subjected to cruel and inhuman tortures. So, for all one could see,
   they were abandoned to the arrogance and savagery of the godless, and
   were altogether without God's help. Their lot, therefore, would seem to
   have been altogether different from that of the saints mentioned in the
   earlier parts of this chapter.

   Nevertheless, faith reigned in both instances, and in both it was
   equally effective. In fact, in the latter it shone even more brightly.
   The victory of faith is more splendid in contempt of death than in a
   life stretched out to five generations. The glory of faith is more
   striking in its effects, and is worthy of greater praise, when we
   endure want, reproach, and utmost difficulty with a calm and constant
   spirit, than when we are restored to health by a miracle, or enjoy some
   other benefit from God.

   For ye have need of patience, that, after ye have done the will of God,
   ye may receive the promise. Forget a little while, and he that shall
   come will come, and will not tarry. Now the just shall live by faith:
   but if any man draw back, my soul shall have no pleasure in him. Heb.
   10:36-38.

   He says patience is necessary, not only because we need to endure a
   while longer until the end, but also because Satan is resourceful in
   innumerable devices with which to trouble us. Therefore, unless we are
   taught great patience, we shall be cut down a thousand times before we
   are even halfway through our course. It is indeed certain that we shall
   inherit eternal life; and yet, since this life is like an athletic
   event, we need to strain every muscle until we get to the finishing
   line. The course itself contains many obstacles and hardships, which
   not only slow us down, but would even stop us altogether in our race,
   unless we overcome them with a prodigious fortitude of spirit. Satan is
   clever enough to put into our heads every kind of disquiet, so as to
   break us down. In short, Christians would be unable to take two steps
   unless fortified by endurance. This then is the only way we can
   steadily go ahead. Without endurance we neither obey God nor receive
   the promised inheritance, which is here called the promise.

   For yet a little while, and he that shall come will come, and will not
   tarry. But endurance is hard for us. Therefore, he reminds us that it
   will not be for long. Nothing lifts the spirit so well when it is weary
   as the hope that the end is at hand. As a general encourages his
   soldiers by saying the battle will not be long, provided they hold on a
   little longer, so the apostle tells us that the Lord will come shortly
   and deliver us from all evil, provided we do not go soft and let our
   spirits fail.

   He gives this consolation greater credibility and authority by an
   appeal to the witness of the prophet Habakkuk, ch. 2:4. But since he
   follows the Greek version and departs somewhat from the words of the
   prophet, I shall first explain the latter, and then compare both with
   what is said by the apostle.

   When the prophet had discoursed of the dreadful fall of his nation, and
   was terrified by his own prophecy, there was nothing left for him to do
   except, as it were, to leave the world and withdraw to his watchtower.
   (But our watchtower is the Word of God by which we are directed toward
   heaven.) Having been placed in his station, the prophet was commanded
   to write a new prophecy which affirmed to the godly the certainty of
   their coming deliverance. But since men are importunate, and their
   precipitate desires make them always judge God as much too slow, even
   when he is quick, the prophet declares that the promise will be
   fulfilled without delay; and at the same time he adds, "If there be
   delay, wait for it." What he says is that, no matter how quickly God
   fulfills his promises, he seems to us too slow. As the old proverb
   says: To desire, even haste is delay. Then follow the words: "Behold,
   he who lifts himself up shall not have a stable spirit, but the
   righteous shall live by his faith." With these words, he warns that the
   ungodly, however armed with their defenses, and however confident they
   be behind their ramparts, shall not stand: because life is not stable
   except by faith. Let the unbelievers arm themselves as they please;
   they will find nothing in this whole world that will not perish;
   therefore, they have to be always in a state of panic. But the faith of
   the godly never fails, because it leans upon God. This is what the
   prophet is talking about.

   Now the apostle applies to God what the prophet had said of the
   promise, and that rightly, since when God fulfills his promises, in a
   way he reveals himself. There is little difference between the prophet
   and the apostle as to the heart of the matter. I say that when the Lord
   stretches forth his hand to help us, he himself comes. The apostle
   follows the prophet in saying, "In but a short while" ; because God
   does not defer his help any longer than fits his purpose. Unlike men,
   God does not dally in order to deceive and fail us. He knows the time
   of opportunity, and does not let it pass by without coming forth to our
   help at the right moment. The apostle says: He that shall come, will
   come; he will not tarry. There are two parts to this sentence. The
   first says that God will come, because he has promised; the second,
   that he will do it at the right time, and not later.

   And now, the righteous shall live by faith. He means that endurance is
   born of faith. And this is true, because we shall never be equal to our
   contests except as we are sustained by faith; as John says truly in
   other words, Our victory which overcomes the world is by faith (1 John
   5:4). So it is that we rise on high; so we bound over the obstacles of
   this life, over its sorrows and troubles; so we have quietness in the
   midst of storms and tempests. Thus, the apostle's whole point is that
   all those who are righteous before God shall live by faith. And the
   future tense of the verb to live indicates that life by faith shall be
   life without end. Let the reader look up Rom. 1:17 and Gal. 3:11, where
   the apostle cites this same verse from the prophet.

   Now faith is the substance of things hoped for, the evidence of things
   not seen. Heb. 11:1.

   Whoever made this verse the beginning of chapter eleven did wrong in
   breaking up the continuity of our text. As the apostle has said, his
   purpose is to show the need for patience. He has already quoted the
   testimony of Habakkuk, that the righteous shall live by faith. Now, he
   shows further that faith can be separated from patience no more than
   from itself. His argument goes as follows: We shall never attain the
   goal of salvation, unless we learn patience; because the prophet
   teaches that the righteous shall live by faith. But faith calls us to a
   destiny which is far off. Therefore, there is no faith without
   patience. Hence, the syllogism includes the minor proposition: faith is
   the substance of things hoped for. It is wrong to think that here we
   have a full definition of faith. The apostle does not speak of the
   whole of faith, but of that aspect of it which fits his present
   purpose; namely, that it is always bound up with patience.

   Now let us consider his words. He calls faith the hypostasis of the
   things hoped for. We of course know that we hope for things not in our
   hands and still hidden from us, or at least for things we expect to
   enjoy at some other time. The apostle teaches us here the same thing
   that Paul does in Rom. 8:24, where the latter says that we hope for
   what we do not see, by which he implies that we must wait for it with
   patience. Thus, the apostle warns us that we must exercise faith in God
   not for things present but for things about whose fulfillment we are in
   suspense. And this paradox is not without its beauty. Faith, he says,
   is the hypostasis, that is the prop, or the place we have, on which we
   may plant our foot; but the prop for what? I answer, For things not in
   our possession, things which are not under our foot, which are in fact
   even beyond the grasp of our minds.

   The same applies to the second clause, where he speaks of the evidence,
   or demonstration, of things not seen. But demonstration has to do with
   things that are seen; it is used commonly with regard to things open to
   our senses. Thus faith and demonstration apparently do not go together.
   And yet they do go together very well; for the Spirit of God
   demonstrates to us the things hidden to us and quite beyond the kind of
   knowledge which depends upon the senses. We are promised eternal life,
   but we are dead; we are told of a blessed resurrection, but we are in a
   state of corruption; we are pronounced righteous, and yet we are
   dwelling places of sin; we hear that we are happy, and yet we are
   buried under countless miseries; we are promised riches of every kind
   of good, but are exceedingly hungry and full of thirst; God cries that
   he will come to us quickly, and yet to our own cry he seems to be deaf.
   What would become of us if we were not upheld by hope and if our minds
   did not escape the darkness of this world through the bright light of
   God's Word and his Spirit? Faith, therefore, is said rightly to be the
   reality (subsistentia) of the things we affirm in hope, and the
   evidence of the things we do not see. It does not displease me that
   Augustine sometimes translates evidence as "conviction," because it is
   true to the apostle's meaning. But I prefer to render it as
   "demonstration," because this is less forced.

  3. FAITH AS HUMAN ACT

   And behold, a woman, which was diseased with an issue of blood for
   twelve years, came behind him, and touched the hem of his garment.
   Matt. 9:20.

   The Evangelist makes it clear that the issue of blood had lasted
   continually for twelve years. She had neglected no remedy, and had even
   spent everything she had on doctors. The glory of the miracle shines
   all the more brightly, because an incurable disease was cured suddenly
   by the mere touch of a garment; and this was obviously not a human
   accomplishment. However, we must not generalize from the woman's notion
   that if she touched Christ's garment she would be immediately healed,
   because it came to her under a special impulse of the Holy Spirit. We
   know how superstition presumes thoughtlessly and stupidly to play at
   imitating the saints. But those who try to follow a unique example
   without the command of God, moved by their own fancy rather than by the
   Spirit, are not imitators; they are apes.

   It is even possible that the faith of this woman was mixed with some
   sin and error, which Christ was generous enough to endure and ignore.
   Certainly, when afterwards her conscience troubled her, so that she
   feared and trembled, her doubting, which was the contrary of faith, was
   without any excuse or justification. Why did she not rather go straight
   to Christ? If it was reverence that kept her back, why did she not
   trust his mercy, which alone was to be her help? And why was she afraid
   of giving offense if she really believed in his kindness?

   And yet, Christ acknowledged her faith with high praise. And this
   agrees with my previous statement that God deals kindly and gently with
   his people; that even though their faith be mutilated and sickly, he
   accepts it, without holding against them the sin and defect which run
   through it. Therefore, the woman came to Christ as guided by faith.
   When she clung to the garment, instead of asking Christ to heal her,
   the force of her thoughtless zeal pushed her somewhat off the right
   way, as soon became especially evident when she made her venture with
   such doubt and perplexity of spirit. Even though her behavior was
   enjoined by the Spirit, it still remains a fixed rule that we must not
   allow special cases like this to cause us to waver in our faith. Faith
   needs to be bound directly to the Word of God; for, according to Paul,
   faith cometh by hearing, and hearing by the Word of God (Rom. 10:17).
   And this is a useful warning, that we may not dignify every opinion,
   picked up one way or another, with the title of faith.

   But the ship was now in the midst of the sea, tossed with waves: for
   the wind was contrary. Matt. 14:24.

   Readers will find my exposition of this story in my commentary on John
   6. Here I shall be brief. When Christ permitted his disciples to be
   tossed about for a while during a dangerous storm, he intended to fix
   their attention upon the wonderful help which he provided for them. For
   the adverse wind began to blow about midnight, or a little before. But
   Christ came only at the fourth watch, or at the earliest, three hours
   before sunrise. By this time their faith was shaken by terror even more
   than their arms were tired by rowing. In this predicament they were
   sorely in need of their Master's presence; and yet, when they saw him,
   they were seized with a gross stupor, as though they had seen a ghost.

   For this reason Mark says that their heart was blinded and they did not
   understand about the loaves; for that miracle might have taught them
   well enough that there was no lack of divine power in Christ for
   helping them, and that he cared for them and would come to their aid
   when they needed him.

   Therefore they are rightly condemned for feebleness of spirit in
   forgetting the power of God which they had seen the day before and
   which should have been still right before their eyes. They were surely
   blameworthy to have been struck with such stupidity that they had
   failed to profit from the earlier miracles they had witnessed. But they
   are reproached mainly for their blindness, which wiped out of their
   minds the memory of so recent and striking an event, or rather for
   their failure to acknowledge the Deity of Christ which had been obvious
   when he multiplied the bread.

   But straightway Jesus spake unto them, saying, Be of good cheer; it is
   I; be not afraid. And Peter answered him and said, Lord, if it be thou,
   bid me come unto thee on the water. Matt. 14:27-28.

   Since Christ is not known as a deliverer until he comes forward as one,
   it is by his Word that he invited his disciples to know him. Besides,
   he set forth his own presence among them as the real basis for the
   trust to which he called them. It is as though he said that, since they
   know he is there, they have solid ground for good hope. But since
   terror had already taken possession of their souls, he took them under
   his care, to keep their dread from hindering or destroying their
   confidence. Of course, he did not expect that they would be emptied of
   all fear and filled instead with sheer joy. He sought to break down the
   strength of their fear, that it might not crush their faith. Whereas
   the voice of the Son of God is deadly to the wicked, and his presence
   terrifying, its effect upon believers, as described here, is altogether
   different; it makes our inner peace and living faith triumph within our
   hearts, so that we may not succumb to the fretting of our flesh. If we
   are alarmed and agitated blindly and precipitously, it is because we
   are ungrateful enough and wicked enough not to take up the shields of
   God's countless benefits, which, properly wielded, would fortify us
   against all evil. Now, even though Christ appeared in good time for
   help, the tempest continued to rage, so that the disciples might be
   roused to rest their hope and expectation in his grace. From this we
   know that the Lord often delays the deliverance, which he has in the
   palm of his hand, for some good reason of his own.

   And Peter answered him and said, Lord, if it be thou, bid me come unto
   thee on the water. The condition which Peter lays down shows that his
   faith is still immature. If it be thou, says he, bid me come! But he
   had already heard Christ speak! Why then does he, doubtful and
   perplexed, argue with him? Such a rash desire burst out of him because
   his faith was both little and feeble. He should have estimated himself
   rightly, and prayed for an increase of faith sufficient to lead and
   guide him across seas and over mountains. As it was, he was trying to
   fly without wings; or, without having the voice of Christ firmly in his
   heart, he desired to turn the water under his feet into solid land. And
   even though Peter's zeal was doubtless good at its source, yet, since
   he overdid it and so corrupted it, it is not worthy of praise.

   But Peter soon began to pay for his rashness. Let his example teach
   believers to avoid too much haste. When the Lord calls, we should of
   course run. But anyone who overreaches himself will find out, from the
   unhappy consequences, what it means not to know one's limit. Yet, it
   may be asked, why did Christ comply with Peter's wish? For, in so
   doing, he seems to have approved of it. The answer is easy. God often
   helps us better by denying us what we ask of him; and at other times,
   he is indulgent with us, so that we may see our folly by experience. It
   happens every day that God, by giving his faithful people more than
   they need, trains them for sobriety and modesty in the future.

   Thus, Christ's dealing with Peter on this occasion was profitable to
   him and to the other disciples; and it is profitable for us today. The
   power of Christ appeared to better advantage in the person of Peter
   when, rather than walk upon the water by himself, he took Peter along
   with him. In this way, Peter understood, and the others saw plainly,
   that when he did not rest in and lean upon the Word of God with a solid
   faith, the secret power of God, which had previously solidified the
   waters, disappeared. Nevertheless, Christ dealt kindly with him and did
   not let him go under and perish. Both of these things happen to us: as
   Peter began to sink, when fear seized him, the passing and the unstable
   thoughts of the flesh soon make us lose our foothold when we should be
   firmly occupied with our calling. Meanwhile, the Lord deals kindly with
   us in our weakness, and stretches his hand out, that the water may not
   suck us in altogether. But we should notice that Peter, seeing the
   unpleasant and unhappy effect of his temerity, throws himself upon the
   mercy of Christ. And we also, even while we are receiving our overdue
   punishment, should seek help from him, unworthy as we are, that he may
   bring us help in our misery.

   And immediately Jesus stretched forth his hand, and caught him, and
   said unto him, O thou of little faith, wherefore didst thou doubt?
   Matt. 14:31.

   While Christ was kind enough to save Peter, he did not justify his
   behavior. The weakness of his faith is properly rebuked. But one may
   ask, Is every kind of fear an evidence of defect in faith? For,
   Christ's words seem to imply that, where there is faith, there is no
   place for doubt. I answer that the doubt which Christ condemns is the
   precise opposite of faith. It is possible for a man to doubt when there
   is no Word from God to give him certainty. But Peter's case was quite
   different. He had received Christ's command and experienced his power;
   and yet, letting go of such a double mainstay, he fell prey to a fear
   which was at once foolish and perverse.

   Then said Martha unto Jesus, Lord, if thou hadst been here, my brother
   had not died. But I know that even now, whatsoever thou wilt ask of
   God, God will give to thee. Jesus saith unto her, Thy brother shall
   rise again. Martha saith unto him, I know that he shall rise again in
   the resurrection at the last day. John 11:21-24.

   She begins with a complaint, even though in this way she tells him
   shyly what she wants. What she means is: "If you had been here, you
   could have snatched my brother from death. You can do it even now,
   because God denies you nothing." But speaking in this manner, she gives
   vent to her feelings more than is proper to a believer. I admit that
   these words were spoken partly by faith; but I submit that they were
   mixed with a confused feeling which pushed her to speak improperly.
   For, what is the ground of the confidence which leads her to assume
   that if Jesus had been there, her brother would not have died? Surely,
   it was not based on a promise of Christ. It must therefore be that she
   was rash enough to follow her own wishes rather than yield to Christ.
   It is [the nature] of faith to attribute all goodness and power to
   Christ; but it is alien to faith that she believed more than she has
   heard from Christ. We must recognize that the Word and faith agree the
   one with the other, so that we dare not presume to invent more than the
   Word of God allows. Besides, Martha was far too attached to the
   physical presence of Christ. It follows that her faith was mixed and
   confused with excessive desire; not being free from superstition it
   could not shine with full brightness. Hence her words exhibited only a
   few sparks of faith.

   Your brother shall rise again. The kindness of Christ is amazing. He
   simply ignores Martha's faults, which we spoke of above, and promises
   her more than she dared ask openly and in so many words.

   I know that he shall rise again. Here Martha's lack of courage is
   evident because she weakens Christ's words. We said above that she went
   too far when she devised a hope out of her own desires. And now she
   falls into the opposite error; when Christ stretches out his hand to
   her, she draws back with trepidation. This is why we should avoid both
   errors. On the one hand, we should not fill ourselves with hopes which,
   being empty of God's Word, are like so much wind. On the other hand,
   when God opens his mouth to us, he should not find our hearts closed
   and shut firmly against him.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [88] Calvin is following Aristotle's classification of causes as
   material, formal, efficient, and final. The conventional classroom
   illustration today is the pair of trousers of which the cloth is the
   material cause, the pattern is the formal cause, the tailor is the
   efficient cause, and the reception at which the trousers are to be worn
   is the final cause.
     __________________________________________________________________

VI Providence

  THE TEXT

  1. PROVIDENCE AND HUMAN ACTION

   The Lord is my shepherd, I shall not want. . . . Ps. 23:1-4, 6.

   God gently draws us to himself by his good gifts to us, giving us a
   taste of his sweetness as our Father; but nothing is so easy for us as
   to forget him when we are enjoying peace and comfort. We ought then to
   attend most carefully to the example set for us by David. David, raised
   to a king's throne, possessing ample wealth and great honors, testifies
   in the midst of the pleasures of his court that he remembers God and is
   mindful of the benefits which God has conferred upon him. He makes of
   them ladders by which he may climb nearer to God.

   By the metaphor of the shepherd, he praises God's care; he means that
   God's care for those who are his own is like the solicitude of a
   shepherd for the sheep intrusted to him. In the Bible, God often
   assumes the title and role of shepherd, which we must recognize as a
   special sign of his love for us. Such a mode of expression is humble
   and undemanding and should make a deep impression upon us, since God
   for our sake is willing to stoop down and, by such a wonderfully gentle
   and intimate invitation, entice us to him, so that we may rest safely
   and quietly under his protection.

   But it must be noted that God is shepherd only of those who are
   conscious of their own needs and weakness, and who feel the necessity
   of his guidance; for it is they who willingly remain in his flock and
   submit themselves to his leading. David, who excelled in power and
   possessions, acknowledged freely that he was a sheep, so that he might
   have God for his shepherd. What then would become of us, whose
   floundering proves our wretchedness, if we did not remain under the
   guidance of this same Shepherd?

   Moreover, we must not forget that our greatest happiness is to have
   God's guiding hand stretched out to us, and to live under its shadow,
   so that his providence may watch over our safety.

   He leadeth me beside the still waters. By still waters David meant
   waters that flow gently, because swift torrents are not suitable for
   sheep to drink from, and often they are even dangerous. . . . David
   here says once again that the Heavenly Shepherd overlooks nothing which
   might take away from the happiness of those under his care. . . . God
   in no way fails his faithful ones; he sustains them with his own power,
   feeds and strengthens them, and keeps them from all harm, so that they
   journey in comfort on smooth roads.

   He leadeth me in the paths of righteousness. This means easy and plain
   paths. Since he continues with his metaphor, it would be out of place
   to understand this as referring to the direction of the Holy Spirit.
   David has said that God supplies him liberally with all he needs for
   this life; and he now adds that God protects him from all trouble.

   Yea, though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death, I will
   fear no evil, for thou art with me; thy rod and thy staff, they comfort
   me. The faithful who dwell safely under God's hand are nevertheless
   exposed to many perils. Keeping the same metaphor, David compares God's
   care in guiding the faithful to the shepherd's rod and staff. When a
   sheep is walking in a dark valley, only the shepherd's presence keeps
   it safe from the attacks of wild beasts or from other accidents. David
   was not boasting of his own fearlessness; but was rather saying that he
   would walk boldly wherever his shepherd led him. And now that God
   reveals himself to us in the person of his only-begotten Son, as our
   Shepherd, more brightly than he did of old to the fathers under the
   law, we do not honor his protection properly unless we keep our eyes
   fixed upon it and by so doing trample upon all our trepidations.

   Surely goodness and mercy shall follow me all the days of my life; and
   I will dwell in the house of the Lord forever. Whence was this
   confidence that God's kindness and mercy would be with him forever, if
   not from the promise by which God confines his benefits to those who
   believe, lest they be devoured by those whose palates have no taste for
   such benefits? For when David said earlier that in the shadow of death
   itself his eyes would be intently fixed on the providence of God, he
   showed well enough that he did not depend on things external; nor did
   he judge God's favor by his bodily senses. When all earthly aids
   failed, his faith remained, because it rested solely on the Word of
   God.

   The last words of the psalm show clearly that David did not confine
   himself to the pleasures or comforts of this earth, but kept his gaze
   on heaven as the ultimate end of everything else. He says plainly that
   for him the culmination of all the good [gifts] from God is to dwell in
   the house of the Lord.

   Blessed is the people whose God is the Lord, and the people whom he
   hath chosen for his inheritance.

   The Lord looketh from heaven, and he seeth all the sons of Adam.

   A king is not kept safe by the size of his army, nor will a giant be
   saved by his great strength.

   A horse is a vain thing for safety; neither shall he deliver by his
   great strength.

   Let thy compassion be upon us, O Lord, according as we hope in thee.
   Ps. 33:12, 13, 16, 17, 22. (Calvin's wording.)

   . . . It is of little use to talk of the stability of God's purpose if
   we do not relate it to ourselves. Therefore the prophet declares that
   those whom God takes under his guardianship are blessed because God's
   purpose is not hidden from them, for it is seen in action in the safety
   of the church. And so we understand that it is not those who consider
   God's power coldly and with indifference, but those who apply it to
   their own immediate need, that have a right knowledge of God as the
   Pilot of the world.

   Indeed, when the psalmist says, "If the Lord is our God," he points to
   the Lord as the fountain of divine love toward us, and tells us that we
   have no happiness except in him. In this way, he includes in one phrase
   everything we could ask for if we are to live a happy life. God's care
   for our safety, keeping us warm under his wings, providing for our
   needs, counting us worthy of his help in time of peril -- all this is
   grounded in his adoption of us. And in order to keep anyone from
   thinking that so much good comes from our own prowess and industry, the
   psalmist specifies that it flows from the fountain of free election
   which makes us God's people.

   Men corrupt this verse senselessly when they transfer to men what the
   prophet ascribes to God. As if men chose God for their inheritance! I
   admit that it is by faith that the true God is distinguished from
   idols; but we must hold fast to the following principle: There would be
   no communion between him and us if he did not first come to us with his
   grace.

   The Lord looketh from heaven. The psalmist continues the same theme.
   The conditions of men do not come about by chance. God directs in
   hidden ways all that takes place. Therefore, the psalmist praises the
   watchfulness of God so that we may learn to see God's invisible
   providence with the eyes of faith. For although the evidences of his
   care are continually before our eyes, the greater part of mankind is
   blind, and invent a blind chance to match their blindness. The more
   bountifully and richly God pours out his kindness upon us, the less we
   turn our minds to him; we keep them instead fixed on what happens to us
   from the outside.

   The prophet castigates the indignity which men offer to God; for no
   greater wrong can be done to him than to shut him up to stay idly in
   his heaven. That is like burying him in a grave! For how would God be
   living if he saw nothing and cared for nothing? Further, by the term
   royal throne, the prophet shows how absurd and stupid it would be to
   divest God of mind and intelligence. For he means that heaven is not a
   palace for idle pleasures, as the Epicureans imagine, but a king's seat
   of government from which God exercises his empire in all the realms of
   the world. But if God has set his seat in the sanctuary of the heavens
   in order to rule the universe, it follows that he by no means ignores
   earthly affairs, but controls them with the highest reason and wisdom.

   A king is not kept safe, etc. A man's life is safe not by his own
   power, but by the grace of God. Kings and giants are mentioned because
   they think they are exempt from the common lot of men and believe
   themselves beyond the reach of javelin or arrow. If some misfortune
   occurs, they expect to find an easy escape. Intoxicated with confidence
   in their own ability, they are hardly able to remember that they are
   mortal; and their pride is strengthened by the foolish admiration of
   the crowd who are astounded at their might. But if the resources of a
   king do not give him security, and a giant does not escape by his
   strength when danger comes, it is futile for any ordinary man to depend
   on earthly riches and forget God's providence. For nothing can be more
   miserably precarious than the position of both the strong and the weak
   unless they rely on God's protection.

   In the next verse, by the use of synecdoche (a part for the whole), the
   word horse means every kind of earthly assistance. Of course, kings are
   not armed with swords for nothing; and horses are not useless; nor are
   any of the wealth and resources, which God supplies to men to guard
   their lives, without value when they are rightly used. But the more the
   majority of men are surrounded with fortifications, the farther they go
   from God and falsely imagine that their wall is impregnable. God
   rightly confounds such insanity. So it is that the flood of God's gifts
   is often without effect; because the world, separating them from their
   Author, deprives itself of his blessing.

   Let thy compassion be upon us.

   The psalm closes with a prayer, which the prophet offers in the name of
   all the faithful, asking that they may know they have not relied on
   God's goodness in vain. In prescribing this rule of prayer by the mouth
   of the prophet, the Spirit teaches us that the door of God's favor is
   opened when we do not seek and hope for safety elsewhere. Meanwhile we
   draw our sweetest comfort from the certainty that our hope will never
   crack up while we are still on our way; nor do we need to fear that God
   will not extend his compassion toward us until the end.

   And fear not those who kill the body, but cannot kill the soul; but
   rather fear him who can destroy both soul and body in Gehenna. And yea,
   I say to you, fear him. Are not two sparrows sold for a farthing? And
   not one of them shall fall to the ground without your Father. Matt.
   10:28, Luke 12:5, Matt. 10:29. (Calvin's wording.)

   Christ is perfectly right when he urges his disciples to despise death,
   because human beings created for heavenly immortality should treat this
   mutable and perishing life as so much smoke. The heart of the matter is
   this: if the believers consider to what end they were born, and what
   their condition now is, they will have no reason for clinging anxiously
   to this earthly life. However, these words have a still fuller and
   richer meaning; for Christ teaches us that the fear of God is dead in
   people who fear tyrants so much that they fail in their confession,
   that a brutish stupidity reigns in the hearts of those who fear death
   so much that they will not even hesitate to give up altogether
   confessing their faith. . . .

   For this reason, Luke repeats emphatically: Yea, I say to you, fear
   him. We must understand Christ to say that, when we succumb to the fear
   of man, we show no respect for God; that when, on the contrary, we show
   proper reverence to God, victory is easy and in our hands, and no human
   power can pull us away from our duty. Besides, the experience of every
   age teaches how necessary it is for ministers and for believers in
   general to be warned about this danger, because there never was a time
   when men did not rise up in fury against God, and did not set
   themselves to crush the gospel. Not all men have equal power to put the
   fear of death into the believers; still, the majority of men are
   possessed with the ferocity of a Cyclops, which springs forth when
   opportunity arises. Besides, the devil often gets hold of giants, whose
   very looks would throw the servants of Christ down lifeless, were they
   not taught to be hard and immovable by this teaching.

   Moreover, since fearing God and not fearing men go together, it is
   stupid and wrong to pay attention only to the latter point. On the
   contrary, as we have said before, Christ set a devout and holy fear of
   God in opposition to a perverse fear of men, which takes us away from
   the right way, as the only remedy for it. Otherwise, there would have
   been no point in his saying that, if we fear God who is Lord over soul
   and body, we ought not to fear men who have power only over the body.
   When Christ admits that men have the power to kill, he does so only by
   way of concession. God holds the bridle of the wicked loose; and they,
   puffed up by confidence in their own power, will dare anything. They
   strike at shaky souls, and act as though nothing could stop them. But
   futile is the insolence of the wicked which makes them fancy that they
   can do as they please with the life of believers. For, all the while,
   God holds the reins; and when it pleases him, he checks their attack,
   however fierce and violent. And yet they may be said to have the power
   to kill by God's permission, because often they are able to go strong
   and give vent to their fury. . . .

   Are not two sparrows, etc. Now Christ goes on to declare, as I have
   already hinted, that no matter how mad the tyrants may be, they have no
   power even over the body. Therefore, those who fear the cruelty of men,
   as though they were without God's protection, are fools. In the midst
   of perils, we have this second comfort that, since God is the keeper of
   our lives, we may safely rely upon his providence. It is really an
   insult to God, not to place our lives at the disposal of him who has
   honored us with his protection. Christ extends the providence of God to
   all creatures in common, and so argues by way of synecdoche (from the
   whole to the part), that God exercises a particular care over us. There
   is nothing cheaper than a sparrow (two were sold for a penny; or as
   Luke has it, five for two pennies), and yet God's eye is upon it, and
   nothing happens to it by chance. Will he then who looks after sparrows
   neglect to watch over the lives of men?

   Moreover, we must notice two things. Christ defines the providence of
   God very differently from those who, not unlike the philosophers, admit
   that somehow the world is under divine government, and yet imagine the
   workings of providence in a confused way, as though God paid no
   attention to individual creatures. Christ, on the other hand, declares
   that every single one of God's creatures is under his hand and care,
   and that nothing happens by chance. In this way, he firmly opposes the
   will of God to chance, without however affirming the fatalism of the
   Stoics. It is one thing to find necessity in a context of a chain of
   many causes; it is quite another to see the world, as a whole and in
   its individual parts, as subject to the will of God. I confess there is
   a certain operation of chance in the nature of things considered in
   themselves; but I say that nothing occurs merely by the wheels of blind
   fortune, because the will of God reigns over all that happens.

   In the second place, we must not look at God's providence after the
   manner of curious and silly people. It must be to us the ground of our
   strength, and an invitation to call upon God. When Christ tells us that
   even the hairs of our heads are numbered, he does it not to arouse us
   to empty speculation, but to teach us to rest in God's Fatherly care,
   which he exercises in behalf of these frail bodies of ours.

   Him, being delivered by the determinate counsel and foreknowledge of
   God, ye have taken, and by wicked hands crucified and slain. Acts 2:23.

   The chief purpose of Peter in mentioning the death of Christ is to
   establish faith in the resurrection all the more fully. It was well
   known among the Jews that Jesus had been nailed to a cross. Therefore,
   that he rose again would have been a token and evidence of the
   wonderful power of God. Meanwhile, in order to prick their consciences
   with a sense of sin, he says that it was they who killed Jesus, not
   that they had crucified him with their own hands, but that his death
   had been requested by the people with one voice. Although many of those
   who heard Peter had had no direct part in that godless and cruel
   wickedness, he was right in blaming them for it, because all of them
   had defiled themselves either by silence or by unconcern. There was no
   place for any pretense of ignorance, because God had already set Jesus
   before them. Peter thus prepares them for repentance by convicting them
   of sin.

   By the determinate counsel. Here he meets a scandal which arises
   because it seems absurd at first sight, that this man whom God had
   adorned with such powers should have afterwards been subjected to every
   kind of insult and allowed to suffer an ignominious death. Because the
   cross of Christ is at first so disturbing to us, Peter declares that it
   did not occur by chance, or because Jesus had no power to set himself
   free, but because it had been ordained by God. For, only the knowledge
   that the death of Christ was ordained by the eternal purpose of God cut
   off in advance all occasion for foolish and depraved cogitations, and
   prevented people's minds from taking offense at it. One thing is
   certain: that God makes no rash or vain decision. Whence it follows
   that he had a just reason for willing that Christ should have suffered.
   Such knowledge of God's providence enables us to take the right step
   toward understanding the purpose and benefit of Christ's death. For,
   the counsel of God confronts us with the truth that the Righteous One
   was delivered to death for our sins, and his blood was our ransom from
   death.

   This then is a notable statement of the providence of God, teaching us
   that our life as well as our death is governed by it. Luke is indeed
   speaking about Christ; but in him we have a mirror of the universal
   providence of God which extends to the whole world, and shines
   especially upon us who are members of Christ.

   In this place, Luke sets forth two things: God's foreknowledge and his
   sure decree. Although first in order comes foreknowledge (since God
   contemplates what he will ordain before he ordains it), Luke puts it
   after God's counsel or decree, to teach us that God neither wills nor
   decrees anything without having long before directed it to its proper
   end. People often make rash decisions because they decide quickly.
   Therefore, when Peter wants to point out that God's counsel is not
   without reason, he couples it with his foreknowledge. Now, we need to
   distinguish between these two with some discernment, because many have
   fallen down at this point. Passing by the counsel of God with which he
   directs the whole world, these people grab at his mere foreknowledge.
   Hence arises the common distinction according to which, even while God
   foresees everything, he lays no constraint upon his creatures. Of
   course, it is true that God foresees this or that which is in the
   future. But Peter teaches us that what befell Jesus was not only
   foreseen by God, but also decreed by him. From this we learn a general
   truth about God's providence, one that appears in the government of the
   world as a whole, no less than in the death of Jesus: it belongs to
   God, not only to know the future, but also to ordain by his will
   whatever he wants to be done. Peter made this second point when he said
   that Jesus was delivered by the sure and determinate counsel of God.
   Wherefore, the foreknowledge of God is other than the will of God by
   which he rules and regulates all things.

   Some whose discernment is sharper admit that God not only foresees but
   also regulates with a nod everything that is done in this world. At the
   same time, however, they imagine a vague direction, as though God lets
   go of the bridle and allows his creatures to follow the rule of their
   own natures. They say that the sun rules by God's will, because in
   giving us light it does the duty enjoined on it by God in the
   beginning. They think that a free will of this kind is left to men,
   because their nature is capable of a free choice between good and evil.
   But those who think in this manner imagine that God is sitting idly in
   heaven. The Scriptures speak very differently, and defend God's control
   over particular events and over the several actions of men. But we must
   consider the purpose of Scripture in teaching us this doctrine; and we
   must at the same time shun all the mad speculations with which we see
   people carried away. The intention of Scripture is to exercise our
   faith, that we may know we are protected by God's hand, and that we may
   not be subject to harm from Satan and wicked men. . . .

   By the hands of the wicked. Peter seems to suggest that the wicked did
   God's will. From this follows one or the other of two absurdities:
   either that God does evil, or that whatever wickedness men may
   perpetrate, they do not sin. As to the second statement, I answer that
   even though the wicked carry out what God himself has ordained, obeying
   God is the last thing they do. For obedience comes from a willing
   disposition, and we know that the purpose of the wicked is inspired by
   something far different. Besides, nobody but one who knows God's will
   obeys him. Obedience depends upon a knowledge of the will of God. But
   God has revealed his will to us in the law. Therefore, they only obey
   God whose deeds fulfill the demands of the rule of the law, who,
   therefore, submit themselves willingly to its authority. But we see
   none of this in the wicked, whom God drives hither and thither without
   their knowing it. Therefore, let no man say that they are to be excused
   because they obey God. We must seek the will of God in his law; but the
   wicked seek to resist God with everything in them.

   I deny the other statement, that God does evil, because it suggests
   that God is disposed to wickedness. We must judge wickedness in the
   light of the purpose which governs a man's action. People who
   perpetrate theft or murder sin in that they are thieves and murderers;
   for they do these things with a wicked purpose. God, who makes use of
   men's wickedness, must not be put in the same class with them; he must
   be seen in a far different light; because when he sets out to punish
   one man, and to exercise another in patience, he never deviates from
   his nature, which is perfect rectitude. Thus, when Christ was delivered
   by the hands of wicked men, and crucified, it was done by the consent
   and decree of God. But the treachery in the matter, which as such is
   evil, and the murder in it which was a great wickedness, must not be
   attributed to God.

   And the Lord said, Shall I hide from Abraham that thing which I do,
   seeing that Abraham shall surely become a great and mighty nation, and
   all the nations of the earth shall be blessed in him? Gen. 18:17-18.

   When God proposes something as though it were doubtful, he does so out
   of kindness to men; for he had already decided what he would do. Here
   he intended to make Abraham pay close attention to the reasons he gives
   for the destruction of Sodom.

   God gives two reasons for wanting to reveal his purpose before it was
   fulfilled: first, because Abraham was worthy of the privilege of the
   superior honor; second, because it would be useful and fruitful in the
   education of posterity. This in brief is the scope and value of this
   revelation.

   One reason, as I said, why God wished his servant to know beforehand of
   his terrible vengeance upon Sodom was to honor him with special gifts.
   God has always shown this same kindness to the faithful; and he even
   increases it, heaping new and fresh blessings upon the earlier ones;
   and so it is that he deals daily with us. What ground is there for the
   innumerable favors he constantly bestows upon us except that he cannot
   refrain from expressing his Fatherly love with which he has enfolded
   us; and in doing this, he honors himself and his own gifts in us? For
   what except his own free gifts does he reward with his kindness? The
   origin of his kindness was in himself, not in Abraham's merits; nor
   does the blessing of Abraham flow from any other fountain except God.

   Moreover, we learn from this passage, what experience also teaches,
   that it is the special privilege of the church to know the meaning of
   the judgments of God and their direction and purpose. God does indeed
   prove himself a just judge of the world by inflicting punishment on
   evil men. But because all things seem to happen by accident, God
   enlightens his sons by his Word, so that they may not walk blindly like
   unbelievers. So, in the past, when he stretched out his hand to smite
   all the world, he confined his holy oracle to Judea; that is, when he
   was ready to bring distresses and misfortunes upon the nations, he
   declared himself as their author by his prophets and to his chosen
   people alone. . . . Let us then be mindful that God, having begun to be
   good toward us, continues unwearied until, having blessed us in every
   way, he completes our salvation. Having once adopted us and enlightened
   our minds by his Word, he keeps the torch of the Word blazing before
   our eyes, that we may in faith keep our minds upon the judgment and
   punishment of evil which the impious confidently ignore.

   Therefore the faithful ought to be well informed on the known history
   of all times, to be able to judge according to the Scripture the
   various calamities which befall the wicked, privately and in public.
   While Sodom was unharmed and enjoying its pleasant luxuries, the Lord
   announced to his servant Abraham that it would soon perish. There was
   then no doubt that it perished not by chance but by the act of God.
   . . . We must accept the same conclusion in other cases; for although
   God does not foretell the future to us, he wishes us to be eyewitnesses
   of his acts and to propound their causes wisely. We are not to be
   deceived by false vision like the unbelievers, who "seeing, see not"
   and turn their backs to their true goal.

   O Assyrian, the rod of my anger, and the staff in their hand is my
   indignation. Isa. 10:5.

   What follows is intended so to announce the coming punishment as to
   mitigate the sorrow of the faithful with some word of comfort.
   Therefore greater emphasis is given to the doctrine that whatever the
   evils perpetrated by the Assyrians, they will be a temporary discipline
   from God, and that when the unbelievers overdo their insolence, they
   will finally be put in their places.

   Hoi is sometimes an exclamation of pain, sometimes a call for
   attention; and sometimes it has the sense "woe to," as the ancient
   interpreters translated it here. But in this passage it can only mean
   either that the Lord is calling the Assyrians, or that he is assuming
   the role of a mourner because he has to punish his people at the hand
   of the Assyrians. But when I look more closely at the whole passage, I
   prefer the interpretation that God is calling the Assyrians as though
   they were armed for battle by his own command. The prophet had already
   proclaimed that the Assyrians would be upon them; but hypocrites feel
   so secure that the fear of God never troubles them, before they can see
   his scourge or until they actually feel its blows. This is why God now
   summons the Assyrians with "Come," just as a judge calls an officer and
   orders him to bind a criminal, or commands the executioner to put him
   to death. So the Lord calls the Assyrians to inflict punishment by
   their hand.

   And the staff. This can refer to the Assyrians, and the clause can be
   understood as a repetition of the preceding in slightly different
   words. But I find here a difference in meaning. First, the Assyrians
   are called "the rod of God's wrath" ; second, the swords and weapons
   with which they are equipped are equated with the anger of God, as
   though the prophet had said, "God according to his will is using the
   Assyrian instead of ax or sword as executor of his wrath," and then had
   added, "Although they may wear swords, what you should fear is [not
   their weapons but] God's anger against his people." The point is that
   whatever strength the enemy may have comes from God's anger, and that
   the enemy would not move a finger unless God roused him by a hidden
   prodding against the nation He intended to destroy. God calls the staff
   which they hold in their hand his "anger" to make it clear to the Jews
   that the apparently blind attacks of their enemies are directed by
   heavenly providence.

   I disagree with some interpreters who would turn beyadam (in their
   hand) to "in their place" or "in their land." That is too forced. The
   point is that God calls the Assyrians as the servants of his wrath, for
   by their hand he will exact due penalty for the crimes of his people.
   Therefore, he declares that his anger is all the might they possess.

   This teaching has two purposes: first, to terrify the wicked by letting
   them know that God's threats to destroy them are not empty words, and
   to show them the reason they are to be punished. These words,
   therefore, had much more force to rouse from their indifference the
   wicked who had laughed at all the former threatenings of the prophets.

   Secondly, this teaching had also no small value when the Assyrians
   began to harass the people. For then, in the midst of the disaster, the
   Jews could see that it was not purposeless, nor happening by accident,
   for it had been predicted by the prophets.

   Someone will object, Why did God when He had first said that the
   Assyrians were the rod of his anger, afterwards call their staff his
   indignation? But we must put it, "The Assyrian is my anger, and the
   staff which he carries is the staff of my indignation." But so long as
   we understand what the prophet means, we should not stop anxiously over
   words. He calls men "the rod of God's anger" because God uses them like
   a rod; he calls the weapons of men God's "indignation," because they
   are not directed by men's own will but are the evidence of God's anger.

   These words of the prophet are most pertinent today, because they
   forbid us to think that the wicked burst forth unrestrained wherever
   their lust drives them; for they are guided and checked by a bridle, so
   that they will accomplish nothing against God's will. Hence we must
   conclude that God acts by the hand of the wicked. But here we must
   think and speak soberly, for there is need to distinguish wisely and
   carefully between the work of God and the work of men.

   There are three ways in which God acts through men. First, all are
   moved and exist through him; from which it follows that all human
   actions proceed from his goodness. Second, he acts in a special way
   when he moves the wicked as seems good to him. Although nothing is
   further from their thoughts, he uses their work so that they mutually
   destroy one another and perish, or so that he may discipline his own
   people by their hand. This last is the prophet's point in this place.
   Third, God guides men by his sanctifying Spirit; but this way belongs
   only to the elect.

   So whether tyrants, or robbers, or any others injure us; or when
   foreign nations rise up against us, always, among turbulent and
   confused commotions, the hand of God sheds his light upon us, to keep
   us from imagining that anything happens by chance.

   Therefore also now, saith the Lord, turn ye even to me with all your
   heart. . . . Joel 2:12.

   After announcing the terrible judgment, the prophet shows that his
   purpose was not simply to inspire terror, but rather to bring the
   people back to their right minds. But this he could not do unless he
   gave them the hope of forgiveness. I have said many times -- and indeed
   the whole Bible proves it -- that men cannot be brought back to the
   right way unless they receive the hope of God's compassion. For despair
   makes men more obstinate and doubles their wickedness, rather
   multiplies it a hundredfold.

   For when a man who has done wrong despairs, he hurls himself wholly
   into the gulf of wickedness without any restraint whatever. Therefore
   the prophet now describes the kindness and compassion of God in order
   gently to lead the people to apply themselves to repentance.

   So now it was not you that sent me hither, but God. . . . Gen. 45:8.

   This is an especially significant passage, for it teaches us that the
   true course of events is never disturbed by the wickedness and malice
   of men; that, on the contrary, God directs men's confused and turbulent
   movements to a good end. Also it shows us how we ought to think of
   God's providence and how we are to profit from it. When curious men
   debate over it, they not only muddle and pervert everything by ignoring
   its purpose, but also concoct whatever absurdities they can to insult
   God's justice. Their effrontery even makes some pious and modest men
   wish they could bury this part of our doctrine. For as soon as it is
   proclaimed that God holds the government of the whole world and that
   nothing is done without his assent and command, those who feel too
   little reverence for the mysteries of God burst out with various
   questions which are not only frivolous, but also pernicious.

   However, in our desire to stop such profane intemperance, we should be
   very careful not to be satisfied with a crass ignorance of truths which
   are not only revealed by the Word of God but are also very useful for
   us to know. Good men are ashamed to confess that nothing which men
   undertake is accomplished unless God wills it, for fear unbridled
   tongues will clamor either that God is the author of sin, or that no
   blame is incurred by impious men since they are only following God's
   purpose. Although there is no way of refuting this sacrilegious
   madness, we should be content to detest it, and meanwhile hold firmly
   to the clear witness of Scripture, whatever men may invent. Amid all
   the shoutings of men, God directs men's plans and efforts from heaven,
   and finally accomplishes by their hands what he himself has decreed.

   Good men who fear to expose the justice of God to the slanders of the
   impious take refuge in the distinction that God wills some things to be
   done and only permits others. As if, without his will, any freedom of
   action would be possible for men! If he had merely permitted Joseph to
   be carried to Egypt, he would not have ordained him as the instrument
   for saving the lives of his father Jacob and his sons; and this is what
   is said here explicitly. A statement like our text would be meaningless
   if evil things which God afterwards turns to a good end were done only
   by his permission, and not by his intention and will.

   I know that on men's side there are evil deeds which are done out of
   sheer perversity. Moreover, since the doers are inherently sinful, they
   must be accounted wholly guilty. But God works through them in a
   wonderful way, so that he produces pure justice out of impure
   corruption. How he acts is hidden and too high for us. And it is not
   strange that lusting flesh rebels against it. But for this very reason
   we ought to avoid attempting to restrict heaven's great height to our
   narrow vision. Therefore let it be a fixed point that even while men's
   passion runs high and rushes uncontrollably hither and thither, God
   remains supreme over all and by his hidden bridle directs their motions
   wherever it seems to him good.

   At the same time we must also hold that God's action is distinct from
   man's, so that his providence is free from all iniquity, and his
   decrees have no affinity with the wrongdoings of men. A most beautiful
   illustration of this truth is presented to our eyes in this story.
   Joseph was sold by his brothers for no other reason than that they
   wanted him somehow destroyed and out of the way. The same act is
   ascribed to God, but with the very different purpose of providing the
   house of Jacob with food in time of famine and beyond their every hope.
   . . . Hence it is clear that, although God at first seems to act as do
   wicked men, in the end their crime is a far cry from his wonderful
   justice. . . .

   But we also see that men are no less criminal because God, contrary to
   their expectations, transforms the end they seek in their wickedness to
   a good and happy outcome. . . . Certainly we must hold that men's deeds
   must be valued not by their issue, but by whether they failed to do
   their duty, or acted contrary to God's command, or went beyond the
   limits of their vocation. When a man neglects his wife and children,
   and does not labor to provide for their necessities, even though they
   do not die unless God so wills, this in no way excuses the brutality of
   the husband and father who deserts them when he ought to be their
   helper. Therefore people with a bad conscience gain nothing by pushing
   forward the providence of God as a screen for their misdeeds.

   But I ask you to note again, How often God resists the malice of those
   who desire to harm us, not only resists but also turns their evil
   efforts to our good! Thus he mitigates the afflictions of our flesh and
   gives us a calm spirit and greater peace.

   And he said: Cursed be Canaan; a servant of servants shall he be unto
   his brethren. Gen. 9:25.

   It is strange that Noah curses his grandson and passes over in silence
   Ham who committed the crime. The Jews give God's favor as the reason
   and say that God had so greatly honored Ham that the curse was shifted
   to his son. But that is a foolish conjecture. I am sure that the
   punishment was transferred to posterity to make its severity all the
   more obvious; for God was giving clear testimony that he did not
   consider the punishment of one man alone to be sufficient, and that
   therefore the curse had to include his descendants and continue in
   force through the ages. Meanwhile Ham himself was certainly not
   exempted; God made his judgment heavier by including his son with him.

   Now another question arises. Why did God single out from among Ham's
   many sons one man in particular for the blow? But here we must not
   allow too much range to our curiosity. We should keep in mind, it is
   not without reason that the judgments of God are called an unfathomable
   abyss. It is not fitting that God, before whose tribunal we must all
   finally stand, be subjected to our judgment -- or rather to our foolish
   temerity. God chooses as he pleases some, to make them examples of his
   grace and long-suffering; he destines others for a different purpose,
   to be proofs of his anger and severity. Here human minds are blind; yet
   each one of us, knowing his own failure, should learn to praise God's
   justice rather than hurl himself by insane audacity into the deep
   abyss.

   The curse of God included the whole seed of Ham. But he singled out the
   Canaanites by name as cursed above all others. We know that this
   judgment was from God, for it was afterwards validated by the event.
   Noah was a man and did not know what was to happen to the Canaanites;
   but in such obscure and hidden matters he spoke as the Spirit directed
   his tongue.

   There is still another difficulty. The Scripture teaches that the sins
   of men are punished to the third and fourth generation; and yet [our
   text] seems to depict the punishment of God's wrath as reaching to ten
   generations. I answer: Scripture does not prescribe a rule which God
   himself may not transgress, as though he were bound not to punish
   beyond four generations. We must see grace and punishment as combined
   and so understand that, while God justly punishes our crimes, he is
   still more inclined to mercy. Meanwhile, let us admit that he is free
   to extend punishment as far as it seems good to him.

   Servant of servants. This Hebrew phrase means that Canaan will be the
   lowest among slaves, or that his situation will be worse than common
   slavery. But does not the lightning bolt of this stern and terrible
   prophecy seem a harmless joke, since the Canaanites were [at the time
   it was written] outstanding, in power, riches, and resources? Where
   then was their slavery? I answer: First, God's threats need not be
   fulfilled immediately; but they are never empty or ineffective; second,
   God's judgments are not always visible to our eyes or recognizable by
   our physical senses. The Canaanites threw off the yoke of slavery which
   was divinely imposed upon them and even grasped an empire for
   themselves. But although they had their time of arrogance, they were
   never in God's sight free.

   In the same way, when the faithful are unjustly oppressed and
   tyrannically harassed by the wicked, their spiritual liberty before God
   is not destroyed. God promised to his servant Abraham dominion over the
   land of Canaan, and condemned the Canaanites to destruction. We must be
   satisfied with this as proof of God's justice.

   One more point. The pope asserts that he utters prophecies. Well, so
   did Caiaphas. I do not wish to appear to deny all his claims; and I
   freely admit that the title [89] with which he adorns himself was
   dictated by the Holy Spirit. May he like Canaan become servant of
   servants.

   And he said, What hast thou done? The voice of thy brother's blood
   crieth unto me from the ground. Gen. 4:10.

   God shows, first, that he knows men's deeds even when no one complains
   or accuses; seconds that human life is too precious to him for him not
   to punish the shedding of blood; third, that he takes the faithful
   under his care not only when they are alive but also after they die.

   Earthly judges for the most part doze unless an accuser appeals to
   them. But even when the wounded are silent, their very injuries cry out
   to God to pronounce the penalty. It is a wonderfully sweet comfort to
   good men who are harassed unjustly to hear that the evils they endure
   silently go before God of their own accord and demand vengeance. Abel
   was silent when his throat was cut (perhaps he was killed some other
   way), but after his death the voice of his blood was more eloquent than
   the plea of any orator. Thus, men may stifle or silence [the cry of the
   innocent]; but they cannot prevent God from judging a cause which the
   world considers buried. This consolation richly nourishes our
   endurance. When we learn that nothing of our right is lost, we bear our
   injuries with moderation and steady minds. The soul's calm silence
   raises an effective cry which fills heaven and earth.

   Nor does the teaching of this verse apply to this life alone. We not
   only know ourselves safe under God's protection amid the innumerable
   dangers with which we are surrounded, but are also lifted up to the
   hope of a better life. It clearly follows that those who live under
   God's protection are safe after they die.

   The people therefore that stood by, and heard it, said that it
   thundered: others said, An angel spake to him. John 12:29.

   It was truly monstrous that the multitude was so stupid as to remain
   unmoved by so open a miracle. Some were so hard of hearing that what
   God so distinctly uttered they took for a confused sound. Others who
   were less dull made little of the majesty of the Voice of God, and said
   it was merely an angel who spoke. But men do the same today. God speaks
   plainly enough in the gospel, and there reveals such power and energy
   of the Spirit as ought to shake the heaven and the earth. But for many
   its doctrine is lifeless as though it were from mortal men; to others
   the Word of God is confused and barbarous, no different from thunder.

   But the question arises, Did that voice sounding from heaven come in
   vain or without benefit to anyone? I answer that what the Evangelist
   says of the whole crowd was true only of a part. There were others
   besides the apostles who had a clearer insight of the matter. The
   Evangelist wanted to point out briefly what is common in this world:
   namely, that most people hear but do not understand when God speaks
   with a clear and loud voice.

  2. PROVIDENCE AND GOD

   He hath blinded their eyes and hardened their heart. John 12:40.

   This passage is from Isaiah (6:9; cp. Matt. 13:14), where the Lord
   warns the prophet at once that his labors of teaching will only end in
   making the people worse. First then he says, "Go and tell these people,
   When you hear, you hear but do not understand." He means, "I send you
   in order that you may speak to the deaf." Then he adds, "Harden the
   people's heart" ; by which he means that he intends his Word to issue
   in the punishment of the wicked; that he will make them totally blind,
   and they will plunge into a deeper darkness. Right as well as
   formidable is the judgment of God when he darkens the mind of men with
   the very light of his Word, so that they are bereft of all sense. By
   means of their only light, he covers them with a gross darkness!

   However, we must note that the Word of God does not blind men by its
   own proper working. Nothing could be more absurd than that there should
   be no difference between truth and lies, or that the bread of life
   should act as deadly poison and medicine make a disease worse. When
   life is turned into death, we must blame men's evil for it. Besides, we
   must observe that God himself sometimes blinds the minds of men by
   depriving them of understanding and judgment; sometimes he does it
   through Satan and false prophets, whose lies make the people mad;
   sometimes he does it by his ministers, as when the doctrine of
   salvation is harmful and even deadly to the hearers. This is why, when
   the prophets fulfill their task of teaching faithfully, they ought to
   commend the fruit of their labors to the Lord. If they do not succeed,
   they should not quit, or lose their temper. Let them be satisfied to
   know that God approves of their labor; that although the savor of their
   doctrine does men no good, and the wicked turn it into a source of
   death to themselves, it is as Paul testifies, good and pleasing before
   God (2 Cor. 2:15).

   Because the carnal mind is in enmity against God; for it is not subject
   to the law of God, neither indeed can be. Rom. 8:7.

   Paul now proceeds to prove what he had said by adding that nothing but
   death can issue from all the effort of the flesh, because it struggles
   in enmity to the will of God. The will of God is the rule of
   righteousness; whatever does not agree with his will is unrighteous;
   and if unrighteous, it is at the same time deadly. When God is set
   against us, it is vain to expect life; for his wrath must directly and
   inevitably be followed by death, which is vengeance wrought by his
   wrath. And now let us remember that in all things the will of man is
   opposed to the will of God. For we differ from God as depravity differs
   from rectitude.

   For. . . to the law of God. This is the explanation of the previous
   sentence. It tells us how it comes about that all the thoughts of the
   flesh strive against the will of God. The will of God is attacked only
   where he reveals it; but it is in the law that God tells us what
   pleases him. Therefore those who would try to find out rightly whether
   they conform with God, must judge all their purposes and concerns by
   the norm of God's law. Even though nothing in this world is active
   except as directed by God's secret providence, it is an intolerable
   blasphemy to pretend that therefore nothing happens except by his
   approval, as some frenzied people cavil in our day. What folly it is,
   to seek the distinction between rectitude and iniquity, which the law
   places before our eyes so openly and distinctly, in the deep labyrinth
   of secret providence! As I have said before, the Lord has his own
   hidden counsel by which he disposes of everything in the world. But
   since it is incomprehensible to us, let us have sense enough to keep
   away from undue curiosity in prying into it. In the meanwhile, it
   remains true and settled that nothing pleases him except righteousness,
   and that we cannot judge our own deeds rightly except by the law of
   God, which testifies without deception to what pleases and what
   displeases him.

   Nor can be. And now look at the faculty of free will, which sophists
   cannot praise highly enough! With these words Paul affirms certainly
   and explicitly what they detest with open mouths: that it is impossible
   for us to bring our powers into subjection so as to obey the law. They
   throw at our faces that the heart is able to bend itself one way or
   another, provided only that it is aided by an impulse of the Spirit;
   that the choice between good and evil is free and in our hand, provided
   the Spirit comes to our help: so that to choose or to refuse is up to
   us. They also invent good impulses by which we set ourselves
   spontaneously to obey the law. Paul, on the contrary, tells us that our
   hard heart is bulging with irrepressible outrage [against God] and will
   not by its own nature bend down to put on the yoke of God. Nor does he
   argue about this or that part of us; but rather, speaking in general,
   he puts together all the impulses which rise up from within us in the
   same bundle. Therefore far be the free will of heathen philosophy from
   the Christian heart! Let everyone know himself as thee servant of sin,
   which he in fact is, that he may become free by the grace which he
   receives from Christ's own hand. To glory in any other freedom is the
   greatest stupidity.

   But evil men and seducers shall wax worse and worse, deceiving, and
   being deceived. 2 Tim. 3:13.

   It is the worst of trials that godless men wax great and strong with
   their sacrilegious audacity, and the blasphemies and errors they
   perpetrate. Paul says elsewhere that Isaac was troubled not by the
   sword of Ishmael but by his taunting (Gal. 4:29). We may gather from
   this verse that the writer did not point to one particular kind of
   persecution, but spoke in general of trials which the children of God
   must endure when they contend for the glory of their Father.

   I spoke, a little before, of how evil men shall grow worse and worse.
   The apostle predicts not only that they will offer obstinate
   resistance, but also that they shall succeed in harming and corrupting
   others. One good-for-nothing fellow can always tear down more than ten
   faithful teachers can build, no matter how hard they try. There is no
   scarcity of the tares sown by Satan and infesting the good earth. No
   sooner are some false prophets put down than others pop up in all
   directions.

   Now, wickedness has this power not because lies are by nature more
   effective than truth, or because the devices of the devil are superior
   to the power of God's Spirit, but because men have a spontaneous
   inclination toward vanity and error, and will embrace much too readily
   whatever suits their fancy. Therefore by a just retribution of God,
   they become blinded and captive slaves to the pleasure of the devil.
   This is the principal reason for the effectiveness of the pestilence of
   ungodly teachings. And considering the ingratitude of men, it is right
   that this should be so. Therefore, godly teachers should take to heart
   the warning to be prepared for constant warfare, not to break down
   because it is long and drawn out, or succumb before the impudence and
   insolence of their adversaries.

   There were present at that season some that told him of the Galileans,
   whose blood Pilate had mingled with their sacrifices. And Jesus
   answering said unto them, Suppose ye that these Galileans were sinners
   above all the Galileans, because they suffered such things? I tell you,
   Nay, but except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish. Luke 13:1-3.

   This passage is extremely helpful to us, because it is almost an inborn
   disease with us to be hard and severe in judging others, while we treat
   our own misdeeds as mere trifles. Thus it happens that not only do we
   deal too sharply with the sins of our brothers, but also, when things
   go wrong with them, we condemn them as infamous and reprobate people.
   Meanwhile, so long as God's hand is not heavy upon us, we sleep safely
   with our sins, as though we enjoyed God's favor and friendship. In this
   way, we are doubly guilty. For, when God chastises someone under our
   very eyes, he does it so as to warn us of his judgments, in order that
   each one of us may learn to examine himself and to weigh the punishment
   he himself deserves. And if he spares us for a time, by his kindness
   and mercy he invites us to repentance. It should be far from us to use
   the time allowed us as an occasion for sloth.

   The point Christ makes is that those who suffer hardship at the hands
   of others are not the worst of men; and his purpose is to condemn our
   depraved judgment which turns us habitually against those who are
   afflicted by some calamity, and to root out that self-indulgence with
   which everybody treats his own self. God exercises his judgments
   freely, in his own way and order, so that some receive their punishment
   immediately, whereas others are allowed for a while to enjoy their ease
   and pleasure in peace. Christ is here teaching us that whatever
   calamities occur in this world, they are testimonies to the wrath of
   God; and from this we learn that unless we avert God's wrath we shall
   be destroyed.

   The occasion which led to this exhortation was the statement of some
   people that Pilate had mixed human blood with the blood of sacrifices.
   They meant to bring contempt upon these sacrifices, because they were
   accompanied by such a chastisement. It is likely that this outrage was
   inflicted upon the Samaritans who had turned aside from the pure
   worship of the law. The Jews, therefore, were quick to applaud
   themselves while they condemned the Samaritans. But our Lord turned the
   matter into something else. Because the Jews hated and condemned the
   whole people of the Samaritans, he asked them if they thought the
   wretched few who were murdered by Pilate were so much more wicked than
   the rest. In other words, he said, "It can be no secret to you that the
   whole land of the Samaritans is full of ungodliness; and yet many who
   are worthy of punishment are still safe and sound." He must indeed be a
   blind and depraved judge who thinks that where there is affliction
   there must be sin. It is not true that the most wicked are dragged for
   punishment first. God chooses to punish a few out of a multitude, so
   that through them he may condemn the rest and fill them with the terror
   of his vengeance.

   After having spoken of the Samaritans, Jesus turns to the Jews
   themselves. He points out that in those days eighteen people had been
   crushed to death by the fall of the tower of Jerusalem. He denies that
   these people were wicked above all others, and argues that their death
   ought to fill everyone with fear; for, if God had made them an example
   of his justice, it was not likely that the rest would be able to escape
   from his hand even though for a while they were being left alone.
   Christ does not discourage believers from attending to God's judgment;
   but he does ask them to do it rightly by beginning with their own sins.
   . . .

   And his disciples asked him saying, Master, who did sin, this man, or
   his parents, that he was born blind? John 9:2.

   First, since Scripture testifies that all the troubles of humanity
   arise from sin, whenever we see anyone in misery it naturally occurs to
   us at once that his distress is a punishment inflicted by the hand of
   God. Thus we err in three ways. First, few judge themselves as severely
   as they do others. If my brother meets adversity, right away I see the
   judgment of God in it. When God chastises me with an even heavier rod,
   I shut my eyes to my sins. But in passing judgment, a man ought to
   begin with himself; he ought not to spare himself more than others. If
   we would be just in this matter, we ought to be quicker to discern evil
   in ourselves than in others. Secondly, excessive rigor is wrong. No
   sooner do we find someone meeting disaster at God's hand than we jump
   to the conclusion that it is because God hates him. We turn his faults
   into crimes and almost despair of his salvation. On the contrary, we so
   belittle sins in our own case that we hardly see as little faults what
   we ought to confess as gross wickedness. In the third place, we sin by
   freely casting off as damned those whom God is trying with a cross.

   It is true, as we said above, that all misery arises from sin. But it
   is also true that God afflicts his own for various reasons. Now, God
   does not avenge certain crimes in this world, but postpones punishment
   to the next, to deal with them all the more severely; conversely, he
   often deals severely with his faithful people, not because they have
   sinned greatly, but in order to mortify the sin of the flesh. At times
   he overlooks their sins; he tries their obedience and trains them in
   patience. Take the case of Job, who suffered more calamity than other
   men; God was not concerned with his sins. His purpose was rather to
   make a better trial of Job's faith through his various afflictions.
   Therefore, the interpreters who attribute all suffering
   indiscriminately to sin are fools -- as though all were punished
   equally, or as though in afflicting men, God had regard only to each
   man's desert!

   Jesus answered, Are there not twelve hours in the day? If a man walketh
   in the day, he stumbleth not, because he seeth the light of this world.
   John 11:9.

   This verse has been explained in various ways. Some are of the opinion
   that men's minds are changeable, and seize every hour upon a new and
   different purpose; but nothing could be further from what Christ meant.
   This view would hardly be worth mentioning except that it has become a
   common proverb. Let us be content with the right and simple meaning of
   this verse. First, Christ borrows the simile from day and night. When a
   man walks in the dark, it is not strange if he knocks against
   something, or goes astray, or even gets lost. But when the sun shines
   and shows the way, he walks in safety. Now, the calling of God is like
   the light of day, which keeps us from hitting something or going
   astray. Whoever obeys the Word of God and does not go ahead except by
   his command, has a Guide and Director from heaven; and with this
   confidence, he sets on his way with courage and security. Now, as we
   learn from Ps. 91:11, anyone who walks in God's ways has angels for
   protectors and is safe under their guidance, so that his feet do not
   strike a stone. Therefore, Jesus, fortified by this confidence, goes
   ahead boldly into Judea without fear of being stoned. There is no
   danger of going astray when God, acting as our sun, directs our way.

   This verse teaches us that, if a man lives by his own wits, without
   God's calling, he will wander and get lost all his life. Those who
   think they are very wise, and neither inquire of God nor receive his
   Spirit to govern all their actions, are blind and grope in the dark.
   There is only one right way: to hold on single-mindedly to our divine
   calling and to have God always walking ahead of us. This firmly
   established rule of life, which we must follow with perfect confidence,
   leads straight to a successful outcome because God does not rule our
   lives except for our well-being. And it is essential for us to realize
   that, as soon as the faithful move one foot in order to follow God,
   Satan comes forward with a thousand obstacles, and presents them with
   all sorts of perils, all with the one purpose of contriving to obstruct
   our way. Nevertheless, the Lord kindles his light and invites us to go
   ahead; we must walk with courage even though our way may be filled with
   many deaths. This we must do because God never bids us to go ahead
   without at the same time fortifying us with his promise; and the
   promise gives us our firm certainty that if we remain under his
   authority, he will bring us to a good and blessed end. This is our
   chariot; anyone who rides in it is never weary and cast down. Even
   though the obstacles on our way are so great that we could not overcome
   them in our own vehicle, we always find our way out with the wings
   which are given us, until we arrive at our destination; not because
   nothing adverse happens to believers, but because the very evils they
   meet are helps which bring them to salvation.

   Then they sought to take him: but no man laid hands on him, because his
   hour had not yet come. John 7:30.

   They did not lack the will to do him harm, or even the zeal to do it.
   They also had the power. Why then with all this were they helpless, as
   if they were bound hand and foot? The Evangelist answers that it was
   because Christ's hour had not come, by which he means that God's own
   protection guarded him against their fury and violence. And at the same
   time, he faces and removes the offense of the cross; because when we
   hear that Christ was subjected to death not by the will of men but as
   destined for such a sacrifice by the decree of the Father, we are no
   longer disquieted. And from this we may infer a general truth, that as
   we live day by day the hour of our death is in God's hand. It is hard
   to believe [but true] that, although subject to so many accidents,
   exposed to evil in the hands of so many lurking men and beasts, and
   liable to so many diseases, we are nevertheless safe from all peril
   until God is ready to call us. Our part is to struggle against our own
   lack of trust. First, let us hold on to the truth here taught us, then
   next to the goal set before us, and finally to the exhortation which
   follows: Casting all our cares on God, let each one of us fulfill his
   vocation without allowing fear to turn him aside from his duty. And let
   no man go beyond God's purpose for him. For, it is not right that a man
   trust the providence of God apart from God's own will for him.

   But when Phineas, the son of Eleazar, the son of Aaron, the priest, saw
   it, he rose up from among the congregation and took a javelin in his
   hand. Num. 25:7. (The Harmony.)

   Phineas' courage is celebrated because, while others did nothing, he
   was fired with holy zeal and leaped forward to inflict punishment. The
   inaction of the others is tacitly condemned, although their tears merit
   praise. But since their grief almost stupefied them, their virtue was
   not free from fault. Certainly, when the unbridled license of the
   people burst forth like waves from a stormy sea, it is not strange that
   the courage of good men broke down, or lay prostrate and feeble; and
   the more glorious was the zeal of Phineas who did not hesitate to
   oppose so many wicked criminals, raging with their own passions.

   Someone may object that he exceeded the bounds of his vocation because
   he snatched a sword to slay, although he was not armed by God. But the
   answer to this is ready. Vocation is not always restricted to its
   ordinary duties, because God sometimes gives his servants new and
   unusual roles. As priest, Phineas was not charged with punishing crime;
   but he was especially called to do so by God's instigation and he was
   under the command of the Holy Spirit.

   This incident ought not to be taken as an example from which to draw a
   general rule. God is free to appoint his servants to whatever special
   tasks he pleases; and his approval is enough evidence that he himself
   has called. We conclude without question that Phineas was under divine
   direction, because God declared that the deed pleased him. And this is
   repeated in Ps. 106:31. But if anyone in a private capacity begins in
   an excess of zeal to punish a like crime, he cannot plead Phineas'
   example unless he is truly convinced of his own heavenly commission.

   We must not forget Christ's answer when his disciples wished to follow
   the example of Elijah and call down fire on those who had not received
   them: You know not of what spirit you are (Luke 9:55). If our zeal is
   to be approved by God, it must be tempered with spiritual wisdom and
   ruled by God's authority. The Holy Spirit must lead us and dictate to
   us what is right.

   Our Father who art in heaven, hallowed be thy name. Thy kingdom come.
   Matt. 6:9-10.

   When we set out to pray, there are two things we must seek above all:
   first, that we may have access to God, and secondly, that we may rest
   in him with full and solid confidence, knowing his Fatherly love for us
   and his unbounded kindness; that he is ready to hear our prayers; and
   above all that he is spontaneously ready to come to our help. Christ
   calls him Father, and with this title, gives us sufficient ground for
   confidence in him. But because we trust God only in part because of his
   goodness, he next commends to us God's power. When Scripture says that
   God is in heaven, it means that God is sovereign over all things; that
   he holds the world and all that is in it in his hand; that his power
   sustains all and his providence orders all. So, David himself says in
   Ps. 2:4, "He who dwells in the heavens, shall laugh at them" ; and in
   Ps. 115:3, "Our God is in heaven; whatever he wills, he does."

   In other words, when God is said to be in heaven, it is not meant that
   he is inside it; we must remember the words "Heaven of heavens do not
   contain him" (2 Chron. 2:6). This expression sets him apart from all
   creatures, and warns us that no mean and earthy thoughts about him
   should enter our minds, because he is higher than the whole world. So,
   Christ, above all, wanted to establish the disciples' trust in God's
   goodness and power; because unless our prayers are rooted in such
   faith, they do us no good. What stupidity and mad arrogance it would be
   to invoke God as Father, unless we are accepted as his children in the
   Body of Christ! It follows that we pray rightly only when we come to
   God trusting in the Mediator.

   Hallowed be thy name. Now what I have said becomes clearer. In the
   first three petitions we are bid to subordinate our self-regard to the
   glory of God; not because the glory of God has no bearing upon our
   salvation, but because the majesty of God deserves to come before all
   other considerations. It is well for us that God reigns and that all
   honor is his due; for no man is aflame with the desire to glorify God,
   unless, forgetting himself, he elevates his mind to seek God who is
   high and lofty. Moreover, there is a close connection and likeness
   among these three petitions. Where God's name is hallowed, there is his
   Kingdom; and the principal mark of his Kingdom is that his will be
   done. When we consider how cold we are, and how slow to choose the
   greatest goods for which we are here commanded to pray, we see how
   needful and useful it is that these three petitions be thus
   distinguished one from another.

   To hallow the name of God is simply to honor him as is his due, so that
   men shall not think or speak of him without the highest homage. The
   opposite of to hallow is to profane, which happens when men forget his
   majesty, or fail to render him the reverence and honor he deserves as
   God. Now, the glory by which God is hallowed [among men] emanates from
   and depends upon men's common knowledge of his wisdom, goodness,
   righteousness, power, and every other excellency of God. Of course, God
   is never without his holiness; but men do obscure it with their ill
   will and wickedness, and violate and corrupt it with their unholy
   contempt. The sum of this petition, therefore, is that the glory of God
   may shine in the world and be duly celebrated among men. Religion is
   most alive and vigorous when men confess that all God's works are right
   and worthy of praise, full of wisdom and altogether righteous. For, so
   it is that men embrace his Word with the obedience of faith, and
   approve of his pleasure and his works. But the faith by which we yield
   to God's Word is as it were our signature by which we acknowledge that
   God is faithful (John 3:33); whereas, unbelief and contempt of his Word
   is the greatest possible dishonor to God.

   These words spoke Jesus, and lifted up his eyes to heaven. . . . John
   17:1.

   John's present account of how Christ prayed with eyes raised to heaven
   indicates his uncommon zeal and ardor. With this gesture, Christ
   testified that in spirit he was in heaven rather than on earth; that,
   having left the society of men behind, he was in communion with God. He
   looked up to heaven, not because God, who fills heaven and earth, is in
   it, but because it reveals his majesty in a special way. Besides, by
   asking us to raise our eyes to heaven, he exalts the Deity of God above
   all his creatures. For this same reason, it is well to raise our hands
   up while we pray. Human nature being lazy and slow, and the mind being
   drawn downward toward earthly things, men need such goadings, rather
   such chariots, that they may rise to God. Besides, if we would imitate
   Christ, let us beware that there be no more in outward act than in the
   mind. Let the inner disposition move the eyes, hands, tongue, and all
   we have.

   The behavior of the publican who cast his eyes down does not contradict
   [the action of Christ spoken of in] this verse. Even though he was cast
   down with shame over his sins, his humility did not prevent him from
   being confident as he prayed for forgiveness. It was proper of Christ
   to pray in a different way, because he had no reason for shame. David,
   himself, prayed with eyes up, or down, according to the occasion.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [89] The title of the pope, "Pius Episcopus, servus servorum Dei," has
   been used since the time of Gregory the Great, in the sixth century. It
   is the regular heading of papal bulls at the present time.
     __________________________________________________________________

VII Election and Predestination

  THE TEXT

  1. ELECTION

   Malachi -- introduction.

   Next comes the book of Malachi. Many imagine him to have been an angel,
   for we know that an angel is called mala'k in Hebrew. But it is easy to
   see what an absurdity that idea is. At that time, God did not send
   angels to announce his oracles, but used the regular ministry of men.
   And since the i, yod, is added at the end of the name, as is usual in
   proper names, we may conclude that Malachi was the man's name. But I
   readily admit that there may have been a reason for the name which
   today escapes us. I am more ready to agree with others who say that he
   was Ezra and that Malachi is a second name given him because God had
   called him for a splendid and magnificent work.

   But whatever the fact may be, he was certainly one of the prophets and
   we can assume with reason that he was the last. In the end of the book
   he urges the people to stand fast in the pure teaching of the law; and
   this he does because thereafter God was not to continue sending a
   succession of prophets as he had done before. . . . Now I come to his
   words:

   The burden of the word of the Lord to Israel by the hand of Malachi.
   Mal. 1:1.

   Those who explain massa' as simply another word for prophecy are
   mistaken, as I have said elsewhere. Not every prophecy is called a
   burden. Further, whenever the word is used, some impending judgment of
   God follows, and it is clear enough from Jeremiah (23:36) that the word
   was generally detested. Godless people, when they wanted to insult the
   prophets, used to say as a common proverb, "This is a burden," implying
   that you could expect nothing from prophets but threats and terrors;
   that it was better to shut one's ears and to avoid all prophecies as
   omens of evil. Malachi's teaching is properly called a burden, because,
   as I have said and explained more fully elsewhere, it was necessary to
   summon the people to God's judgment court, on account of the infamy
   which was once again rampant and had to be stopped. Therefore he says
   that God's judgment is upon them. . . .

   Hand, as we have seen, means service. It means that this teaching is
   from God, with Malachi as the intermediary. The prophet is bringing
   nothing of his own; he is faithfully reporting as God, the author [of
   the prophecy], has commanded him.

   I loved you, saith the Lord. And you said, How didst thou love us? Was
   not Esau Jacob's brother? saith the Lord. And I loved Jacob, and Esau I
   held in hatred. . . . A son honoreth his father, and a servant his
   master. And if I am a father, where is my honor? And if I am a master,
   where is my fear? saith the Lord of hosts. Mal. 1:2-6. (Calvin's
   wording).

   I am compelled to read all these verses together because otherwise the
   meaning of the passage would not be clear. God is here remonstrating
   with a perverse and ungrateful people who doubly deny him his right
   since they neither love him nor fear him. He rightly claims the name
   and position of both Father and Lord. When the Jews show him no
   reverence, he reproaches them for denying him a father's right; and
   when there is no fear of him, he accuses them again because they do not
   recognize him as Lord, although they cannot elude his authority. But
   before he comes to the accusation, he shows that he is both Lord and
   Father. And above all he shows that he is a father, in that he has
   loved them freely. . . .

   God could have appealed to the Jews on other grounds. Even if he did
   not love them, they were bound to him by his sovereignty. However, here
   God is not speaking of his universal love toward the whole human race.
   He is reproaching the Jews because, having been freely adopted by him
   as a holy and special people, they had forgotten his honor and despised
   him and had paid no heed to his teaching. When, therefore, God says
   that he loved the Jews, we can see that in this way he wants to convict
   them of ingratitude because they have spurned the singular favor by
   which he had honored them alone, rather than to convince them of his
   universal Kingdom to which all men are subject.

   God could have said to them: "I created you and I am your father who
   feeds you. The sun shines daily upon you and the earth bears its
   fruits. In fact I hold you bound to me by the innumerable benefits I
   confer upon you by my kindness." God could have dealt with them in that
   way; but as I have already pointed out, he preferred to bring before
   them the free adoption of Abraham's seed. The disloyalty of the Jews
   was all the more intolerable because they were rejecting an
   incomparable favor. For God had raised them above all nations not
   because of any merit or worth of their own, but because he was pleased
   to do so.

   The prophet begins by saying that God loved the Jews in order to make
   them realize that their scorn for God's teaching was the worst possible
   response to his love. This is the first point.

   Next, it is obvious that he is indirectly reproaching their ingratitude
   when he makes them say, How didst thou love us? With this God implies,
   "If you should say, or rather, should ask, In what way have I loved
   you? my answer is, Truly in that I set aside Esau and chose your father
   Jacob, although they were brothers. . . ." We see, as I mentioned
   above, that the prophet reminds the Jews of the free covenant to leave
   them no excuse for their wickedness in repaying God so badly for his
   special grace toward them.

   He does not accuse them because they were created like the rest of
   mankind, or because God has given them the light of his sun, and
   provided them with food out of the ground. He says that if they have
   been set above other peoples, it is not by their own merit but because
   God had seen fit to choose their father, Jacob. The prophet could have
   named Abraham; but since Jacob and Esau were both descended from
   Abraham, with whom God had made his covenant, God's gracious favor was
   the more conspicuous in Jacob. First, God chose Abraham alone, and put
   the other families of mankind aside. Then, out of this one family whom
   God had adopted, one man was chosen and the other rejected.

   The point is not merely that Esau and Jacob were brothers. We must
   notice other facts which the prophet does not state because everybody
   knew them. . . . All the Jews knew that Esau was the first-born, and
   that it was contrary to nature for Jacob to obtain the first-born's
   right. . . . But Jacob was divinely chosen and his brother, the
   first-born, was rejected.

   If we seek the reason for this, we shall not find it in a difference of
   root or origin. The two men were brothers; and even before they came
   out of their mother's womb, God had already declared by oracle that
   Jacob would be the greater of the two. So we see that the primary
   source of every good we find in the descendants of Abraham was derived
   solely from the free love of God. Indeed Moses says often, Not because
   you excelled other nations, or were more numerous, did God honor you
   with so many kindnesses, but because he loved your fathers (Deut. 7:7).
   The Jews were continually warned not to look for the reason for their
   adoption elsewhere than in God's free favor. He had seen fit to choose
   them; this alone was the source of their security.

   After having briefly recalled the benefits which should have filled the
   Jews with shame, the prophet comes to his main point, which is, as I
   said above, that God declares himself defrauded of his right in two
   ways: the Jews neither revere him as Father nor fear him as Lord. He
   could indeed, by right of creation, call himself both Father and Lord,
   but I have already explained that he refers rather to their adoption
   because God's grace is the more striking when he out of all mankind
   chooses some few to be his own people. . . . Those whom he honors with
   such an election he binds to himself with a most holy chain; and if
   they desert him, there is no excuse whatever for their treachery.

   Since we now understand the prophet's purpose and the aim of the whole
   reproof, it remains to adapt his teaching to our own use. We are not
   descendants of Abraham or of Jacob, according to the flesh; but God has
   given us sure evidence of his adoption, which singles us out from other
   peoples whom we in no way excel. Clearly, then, if we do not respond to
   God's call, we are found no less guilty than the Jews. I am touching on
   this briefly now, to point out that this teaching has no less
   importance for us today than it did for the Jews at that time.

   Although the method of our adoption differs from that which affected
   one seed or one family, it is true of us as it was of them that we are
   raised above others not by our own worth but because God has freely
   chosen us for his people. Since he has so chosen us, we belong to him,
   more especially because he has bought us by the blood of his Son. By
   granting us participation in his inestimable grace through the gospel,
   he has made us both sons and servants. Therefore, unless we honor him
   as Father and fear him as Lord, the same (and no less) ingratitude will
   be found in us as was found in that ancient people.

   Today I dealt with the main points of this passage in a summary way;
   tomorrow I shall speak of election, as the text itself requires. It was
   necessary to discuss first the prophet's purpose, which I have done.
   Next I will treat single topics more fully so far as necessary.

   Prayer

   Grant, Almighty God, who hast not only given us life in common with all
   men in this world, but hast also separated us and illuminated us by the
   Sun of Righteousness, thine only-begotten Son, in order to lead us into
   the inheritance of eternal salvation, grant I beseech thee that since
   we have been rescued from the darkness of death, we may ever attend to
   that heavenly light by which thou guidest and invitest us to thyself.
   May we walk as children of light, and never wander from our holy
   calling, but continually go forward in it, until we shall at length
   reach the goal which thou hast set before us, so that we may put off
   the uncleanness of the flesh and be transformed into that ineffable
   glory of which we have now the image in thine only-begotten Son. Amen.

   Yesterday we explained the purpose of Malachi the prophet. . . . But to
   appreciate the justice of his remonstrance, first, we must consider
   under what obligation we are to God, because he created us as men, in
   his own image and likeness, for he could equally well have created dogs
   and donkeys instead of men. We know that Adam was made of the earth as
   were the other animals, and therefore as to body there was no real
   difference between men and the dumb beasts. God is said to have
   breathed the breath of life into men, but we should not take this as
   the Manichaeans dream about it, as though men receive their souls by
   way of transplantation. (By using this word, they teach that the human
   soul is of the substance of God.) Moses on the contrary means that the
   human soul was created out of nothing. We are born by generation, but
   our origin is clay. Still, there is something special in us, a creation
   from nothing which is the soul. We see, therefore, that we differ from
   the beasts only because God by his gracious favor willed to create us
   men. Therefore, if we do not worship him, he has every right to charge
   us with ingratitude, since we were created in his image for this very
   purpose.

   This passage, however, has to do with the special favor of God in
   taking the seed of Abraham to himself. As the Song of Moses declares,
   All peoples belong to God; and yet he has thrown a rope and separated
   Israel for himself (Deut. 32:9). [90] With the whole earth under his
   dominion, he pleased to choose one family as his own.

   If we look for a reason for this, we shall not find it in men. All men
   alike were created out of the earth, and all had souls created from
   nothing put into their bodies. If this be so, we see that when God
   gives precedence to one race over others, the distinction among them
   must have its source in his gracious favor. . . . The prophet speaks
   here of the third step in election by which God set apart a branch of
   Abraham's descendants. But we must keep in mind the first step, by
   which mankind was bound to God in a special way, because while he could
   have created them donkeys and dogs, he chose to form them after his own
   image. The second step was his choice of the race of Abraham, although
   his power extended over all peoples without exception. . . . In the
   third stage, to which Malachi refers, we must note that, having
   promised to be the God of Abraham and his seed, God distinguished also
   between the sons of Abraham, rejecting some, taking others for his own.
   This is emphasized by Paul in the ninth chapter of Romans. . . .

   Now upon the third step follows a fourth. From the sons of Jacob, God
   chose whom he would, and rejected others. The Scripture is full of
   statements like the words of Moses (Deut. 9:6), "I did not choose you
   from other nations because of your virtue, for I knew that you were a
   rebellious people, stiff-necked and obstinate." Even while God knew the
   perverse spirit of this people, he chose to reveal in them an example
   of his wonderful kindness. Therefore, we must not look for the cause of
   their adoption outside of God.

   But if the election of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob was a free act of God,
   we must conclude that the individuals whom God singles out from the
   whole body are freely chosen. And so I come to the fourth step. . . .
   For when many who are descended from Jacob according to the flesh are
   rejected no less than Esau, it is clear that when God elects individual
   men his choice is governed by his free favor and pure compassion. This
   is the line of argument which the apostle follows in the letter to the
   Romans.

   It seems harsh to many to think that God chooses some and rejects
   others, and does not consider men's worth, that by his own free will he
   chooses whom he pleases and moreover rejects others. But what is this
   scruple except a desire to call God to order and subject him to their
   judgment? We must return to the first step. If it is unreasonable for
   God to choose one of two men and reject the other, how can we defend
   God's justice in creating a donkey and a man -- if it needs defense?
   For as I said the bodies of donkeys and men come from the same clay.
   And all of a donkey's strength and energy he possesses because he was
   so created by the secret life-giving power of God. As for man's soul,
   although it is immortal, it is also a creation from nothing. Now let
   these good critics explain what wrong they think is done to God, and
   how he is slandered by the statement that the salvation of men depends
   on God's will to reject some and choose others. For, if they wish to
   satisfy human judgment, they have the same problem in the universal
   election of men and beasts at their creation.

   As we have said, there is no real difference among men, except in their
   hidden election. Some theologians would make foreknowledge the mother
   of election, and that very foolishly and childishly. They say that some
   men are chosen and others rejected by God, because God, from whom
   nothing is hidden, foresees of what sort each man will be. But I ask,
   Whence comes virtue to one and vice to the other? If they say, "From
   free will," surely creation was before free will. This is one point.
   Besides, we know that all men were created alike in the person of Adam.
   . . . And what does this mean except that the condition of all who come
   from the one root is the same?

   I am not discussing "special gifts." I admit that if our nature had not
   been corrupted and we all had the same assurance of blessedness, we
   would be endowed with a variety of gifts. . . . But since in Adam all
   are sinners, deserving of eternal death, it is obvious that nothing but
   sin will be found in men. Therefore, God's foreknowledge cannot be the
   reason of our election, because when God [looks into the future and]
   surveys all mankind, he will find them all, from the first to the last,
   under the same curse. So we see how foolishly triflers prattle when
   they ascribe to mere naked foreknowledge what must be founded on God's
   good pleasure. . . .

   When Moses prays to God not to break his covenant with Abraham, God
   answers, "I will have compassion on whom I will have compassion." What
   does he mean? He means that the reason for God's keeping some for
   himself and rejecting others is to be sought nowhere but in God
   himself. When he says, "I will have compassion on whom I will have
   compassion," the repetition may seem empty and dull; but it is in
   reality emphatic. . . . The reason for compassion is compassion itself.

   At that time, Jesus answered and said, I thank thee, O Father, Lord of
   heaven and earth, because thou hast hid these things from the wise and
   prudent, and hast revealed them unto babes. Even so, O Father, so it
   seemed good in thy sight. Matt. 11:25-26.

   It is certain that he gave thanks to the Father on their behalf and for
   their sakes, so that they might not be offended because the church
   appears so lowly and mean. We are always looking for splendor, and
   nothing seems more absurd than that the Heavenly Kingdom of the Son of
   God, the glory of which is celebrated with such magnificence by the
   prophets, should consist of the dregs and nobodies of low-class
   peoples. And surely it is an amazing counsel of God that when he had
   the whole earth in his hands he chose his people out of the
   contemptible folk, rather than out of the upper classes who might have
   brought the name of Christ greater credit through their own
   excellencies. But here Christ sets his disciples apart from the proud,
   from the high and mighty, so that they will not dare to despise the
   mean and obscure condition of the church with which he himself is well
   pleased and happy. Besides, in order to suppress more effectively the
   curiosity which is constantly creeping into people's minds, he goes
   beyond the realm of cause and effect, and contemplates the secret
   judgments of God, in order to lead others to wonder at them with him.
   Even though God's judgment shows him certainly to be of a mind quite
   different from our own, our pride is nonetheless insanely blind if we
   cry out against God's judgment while Christ who is our Head bows his
   head to it and adores it. But let us consider further the statement, I
   acknowledge to thee, O Father. With these words, he testifies to his
   acquiescence in the decree of the Father, which accords so ill with the
   mind of man. There is here a hidden contrast between the praise which
   he renders to God and the malicious calumnies, and even the insolent
   barkings, of the world. It is clear that he glorifies the Father,
   because even though he is the Lord of the whole world, he has preferred
   babies and simple folk to those who are wise. Now, in this context, it
   is not without significance that he calls the Father the Lord of heaven
   and earth. In this way he declares that the distinction between the
   wise who act as blind men, and the uncouth and ignorant who embrace the
   mysteries of the gospel, depends on nothing else than the will of God.
   There are many other passages of this kind, where God shows that those
   who attain salvation are the ones whom he himself has chosen freely;
   for he is the Creator and Fashioner of the world, and all nations are
   his own.

   This verse is impressive in two respects. The fact that not all receive
   the gospel is not due to the impotence of God, who could readily make
   all creatures submit to his empire. Secondly, that some arrive at
   faith, while others remain stupefied and obstinate, is due to his free
   election. He draws some to himself and passes others by; and in so
   doing, he himself distinguishes among men, whose situation by nature is
   the same. It is for his own glory that he elects little children rather
   than the wise. The flesh is much too zealous to set itself up. If
   clever and learned men were to have an advantage, then everybody would
   assume that faith is acquired by human skill, or industry, or
   knowledge. There is no other way in which the mercy of God can stand
   out more clearly than in God's way of choosing; for thus it becomes
   evident that men come to God empty-handed. Therefore, it is right that
   the wisdom of men should be overthrown; because in this way it will not
   obscure the glory of God's grace.

   But someone will ask, Whom does Christ call the wise, and whom, little
   children? Experience teaches us clearly that not all those who are
   ignoramuses and uncultivated men receive the light and believe; and not
   all who are prudent or literate are left to their blindness. Therefore,
   they who are here called prudent and wise are those who, inflated with
   the devil's own arrogance, cannot bear to hear Christ speaking to them
   from his own height. And yet, as we are taught by the example of Paul
   whose fierce zeal was overcome by Christ, it is not always the case
   that God reprobates those who have too high an opinion of themselves.
   And when we go down and look at the uncultivated crowd, we find that
   the majority of them are poisonously mean, and left for destruction
   together with those who are great men and noble. . . . Christ is the
   master of the humble, and the first principle of faith is, "Let none be
   wise in his own eyes." But what matters is not the willingness of men
   to become like children. Rather, Christ's discourse enlarges upon the
   grace of the Father, who does not disdain to go down to the weak, and
   to pull the paupers out of their filth. . . .

   Even so, Father. These words remove every excuse for the kind of
   unlawful nosiness which always pleases us. Nothing is more difficult
   for God than to draw out of us an unquestioning acceptance of his will
   as rational and just. He teaches us often that his judgments are a deep
   abyss; and still we are impetuous enough to plunge headlong into its
   depths. And when anything does not suit us, we growl and murmur against
   him; and many break out in open blasphemy. Against all this, God has
   laid down the rule that we accept whatever pleases him as right. Sober
   wisdom is precisely this, that one good pleasure of God is more than a
   thousand reasons. Christ certainly could have brought out many reasons
   for the distinctions God makes among the people. But, satisfied with
   God's good pleasure, he did not search further into God's calling
   children rather than others to salvation; nor did he ask why God wills
   to fill his Kingdom with these sheep and nobodies. It is evident from
   this that people rage against Christ himself when they raise a hue and
   cry upon hearing that by the will of God some are freely chosen and
   others are rejected; they do it because they cannot bear to let God
   have his way.

   Then shall the King say unto them on his right hand, Come, ye blessed
   of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation
   of the world. Matt. 25:34.

   . . . Christ does not invite the believers to possess the Kingdom as
   though they were fit for it by their own merits. He says explicitly
   that it shall be given to the heirs (of God's promise). He has also
   another purpose in saying these words. Since the life of the godly is
   nothing but an exile full of sorrow and misery, so that the earth
   itself can hardly bear them; since they are hard pressed by want, and
   are covered with shame and other afflictions -- the Lord testifies to
   them of a Kingdom all ready for them, so that with fortified and
   buoyant spirit, they may be able to overcome these odds against them.
   For it is no common inducement to patience that men be persuaded with
   certainty that they are not walking in vain. Therefore, if our souls
   are not to be cast down by the pride of the godless in which they now
   exult before our face; if our hope is not to be turned into despair by
   the troubles we undergo -- we must always keep in mind our inheritance
   in heaven, which depends not upon doubtful contingencies, but was
   prepared for us by God before we were born. This I say to each one of
   the elect, for it is he whom Christ calls the blessed of the Father. It
   is no contradiction that here we read from the foundation of the world,
   and elsewhere, before the creation of heaven and earth. Here Christ is
   not fixing the exact time when the eternal inheritance was destined for
   the sons of God. He rather calls us back to the Fatherly care and
   protection of God which embraced us before we were even born; he
   confirms the certainty of our hope by reminding us that all the
   turbulent agitations of this world shall not have the force to make our
   lives sway and come down in ruins.

   What then? Israel hath not obtained that which he seeketh for; but the
   election hath obtained it; and the rest are blinded. Rom. 11:7.

   Since the elect alone by God's grace are drawn away from destruction,
   it follows that those who are not elected, in the nature of the case,
   remain in their blindness. With regard to the rejected, Paul means that
   those who are left aside by God have the principle of their ruin and
   damnation from themselves. The Scriptural proofs which he puts
   together, from not one but several places, when examined in their
   proper context, do not seem to serve his purpose; for in all these
   passages, the scourges of God, such as blindness and hardening, are
   visited upon those who are already wicked. Paul, on the other hand, is
   trying in this place to prove that the blinded are not those who
   deserve it through their wickedness, but those who have been rejected
   of God before the creation of the world.

   Let us untie this knot briefly as follows: the source of wickedness
   which in itself provokes the wrath of God is in the perversity of
   natures which God has left alone. Therefore, it is not without reason
   that, according to Paul, such natures proceed from the eternal
   rejection of God as fruit from the tree or a river from its source. It
   is true that the godless are punished by God justly with blindness
   because they are wicked. But if we look for the source of their ruin,
   we must ultimately come to this, that being cursed by God, all that
   they do, say, or intend, only furthers and increases their curse. Yet,
   the cause of eternal rejection is so hidden that there is nothing left
   for us to do but to be amazed at the incomprehensible mind of God, as
   will appear finally from the conclusion of this passage. It is stupid,
   as soon as an immediate cause is mentioned, to make this an excuse for
   trying to deny the ultimate cause which is hidden from our view; as
   though, because God condemns the corrupt and depraved seed of Adam, and
   then repays individuals with the reward of their crimes, according to
   their deserts, God had not freely ordained, before the Fall of Adam,
   what seemed good to him for the whole human race.

   What shall we say then? That the Gentiles, which followed not after
   righteousness, have attained righteousness, even the righteousness
   which is of faith. Rom. 9:30.

   Nothing seemed more absurd and less congruous [with justice] than that
   the Gentiles, who cared nothing for righteousness and wallowed in the
   debauchery of the flesh, should have been called to partake in
   salvation and obtain righteousness, and that the Jews, on the contrary,
   who gave themselves wholeheartedly to doing the works prescribed by the
   law, should have been deprived of every reward due to the righteous.
   Paul states this amazing paradox boldly so that he may temper its
   bitterness with the reason he gives for it: namely, that the
   righteousness which the Gentiles acquired was by faith, which depends
   not upon human worth but upon the mercy of God. The zeal with which the
   Jews plied the law was preposterous, because they sought to be
   justified by their works; they strove after what no man can attain.
   What is more, they stumbled at Christ, who alone opened the way by
   which we obtain righteousness.

   In the first part of this verse, the apostle intended to exalt the
   marvelous grace of God; he looks for the reason behind the call of the
   Gentiles nowhere except in that God deigned to embrace those who were
   unworthy of his favor. He speaks particularly of that righteousness
   without which there is no salvation. But by saying that this
   righteousness consists in faith, he means that the righteousness of the
   Gentiles is effected by the free act of God which reconciles them to
   him. For, if anyone fancies that their own faith prepared the Gentiles
   for regeneration by the Spirit, he is far from what Paul is talking
   about. It could not have been true that they had attained what they did
   not even seek after, unless God had freely taken hold of them while
   they themselves were lost and wandering, unless God had offered them a
   righteousness which they could neither have pursued nor practiced,
   because they were ignorant of it. Whence it must be noticed that the
   Gentiles were made fit for righteousness by faith, because God had
   anticipated their faith with his grace. And if it is by faith that they
   first aspired after righteousness, it was by faith also that they
   followed it. Thus faith itself was an element in grace.

   Woe unto thee, Chorazin! woe unto thee, Bethsaida! for if thy mighty
   works, which have been done in you, had been done in Tyre and Sidon,
   they would have repented long ago in sackcloth and ashes. Matt. 11:21.

   Since Tyre and Sidon, being nearby, were infamous for their
   godlessness, their pride, debauchery, and other vices, Christ draws
   this comparison between their works and those of the Jews, so as to
   pierce more deeply into the hearts of his countrymen. There was not one
   among the latter who did not blame the people of Tyre and Sidon for
   their wicked contempt of God. Therefore, Christ intensified his curse
   greatly when he said that there was more hope for repentance in those
   godless places than in Judea itself.

   However, to avoid thorny questions about the secret judgments of God,
   let us hold that this discourse of our Lord is intended to apply to the
   common mentality of men. By comparing the people of Bethsaida and their
   neighbors with those of Tyre and Sidon, he is not arguing that God
   foresaw what these or those would do; he is simply stating what the
   latter would have done, so far as one can see from the facts of the
   case. The corrupt ways of their cities and their unbridled profligacies
   could be explained as due to ignorance, because they had not heard the
   voice of God, and no miracles had been performed to bring them to their
   senses. On the other hand, the cities of Galilee which Christ upbraids
   had shown a more than iron obstinacy, which had led the people to
   witness a multitude of miracles without learning anything from them. In
   short, the words of Christ mean nothing except that, in malice and
   incurable contempt of God, Tyre and Sidon were surpassed by Bethsaida
   and Chorazin.

   And yet, we are in no position to bring a case against God, because,
   neglecting some from whom more might have been hoped for, he revealed
   his power among those who were worse and altogether hopeless. God is
   just when he destines for perdition those who are not worthy of his
   mercy. Who is to blame God with injustice, because he withholds his
   Word from some and allows them to perish, whereas he seeks others out
   in various ways and calls them to repentance to make the latter all the
   more inexcusable? Therefore, knowing our weakness, let us learn to
   contemplate this high matter with reverence. We must not tolerate in
   the least the pride and ill-humor of those who cannot bring themselves
   to pay the tribute of praise to God's righteousness, except in so far
   as their mind can grasp it, who spurn with disdain those mysteries
   which they should in justice adore, because the reason for them is not
   obvious.

   For the Scripture saith unto Pharaoh, Even for this same purpose have I
   raised thee up, that I might show my power in thee, and that my name
   might be declared throughout the earth. Rom. 9:17.

   Now he comes to the second part, which is the rejection of the ungodly.
   Since this seems to be quite absurd, the apostle not only tries to make
   it plainer than ever that God is without blame in his willing to reject
   (reprobando), but also shows the excellence of his wisdom and justice.
   Therefore, he makes use of the witness of Ex. 9:16, where the Lord
   asserts that it was he who had stirred up Pharaoh and that his purpose
   in so doing was to give evidence of his invincible arm, which he did
   when he overcame and overthrew Pharaoh, who was obstinate enough to
   make a great show of resisting the power of God. There is no power of
   man which can stand up under the power of God, much less break it down.
   God used Pharaoh as an example.

   Wherefore, there are two things to be considered: first, the
   predestination of Pharaoh to destruction, which must be referred to the
   just but hidden counsel of God; and secondly, its purpose, which was to
   declare the name of God. It is the latter that Paul wants primarily to
   bring out. If God's purpose in hardening Pharaoh's heart was to declare
   his name, it is wicked to construe this work of God as unjust.
   Considering its purpose, it was quite the contrary.

   Since many interpreters pervert this passage by trying to soften it,
   let us notice in the first place that the Hebrew word for stir up means
   appoint. God wanted to show that in spite of Pharaoh's obstinate
   resistance, He would make his people free: not only that He had
   foreseen the Pharaoh's obduracy and was ready with the means of
   restraining it, but that He himself had ordained it, with the purpose
   of establishing a shining evidence of his own power. . . .

   But let no one imagine that the Pharaoh acted by an ordinary and
   indefinite prodding from God. We must keep in mind the particular
   reason and purpose in this matter. This verse means that God not only
   knew what Pharaoh would do, but also destined his deed for the special
   use of declaring God's glory. It follows that it is futile to quarrel
   with him, as though he were bound to give a reason for his ways. In
   fact, he presents himself to us and, anticipating our objection,
   declares that the reprobate appear by his providence, so that by them
   he may glorify his name among the people.

   For who hath known the mind of the Lord? or who hath been his
   counselor? Rom. 11:34.

   Therefore, since we are utterly incapable of exploring the secrets of
   God with our own faculties, we are admitted to a certain and clear
   knowledge of them by the grace of the Holy Spirit. And if we are to
   follow his guidance, where he puts us there we ought to stop and there
   as it were put down our foot. And if anyone sets out to know more than
   God has revealed, he shall be overwhelmed by the infinite brightness of
   his inaccessible light. We must be sure to bear in mind the distinction
   I made above, between God's secret counsel and the will of God revealed
   in Scripture. Although the doctrine of Scripture is too high for human
   ingenuity, still believers are not excluded from access to it when they
   follow the guidance of the Spirit with sobriety and reverence. But the
   secret counsel of God is something else. It is so deep and so high that
   no exploration can attain to it.

   For there shall arise false Christs, and false prophets, and shall show
   great signs and wonders; in so much that, if it were possible, they
   shall deceive the very elect. Matt. 24:24.

   This is added to fill the faithful with fear, and so to make them more
   watchful and on their guard. For, when false prophets are given
   unbridled freedom and allowed to flourish, and when they are even given
   power enough to deceive, the careless are readily caught in the net of
   their frauds. Christ therefore calls and arouses his disciples to stay
   at their posts. Besides, he admonishes them not to be troubled when
   they see the strange spectacle of many all around abducted into error.
   As he invites them to be watchful, so that Satan may not come upon them
   in their sleep, he adds ample ground for confidence and peace by
   promising them that by the help and protection of God they shall be
   safe against all the snares of Satan. Therefore, no matter how weak and
   slippery the condition of the godly, here they shall find a firm
   support upon which to stand, for it is not possible that those who have
   the Son of God as their faithful protector should fall away from
   salvation. It is not that they have at their disposal arms enough to
   resist the armaments of Satan, but rather that they are Christ's sheep,
   whom no one shall be able to snatch away from his hands (John 10:28).
   But we are not to forget that the stability of our salvation is not in
   us but in the secret election of God.

  2. PREDESTINATION

   And this is the will of him that sent me. . . . John 6:40.

   Having said that he had a mandate from the Father to watch over our
   salvation, Jesus now sets down the way of salvation, which is obedience
   to the gospel of Christ. He had touched on this earlier; now he
   explains what he had left obscure. Since God wills that his elect
   should be saved by faith, and ratifies and executes his eternal decree
   in this manner, anyone who is not content with Christ, and pries into
   eternal predestination, takes it upon himself to be saved apart from
   God's counsel. Divine election is in itself hidden and secret. The Lord
   reveals it to us in the calling with which he honors us.

   Those who seek their or others' salvation in the labyrinth of
   predestination, while they move out of the way of faith set before
   them, are insane, by such absurd speculation, they even try to do away
   with the power and effect of predestination. For, if God elected us for
   faith, take away faith, and election itself is mutilated. It is in fact
   wicked to break up the continuity and order of God's counsel, with its
   beginning and its end. Moreover, since election carries calling with
   itself and is inseparable from it, and since it is by calling us that
   God makes faith in Christ effective in us, our call should be to us
   sufficient evidence of our salvation as though it were his seal cut
   into us. For the witness of the Spirit is none other than the sealing
   of our adoption. Therefore faith is strong enough proof of God's
   eternal predestination. It is a sacrilege to inquire further, because
   he who refuses simply to accept the testimony of the Holy Spirit,
   offers him insult with injury.

   According as he hath chosen us in him before the foundation of the
   world, that we should be holy and without blame before him in love,
   having predestinated us unto the adoption of children by Jesus Christ
   to himself, according to the good pleasure of his will, to the praise
   of the glory of his grace, wherein he hath made us accepted in the
   beloved. Eph. 1:4-6.

   The ground and first cause of our calling, as well as of all the good
   things we receive from God, the apostle presents as the eternal
   election of God. Therefore, if anyone asks why God has called us to
   share in the gospel, why he honors us with so many blessings every day,
   why he opens heaven itself before us, we must always come back to this
   same principle: that clearly, before the foundation of the world, he
   has elected us. But, from the time of election itself, we gather that
   it is free. For, how could we have possessed worth, or how could there
   have been merit in us, before the world itself was created? It is a
   childish cavil devised by sophistry to say, "We were not chosen because
   we were worthy, but because God foresaw that we would be worthy!" For
   we are all lost in Adam. Unless God himself had by his election
   redeemed us from ruin, there would have been nothing but ruin to
   foresee. . . .

   In the second place, he confirms that our election is free by adding in
   Christ. For if we are chosen in Christ, the reason for our election is
   outside of us; that is, our Heavenly Father has included us in the body
   of Christ, not because he saw that we are worthy of it, but by the
   favor of adoption. For, if as he says we are chosen in Christ, it
   follows that we in ourselves are unworthy of our election.

   That we should be holy. Here he considers the proximate, not the
   ultimate, purpose of election. For it is not absurd that the same thing
   should have two objectives. For instance, the purpose of a building is
   that it be a house. But this is the proximate purpose: the ultimate
   purpose is that it be used as a home. We touch upon this in passing
   because Paul speaks constantly of another purpose, which is the glory
   of God. There is no contradiction here. Our sanctification is
   subordinate to the highest end of election, that is, the glory of God.
   Moreover, this leads us to conclude that sanctity, innocence, and every
   virtue among men, is the fruit of election. Therefore once again, with
   this phrase [as he has chosen us], Paul expressly sets aside every
   thought of merit. If God foresaw something in us worthy of election,
   Paul would have said the contrary of what we read in this place; which
   is, in effect, that a holy and innocent life comes from the election of
   God. For, how does it happen that some men live a godly life in the
   fear of the Lord, and others prostitute themselves to all manner of
   wickedness? Certainly, if we are to believe Paul, there is no other
   reason for this except that the latter follow their own disposition,
   whereas the others are elected for holiness. Surely, the cause does not
   come after the effect! Therefore, as Paul testifies, election, which is
   the cause of good works, does not depend upon men.

   Besides, this verse means that election does not give men any occasion
   for license. Impious people blaspheme, saying; "Let us live as we
   please. We are safe. For, if we are elect, it is impossible that we
   should perish." But Paul protests that it is vicious to separate the
   holiness of life from the grace of election; because those whom God
   elects, he also calls and justifies. On the other hand, the
   long-standing inference made from this verse, by Catharists,
   Celestines, and Donatists, [91] that we can be perfect in this life, is
   without any weight whatever. Perfection is the goal toward which we
   strive throughout the course of our lives, and do not attain until the
   race is done. Where are the men who abhor the doctrine of
   predestination and run away from it as from a dreadful labyrinth, who
   consider it not only useless but downright harmful? [Let them come
   forward!] On the contrary, no other part of our doctrine is more
   useful, provided we treat it in a judicious and sober way, as does
   Paul, whose use of it invites us to consider the infinite goodness of
   God and moves us to gratitude. This, therefore, is the true fountain
   from which we are to draw the knowledge of the mercy of God. Even if
   men should evade all other arguments, election shuts their mouths, so
   that they neither dare nor can claim anything for themselves. But let
   us remember for what purpose Paul here argues about predestination, so
   that we may not dispute from other points of view, and thus fall into
   dangerous errors. . . .

   Who has predestined us. What follows is a further and greater
   commendation of the grace of God. We have already said why it was that
   Paul impressed so zealously upon the Ephesians the gratuity of their
   adoption, and the eternal election which preceded it. Since there is in
   truth no other place in which the mercy of God is declared with such
   magnificence, we must begin with a close look at this passage. Here the
   apostle presents us with three causes of our salvation, and he soon
   after adds a fourth; the efficient cause is the good pleasure of the
   will of God; the material cause [92] is Christ; the final cause is the
   praise of God's grace. Let us now see what he says of each of these.

   To the first belongs the following complex of ideas: God in himself, by
   the good pleasure of his will, has predestined us for adoption, and
   has, by his grace, received us to his favor. In the word predestine we
   must again notice the sequence. We did not exist when we were
   predestined; hence, our merit also was nonexistent! Therefore, the
   cause of our salvation could not have been from us, but was from God
   alone. Paul, still not satisfied, adds in himself, which in Greek is
   eis auton and means the same as en auto. By this he means that God did
   not look for a cause outside himself, but predestined us because it was
   his will to do it. But this is still clearer from what follows:
   according to the good pleasure of his will. The word will would have
   been enough for Paul's purpose; it is the word he used habitually to
   contrast the will of God with all other causes by which men commonly
   think they can induce God to act. But to avoid all ambiguity, he adds
   good pleasure, which expressly sets aside all notion of merit.
   Therefore, in choosing us, the Lord does not consider what kind of
   people we are, neither is he reconciled to us because of our worth. The
   only ground of our reconciliation is his eternal good pleasure by which
   he predestines us (for holiness). Why then are the sophists not ashamed
   of confusing matters with alien considerations, when Paul forbids with
   such zeal any concern except for God's good pleasure? . . .

   Meanwhile, he presents Christ, whom he calls "the beloved," as the
   material cause of eternal election as well as of the love now revealed
   in him. Thus we are to know that the love of God is poured out upon us
   through Christ; for he is well beloved, so that he may reconcile us to
   God. And immediately Paul adds the highest and ultimate purpose of
   election, which is that we glorify God by praising his wonderful grace
   toward us. Anyone, therefore, who obscures the glory of God, puts
   himself in the position of striving to subvert the eternal purpose of
   God. . . .

   We know that all things work together for good in them that love God,
   to them who are the called according to his purpose. For whom he did
   foreknow, he did also predestinate to be conformed to the image of his
   Son, that he might be the first-born among many brethren. Moreover,
   whom he did predestinate, them he also called; and whom he called, them
   he also justified; and whom he justified, he also glorified. Rom.
   8:28-30.

   Now we know. From the preceding he now concludes that the bitter things
   of this life, far from hindering our salvation, rather help us on our
   way. It is no objection that Paul uses the illative particle (de,
   autem), because it is nothing new for him to use adverbs in a confusing
   way. In any case, with this conclusion, he anticipates an objection.
   The sensibility of the flesh cries out, saying that God does not hear
   our cry and troubles keep forever coming the same old way. This is what
   concerns the apostle. He says that, even though God does not do away
   with the troubles of his people as soon as they occur, he does not
   really forsake them. He has a wonderful way of turning the hardship
   they experience into a means of their salvation. If anyone prefers to
   read this sentence by itself, as a new argument, taking Paul to mean
   that we must not be troubled and bitter about hardships which in fact
   are helps toward our salvation, I do not object. However, there is
   nothing obscure about Paul's meaning. Even though the elect and the
   reprobate are liable without distinction to the same evils, there is a
   great difference between the sufferings of the two; for, by means of
   afflictions, God trains the faithful and oversees their salvation.

   But we must recognize that here Paul is speaking only of adversities.
   What he is saying is that, whatever comes to believers, even if it be
   harm as the world sees it, God intervenes in their behalf; and the
   outcome shows that it was useful for them. Even though it is true, as
   Augustine says, that by the guiding providence of God even the sins of
   believers, instead of harming them, serve rather the purpose of their
   salvation -- this has nothing to do with this passage, which concerns
   rather the cross. . . .

   To them who according to his purpose. This phrase seems to be added as
   a correction, in order to keep one from thinking that the good fruit
   which the faithful gather from their adversities is due to any merit in
   their love for God. For we know that when it comes to salvation, men
   are all too inclined to begin with themselves, and to fancy that they
   have gone ahead of God's grace with preparations of their own. This is
   why Paul teaches that those whom he calls true worshipers of God have
   already been elected by him. Surely this is why the sequence in this
   passage is brought to our attention. We are to know that all things
   which issue in the salvation of the saints depend upon the free
   election of God as their first cause. Certainly, Paul intends to show
   that believers do not love God before they are called by him, as in
   another place he points out that the Galatians were known of God before
   they knew him (Gal. 4:9). Indeed, for Paul it is true that afflictions
   further the salvation of none except those who love God. But equally
   true is the statement of John that we begin to love God only when he
   precedes us with his own unmerited love. . . .

   The word purpose clearly excludes everything that might be imagined as
   devised among men. Thus Paul denies that the causes of our election can
   be sought anywhere except in the hidden good pleasure of God. This is
   even clearer in the first chapter of Ephesians and the first of 2
   Timothy, where the contrast between God's purpose and the righteousness
   of man is expressly and clearly stated. However, no doubt when Paul
   here says explicitly that our salvation is founded upon the election of
   God, he does so in order to go on to the next point, which he adds
   immediately: namely, that our sufferings which conform us to Christ
   have been obviously appointed for us by the same heavenly decree as our
   election, so that our salvation might be connected necessarily with
   carrying the cross.

   For whom he had foreknown. He then shows, by the sequence in election,
   that all the sufferings of the faithful are nothing but the way in
   which they are led to conform to Christ; and he has already testified
   that such conformity is essential to the Christian life. Therefore, we
   are not to be sorrowful, or to suffer with heavy hearts or in
   bitterness, unless we would despise the election of the Lord by which
   we have been foreordained for life, or unless we cannot bear to have in
   us the image of the Son of God which prepares us for his heavenly
   glory. The foreknowledge of God, therefore, which Paul mentions here,
   is not a mere knowing beforehand, as some ignorant people imagine in
   their stupid way. It is rather the act of adoption, by which God has
   always distinguished his children from those who are reprobate. In this
   same sense, Peter says that believers have been elected for the
   sanctification of the Spirit according to the foreknowledge of God.
   Whence, those mentioned above reason foolishly when they infer that God
   has elected those whom he foresaw as worthy of his grace. Peter does
   not flatter the believers, as though each one of them owed his election
   to his own merit. On the contrary, by recalling them to the eternal
   counsel of God, he denies that they are worthy of God's grace. So, Paul
   here repeats with other words what he had said about God's purpose
   elsewhere. It follows that God's knowing the elect rests upon his own
   good pleasure, because he foreknew nothing outside of himself which led
   him to will the adoption of sons. He marked some for election according
   to his own good pleasure.

   The verb proorizein, which some translate as to predestinate, must be
   understood in the context of this passage. Paul means no more and no
   less than that, by God's arrangement, those who are adopted must bear
   the image of Christ, that they must conform to the image of Christ, and
   not merely to Christ. In this way he teaches that in Christ God has put
   before us a living and visible example, who must be imitated by all
   God's children. In short then, free adoption in which our salvation
   consists is inseparable from that other decree which demands that we
   carry the cross [of Christ]; because no one who does not first conform
   to the only-begotten Son of God can inherit the heavenly life. . . .

   And those whom he has predestined (praefinivit), them he has also
   called. He now proceeds step by step to establish with a clearer
   argument the truth that, if we are to be saved, we must conform to the
   humiliation of Christ. He teaches us that our call, and our
   justification, and finally our glory, are bound up with our association
   with the cross and cannot by any means be separated from it.

   To make sure that the reader understands the mind of the apostle
   better, it is well to repeat and remind him of what I have stated
   before: that the word predestinate refers not to election but to that
   decree or purpose of God by which he has ordained that his own bear the
   cross. In teaching that they are now actually called, he brings out
   that God has not kept his purpose concerning them hidden in his own
   hands, but has rather laid it open that they may submit to the rule
   imposed upon them with a calm and good-tempered spirit. For, calling is
   here distinguished from hidden election as coming after it. Now,
   someone may object that a man cannot ascertain for himself what destiny
   God has appointed for him. The apostle answers that God himself has
   testified openly concerning his secret counsel through our call. This
   testimony of God is given truly not only through external preaching,
   but also through the accompanying power of the Spirit. Here we have to
   do with the elect, whom God does not so much compel with an outward
   voice as draw to himself from within.

   Justification may rightly be extended to the uninterrupted continuance
   of God's grace, from our calling to our death. But since, throughout
   the epistle, Paul uses this word for the free imputation of
   righteousness, there is no necessity for turning aside from this
   meaning of it. The real purpose of Paul is to show that we stand to
   gain much more through suffering than by avoidance of it. For what is
   more to be desired than that by reconciliation with God our miseries
   should not any longer signify a curse, or lead us to destruction?

   Therefore, he adds immediately that those who at the present time are
   weighed down by the cross shall be glorified, that they shall lose
   nothing by the bitter trials they now suffer. Although so far our Head
   alone is glorified, we already discern in him somewhat the inheritance
   of life eternal; his glory brings us such assurance of our own coming
   glory that it is right to regard our hope as the equivalent of a
   present possession.

   We may add that Paul, following the Hebrew style, puts his verbs in the
   past tense instead of the present. But certainly there is no doubt that
   he is speaking of a continued action. What he means is: those whom God
   now exercises under the cross, according to his purpose, are at the
   same time called and justified, in the hope of salvation; even while
   they are humiliated, they suffer no loss of glory. Even though their
   present miseries disfigure their glory in the sight of the world, yet
   before God and the angels it shines without diminution.

   Who hath saved us, and called us with a holy calling, not according to
   our works, but according to his own purpose and grace, which was given
   us in Christ Jesus before the world began, but is now made manifest by
   the appearing of our Savior Jesus Christ. . . . 2 Tim. 1:9-10.

   This gift of grace, of which Paul reminds us, is nothing other than the
   predestination by which we are adopted to become sons of God. With
   regard to this matter, I have wanted to bring to the attention of my
   readers that often God is said to give his grace when we perceive its
   effect. But here Paul is speaking of it [grace] as God has had it from
   the beginning. . . .

   But is now made manifest. Notice how properly he ties up the faith we
   have through the gospel with the secret election of God, and assigns to
   each its proper place. Now, God calls us through the gospel because he
   has set himself to the purpose of saving us, not suddenly and without
   forethought, but from the beginning in eternity. And now Christ has
   appeared for our salvation, not because he has just received the power
   to save us, but because before the foundation of the world this grace
   had been bestowed upon him for our sakes; but this we know by faith.
   The apostle is wise to connect the gospel with the most ancient
   promises of God; otherwise it would be treated with contempt as a
   novelty. But someone will say: "Was grace concealed from the fathers
   who lived under the law? For if it is revealed only with the coming of
   Christ, it follows that formerly it was hidden." I reply that Paul is
   speaking of the full revelation of the grace upon which depended also
   the faith of the fathers. Therefore, nothing is detracted from them.
   Hence Abel, Noah, Abraham, Moses, David, and all the godly, obtained
   the same salvation with us, because they put their trust in this
   manifestation [in Christ]. Therefore, when he says that grace appeared
   to us with the revelation of Christ, he does not exclude the fathers
   from communion with that grace, because their faith made them partakers
   with us of this same appearance. For Christ was yesterday as he is
   today (Heb. 13:8). But he did not manifest himself, by his death and
   resurrection, before the time appointed by the Father. The faith of the
   fathers was turned toward this manifestation, as is also ours, as to
   the one common pledge and fulfillment of salvation.

   In the hope of eternal life (or, according to the hope) which God, who
   cannot lie, promised before the times of the ages (ante tempora
   saecularia). Titus 1:2. (Calvin's wording.)

   Which God promised. Because Augustine understood eternity as prior to
   the temporal ages, he troubled himself a great deal about the eternity
   of times, and finally explained eternal times as preceding all
   antiquity.

   Although I do not reject this exposition, when I weigh everything
   properly, I am forced to take a different view of the matter: that
   eternal life was promised to men many ages ago not only for those who
   lived at that time, but for our generation as well. It was not only for
   Abraham that God said: "All the nations shall be blessed in thy seed"
   (Gen. 22:18); it was also for all those who came after. And this is not
   inconsistent with the first chapter of 2 Timothy where, in another
   sense, salvation is said to have been given "before the times of the
   ages" (pro tempera saecularia). Nonetheless the word means the same
   thing in both places. Now, since the Greek word aion means the series
   of times which follow one another from the beginning till the end of
   the world, we understand Paul to say in the letter to Timothy that
   salvation was given or ordained for the elect of God before the times
   began to flow. But in this place we have to do with God's promise. Here
   all ages is intended not to take us beyond the creation of the world,
   but to tell us that many ages have gone by since the premise of our
   salvation.

   If anyone prefers, in short, the times of the ages may be taken to mean
   the ages themselves. Since salvation was given by the eternal election
   of God before it was promised, in the passage in Timothy it is said to
   have been given before all ages; then the word "all" is implicit. But
   here, "the times of the ages" means nothing but that the promise is
   older than the long succession of the ages, because it began forthwith
   at the creation of the world. In the same sense, Paul teaches in Rom.
   1:2 that the gospel which was to be published with the resurrection o
   Christ from the dead, had been promised by the prophets is the
   Scriptures. . . .
     __________________________________________________________________

   [90] Calvin's paraphrase bears little verbal resemblance to anything in
   Deut., ch. 32, although the main point is made in the Song.

   [91] Catharists (Cathari) was a name given to members of various
   heretical sects of the Middle Ages, including the Albigenses and the
   Bogomils. They were dualistic and ascetic and in many ways resembled
   the earlier Manichaeans. Their leaders were known as the Perfect, who
   were supposedly free from all the sins of the flesh and had become the
   dwelling of the Holy Spirit. The Donatists were a schismatic church
   originating in North Africa at the time of the Diocletian persecution.
   They believed that the sacraments valid only when administered by
   clergy who had remained wholly faithful to their trust. Celestines.
   Calvin probably meant not the Benedictine Order founded by Pope
   Celestine V in 1294, but an extreme group of the Spiritual Franciscans,
   who took the name in gratitude for the permission to live as hermits
   given them by the same pope. They were persecuted after his abdication
   and continued under the ban of the Roman church until 1466. All three
   groups assumed the possibility of perfection in this life.

   [92] Aristotle's classification of causes. See note 1, Chapter V.
     __________________________________________________________________

VIII Ethics and the Common Life

  THE TEXT

  1. WORSHIP AND ETHICS

   I beseech you therefore, brethren, by the mercies of God, that ye
   present your bodies a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God,
   which is your reasonable service. Rom. 12:1.

   Paul has so far dealt with the things necessary for the building of the
   Kingdom of God: namely, for our righteousness to call upon God alone;
   to seek our salvation from his mercy alone; and to recognize that the
   sum of all good is found and is offered us daily in Christ alone. He
   now rightly proceeds with the formation of our conduct. If it be true
   that the soul is, as it were, regenerated for a heavenly life through a
   saving knowledge of God and Christ; and if our life itself is formed
   and shaped by the holy exhortations and precepts of God -- it is futile
   to search zealously for the elements of a good life unless it is first
   established that the source of all righteousness among men is in God
   and Christ, that is, in the resurrection of the dead. Here is the
   difference between Christianity and philosophy. However splendidly and
   with whatever great and praiseworthy inventiveness the philosophers
   discourse on the subject of morals, yet their ornate and striking
   precepts are after all splendid superstructures without a foundation;
   for, having omitted the first principles, they present us with a
   mutilated teaching, not unlike a body without a head. And papal
   teaching is not very different; for although the papists say something
   in passing about faith in Christ and the grace of the Holy Spirit, it
   is clear that they are much nearer to the heathen philosophers than to
   Christ and his apostles. As the philosophers, before they set down the
   rules of morality, discuss the ultimate good, and inquire into the
   source of all the virtues, from which they draw and derive all the
   duties of men; so, also, Paul lays down the first principle from which
   flow all the elements of a holy life, that the Lord has redeemed us for
   no other purpose than that we may consecrate ourselves and all our
   members to him. . . .

   That you present your bodies. Therefore, the principal requirement for
   doing good works is for us to understand that we are consecrated to the
   Lord; and from this it follows that we must cease to live to ourselves,
   and devote all the actions of this life to obedience to him. Thus,
   there are two things to consider: first, that we are the Lord's;
   secondly, that we ought for this reason to be holy; for it is an
   indignity to the holiness of God that anything should be offered to him
   unless it first becomes holy. Granted this, it follows that our whole
   life should be an exercise in holiness and that we would not be free
   from sacrilege if we lapsed into uncleanness; for sacrilege is nothing
   else than to profane what is consecrated.

   Throughout this passage, Paul uses his words with great propriety. To
   begin with, he says that we are to offer our bodies as a sacrifice to
   God; this implies that we are not a law to ourselves, but have come
   entirely under the power of God; which can mean nothing else than that
   we must renounce and thus deny ourselves. Then, adding two adjectives,
   he tells us what kind of sacrifice this ought to be. Living signifies
   the nature of our immolation before God; that is, the destruction of
   our former life, by which we shall be quickened to a new life. By holy,
   as we said before, he designates the quality of the sacrifice offered
   to God; for a sacrifice is valid only if it has already been
   sanctified. The third adjective (acceptable) reminds us that our life
   is shaped rightly when by our sacrifice we seek to please God. He
   offers us a rare consolation when he teaches us that, when we devote
   ourselves to innocence and holiness, our labor is pleasing and
   acceptable to God.

   By bodies Paul means not only bone and skin, but our whole being; he
   uses the word bodies, which is a part of a man to signify the whole of
   him, for the members of the body are the means by which a man acts; but
   he demands of us integrity not only of the body, but also of the soul
   and spirit (1 Thess. 5:23). In bidding us to present ourselves, he
   alludes to the Mosaic sacrifices which were presented at the altar, as
   it were in the sight of God. But still, he shows us beautifully that we
   should promptly lay hold of God's commandments and obey them without
   delay.

   So we learn that mortal men err miserably and wander blindly, unless
   they set themselves to worship God. Thus we also know what kind of
   sacrifice Paul recommends to the Christian church. Since we have been
   reconciled to God by the sacrifice of Christ alone, by his grace we all
   have been made priests, that we may dedicate all we have to the glory
   of God. . . .

   Wherewithal shall I come before the Lord?. . . He hath showed thee, O
   man, what is good; and what doth the Lord require of thee, but to do
   justly, and to love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God? Micah
   6:6-8.

   Now the prophet assumes the people's role and asks what it is that he
   ought to do. But he answers the question by citing the law, and so
   deprives them of the excuse of ignorance. This he does in the hope that
   they may be induced to confess their guilt.

   He hath shown thee what is good. He refutes the hypocrisy with which
   Jews deceived themselves. It is as if he had said: ". . . When you go
   to God with your prayers, you pretend a great zeal for piety. But your
   religion is nothing but an impudent lie. You do not sin out of
   ignorance or error, but out of sheer mockery of God. Why? For the law
   teaches you clearly enough what God demands of you. Does it not tell
   you well enough the nature of true communion with God? But you close
   your eyes to the teaching of the law, and pretend that you are ignorant
   of it. But all this is childish. For God has already told you what is
   good: to do justly, to love mankind and to walk humbly with your God.
   . . ."

   Now let us consider the prophet's counsel. When he begins, With what
   shall I come before God? we are to understand that God has come down as
   if to meet men in a court of law. When men go to law with one another,
   there is no good cause which the other side cannot obscure with
   caviling and technicalities. But the prophet shows that when God
   himself brings them to trial, their evasions only make them ludicrous.
   This is one point. For another, the prophet shows how deeply hypocrisy
   is rooted in the hearts of all men, and how they always paint
   themselves with false colors, and want to do it even before God. Why is
   it that men are determined not to present themselves [honestly] to God
   or to walk uprightly? Why are they always looking for a deception? Why?
   Not because they doubt what is right and are deceived without knowing
   it, but because they connive and deliberately look for a subterfuge for
   their errors. Of course men readily fall into errors when they have no
   taste for what they are taught and refuse to bring God a true integrity
   of heart. Hence, it is clear that the whole world is without excuse in
   its superstition. . . . So it is that there is no pretext or escape for
   anyone who tries to please God with ceremonies and other impertinences.
   . . .

   In our own day we know well enough, and if our eyes are open, common
   experience shows us clearly, that the wicked who have no real and
   sincere relation to God, exhibit great anxiety and pretend to be wholly
   intent upon worshiping God correctly. But they run off in all
   directions and seek innumerable bypaths, to avoid being forced to
   present themselves before God. Now we see how such pretense can be
   exposed; God has already shown in his law what he approves and what he
   demands of men.

   The teaching of the law should be to men like a torch, directing their
   steps. . . . If anyone asks questions about the road when he already
   knows it, he really wants to stay where he is and be spared the trouble
   of moving his feet. God had shown the way by which the Jews were to
   come to repentance and faith. Their duty was to walk. And they
   irreverently mocked God when they assumed that his judgment was
   satisfied if they performed the external ceremonies.

   Now when the prophet says do justly, seek mercy (or kindness) and walk
   humbly before God, it is clear enough that the first two points refer
   to the second table of the law. . . . Nor is it strange that he begins
   with the duties of love of neighbor. For although the worship of God
   has precedence and ought rightly to come first, yet justice which is
   practiced among men is the true evidence of devotion to God. The
   prophet therefore names here justice and compassion, not because God
   omits the first essential of religion, his worship, but because he is
   here defining true religion by its manifestations. Hypocrites connect
   all holiness with external ceremonies. God requires something very
   different; for his worship is spiritual. And because hypocrites can
   pretend great zeal and great concern in external prayer to God, the
   prophets examine the life of men in a different fashion. They ask
   whether men deal with others justly and kindly, whether they are
   innocent of all deceit and violence, whether they practice justice and
   compassion. Our prophet follows this rule when he says the law requires
   men to practice justice with one another, and then to busy themselves
   in acts of mercy. Afterwards he adds what is really the prior demand,
   walk humbly with God.

   There is no doubt that the name of God is more precious than the whole
   world, and therefore the worship of him ought to be counted of more
   value than all the duties by which we exercise our love for our fellow
   men. But the prophet, as I said, was not scrupulous about keeping this
   order and preferred to show by what actions men can prove that they
   really fear God and keep his law.

   Then he speaks of the worship of God; and it is worth noting that he
   says, to walk with God, men must be humble. Here he condemns all pride,
   all confidence in the flesh. For whoever claims anything at all for
   himself walks with God, turning his back to Him. The true way to walk
   with God is to surrender ourselves wholly, making ourselves as nothing.
   The beginning of worshiping God and glorifying him is to think humbly
   and modestly of ourselves.

   For none of us liveth to himself, and no man dieth to himself. For
   whether we live, we live unto the Lord; and whether we die, we die unto
   the Lord: whether we live, therefore, or die, we are the Lord's. For to
   this end Christ both died, and rose, and revived, that he might be Lord
   both of the dead and living. Rom. 14:7-9.

   He now confirms the previous verse by arguing from the whole to the
   parts; since our whole life must be devoted to the glory of God, it is
   no surprise that our particular acts throughout our life should be done
   before him. So then, a Christian's life is ordered rightly only when he
   keeps his eyes upon the will of God. Since you should relate everything
   you do to his will, it is wrong to undertake anything at all which you
   know will displease him, or anything which you are not convinced will
   please him.

   To live to the Lord, here, does not mean, as it does in chapter 6,
   verse 8, to come to life by the working of the Spirit. It means rather
   to be ready for his will and the nod of his head, and to place all
   things at the disposal of his glory. We are not only to live but also
   to die in the Lord; that is, we are to die as well as live by his will;
   and for this he gives the best of reasons: whether we live or we die,
   we are his; from which it follows that in life and in death we are
   under his authority. This teaching is open to a wide application; for
   in this way God asserts his power over life and death, so that everyone
   may accept his condition as under his yoke; for it is only just that
   God should assign to every man his own place, and how he is to spend
   his life. In this way, we are not only forbidden to undertake anything
   without God's authority, but we are also enjoined to endurance under
   all trouble and privation. When our flesh shrinks before adversity, let
   us keep in mind that if a man, who is neither free nor a law to
   himself, refuses to depend upon the good pleasure of his Lord, he
   subverts justice and right order alike. So then, this is the rule for
   living and dying which has been given us: when God prolongs for us a
   life which is continually full of bitterness and exhaustion, we must
   not yearn to get away from it before our time; on the other hand, if he
   calls us away suddenly in the flower of our youth, we should always be
   ready to go.

   For to this end Christ died. This confirms the above argument. It
   proves that we ought to live and die to the Lord, by adding that
   whether we live or we die, we are in Christ's power. He now shows how
   rightly Christ asserts his power over us, since he acquired it at a
   great price; for, by his death for our salvation, he obtained a power
   which he exercises beyond our death; by his death and resurrection, he
   is worthy that we should, in our dying as well as in our living, serve
   the glory of his name. Rose and lived again, furthermore, means that by
   the resurrection he partakes of a new mode of life, and that since this
   life of his, which he now has, is unchangeable, his dominion over us is
   to be eternal.

   He who loveth his life shall lose it; and he that hated his life in
   this world shall keep it unto life eternal. John 12:25.

   He that loveth his life. Christ adds exhortation to teaching. If it is
   by death that we bear fruit, when God mortifies us we should bear it
   with patience. Since he opposes the love of life to the hatred of it,
   we should understand what it is to love and hate life. Anyone who
   desires the present life so much that he will not let go of it except
   by force is said to love life. Anyone who despises life so much as to
   be willing with courage to go to his death is said to hate life. Life
   should not be hated as such, because it is regarded rightly as among
   God's chief blessings. Still, believers should be willing to lay it
   down when it keeps them from Christ, just as a man who is in a hurry to
   go somewhere will throw a troublesome and unwieldy burden off his
   shoulder. In short, it is not in itself wrong to love this life,
   provided we walk its course with our eyes upon our ultimate end. We
   love life rightly when we remain in it according to God's intention for
   us, and are ready to leave it according to his will: in a word, when as
   it were we carry it in our hands and offer it to God as a sacrifice.
   Anyone who is unduly attached to this world loses his life; that is, he
   hurls it to everlasting ruin. . . .

   Whoever is attached to this world deprives himself of heavenly life, to
   which we cannot be heirs unless we live as strangers and sojourners in
   this world. Hence it is that anyone who is too anxious for his security
   in this world is an alien to the Kingdom of God, or the true life.

   He that hateth his life. I have already pointed out that this is said
   relatively; we ought to spurn life, in so far as it keeps us from
   living to God. If meditation on the heavenly life came first in our
   hearts, the world would not be able to keep us back. . . . Anyone who
   does not turn his eyes to heaven has not learned how to take care of
   this life.

   And be not conformed to this world; but be ye transformed by the
   renewing of your mind, that ye may prove what is that good, and
   acceptable, and perfect will of God. Rom. 12:2.

   World has many meanings; here it refers to men's attitudes and moral
   behavior. Paul forbids us, with good reason, to conform to them. Since
   the whole world lies in wickedness, if we would put on Christ, we must
   put off everything that is of man [or the world]; and to remove all
   doubt, he asks us on the contrary to be transformed into a newness of
   mind. We find such contrasts often in Scripture; there is no room left
   for doubt on this point.

   Now, consider seriously what kind of newness it is that is required of
   us. We are not to be renewed merely in our flesh, or, as the Doctors of
   the Sorbonne [93] interpret "flesh," in the lower part of the soul, but
   rather in our minds, which is the best part of us, and according to the
   philosophers, the ruling element in us; for they call reason
   hegemonikon and fancy it as a queen of wisdom. But Paul shames it off
   its godly throne, and bidding us to put on a new mind, reduces it to
   nothing. However much we flatter ourselves, the word of Christ is still
   true, that every man who would enter the Kingdom of God must be born
   again; for, in mind and heart, we are altogether alienated from the
   righteousness of God.

   That ye may prove what is the will. Here we have the purpose for which
   we are to put on a new mind; we are to say good-bye to all our own
   counsels and considerations, and to those of all men, so that we may
   attend only to the will of God, who alone possesses true understanding
   and wisdom. But if we can prove what is the will of God only by the
   renewing of our mind, we can see how far gone we are in our enmity to
   God.

   The additional adjectives in this verse are meant to commend the will
   of God to us, and to turn us to it with greater eagerness. If our
   perversity is to be kept within bounds, it is necessary to realize that
   righteousness and perfection which truly deserve praise belong to the
   will of God alone. The world invents its own good works and persuades
   itself that they are good. But Paul declares that good and right
   according to the world are to be judged by the commandments of God. The
   world praises and finds pleasure in its own devices; Paul on the other
   hand affirms that nothing is pleasing to God except what he himself has
   commanded. In seeking perfection, the world backslides from the Word of
   God and goes after new inventions; Paul fixes perfection in the will of
   God, and shows that anyone who goes beyond it imagines falsehood and
   falls into delusion.

   But he that glorieth, let him glory in the Lord. 2 Cor. 10:17.

   This statement is made to avoid the impression that Paul's glorying was
   an empty boast. So, he brings himself and others before the judgment of
   God, and says that only those of whom God approves have the right to
   glory. Besides to glory in the Lord does not mean the same thing as it
   does in the former epistle (1 Cor. 1:31) and in Jer. 9:24. In these
   latter passages, it means to know God as the Author of all good, and to
   ascribe every good to his grace, so that men will not exalt themselves,
   but glorify God alone. Here, on the other hand, it means to let God
   alone be the judge in our glorying, and to consider all other judgment
   as worthless. Some people rely upon human opinion and weigh themselves
   in the balance of popular judgment; others are deceived by their own
   arrogance. Paul commands us to seek only the glory which comes from
   pleasing the Lord, by whose judgment we all stand or fall.

   Even the pagans say that true glory consists in an upright conscience.
   Now, this is true, but it is not the whole truth. Since all men are
   blinded by too much self-love, we are not to be satisfied with our own
   judgment of our deeds. We must keep in mind what Paul says elsewhere:
   that even though he is not aware of anything [wrong] in him, he is not
   therefore justified (1 Cor. 4:4). What then? Let us remember that
   judgment is reserved to God, who [alone] declares it concerning us;
   therefore, we are in no position to plead our own cause. This is
   confirmed by what follows. For, it is not the man who commends himself
   that is approved. It is easy for men to be deceived by a false
   conviction; and it happens every day. Therefore, putting all else
   aside, let us aspire to be approved by God: let us be satisfied by his
   approval alone, which should mean more to us than the plaudits of the
   whole world. Someone (Cicero [94] ) has said that one good word from
   Plato was equal to a thousand. But we are not concerned with the
   judgment of men, as to who is worth more than another; we have to do
   with the judgment of God, whose it is to turn all human pronouncements
   upside down.

   Now Peter sat without in the palace; and a damsel came unto him saying,
   Thou also wast with Jesus of Galilee. But he denied before them all.
   . . . And again he denied with an oath, I do not know the man. . . .
   Then he began to curse and to swear, saying, I know not the man. And
   immediately the cock crew. And Peter remembered the word of Jesus.
   . . . And he went out, and wept bitterly. Matt. 26:69-75.

   This story of Peter's fall is a clear image of our own weakness, and
   his repentance is given us as an unforgettable example of the goodness
   and mercy of God. This one man's story contains a teaching which is
   extremely useful for the whole church. It instructs those who stand
   faithful to watch and fear that they may not fall; and it lifts up
   those who have fallen with the hope of forgiveness.

   In the first place, let us notice that Peter showed poor judgment in
   entering the high priest's court. It was, of course, an act of
   devotion; it was his duty to follow the Master. But since he had
   already been warned of his coming defection, he should rather have
   hidden himself in a corner, so as to avoid an occasion for sin. So, it
   happens often to believers that, while seeming to do something
   virtuous, they throw themselves in the way of temptation. Therefore, we
   ought to pray to the Lord that he hold us back with the rein of his
   Spirit, so that we may not charge ahead on our own, and be punished
   right off. Besides, we should pray that, when we propose to do
   something, we may not fail before we have started, or at a later time;
   that he may supply us from heaven with the fortitude to finish what we
   have begun. The knowledge of our own weakness ought not so to unnerve
   us that we will not go when God calls us. Still, it ought to restrain
   our rashness, and prevent us from attempting what is beyond our
   calling. Also, it ought to move us to pray that God, who has led us to
   begin well, may give us the grace to persevere.

   A damsel came unto him. We see here that it takes less than a great
   struggle, or a big army and many guns, to overpower a man. Any man who
   is not upheld by the hand of God is soon knocked down by a slight wind
   or the uproar made by a falling leaf. Peter certainly had as much
   courage as the rest of us. He had already given evidence of an
   uncommonly high spirit, even though combined with a preposterous
   audacity. Still, he denied the Master; not because he was being dragged
   before the tribunal of the high priest, or because his enemies were
   upon him to kill him with violent hands, but because he was terrified
   by the voice of a woman. But he had a little while before fancied
   himself a soldier fighting to the death! Let us remember therefore that
   our strength, far from being equal to standing up under powerful
   attacks, fails in the mere shadow of a battle. But in this way, God
   works the just reward of our own unfaithfulness; he disarms us and
   strips us of all power. Thus it is that, when we set aside the fear of
   God, a mere nothing fills us with trepidation. If Peter had had a
   living and solid fear of God, he would have been an invincible
   fortress. As it was, being naked and unarmed, he was frightened while
   he was still a long way from peril.

   He denied before them all. Peter's crime is all the greater because he
   did not shrink from denying his Master before a whole crowd of
   witnesses. The Spirit states this fact purposely, so that, when faced
   with a crowd of people, we may hold on to the confession of our faith.
   For, if we deny Christ in the presence of the weak, and they are struck
   by our example, and give way, we become destroyers of human souls, so
   far as it lies within our power. When we cheat Christ of the witness we
   owe him in the presence of the godless who have contempt for God, and
   are enemies of the gospel, we expose his sacred name to ridicule by
   everybody. Finally, as bold and free confession builds up all the
   believers, and puts the unbelievers to shame, so equally public
   defection in the church brings with it ruination of faith and disgrace
   upon sound doctrine.

   It is worth noting that Peter, when he was unable to slip out with a
   simple denial, doubled his crime by adding an oath; and a little later,
   under harder pressure, he even stooped to cursing. From this we gather
   that once a sinner falls, he is immediately forced to go from bad to
   worse. Thus, those who begin with a mediocre offense thereafter hurl
   themselves headlong into the most frightful wickedness, which would at
   first have filled them with horror. And this is the just vindication of
   God that, after we deprive ourselves of the aid of the Spirit, he
   permits Satan to exercise his violent dominion over us; and Satan,
   having first subdued and held us in bondage, throws us around, now in
   one direction, now in another. But this happens chiefly when we deny
   our faith; because, when a man through the fear of the cross turns
   aside from confessing the gospel in its purity, and finds that he still
   cannot satisfy his enemies, he goes further and denies openly with an
   oath what he did not have the courage to confess.

   Moreover, it is to be observed that in one moment Peter defaulted three
   times: which shows how unstable we are and how disposed to fall when
   pushed by Satan. Certainly, a mere nothing will make us fall unless God
   holds us up with his outstretched hand. When the energy of the Spirit
   of grace became dead in Peter, he was ready to deny Christ a hundred or
   a thousand times, no matter who came by and questioned him about his
   Lord. But, though he was vile enough to fall three times, the Lord
   spared him; He stopped the tongues of his enemies, so that they did not
   bury him under their attacks. Thus, it is necessary that Satan be
   bridled every day; otherwise, he would overwhelm us with endless
   temptations. For, he never stops attacking us with his numerous
   weapons. If God were not on our side, knowing our weakness, and
   breaking the force of his [Satan's] fury, we would have to battle with
   a whole array of overwhelming temptations. Hence, we ought to celebrate
   the mercy of God in this matter, because he allows our enemy only a
   hundredth of the force he would like to use in his assault upon us.

   Then he began to curse. By this third denial, Peter's unfaithfulness
   towards the Master reached the limit. Not satisfied with an oath, he
   went on to curse, consigning his body and soul to destruction. He calls
   on God himself to curse him, if he knows Christ; which is as much as
   saying, "May I perish to hell if I have anything to do with the
   salvation of God." Therefore, we ought to admire the goodness of Christ
   all the more, because he raised his disciple up from such a deadly ruin
   and healed him. Besides, this passage shows us that when a man falls
   through the weakness of the flesh, and denies knowing the truth, he
   does not necessarily blaspheme against the Spirit. Of course, Peter had
   heard from the mouth of the Lord himself what a treachery it is to deny
   him before men, and what horrible judgment before God and the angels
   awaited those who in cowardly fear of the cross abandon the confession
   of faith. Moreover, it is not for nothing that a little while before
   Peter himself had preferred death as well as torment to denial of
   Christ. Now, knowing all this and in spite of previous warning, he
   rushes headlong to deny his Lord! And still, and after all this, he is
   forgiven. It follows that he sinned not by any incurable malice but
   through weakness. He would have been more than willing to pay Christ
   the debt of godly duty, had not fear put out even the sparks of right
   feeling.

   And Peter remembered. Luke is our witness that when the voice [of the
   cock] had sounded, Christ looked at Peter. Mark says that before this
   Peter paid no attention to the crowing of the cock. Therefore, he
   needed the look of Christ to bring him to his senses. Every one of us
   has the same experience. Which one of us does not ignore calmly with
   heavy ears, not merely the many and different songs of the birds who
   call us to glorify God, but also God's own voice which sounds clearly
   and distinctly in the law and the gospel? And such beastly stupidity
   takes hold of our minds, not only for a day but at all times, unless
   Christ bless us with his look, which alone converts the heart of man.
   It is important to note, however, that it was no ordinary look that
   accomplished this; for Christ had before looked also at Judas, without
   making him any the better. When Christ looked at Peter, he added the
   secret power of the Spirit to his eyes, so that, by the rays of his
   grace, his look penetrated into Peter's very heart. From this let us
   know that when a man falls he will not even begin to repent, unless the
   Lord look at him.

  2. FREEDOM, LOVE, EQUALITY

   Stand fast, therefore, in the liberty wherewith Christ hath made us
   free, and be not entangled again with the yoke of bondage. Gal. 5:1.

   Here Paul is concerned with freedom from the ceremonies of the law,
   which the false apostles prescribed as necessary. But let readers
   remember that such liberty is but a part of what Christ has acquired
   for us. How little it would have been had he freed us only from the
   ceremonies -- but a trickle from the fountain! Christ was made a curse:
   to save us from the curse of the law (Gal. 3:13); to break the power of
   the law, in so far as under it we were subject to the judgment of God
   and to the penalty of eternal death; finally, to snatch us from the
   tyranny of sin, Satan, and death. Thus, when Paul speaks of the
   ceremonies, he includes under it the law as a whole. But we shall speak
   of this more fully under the epistle to the Colossians.

   Furthermore, upon the cross, Christ obtained our liberty; and, through
   the gospel, he gives us its fruit for a possession. Paul therefore does
   well to warn the Galatians not to be entangled with the yoke of
   bondage: that is, not to let a trap be laid for their consciences. For,
   when men put an unjust burden on our shoulders, we might be able to
   bear it; but when they try to enslave our conscience, we ought to
   resist strongly and to the death. If we let men bind our consciences,
   we shall be deprived of a priceless good; what is more, we shall have
   insulted Christ who is the author of our liberty. But what does again
   mean, since the Galatians never did live under the law? It means simply
   that they are not to act as though they had not been redeemed by the
   grace of Christ. Even though the law was given to the Jews and not to
   the Gentiles, apart from Christ both alike were in bondage, and not
   free.

   For, brethren, ye have been called unto liberty; only use not liberty
   for an occasion to the flesh, but by love serve one another. For the
   law is fulfilled in one word, even in this: Thou shalt love thy
   neighbor as thyself. Gal. 5:13-14.

   Now Paul warns them against the wrong use of their liberty. In writing
   on the epistle to the Corinthians, we pointed out that having liberty
   is one thing, practicing it quite another; liberty belongs to the
   conscience, and has to do with God; the practice of liberty is an
   outward matter and concerns not only God but also our fellow men. After
   having exhorted the Galatians not to let anyone touch their liberty, he
   now asks them to exercise it properly. He prescribes a rule for its
   legitimate use, so that they may not turn it into a pretext of, or an
   occasion for, license. Liberty is not given to the flesh, which ought
   rather to be held captive under the yoke; it is a spiritual good which
   godly minds alone are able to exercise.

   But by love. He now explains that the way to temper liberty, so that it
   will not be dissipated through erratic and licentious abuse, is to
   regulate it by love. But let us always keep in mind that the question
   is not how we have liberty before God, but how we are to use our
   liberty among men. A conscience which has integrity will not submit to
   any kind of servitude; but there is no danger in acting as servants
   outwardly, or in not exercising our liberty. In short, if by love we
   serve one another, we shall always be disposed to build up; so we shall
   not give ourselves up to loose living, but shall rather by God's grace
   use our liberty in his honor and for the good of our neighbors.

   For all the law. There is here an implied contrast between the
   exhortation of Paul and the teaching of the false apostles. Since the
   latter insisted solely upon ceremonies, Paul drives home in passing the
   real duties and practices of Christians. The present commendation of
   love is intended to make the Galatians understand that it is the chief
   part of Christian perfection. But we must now ask why all the precepts
   of the law are included under love; for the law consists of two tables,
   the first of which enjoins the worship of God and the duties of piety,
   while only the second has to do with love. It would seem absurd to make
   a part of the law into the whole of it. Some try to escape this
   difficulty by saying that the first table also requires nothing but
   that we love God with all our hearts. But Paul is obviously speaking of
   love for our neighbors. We must therefore look for a better solution of
   our problem.

   I recognize that piety toward God comes before love of our brothers;
   therefore to observe the first table is more precious before God than
   to observe the second. But since God is invisible our piety cannot be
   seen by our fellow men. It is true that religious ceremonials were
   established to give evidence of piety; but men's observance of them was
   no proof of their godliness; for it often happens that nobody is more
   diligent and zealous in going through the ceremonies than the
   hypocrites. God, therefore, wanted to test our love for him by
   enjoining us to love one another as brothers. For this reason love is
   called the perfection of the law (not only here, but also in Rom.
   13:8): not because it is better than the worship of God, but because it
   is the convincing evidence of it. I have said that we cannot see God;
   he therefore presents himself to us in our brothers, and in their
   persons demands from us what we owe him. So then, the love of the
   brother grows from nothing but the fear and love of God; it is not
   therefore surprising that our love for our brother, being the sign of
   the love of God, even though it is a part of the law, stands for the
   whole of it, and includes the worship of God. It is certainly wrong to
   separate the love of God from the love of man.

   Thou shalt love thy neighbor. Anyone who loves another will give him
   his due; he will not hurt or injure him; he will do what is beneficial
   to all so far as he can. What else does the second table mean? This is
   what Paul is talking about in Rom. 13:10. Besides, the word neighbor
   stands for all flesh and blood; for, as Isaiah says, we are bound
   together by a common nature: Thou shalt not turn away from thine own
   flesh (Isa. 58:7). Above all, the image of God ought to be the bond of
   a holy union among us. Therefore, here there can be no question of
   friend or enemy: for, no evil in man can destroy his nature.

   The phrase as thyself means as we are moved by the feelings of the
   flesh to love ourselves: so it is that God enjoins us to love our
   neighbor. But the Word of God is perverted and not interpreted when men
   conclude (as do teachers at the Sorbonne) that the love of ourselves
   has priority over the love of the neighbor, because it is the norm for
   the latter. Such people are asses, and have not even a grain of love:
   for if our own love were the norm for the love of others, then it would
   be right and holy, and well approved by God. But the truth is that we
   never love our neighbor with sincerity and according to the will of our
   Lord, until we turn our own self-love into the right kind of love. Our
   love of ourselves and the love of our neighbor are contrary and
   conflicting dispositions; our self-love produces a neglect of and
   contempt for others; it produces cruelty, and is a fountain of avarice,
   robbery, fraud, and every other kind of pestilence; it drives us to
   impatience, and arms us with a passion for revenge. Therefore, our Lord
   demands that it be converted to [true] love.

   Consider, O Lord, how I have loved thy precepts. Ps. 119:159.

   . . . When the saints declare their devotion to God, they do not urge
   upon him their own shining merits; they act by the principle that God,
   who knows his true worshipers from the profane and wicked, will look
   with favor upon them because they seek after him with sincerity. To
   this it must be added that a sincere love of the law of God is a sure
   sign of our adoption because it is a work of the Spirit. . . .

   Here we are also taught that true keeping of the law grows out of love
   which is offered freely. For God seeks willing sacrifices, and as Moses
   said, the first principle of right living is to love him. . . . Hence
   it must not be forgotten that nothing inclines our hearts to love God
   except his unmerited goodness and his Fatherly love toward us.

   Great peace have they which love thy law; and nothing shall offend
   them. Ps. 119:165.

   This peace is rightly judged to be the first foundation stone of a
   happy life. We have this peace when we act with a tranquil spirit, when
   we receive God's favor and our hearts are illumined by his Fatherly
   goodness. Rightly also does the prophet teach that we receive this
   peace from love of the law, for anyone who depends upon anything else
   will tremble every time he feels the least breath of air.

   The stumbling block in the next clause means all the perturbations of
   the mind by which men labor in misery and are consumed, when they do
   not rest upon the Word of God but are carried along by their own lust
   or by the will of men. . . . But from the word love we gather that this
   peace is not acquired by slavish observance of the law, but is obtained
   by faith; for the law is neither sweet nor alluring to us unless it
   reveals God to us as Father and quiets our mind with the assurance of
   eternal well-being.

   Thou shalt not steal. Ex. 20:15.

   Thou shalt not steal. Deut. 5:16. [95]

   Since the goal of the law is love, the meaning of love must be looked
   for in the law. This is the rule of love: every man must be secure in
   his own right, and no man must do to another what he does not wish done
   to himself.

   Hence it follows that men steal not only when they secretly take the
   property of others, but also when they make money by injuring others,
   accumulate wealth in objectionable ways or are more concerned with
   their own advantage than with justice. Consequently all ways of wrongly
   appropriating the property of others are included under theft; for
   there is no difference between robbery by force and by fraud.

   We know how men hide their evil deeds under all kinds of wrappings; and
   how by dressing them up in false colors they even win praise for them.
   Slyness and hateful cunning are called prudence. The man who cleverly
   tricks others, who entraps the simple-minded and in unseen ways
   oppresses the poor, is called farsighted and cautious. When the world
   sells vices for virtues and all men indulge in them openly, God wipes
   off all the cosmetics and declares every kind of unjust gain to be
   theft. We need not wonder that the judgment of heaven decrees this law,
   since almost the same teaching is given by the philosophers.

   We must remember that a "positive" command, as it is called, is
   attached to the prohibition. If we merely refrain from all evil-doing,
   we are far from satisfying God, who has bound men mutually together so
   that they may strive to help one another to get ahead by counseling and
   assisting one another. There is not the slightest doubt that God
   commands generosity, and kindness, and the other duties which give
   warmth to human society. Therefore, if we are not to be condemned as
   thieves by God, we must seek our brothers' advantage no less than our
   own.

   Thou shalt not muzzle the ox when it treadeth out the corn. Deut. 25:4.

   This verse belongs properly in the supplement [of the law]; but because
   it adds force to the command, this place seems appropriate for it --
   especially since Paul, an apt interpreter, explains it as meaning that
   God requires laborers not to be defrauded of their just pay. In
   discussing provision for the ministers of the Word, he fits this
   commandment to their case (1 Cor. 9:10). To prevent anyone from
   applying it to oxen, rather than to men, he adds that God gave it, not
   because he was concerned about the oxen, but for the sake of laborers.

   But it must be remembered that men are required to practice justice
   even in dealing with animals. Solomon condemns injustice to our
   neighbors the more severely when he says, a just man cares well for his
   beasts (Prov. 12:10). In a word, we are to do what is right voluntarily
   and freely, and each of us is responsible for doing his duty. If
   animals are entitled to their food, much less should we wait for men to
   plague us before we give men their rights.

   The foreign born you shall not oppress nor plunder; for you were
   foreigners in the land of Egypt. You shall not afflict widows and
   orphans. Ex. 22:21-22, Lev. 19:33-34. (Calvin's wording.)

   Before passing on to other iniquities, I thought it best to insert here
   the commandment which requires the people to deal justly with all
   without exception. If no mention had been made of the foreign born, the
   Israelites would have thought that when they harmed no one of their own
   race they had discharged their duty. But when God includes guests and
   resident aliens as well as members of their own families, they know
   that justice must be practiced always toward all.

   And there is need for God to set himself and his guardianship against
   injury to foreigners. For they have no one willing to incur hatred in
   their defense, and are the more subject to the violence and oppression
   of the wicked because they lack the protections possessed by the native
   born.

   Widows and orphans are in the same situation. The woman on account of
   her sex is exposed to various injuries unless she is sheltered in the
   shade of her husband. And many people take advantage of orphans as if
   they were legitimate prey because they have no adviser. But God hastens
   to bring his help when they are without human aid, and he declares that
   he will be their vindicator if they are unjustly treated.

   In the first passage (Ex. 22:21-23), the law joins orphans and widows
   with the foreign born; in the second (Lev. 19:33-34) only the foreign
   born are mentioned. But the principle is the same. All those who are
   orphaned or otherwise deprived of earthly resources are under the
   guidance and guardianship of God and are protected by his hand. This
   ought to restrain the boldness of those who think that their crimes
   will remain unpunished if no one on earth takes action against them.

   Truly no iniquity will remain unpunished by God. But there is a special
   reason why God declares that he takes the foreign born, the widows, and
   the orphans as his wards. Where evil is more flagrant, there is more
   need of potent remedy. . . .

   In the second passage, it is said further that they are ordered to love
   outsiders and the foreign born as themselves. Hence it is clear that
   the term neighbor is not restricted to those of the same blood or to
   those who are the same sort of people, among whom the need of love is
   more obvious. Neighbor includes the whole of mankind, as Christ showed
   in the person of the Samaritan who took pity on an unknown man and
   showed him human kindness when he had been neglected by a Judean, and
   even by a Levite.

   Be have heard that it hath been said, Thou shalt love thy neighbor, and
   thou shalt hate thine enemy. But I say unto you, Love your enemies.
   . . . That you may be the children of your Father who is in heaven.
   . . . For if ye love them which love you, what reward have ye? Do not
   even the publicans the same? Matt. 5:43-46.

   It is astonishing that the scribes fell into the absurdity of limiting
   the word "neighbor" to those who are friendly. There is nothing clearer
   and more certain than that when God spoke of our neighbor, he meant to
   include the whole of the human species. Since everyone is devoted to
   himself, and people are separated from others in the pursuit of their
   private interests, mutual communication, required by nature itself, is
   broken. Therefore, God testifies that any man whoever he may be is our
   neighbor, in order to keep us in the bond of brotherly love with which
   we are bound one to another by our common nature; for it is necessary
   that whenever I see another man, who is my own flesh and bone, I see my
   own self. Even though most men, most often, break away from this holy
   society, their depravity does not remove the order of nature; for we
   must remember that God himself is the maker of this union. It follows
   that the precept of the law which commands us to love our neighbor
   applies to all men. On the contrary, the scribes, who regarded a man as
   a neighbor on the ground of his attitude toward them, denied that
   anyone was their neighbor unless he showed himself worthy of their love
   by returning their friendship. This is the mentality common to the
   children of this world, who are not ashamed to hurl their hatred at
   others for any reason whatever. Love, on the other hand, which the law
   demands, has no regard for anybody's merit, and pours itself alike upon
   the unworthy, the wicked, and those without gratitude. Here Christ
   restores to love its true and authentic meaning, and defends it against
   misinterpretation and reproach. Once again, what I said before becomes
   plain: Christ does not make new laws; he rectifies the wrong
   interpretations of the scribes which had vitiated the purity of the law
   of God.

   Love your enemies. This one point contains the whole meaning of the
   teaching of Christ about love as stated above; for, anyone who brings
   his spirit to loving those who hate him will easily soften his heart
   against vengeance; he will be patient towards the wicked, and will be
   all the more ready to help those who are wretched. With this saying,
   Christ shows us the way and manner in which we are to fulfill the
   precept. Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself. For, no man will
   fulfill this precept, until he gives up the love of himself, or denies
   himself; until he sees others as bound by God with himself, and so goes
   ahead to love those who hate him. We learn from these words that the
   faithful should have nothing to do with revenge: they ought to wipe it
   out of their souls, so that they not only will be kept from praying to
   God for it, but will even pray him for the good of their enemies.
   Meanwhile, they do not fail to commit their cause to God, to let him
   punish the reprobate; but they still desire to do all they can to
   restore the wicked to a sound mind, so that they may not perish; and
   they consider how they may be saved. At the same time, they are
   comforted and their troubles become bearable when they do not doubt
   that God is the avenger of obstinate evil and declares himself the
   protector of the innocent. It is indeed hard, and contrary to the mind
   of the flesh, to repay evil with good; but we should not make our evil
   and weakness an excuse: we should rather inquire simply as to what the
   law of love demands, so that, relying upon the power of the heavenly
   Spirit, we may battle and overcome our feelings against it.

   Monks and similar loud mouths imagined that these are counsels and not
   precepts, because they judged our duty before God and the law according
   to human ability. Moreover, having taken it upon themselves and bound
   themselves to follow these "counsels," the monks were not ashamed to
   claim perfection. How faithful they were to this title which they
   claimed, I will not say. But, it is evident that to interpret this
   saying as a counsel is insipid and preposterous: first, it is an insult
   to Christ to say that he did not command but only advised his disciples
   concerning the right; secondly, it is more than silly to make the
   duties of love, which are derived from the law, optional; in the third
   place, it is wrong to interpret the words I say as I advise, because in
   this place they mean "I warn" or "I command."

   Finally, when Christ adds immediately, that you may be the children of
   your Father, he gives us proof beyond any doubt that these sayings are
   plain commandments and bind us to their obedience. When Jesus declares
   openly that no one can be a child of God unless he loves those who hate
   him, who dares to say that we are not under obligation to practice this
   teaching? It is as though he had said, "Let anyone who would consider
   himself a Christian love his enemies." It is truly dreadful and
   monstrous that for three or four centuries the world should have been
   covered with such thick darkness as not to see that this is an express
   command, and that anyone who neglects it, is struck out of the number
   of God's children.

   Moreover, we must remember that we are not asked to imitate God in the
   sense of doing whatever he does. God chastises the ungrateful and often
   dispatches the wicked out of this world; it is not for us to imitate
   God in these respects, because the judgment of the world belongs to him
   and is beyond our competence. His will is that we imitate him as a
   Father who is good and does good. This has been known not only by pagan
   philosophers but also by the worst despisers of godliness, who have
   confessed openly that we are never so like God as when we do that which
   is good. In short, Christ himself is our witness that the best evidence
   of our adoption is to do good to the wicked and the unworthy. But this
   does not mean that our own goodness makes us children of God: the
   Spirit himself, who is the witness, earnest, and seal of our free
   adoption, purifies the depraved impulses of the flesh and does away
   with their aversion to love. From this effect of the work of the
   Spirit, Christ shows that the children of God are only those who, like
   him, are generous and kind.

   Do not the publicans? Luke calls these people sinners, that is, vicious
   and wicked men. He does not condemn the work of the publican as such.
   The publicans were tax collectors. Princes have a right to impose
   taxes, therefore it is not wrong to collect them. Luke speaks of
   publicans as sinners because people in their position are usually
   greedy and grabbing, and even deceitful and cruel; and because the Jews
   regarded them as instruments of tyrannical injustice. Anyone who thinks
   from Christ's words that the publicans as such were the meanest people
   around is mistaken. Christ was speaking to a common prejudice. What he
   really meant is that there are people who are so bereft of humanity as
   to pursue their private interests even while they make a show of doing
   their duty.

   But I say unto you, that ye resist not evil: but whosoever shall smite
   thee on thy right cheek, turn to him the other side. Matt. 5:39.

   There are two ways of resisting: first, by warding off evil without
   violence; second, by retaliation. Even while Christ does not permit his
   own to meet force with force, he does not forbid them to avoid unjust
   violence from others. Paul interprets this verse best when he bids us
   to overcome evil with good, rather than fight with evildoers (Rom.
   12:21). But notice that here we have to do with evil and contrasted
   ways of correcting it. Christ is talking about retaliation as a way of
   dealing with evil; when he forbids his disciples to repay evil with
   evil, his intention is to prevent their giving way to their feelings.
   He extends the rule of patience, so that we shall not only bear present
   injury with patience but shall also be ready to endure what is to come.
   The sum of this saying is that the faithful ought to learn to forget
   whatever evil they are made to suffer; that when hurt they are not to
   break out in hatred and ill will, or desire to hurt on their part; that
   the greater the injustice and passion of the wicked grows, and the more
   infuriating it becomes, the more Christians must be ready for patience
   and forbearance.

   Whoever shall inflict a blow. Julian [96] and his like have raised a
   stupid cry against this teaching of Christ, saying that it would
   destroy the foundations of law and legal justice. But Augustine, in the
   fifth epistle, is both wise and intelligent when he shows that the
   intention of Christ was nothing else than to create a just and
   temperate spirit among the faithful, so that, when they are offended
   once or twice, they do not fail and grow weary. Rightly understood,
   Augustine is correct when he says that this statement does not lay down
   a law of external conduct. On the other hand, I think Christ restrains
   our hands no less than our hearts. Still, when a man is able to protect
   himself and his own from injury, and that without vindictiveness, these
   words of Christ do not prevent him from turning aside the force of an
   assault, provided he does it calmly and without harming the other man.

   Of course, Christ did not intend to exhort his people to whet the
   malice of those who are already on fire with the desire to hurt others:
   what would offering the other cheek do except provoke them further? It
   is not up to a sane and honest interpreter to pounce on every syllable
   like a birdcatcher; he should pay attention to what is in the speaker's
   mind. Nothing is less becoming to the disciples of Christ than to amuse
   themselves caviling about words, when what the Master wants is clear.
   And in this place, there is nothing obscure about the intention of
   Christ: one conflict leads to another, and so, during the whole of
   their life, believers suffer continually many injuries; therefore, with
   this saying Christ wants to train them to endure every attack, that by
   being patient they may learn patience.

   And he lifted up his eyes and looked, and, lo, three men stood by him:
   and when he saw them, he ran to meet them from the tent door, and bowed
   himself toward the ground. Gen. 18:2.

   Before Moses comes to the main point, he describes to us the
   hospitality of the holy man. . . . His hospitality stands out
   conspicuously because it is no ordinary virtue to aid unknown men from
   whom no advantage is expected. For in general when men exert themselves
   for others, they get advantages in return. He who is kind to foreigners
   and strangers deserves no little praise, since he voluntarily invites
   as guests unknown men from whom he had received no favors and where
   there was no hope of mutual benefit.

   What then was Abraham's motive? Truly, simply to satisfy the needs of
   his guests. He sees them weary from their journey; he is sure they are
   worn out with the heat; he thinks the time of day bad for traveling.
   And so he desires to comfort and refresh those who are weary. Certainly
   nature itself dictates that strangers are to be helped as much as
   possible -- unless we are impelled by our self-love to act only for
   motives of gain. For none more deserve compassion and help than those
   whom we see bereft of friends and homeland. Among all peoples the law
   of hospitality was formerly held sacred. And no epithet was more
   detestable than axenos, inhospitable. It is inhuman cruelty in our
   pride to despise those who flee to us and lack the ordinary means of
   self-protection.

   But it is asked, Was it Abraham's habit to receive all comers equally?
   For the number would have been too great, and he would have had to feed
   mobs. I answer that he was a man of sense and exercised discrimination.

   And he bowed. This sign of respect was in common use in the Orient.
   Certain ancient writers have tried to extract a mystery from this
   clause, and have said that Abraham worshiped the One in Three whom he
   had seen and that he saw here by faith the three Persons in one God.
   This interpretation is better ignored, for it is frivolous and open to
   mockery and insult. We said before that the angels were entertained by
   the holy man because he wished to do his duty toward men. But God
   rewarded his kindness, and he was worthy of the reward of having angels
   for guests. He did not know that they were angels until they revealed
   themselves at the end of the banquet. It is a humane and polite honor
   which he pays them.

   But [finally] her merchandise and her reward shall be holy to the Lord.
   It shall not be deposited or laid away, but her merchandise shall be
   [set aside] for them who dwell before the Lord, that they may eat and
   be full, and for thick garments. Isa. 23:18. (Calvin's wording.)

   This means that we ought to give to our brothers much more bountifully
   and generously than men are usually in the habit of doing. For men are
   somewhat grudging in what concerns their neighbors. Few do their duty
   eagerly and promptly, or give their labor and kindness without
   calculation. To correct this fault, God praises above all alacrity.

   Paul's direction to the deacons to distribute cheerfully must bind us
   all, and his statement that God loves a cheerful giver (2 Cor. 9:7)
   must be kept in mind. Also we must note the prophet's words that
   whatever is distributed to the poor is consecrated to God. And in other
   passages the Spirit teaches that God himself is served by such
   offerings. God never ordered sacrifices for his own benefit, and he
   certainly had no need of them. But he established such acts of piety
   under the law, and now he commands us to give generously and to spend
   our money for our neighbors. Whatever we spend in their service, he
   declares, is a fragrant sacrifice, pleasing and acceptable to him.

   Hence when we hear our giving so highly praised, we should be kindled
   to generosity and kindness; and we should know that our hands are by
   their gifts, consecrated to God.

   Blessed are the meek: for they shall inherit the earth. Matt. 5:5.

   Christ means people who are kind and gentle: who are not easily
   provoked when they are hurt; who do not turn ugly when offended; who
   are ready to put up with anything rather than repay the wicked in kind.
   When Christ promises such people that they shall inherit the earth, it
   looks like sheer nonsense. The ones who usurp dominion over the world
   are those who fiercely repel all injuries; when attacked and wounded,
   such men have their hands quick for revenge. And experience shows that
   the milder one is with such people, the bolder and the more insolent
   they become. This is the reason for the devil's own proverb: "A man
   must howl with the wolves; for they will soon devour anyone who turns
   himself into a sheep." But Christ meets the fury and violence of the
   wicked with his own and the Father's protection; and so, it is not for
   nothing that he declares the meek lords and heirs of the earth. The
   children of this age never feel safe unless they are able to take
   bitter vengeance upon everyone who causes them evil, and thus to defend
   their lives with hand or arms. But since in truth Christ alone can
   protect our lives, there is nothing else to do but to hide ourselves
   under his wings. We have to be sheep, if we want to be counted among
   his flock. If anyone objects that what we say is against all
   experience, let him consider: Why is it that fierce people are so
   uneasy inside as to be their own disturbers? While they live so
   turbulent a life, even though they may be lords of the earth a hundred
   times over, having everything, they possess nothing. On the other hand,
   answering for the children of God, I say, even though they cannot put
   their feet down on anything they own, they enjoy the earth as a
   peaceful home. And this is no fictitious possession, because they live
   on an earth which they know to have been given them by God. Besides,
   they live under the cover of God's hand in the midst of all the
   violence and fury of wicked men; even while exposed to all the missiles
   of fortune, subject to the malice of evildoers, surrounded by all
   perils, they still live in safety under God's vigilance, and already
   and in a measure have a foretaste of the love of God for them: and this
   is enough, until, on the last day, they inherit the world.

   And it came to pass, as Jesus sat at meat in the house, behold, many
   publicans and sinners came and sat down with him and his disciples.
   Matt. 9:10.

   Matthew says that sinners, that is, men of scandalous lives and
   infamous reputation, came with the publicans. The reason for this is
   that the publicans, hated and abhorred by the people at large, did not
   shrink from such company. As a moderate punishment shames and humbles
   the sinners, harshness drives them to despair, so that putting aside
   all shame, they abandon themselves to a corrupt life. There was nothing
   wicked about collecting tribute or taxes; but when the publicans saw
   that they were rejected as godless and detestable men, they looked for
   comfort in the company of people who did not despise them; because,
   being disreputable, they shared their shame. Meanwhile they mixed with
   adulterers, drunkards, and their kind, even though they were not like
   them and detested their crimes, because they were driven to it by
   public hatred and rejection.

   Let the brother of less degree rejoice in that he is exalted: but the
   rich in that he is made low; because as the flower of the grass he
   shall pass away. James 1:9-10.

   Paul, in 1 Cor. 7:22, while exhorting slaves to bear their lot with a
   calm spirit, reminds them that they are God's free men, delivered by
   his grace from the misery of bondage to Satan; he also warns those who
   are born freemen to remember that they are God's slaves. In the same
   way, James here calls upon the lowly to glory in this, that they have
   been adopted by the Lord to be his children; and he has the same advice
   for the rich, who have been made to see the vanity of the world and
   have been brought to equality with the poor. He would have the former
   be content with their humble and mean position; he forbids the latter
   to be proud. Since it is the highest and incomparable dignity to be
   admitted to the society of angels, and even to be made companions to
   Christ himself, anyone who estimates this favor of God justly will look
   at everything else which comes his way with equal indifference.
   Therefore neither poverty nor contempt, nor nakedness, nor hunger, nor
   thirst, will make his spirit so anxious that he will not be able to
   comfort himself by saying, "Since the Lord has given me what really
   matters, I must bear the loss of all lesser things with a serene mind."
   This is how a lowly brother ought to glory in his high dignity: if he
   be acceptable to God, his adoption alone is enough reason for
   happiness; he ought not to be too much troubled because his state in
   this life is less than prosperous.

   But the rich in that he is made low. The rich represents a whole class
   of people. This warning is directed to all those who excel in honor, or
   nobility, or anything else. To break down the lofty spirits of those
   who become inflated by prosperity, he bids them to glory in their
   lowliness or littleness.

   As the flower of the grass. If anyone thinks that this is a reference
   to Isaiah, I do not object too strongly. But I cannot allow that James
   is quoting the prophet, who was not speaking figuratively of good
   fortune or of the vanity of the world, but rather of the whole man, no
   less of his soul than of his body. Here it is a question of the pomp of
   wealth or possessions. The point is that it is stupid and preposterous
   to boast in riches which can be lost in one moment. Of course, the
   philosophers say the same thing; but their song is wasted on the deaf,
   until men's ears are opened by the Lord himself, and they hear
   concerning the eternal Kingdom of Heaven. Therefore, when he says
   brother, he means that we have no place for this doctrine until we are
   admitted to the company of God's children.

   . . . Behold, an Israelite indeed, in whom is no guile! John 1:47.

   Since this verse gives us a characteristic trait of a Christian man,
   let us not pass it by too lightly. Truly, we can grasp Christ's thought
   without too many words if we notice that sincerity here is contrasted
   with deceit. He calls deceitful those whom Scripture elsewhere calls of
   a double mind. He attacks not only the crass hypocrisy of "good men"
   with a bad conscience, but that practiced by men who are so blinded by
   their wickedness as to lie not only to others but also to themselves.
   What makes a man a true Christian is integrity of heart before God and
   toward men.

  3. SOCIAL ETHICS: THE USE OF GOD'S GIFTS

   Now is the judgment of this world: now shall the prince of this world
   be cast out. John 12:31.

   Now, the Lord, as though he had already won the battle, exults as
   victor, not only over fear but also over death itself. He proclaims the
   issue of his death in magnificent terms, to avoid consternation among
   his disciples. Judgment is interpreted variously as reformation and
   condemnation. I agree rather with the former view, with those who say
   that the world shall be restored to right order. For the Hebrew,
   Mishpat, which is rendered judgment, means a state of good order. Now,
   we know that apart from Christ there is nothing but confusion in this
   world. Although Christ has already begun to set up the Kingdom of God,
   his death was the real beginning of a right order and the full
   restoration of the world!

   Song of Ascents of Solomon. Except the Lord build the house, they labor
   in vain that build it. Except the Lord keep the city, the watchman
   watcheth but in vain.

   It is vain for you to rise up early, to sit up late, to eat the bread
   of sorrow: for so he giveth his beloved sleep. Ps. 127:1-2.

   There is no reason why the Jews should deny that this psalm was
   composed by Solomon. They assume that the l means in honor of Solomon,
   but ordinary usage is against this, since this kind of ascription
   everywhere denotes authorship. Why should they insist on concocting a
   new interpretation when it [the psalm] seems especially appropriate for
   Solomon, who had much experience in political affairs, and could
   discourse in the wisdom of the Spirit on matters about which he had
   expert knowledge?

   He emphasizes for a double reason that both the world and the lives of
   men are divinely governed. First, whenever men succeed in something,
   their ingratitude leads them to credit it solely to themselves, and God
   is not given his due honor. To correct this flagrant wrong, Solomon
   declares that nothing goes well for us except so far as God prospers
   our actions. Secondly, he intends to repulse the foolish
   self-confidence of men who, ignoring God and relying only on their own
   wisdom or strength, dare to start anything that comes to their heads.
   Therefore, he sweeps away everything which they rashly claim for their
   own and calls them to humility and prayer to God.

   But he does not disparage man's labor or his effort and planning. For
   any virtue of ours is worthy of praise if we employ it in our zeal for
   the fulfillment of duty. The Lord does not want us to be like logs of
   wood, or to sit idle; he expects us to put to use whatever abilities we
   may have. It is of course true that the heaviest part of our labors
   comes from God's curse. But even if man's original state of integrity
   had remained, God would still have desired us to keep busy. Adam was
   put in a garden to cultivate it. Solomon does not condemn what God
   approves, and certainly not the labor men undertake gladly at God's
   command and offer to him as an acceptable sacrifice. But to keep men
   from being blinded by pride and from grasping at what belongs to God,
   he warns them that hard work wins success only so far as God blesses
   our labor.

   By house he does not mean just the wooden or stone building. He
   includes in it the whole family economy, as a little farther on by the
   word city he does not mean merely the buildings and the surrounding
   walls but the common welfare of the whole state. He also is using the
   part for the whole (synecdoche) when he speaks of building and
   guarding. He is making the general statement that whatever effort,
   wisdom, or industry men expend in looking after a family or in
   protecting a city will be ineffectual unless God from heaven orders a
   prosperous outcome. We need to remember often what has just been said.
   For since blind pride almost fills the minds of men and leads them in
   contempt of God to an immoderate exercise of their own abilities,
   nothing is more salutary for them than to be called to order and
   reminded that whatever they attempt will quickly come to nothing,
   unless the grace of God alone sustains it and makes it to prosper.

   When philosophers dispute about the political state, they cleverly put
   together everything which seems to apply to the subject. They show
   acutely the reasons for and the means of establishing a state; and
   again they describe the faults by which a good state is frequently
   corrupted. In fact they search out with the greatest skill all that is
   needed to understand the matter. But they leave out the main point:
   that however much men excel in wisdom and ability, they cannot
   accomplish what they undertake unless God takes it in his hand and uses
   it as his instrument. Who of the philosophers has ever recognized that
   human politics are only a tool directed by the hand of God? They have
   made human virtue the prime cause of good fortune.

   When men in sacrilegious boldness rush off to found cities and to
   regulate the state of the whole world, the Holy Spirit rightly exposes
   such insanity. So let each one of us work as he can in the line of his
   duty, giving to God the praise for every success we have. For it is
   altogether wrong to divide the credit as many try to do, giving half to
   God and claiming the other half for themselves because they have worked
   so hard. We must prize the blessing of God alone and live under its
   reign.

   But if even our earthly welfare depends wholly on God's good pleasure,
   with what wings shall we fly to heaven? A man may establish a decent
   household with a way of life that suits him; men may make good laws and
   practice justice -- but all such achievements are but a crawling on the
   ground, and the Holy Spirit pronounces them all transitory. Still less
   to be tolerated is the madness of those who strive to penetrate heaven
   by their own strength.

   From this doctrine we may gather that it is not strange if world
   affairs are turbulent and confused, if in cities the rule of law is
   overthrown; if husbands and wives bring bitter and groundless
   accusations against each other, parents complain of their children, and
   all men bewail their lot. How many today devote themselves to the
   service of God in the practice of their own proper calling? How many,
   puffed up with pride, are not trying constantly to exalt themselves?
   God justly pays today's sad wage to unthankful men who defraud him of
   his honor. But if all should humbly submit themselves to God's
   providence, the blessing which Solomon celebrates would certainly shine
   bright in every aspect of our life, both public and private.

   The verb 'amal, which we translate labor, means not just to be occupied
   in some work but to labor to the point of fatigue and pain. I said that
   by watchmen we must understand not only those stationed at lookouts but
   all magistrates and judges. Whatever watchfulness they have is a gift
   of heaven. But we need still another watchfulness -- God's. For unless
   he watches over us from heaven, no human keen-sightedness will be
   enough to ward off danger.

   In vain. Solomon now explains more fully that it is useless for men to
   wear themselves out with hard work and grow weak with fasting in order
   to acquire wealth, since wealth also is the gift of God alone. In order
   to impress them more effectively, he speaks to each man individually:
   For you [he says] it is vain. He mentions specifically the two means
   which are commonly reckoned to contribute most to amassing wealth. For
   when men do not spare their labor, but consume night and day in
   business and spend little of what they gain from their labor on their
   living, it is not surprising that they accumulate riches in a short
   space of time. But Solomon declares that there is nothing gained by
   poor living and perpetual labor.

   Not that he forbids living economically or getting up early in the
   morning to work; but he does urge us to prayer, to the invocation of
   God. And in order to inspire us to gratitude, he says that anything
   which obscures God's goodness is vanity. For we prosper only when our
   hope rests wholly upon God; and moreover the outcome of our work will
   depend on how we pray. But if anyone pushes God into the background and
   hastens eagerly ahead, his hurried rush will surely end in a fall. The
   prophet is not advising men to succumb to indolence and to make no
   plans in all their lives, merely to doze and indulge their inertia; on
   the contrary, his point is that, when they pursue the tasks divinely
   imposed upon them, they ought always to begin with prayer and
   invocation to God, and offer their labors for his blessing.

   Bread of sorrow can be explained in two ways: either "he eats by hard
   and anxious labor" or "he eats with pain," as it happens when miserly
   and greedy men scarcely taste their bread before they take their hand
   back from their lips. It makes no great difference which meaning you
   choose, for the point of the statement is that miserly men gain nothing
   when they grudgingly defraud their Provider [of invocation and prayer].

   Surely he will give to his beloved sleep. This describes exactly the
   way in which God's blessing on his sons and servants is manifested. For
   acceptance of the futility of mere human striving would not be enough;
   the addition of a promise is needed if men are to perform their duties
   with a sure hope. This clause may be read, He will give sleep to his
   beloved or He will give through sleep what the unbelieving vainly seek
   to gain through their own struggles. The word ken is used to emphasize
   the certainty [of the promise] and to make more convincing what seems
   unbelievable and unrealistic; as though Solomon were pointing his
   finger toward God's feeding of the faithful without any anxiety on
   their part. Indeed, he speaks as if God in his indulgence, were
   encouraging his servants to be idle. But since we know from the law
   that men were created to work and since in the next psalm we shall see
   that farmers are regarded as blessed of God when they eat what their
   own hands have produced, it is certain that sleep does not mean doing
   nothing but rather the tranquil labor to which men of faith apply
   themselves in obedient trust.

   For what causes the great excitement of unbelievers who never move a
   finger without making a commotion (that is, without tormenting
   themselves with useless anxieties), except that they refer nothing that
   happens to God's providence? But men of faith, even when they spend
   their whole lives in hard labor, obey God's call calmly and with
   tranquil minds. Their hands are not idle, but their minds rest quiet in
   silent faith as if they were asleep.

   If anyone object that the faithful often stew in bitter cares and worry
   about the future when they are hard pressed by the want of everything
   they need and destitute of all means of support, I answer: If the faith
   and devotion of the servants of God were perfect, the blessing of God
   which the prophet here describes would be plainly visible. And as for
   those who worry too much -- that is due to their own sin in not resting
   firmly upon God's providence. I even add that they are punished more
   severely than unbelievers, because it is good for them to suffer
   anxiety for a time, so that they may attain the quiet of this sleep.
   But meantime God's kindness [to his servants] persists, and shines
   always in the midst of the shadows [of this world]; for the Lord
   supports his sons as with sleep.

   Now the Spirit speaketh expressly, that in the latter times some shall
   depart from the faith, giving heed to seducing spirits, and doctrines
   of devils; speaking lies in hypocrisy; having their conscience seared
   with a hot iron; forbidding to marry, and commanding to abstain from
   meats which God hath created to be received with thanksgiving of them
   which believe and know the truth. For every creature of God is good,
   and nothing to be refused, if it be received with thanksgiving: for it
   is sanctified by the word of God and prayer. 1 Tim. 4:1-5.

   Paul has been busy warning Timothy about many things. Now he brings out
   the necessity of being prepared to oppose the perils announced by the
   Holy Spirit as imminent: namely, that false teachers shall appear, who
   shall hold out mere trifles as doctrines of the faith; who, putting all
   holiness in outward observances, shall obscure the spiritual worship of
   God which alone is lawful. And, in truth, the servants of God always
   had to struggle against the kind of people Paul describes in this
   place. Since men's nature is prone to hypocrisy, it is easy for Satan
   to persuade them that the true worship of God consists in ceremonies
   and outward discipline; men believe this kind of thing and need no
   teacher to fix their souls on it; then comes the crafty devil and
   confirms them in their error. So it comes about that through the ages
   there have been false teachers who have championed a false worship,
   which has been the burial of true godliness. Next to this pestilence
   has appeared another, which has turned matters of freedom into things
   of necessity. So, the world allows itself readily to be forbidden what
   God himself allows, in order that it may allow itself to transgress the
   laws of God. . . .

   Speaking lies in hypocrisy. This may refer to demons who deceive others
   at the instigation of the devil. On the other hand, the speakers may be
   taken to be simply men.

   When Paul says that they lie as hypocrites and their consciences are
   seared with a hot iron, he is coming down to particulars. Let us
   observe also that these two evils go together and that the second grows
   out of the first. For, people with bad consciences, which are burned
   into by their wickedness, take refuge in hypocrisy: that is, they put
   on false colors so as to deceive the eyes of the Lord. What else can
   they do, when they are busy trying to win the favor of God with the
   counterfeit of external observances?

   The word hypocrisy must be defined in the light of the present passage.
   First, it has to do with doctrine; and then, with the kind of doctrine
   which perverts the spiritual worship of God into a set of bodily
   practices, and so corrupts its real purity. Thus, it includes all
   artificial means of pleasing God and claiming his favor. In short, all
   those who go around draped with a false sanctimoniousness do it by the
   devil's prodding; because no one can worship God rightly with outward
   ceremonies, for true worshipers adore him in spirit and in truth (John
   4:24). Secondly, such ceremony is a useless medicine with which
   hypocrites mitigate their miseries, or rather a plaster by which they
   hide their wounds without deriving any benefit from it; but in fact it
   kills them.

   Forbidding to marry. Having given us a characterization of diabolical
   doctrine, he now presents us with two particular elements of it:
   namely, the prohibition of marriage, and of certain foods. These arise
   out of hypocrisy which, having set aside true holiness, seeks to hide
   itself under alien and false colors. For people who do not refrain from
   ambition, hatred, avarice, cruelty, and the like, try to acquire
   integrity by abstaining from things about which God has left us free.
   Why are men's consciences burdened with laws about marriage and foods,
   unless to permit them to seek perfection outside of God's law? This
   kind of thing is not done except by hypocrites, who try to cover over
   their wickedness with trifling observances as with a veil, so that they
   may transgress the righteousness of the heart which is what the law
   requires. . . .

   Such is the mind of the world that it always dreams of worshiping God
   with carnal customs, as though God himself were carnal. In the ancient
   church, little by little, things went from bad to worse, until we
   arrive at the tyranny according to which it is wicked for priests and
   monks to enter into marriage, and under which no man dare eat meat on
   certain days. Therefore, we are today far from wrong in applying this
   prophecy to the papists, who urge celibacy and abstinence from foods
   more forcefully than any precept of God. They think they can escape by
   clever caviling, when they twist Paul's words to apply them against the
   Tatianists, [97] or Manichaeans, [98] or others like them; as though
   the Tatianists did not have the same means of escape, by throwing
   Paul's words at the Phrygians and at Montanus [99] who was the founder
   of that sect; as though the Phrygians themselves could not come forth
   with the Encratites [100] as the guilty party. However, Paul is not
   talking about persons but about the principle of the thing. Thus, if a
   hundred sects were brought forward as having all labored with the same
   hypocrisy to forbid certain foods, none of them would be any less
   guilty. It follows that the old heretics are of no use to the papists,
   as though they alone were to be blamed; the question always is whether
   the papists are not guilty in the same way. The papists object on the
   ground that they are utterly unlike the Encratites, and the Manichaeans
   because they do not absolutely forbid marriage and meats. They say that
   they enjoin abstention from meats on certain days, and that they
   require celibacy only from priests, monks, and nuns. But this is a very
   poor excuse; for they nonetheless identify holiness with such matters:
   further, they establish a false and corrupt worship of God; finally,
   they bind consciences with a necessity from which men ought to be free.

   In the Fifth Book of Eusebius, [101] there is a fragment from the
   writings of Apollonius, [102] in which, among other things, the latter
   reproaches Montanus for having been the first to dissolve marriage, and
   for having imposed the law of celibacy. He does not say that Montanus
   prohibited marriage or certain foods to everybody. It is enough that
   anyone should lay this kind of religion upon the consciences of men, or
   that he should require the observance of these things as the worship of
   God. To forbid anything that should be left to human decision, whether
   for everybody or for some, is diabolical tyranny. That this is true of
   foods will be clear from what follows.

   Which God has created. Let us notice the reasoning in this matter: we
   ought to be content with the freedom which God has given us in the use
   of different foods, because it is for our use that he has created them.
   It is the joy of all godly people to know that every food which
   nourishes them is offered them by the hand of the Lord; that to eat it
   is pure and lawful. What arrogance it is to take away what the Lord
   himself bestows upon men! Did the papists create good? Can they void
   God's own creation? Let us always keep in mind that he who has created
   food also gave us free use of it, and that men's efforts to keep us
   from it are in vain. I say that God created food to be eaten, that is,
   for our enjoyment. There is no human authority which can change this.

   But now he adds, with the giving of thanks; because we have nothing
   with which to repay God's generosity except the evidence of our
   gratitude. And thus he castigates the godless lawmakers with all the
   greater abhorrence in that they obstruct the sacrifice of praise, which
   God in the beginning established for our offering, with their own novel
   and useless enactments. On the other hand, we cannot act with gratitude
   unless we are sober and temperate; for no one knows the goodness of God
   if he makes a wicked use of it.

   Of them which believe and know the truth. What then? Does not God make
   his sun to rise daily upon the good and the evil (Matt. 5:45)? Does not
   the earth, by his command, yield bread to the wicked? Are not even the
   worst men fed through his blessings? Therefore, his goodness is toward
   all men, as David sings in Ps. 104:14. But to all this I answer: Paul
   is here concerned with the right use of God's gifts, and has shown us
   the way we are to act before God. The ungodly do not share in such
   integrity before God, because their unclean consciences contaminate
   everything they touch, as we can see readily from Titus 1:15. Of
   course, in this sense, and strictly speaking, God has destined the
   world and all that is in it for his children alone; for this reason it
   is said that they shall inherit the earth. In the beginning, Adam
   himself was given dominion over all things on condition that he
   remained obedient to God. Therefore, when he rose in rebellion against
   God, he deprived himself and his posterity of this right which was
   conferred upon him. So, it follows that we are restored to our original
   dignity only by the benefit we receive from Christ to whom all things
   are under subjection: and this we receive by faith. Therefore, whatever
   men without faith get hold of, they rob or steal from others. . . .

   For every creature. The use of food must be judged partly from its
   nature and partly by him who eats it. The apostle argues in both
   directions. He asserts that food in itself is clean, because it is God
   who gives it: and that we make a holy use of it by faith and prayer.
   When he says that the creatures are good, he is speaking of them in
   relation to man, not with regard to the body or one's health, but to
   one's conscience. I say this to avoid philosophical hairsplitting
   beyond the scope of this passage. Briefly, Paul means that whatever
   comes from God's hand is neither corrupt nor unclean before God, that
   it is simply for our nourishment; and as such, with regard to
   conscience, it is lawful. If anyone objects that of old under the law
   many animals were declared unclean, or that the fruit from the tree of
   the knowledge of good and evil was fatal to men, I answer: Creatures
   are called clean not merely because they are works of God, but because
   they are given to us by his goodness. We must always pay attention to
   what God himself commands and to what he forbids.

   For it is sanctified. This confirms the previous clause which said, if
   it is received with thanksgiving. This is an argument from the contrast
   between holy and profane. Now we learn how we are to sanctify all the
   good things which sustain our present life, that is, according to
   Paul's witness, by the Word of God and by prayer. But we must realize
   that if the Word is to do us any good, it must be heard by faith. Even
   though God himself sanctifies all things by the Spirit of his Word
   (mouth) alone, we cannot know this blessing except by faith. And to
   this is added prayer, because Christ himself commands us to ask our
   daily bread from God (Matt. 6:11): and because we must respond to his
   goodness with thanksgiving.

   Paul's doctrine is based upon the principle that there is no such thing
   as lawful possession, unless our conscience testifies that what is ours
   is ours by right. And in truth, which one of us would dare call even a
   grain of wheat his own, unless he learns from the Word of God that he
   shall inherit the earth? Common sense tells us that by nature the
   abundance of this world is destined for our use. But, since in Adam
   dominion over the world was taken away from us, every time we touch a
   gift of God, it is polluted by our own filth; it is unclean to us,
   unless God comes to our help, and uniting us with the body of his Son,
   once again makes us lords of the earth. It is in this way that we come
   to a lawful enjoyment of all the things God gives us in such abundance.
   Paul is right in tying up rightful enjoyment with the Word of God,
   since it alone enables us to regain what we lost in Adam, for, if we
   are to be heirs of God, we must know him as our Father; and we must
   know Christ as our Head, if we are to have what is his. From this we
   gather that all the gifts of God are usurped by us and are unclean to
   us, unless we know the true God and call upon his name. It is a beastly
   business when people start eating without prayer, and when they are
   full, they run out without as much as mentioning God's name.

   And they drank and were drunk with him. Gen. 43:34. (Calvin's wording.)

   From the end of the chapter we conclude that there was a sumptuous
   banquet at which they indulged themselves more freely and hilariously
   than was usual. The verb shakar, which is translated be drunk,
   indicates either that they were not accustomed to drinking wine, or
   that an unusual amount was drunk at this banquet given in their honor.
   But the word does not necessarily mean drinking to excess (as riotous
   men interpret it to excuse their own dissipation by the example of the
   patriarchs), but drinking with honest and free enjoyment. I admit that
   the word is ambiguous and is often used in a bad sense, as in Gen.
   9:21, and similar passages, but in this place, Moses' meaning is clear.

   If anyone raises the objection that a frugal use of food and drink is
   sufficient for the nourishment of the body, I answer: Although food is
   a proper provision for our bodily need, yet the legitimate use of it
   goes beyond mere sustenance. For good flavors were not added to food
   value without a purpose, but because our Heavenly Father wishes to give
   us pleasure with the delicacies he provides. It is not by accident that
   Ps. 104:15 praises his kindness in creating wine to cheer man's heart.

   But the more kindly God treats us, the more it becomes our duty to be
   careful to control ourselves and to use his gifts temperately. For we
   know how unrestrained our appetite is; in abundance it always
   overindulges itself and it is always impatient of scarcity. In fact, we
   must keep Paul's rule (Phil. 4:12) and know both how to be in want and
   how to abound. This means to be on our guard when large quantities are
   at hand so that we are not tempted to extravagance; and again we must
   see to it that we endure privation calmly.

   Someone will perhaps say that the flesh is much too clever at
   camouflaging extravagance, and therefore nothing beyond actual
   necessities should be allowed it. I certainly agree that Paul's
   requirement (Rom. 13:14) must be observed, and we must not serve our
   lusts. But what is most important for religious people is to receive
   their food from God's hand with a quiet conscience. And to do this, we
   must determine how far the enjoyment of food and wine is allowable.

   For the day of the Lord of hosts shall be. . . upon all the ships of
   Tarshish. . . . Isa. 2:12, 16.

   There is no doubt that Cilicia was called Tarshish in Hebrew. Since
   there was much trade between that nation and the Jews, we find in
   Scripture frequent references to ships of Tarshish, so named from the
   Cilician sea on which they sailed. Trading in ships cannot of course be
   condemned in itself, for the import and export of goods bring no small
   advantage to men. And especially since God desires the whole human race
   to be united in mutual service, it is impossible to disapprove of ships
   as a means of communication. But since abundance increases pride and
   cruelty, Isaiah here denounces commerce by which a land is especially
   enriched. Also trade carried on with far-off foreign nations is often
   replete with cheating and extortion, and no limit is set to the
   profits.

   Isaiah recognizes in the first place that if Jews are to learn to
   submit themselves to God, they must be stripped of their wealth. He
   then uses a symbol for their greed and their unjust gains, as he might
   have held up a bloody sword to announce a murder. The latter part of
   the verse makes it clearer that the prophet is condemning commerce
   because it has infected the land with many corruptions. For it too
   often happens that riches bring self-indulgence, and superfluity of
   pleasures produces flabbiness, as we can see in wealthy districts and
   cities [where there are merchants]. Now those who sail to distant
   places are no longer content with home comforts but bring back with
   them unknown luxuries. Therefore, because wealth is generally the
   mother of extravagance, the prophet mentions here expensive household
   furnishings, by which he means that the Jews brought God's judgment
   upon themselves by the lavish way they decorated their houses. For with
   pictures he includes expensive tapestries like Phrygian embroidery and
   vases molded with exquisite art.

   It is indeed certain that morals are corrupted when men are greedy for
   such empty diversions. We know that such indulgences brought about the
   end of the Roman Empire. Before the Romans entered Greece, they
   practiced a high degree of self-control; but finally, after Asia was
   conquered, they began to grow soft and effeminate. And when their eyes
   were trapped with pictures, vases, jewels, and tapestries, their noses
   with ointments and perfumes, all their senses at once were overwhelmed.
   And by copying the luxury of the East, as if it were a higher culture,
   they came more and more to squander their lives in every kind of
   pleasure.

   And Lot, also which went with Abram, had flocks, and herds, and tents.
   . . . And there was strife between the herdmen of Abram's cattle and
   the herdmen of Lot's cattle. . . . Gen. 13:5, 7.

   Now follows an account of the trouble Abram suffered because of his
   wealth. Certainly he did not want to part from his nephew whom he loved
   especially as if he were his own son. Surely, if he had had a choice,
   he would have preferred the loss of his wealth to separation from one
   whom he regarded as an only son. But he found no other remedy to stop
   the quarreling. Shall we ascribe the difficulty to his own too stern
   temper or to his nephew's insolence? I think we should do better to
   consider the purpose of God.

   There was danger that Abram might become too well pleased with his own
   good fortune, just as many men are blinded by lesser goods. Therefore
   God seasons the sweetness of wealth with vinegar and does not allow the
   mind of his servant to be too much entranced with it. When a false
   sense of value leads us to seek riches more than is right, because we
   do not realize how many troubles they bring with them, the remembrance
   of this story should serve to limit our inordinate love. And whenever
   rich men fall into trouble because of their wealth, they should learn
   to use the pain it gives them as a medicine to purge their minds of too
   great a desire for the good things of this present life. Unless God in
   his wisdom tightened the curb rein wisely, men would leave the right
   road and would stumble badly in their pursuit of prosperity.

   Again, when we are hampered by poverty we should understand that God
   uses this also as a remedy for the secret vices of our flesh.

   In conclusion, let those who have abundance remember that they are
   surrounded with thorns, and let them take great care not to be pricked
   by them; and let those who have little and are very much hemmed in know
   that God planned [their poverty] to keep them from evil and hurtful
   snares.

   Separation from Lot grieved Abram; but it could serve to correct much
   evil latent in him, and prevent wealth from stifling the ardor of his
   devotion. If Abram needed such an antidote, we should not wonder that
   God employs painful checks against our lust for pleasure. He does not
   always wait until the faithful have actually slipped, but he looks
   ahead for them. He did not punish Abram, his servant, for avarice or
   pride; he gave him a preventive medicine to keep Satan from infecting
   his mind with such sentiments.

   And there was strife. What applies to wealth applies equally to large
   households. Yet we see how ambitiously many men seek to collect a great
   crowd of servants -- as if they wanted to preside over a whole nation.
   But seeing that Abram's great establishment cost him so much, we should
   learn to be willingly satisfied with a small establishment, or with
   none at all if it so please God. It is almost impossible for a house to
   be filled with many people without its being in turmoil. Experience
   proves the truth of the proverb, "A crowd is the same as a tumult." If
   quiet tranquility is an inestimable good, then we should see that our
   wisest course is to have a small house and to live unpretentiously
   within our family.

   In this example, note carefully what we are advised to avoid if we are
   to keep Satan from drawing us into conflicts by circuitous devices. For
   when he cannot inflame us directly with mutual hate, he implicates us
   in the disputes of others. Lot and Abram agreed well together, but the
   quarrel which arose among the shepherds involved them against their
   will so that they were compelled to separate.

   There is no doubt that Abram had given strict orders to his servants to
   keep the peace; but his zeal and effort did not prevent his seeing the
   flame of discord, kept alight by small fans, blazing in his own home.
   So it is no wonder that disturbances arise in the church which contains
   a still larger number of people. Abram had about three hundred
   servants; Lot's household was certainly little smaller. What then will
   happen among five or six thousand, especially when the quarrelers are
   all free men?

   We must not let ourselves be upset by these offenses, but equally we
   must be on guard in every way against the outbreak of fighting. For
   unless disagreements are stifled properly at the beginning, they will
   burst into harmful dissensions.

   And the squares of the city will befall of boys and girls playing in
   the squares. Zech. 8:5.

   With a different figure the prophet repeats and emphasizes the same
   point: that boys and girls will be playing on the public squares and in
   the streets, which they cannot do in the uproar of warfare. For when
   arms clash, when the sound of the trumpet is heard, when insults from
   the soldiers of the enemy threaten, everyone keeps his children in the
   house. Outside it is an ugly and sad business, and almost nobody will
   be caught on the street. When fear hangs over the whole [city] even the
   children lose their gaiety. The prophet, then, is promising that
   Jerusalem will once again enjoy peace, that God will chase the menace
   of the enemy to a far distance; not that Jerusalem would ever be free
   from all danger, but that God's defense would give her people security
   in the midst of many terrors.

   This is not the place to argue subtly whether one may play games in
   peacetimes. The prophet draws his picture from ordinary human behavior;
   it is indeed an expression of human nature. For we know that when men
   are not afraid, they relax and enjoy fun. Besides games and silly
   amusements are proper for children. Therefore all the prophet intended
   here was to assure the Jews that even though they were struggling with
   various enemies, they could nonetheless enjoy security and quiet.

   And they shall not wear a rough garment to deceive. Zech. 13:4.

   This means that they will not be concerned to maintain their prestige
   and reputation, but will abandon willingly the esteem which they had
   dishonestly acquired.

   This passage shows that prophets wore a coarse and hairy garment. But
   interpreters are wrong to cite as evidence passages in which a prophet
   is ordered to put on sackcloth and a garment of goat's hair. For Isaiah
   in many of his prophesyings wore neither; he did so only when he
   announced disaster. And Jeremiah was once ordered to go naked. [103]
   But ordinarily the prophets were content with hairy garments, that is,
   with ordinary, coarse clothes.

   Now although we have liberty in external things, we must practice some
   moderation. If, for example, I were to teach in a military uniform,
   good sense would be quick to object. There is no need of a special
   doctrine to teach decency and ordinary good taste.

   The true prophets wore rough garments to show that their lives were as
   simple and plain as their clothing. But they did not achieve a
   reputation for holiness by means of their clothes only, as do the monks
   today who are supposed to be holy because of their cowls and such
   trumpery. That was not the aim of the prophets; they meant to show by
   their dress that their only purpose was to serve God, and that they
   were separated from the world only in order to devote themselves wholly
   to their ministry.

   It was because the false prophets imitated them that Zechariah says
   they shall not wear a hairy mantle -- that is, they shall no longer
   wear prophetic garb. He was not merely condemning the garb worn by the
   false prophets. Therefore interpreters twist these words from their
   true meaning when they use them to condemn long gowns or whatever else
   of the kind displeases their sour minds. The prophet means simply that
   when pure doctrine shines bright and true religion has won its due
   honor, then there will no more be a place for false teachers. They will
   voluntarily leave their positions of honor and will no longer try to
   deceive uneducated folk. This is what the prophet really means, as he
   shows clearly when he adds to deceive.

   So we see that hairy mantles are condemned, because rapacious wolves
   hide under sheepskins, and foxes infiltrate the fold in disguise.
   Zechariah is condemning the motive and not the garment.

   Jabal was the father of such as dwell in tents. . . . Gen. 4:20.

   Moses now reminds us that some good was combined with the evils which
   came from the family of Cain. For the discovery of the arts, and of
   whatever is useful and makes our common life more pleasant, is a gift
   of God which is not to be despised and an achievement worthy of praise.
   It is indeed surprising that the race which had departed furthest from
   the right way, surpassed the rest of Adam's descendants in serviceable
   endowments.

   Indeed, I would suggest that Moses specifically enumerated the arts
   invented by the family of Cain to inform us that Cain was not so cursed
   by God that he had no gifts to distribute to his descendants. For it is
   probable that others also were not lacking in talent, and that there
   was among other sons of Adam no lack of industrious and clever men who
   busied themselves in inventing and developing the arts. Clearly, here
   Moses is celebrating what was left of God's blessing, in a people whom
   we should otherwise regard as sterile and devoid of every other good.

   We must therefore recognize that, although the sons of Cain were
   deprived of the Spirit of regeneration, they were blessed with
   endowments far from negligible. In fact, the experience of all ages
   shows us how many rays of divine light have always gleamed among
   unbelieving nations, and have contributed to the improvement of our
   present life. And today we see glorious gifts of the Spirit spread
   throughout the whole human race. For the liberal and industrial arts
   and the sciences have come to us from profane men. Astronomy and the
   other branches of philosophy, medicine, political science -- we must
   admit that we have learned all these from them.

   No doubt God endowed them so liberally with his excellent favors to
   give them no excuse for their impiety. But while we are amazed at the
   riches of his grace which God pours out on them, we marvel much more at
   the grace of regeneration given us, by which God sanctifies his elect
   to be his own.

   Although the invention of the lyre and of other musical instruments
   serves our enjoyment and our pleasures rather than our needs, it ought
   not on that account to be judged of no value; still less should it be
   condemned. Pleasure is to be condemned only when it is not combined
   with reverence for God and not related to the common welfare of
   society. But music by its nature is adapted to rouse our devotion to
   God and to aid the well-being of man; we need only avoid enticements to
   shame, and empty entertainments which keep men from better employments
   and are simply a waste of time.

   However, even if you think the invention of the lyre does not in itself
   deserve much praise, everyone knows how long and how widely people have
   valued the carpenter's skill.

   To conclude -- in my opinion, Moses here wished to show that the race
   of Cain excelled in many important endowments which at once made their
   impiety inexcusable and were shining witnesses to God's goodness.

   Jabal is said to be the father of the people who live in tents because
   he invented that convenient shelter, and others afterwards imitated
   him.

   And God made two great lights, the greater light to rule the day, and
   the lesser light to rule the night; he made the stars also. Gen. 1:16.

   The greater light. I have already said that Moses is not analyzing
   acutely, like the philosophers, the secrets of nature; and these words
   show it. First he sets the planets and stars in the expanse of the
   heaven. Astronomers distinguish a number of spheres in the firmament
   and teach that the fixed stars have their own place in it. Moses
   mentions two great luminaries. The astronomers prove with strong
   arguments that the star Saturn, which seems small because of its
   distance, is larger than the moon.

   All this shows that Moses described in popular style what all ordinary
   men without training and education perceive with their ordinary senses.
   Astronomers, on the other hand, investigate with great labor whatever
   the keenness of man's intellect is able to discover. Such study is
   certainly not to be disapproved, nor science condemned with the
   insolence of some fanatics who habitually reject whatever is unknown to
   them.

   The study of astronomy not only gives pleasure but is also extremely
   useful. And no one can deny that it admirably reveals the wisdom of
   God. Therefore, clever men who expend their labor upon it are to be
   praised and those who have ability and leisure ought not to neglect
   work of that kind.

   Moses did not wish to keep us from such study when he omitted the
   details belonging to the science. But, since he had been appointed
   guide of rude and unlearned men rather than of the learned, he could
   not fulfill his duty except by coming down to their level. If he had
   spoken of matters unknown to the crowd, the unlearned could say that
   his teaching was over their heads. In fact, when the Spirit of God
   opens a common school for all, it is not strange that he chooses to
   teach especially what can be understood by all.

   When the astronomer seeks the true size of stars and finds the moon
   smaller than Saturn, he gives us specialized knowledge. But the eye
   sees things differently; and Moses adapts himself to the ordinary view.

   God has stretched out his hand to us to give us the splendor of the sun
   and moon to enjoy. Great would be our ingratitude if we shut our eyes
   to this experience of beauty! There is no reason why clever men should
   jeer at Moses' ignorance. He is not explaining the heavens to us but
   describing what is before our eyes. Let the astronomers possess their
   own deeper knowledge. Meanwhile, those who see the nightly splendor of
   the moon are possessed by perverse ingratitude if they do not recognize
   the goodness of God.

  4. MARRIAGE

   And the Lord God said, It is not good that the man should be alone; I
   will make a helpmeet for him. Gen. 2:18.

   Here Moses explains God's purpose in creating woman. God wished the
   earth to be populated by men who would live together and create a
   society. Some may question whether God's purpose included offspring;
   for the words say only that since it is not well for a man to be alone,
   a woman had to be created to be his helpmate. But as I understand it,
   when God took the first steps towards a human society, he intended the
   others to follow each in turn. We have then a general principle: man
   was created to be a social animal. Now since the human race could not
   exist without woman, no bond whatever in human relations is more sacred
   than that by which husband and wife unite to become one body and one
   soul. On this point, nature itself taught Plato and others among the
   saner philosophers to speak with wisdom.

   But although God made the statement that it is not good for man to be
   alone about Adam, I do not restrict it to his single person. I consider
   it rather a general rule for human living. Therefore everyone ought to
   take as a precept directed to himself that solitude is not good --
   except for a man whom God exempts as a matter of unusual privilege.

   Many think celibacy furthers their plans and refrain from marriage to
   avoid trouble. But it is not only worldly people who say that, if a man
   wants to be happy, he should stay away from a wife. Jerome's book
   against Jovinian is crammed with petulant insults by which he tries to
   make sacred marriage hateful and to disgrace it. Let men of faith learn
   to fight the evil suggestions of Satan with this Word of God, by which
   he decrees married life for man, not for his ruin but for his
   well-being.

   I will make a helpmeet for him. Why is the verb used here not plural,
   as it was in the account of the creation of man when it said, Let us
   make? (Gen. 1:26). Some think that the change indicates a difference
   between the sexes and shows how greatly superior man is to woman. But a
   different, although not altogether contradictory, interpretation
   pleases me better. When the human race was created in the person of a
   man, a dignity common to all humanity was universally conferred with
   the words let us make man. There was no need to repeat this at the
   creation of a woman, for she was really a supplement to the man. We
   certainly cannot deny that woman also, perhaps in a secondary way, was
   created in the image of God. Hence it follows that what was said of man
   applies equally to woman.

   Now when God designates woman as man's helper, he is not giving women a
   rule to determine their vocation in life by assigning them a special
   task; he is rather declaring that marriage itself will be man's best
   help in life. Let us then accept it as a rule of nature that a woman is
   a man's helper. Of course we know the common proverb that she is a
   necessary evil, but we ought to listen to the voice of God which
   asserts that woman was given to man as a companion and partner to help
   him to live really well.

   I confess indeed that in the present corrupt state of the human race,
   God's blessing as here described is not often seen and amounts to
   little. But we must keep in mind the reason for this evil. We have
   perverted the order of nature instituted by God. If man still had today
   the wholeness which he had in the beginning, God's ordinance would be
   fulfilled and the sweetest harmony would reign in marriage. For man
   would look to God; and woman, equally faithful, would be his helper.
   Being both of one mind, they would cherish an association no less holy
   than friendly and peaceful. Now because of our own wickedness and
   corrupt nature such married bliss is for the most part lost or at least
   is marred by many annoyances. Quarrels arise, and hurt feelings,
   bitterness, discords, and a great sea of trouble. So it happens that
   men are often seriously distressed by their wives and think of them as
   a hindrance.

   Yet marriage cannot be so wholly spoiled by man's sin that the blessing
   with which God hallowed it by his word is entirely abolished and no
   longer exists. Therefore in spite of the many troubles of married life,
   which arise from our degenerate nature, there remains a residuum of
   divine good; in a fire which is almost smothered, some sparks still
   glow.

   From this truth follows another: women should learn their duty, strive
   by helping their husbands to fulfill God's purpose. And men also ought
   to consider carefully what they owe in return to half of the human
   race. A mutual obligation binds both sexes. By God's law woman is given
   to man as helper, so that he may do his part as the head and leader.

   We must observe one more thing. It is not only because of the necessity
   which we have suffered since Adam's fall that the woman is called man's
   helper. Even if man had remained obedient and whole, the woman would
   still have become his helpmate. But now when marriage is also a remedy
   for lust, we have in it a double gift from God. But the second is
   incidental.

   Because I have known him, therefore he shall teach his sons and his
   household after him and they will do justice and right judgment. Gen.
   8:19. (Calvin's wording.)

   He shall teach his sons. This is the second reason why God wished
   Abraham to share his counsel. He did not reveal it without a purpose.
   The plain meaning of the verse is that Abraham is told of God's plan
   because he is to perform the task of a good father and teach his
   family. So we infer that Abraham was told of Sodom's coming destruction
   not for his own sake alone, but as a kindness to all his descendants.

   Indeed, the scope of God's purpose must be carefully noted. His will,
   as made known to Abraham, bound all Abraham's descendants. Certainly
   God does not make his will known to us with the intent that the
   knowledge of him should perish with us. He requires us to be his
   witnesses to the next generation so that they in turn may hand on what
   they have received from us to our remoter descendants. Therefore it is
   a father's duty to teach his sons what he himself has learned from God.
   In this way we must propagate God's truth. It was not given us for our
   private enjoyment; we must mutually strengthen one another according to
   our calling and our faith.

   There is no doubt that the gross ignorance which prevails in the world
   is the just punishment of men's indolence. For while the greater part
   of the people shut their eyes to the light shed by heavenly doctrine,
   many smother it by making no effort to transmit it to their children.
   God rightly withholds the precious treasures of his Word as punishment
   for the world's indolence.

   We must consider particularly the phrase after him, which teaches us
   that God's care is not limited to our own lives. He takes measures to
   provide that his eternal truth live and flourish after our death and
   that a holy manner of life continue on earth when we are dead. Hence we
   also conclude that histories which inspire terror in us are worth
   knowing, since our carnal confidence needs a sharp stimulus so that we
   may be stung to fear God.

   Let no one imagine that this kind of teaching does not apply to him;
   for when God mentions the sons of Abraham, he means the whole household
   of the church. There are perverse and deluded interpreters who insist
   that if they terrify consciences they repel and discourage faith.
   However, nothing is more alien to faith than disrespect and sloth; and
   on the other hand, the teaching which leads men to the fear of God fits
   most perfectly with the preaching of mercy, for it brings unhappy and
   hungry men running to Christ.

   And they will keep the way of the Lord. With these words Moses shows
   that the judgment of God is announced not only in order that those who
   in their stupidity are well satisfied with themselves may be filled
   with dread, and so be driven to long for the grace of Christ, but also
   in order that the faithful who are already endowed with fear of God may
   become more and more practiced in the pursuit of religion. God desires
   to have Sodom's destruction recounted not only to draw wicked men
   toward himself by their fear of the same punishment, but also to give
   to those who have already begun to serve God a better understanding of
   true obedience. The law contributes not only to the beginning of
   repentance, but also to our continuing perseverance [in the Christian
   life].

   When Moses adds that they may do justice and right judgment he is
   describing briefly the way of God which he has already mentioned.
   Although the definition is not complete, yet he briefly indicates by
   synecdoche the duties of the second table of the law, and shows us what
   God especially requires of us. The Scripture often draws a description
   of a good and godly life from the second table of the law; not that
   love of neighbor is more important than the service of God, but that
   men can prove their loyalty to God only by living honestly and doing no
   injury to their neighbors. By the words justice and right judgment, he
   includes the kind of equity which gives to each man his due. If one
   wants to differentiate between the two words, justice implies the
   honesty and kindness which we practice, when we strive to help our
   brothers in every way and avoid hurting them in any way by fraud and
   violence. Right judgment means that we stretch out our hands to the
   poor and oppressed, that we see and support good causes, that we work
   hard to keep the weak from being unjustly hurt. These are the lawful
   tasks with which the Lord orders his own to keep occupied.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [93] Sorbonne the original name of the University of Paris, founded by
   Robert de Sorbon in 1256. The university, where Thomas Aquinas had
   taught, was in the sixteenth century a citadel of Catholic orthodoxy,
   and its theologians defended it zealously against the Lutheran heresy.

   [94] 106-43 B.C. Roman statesman and philosopher who was regarded very
   highly during the Renaissance. He belonged to the New Academy and was
   deeply imbued with Stoic ethics. His more famous writings are "On the
   Supreme Good," the "Tusculan Disputations," "On the Nature of the
   Gods," "On Duties" (de Officiis). He was also a great stylist and was
   eagerly emulated during the Revival of Learning.

   [95] Put together by Calvin in his Harmony of the Pentateuch. Calvin's
   commentary on the last four books of Moses presents the material in the
   form of a harmony. The work as a whole (four volumes in the Edinburgh
   edition) is an astonishing achievement. The laws are arranged, with a
   combination of insight and ingenuity, under the ten laws of the "Two
   Tablets" of Sinai. Parallel laws are treated together. The fundamental
   purpose of each command, both for ancient Israel and for the church of
   Calvin's day, is briefly explained. Calvin's arrangement is primarily
   topical but the narrative sections are fitted together to present a
   reasonable sequence of events. The volumes cannot be fairly presented
   in excerpts, but Calvin's treatment of the law should "be commended"
   especially to the Biblical theologians of the present day.

   [96] Julian the Apostate -- A.D. 361-363. Roman emperor, who tried to
   revive a syncretistic form of paganism, made up of mystery religion,
   polytheism, and Neoplatonic philosophy. He died fighting the Persians
   in Mesopotamia. Even though he incurred the hostility of the church, he
   was a great emperor.

   [97] Tatianists. Named after Tatian, an Assyrian Christian, these
   heretics were infected with Gnosticism and Docetism, and are even
   better remembered for their extreme asceticism. They condemned
   marriage, meat, and wine.

   [98] The Manichaeans are especially important in the church because of
   the controversy of Saint Augustine with them. These dualists, who
   derived their heresy ultimately from Zoroastrianism, had many adherents
   because of the neat way they explained the origin of evil in one god
   and the origin of good in another. In its Christianized form, this
   heresy identified the treason with Ahriman, the evil god, and Christ
   with Ormazd, the good god. Flesh was evil, spirit was good. Hence they
   forbade eggs and milk as well as meat; they also forbade marriage and
   bathing.

   [99] Montanus was a heretic of the early second century A.D., from
   Phrygia in Asia Minor, and his followers were called both Montanists
   and Phrygians. They received a new dispensation of the Spirit superior
   to that of Christ or of the apostles, and waited eagerly for the
   Parousia. They were visionaries and ascetics, forbidding marriage; and
   during prolonged fastings they forbade wine, meat, fruits, and bathing.
   This was a heresy which was espoused by Tertullian and left deep marks
   in the ancient church.

   [100] Encratites, second-century heretics, believed in the inherently
   evil character of matter and advocated abstinence from marriage, flesh,
   and wine. They believed like the Marcionites that the Creator was the
   inferior God.

   [101] Eusebius of Caesarea (A.D. 260-340) was a bishop and church
   historian who wrote the Ecclesiastical History which is an
   indispensable source book for the history of the ancient church (A.D.
   325) inclusive of the reign of Constantine. This is a majestic account
   of the struggle and the triumph of the church of Jesus Christ.

   [102] Apollonius Claudius, bishop of Phrygia, c. 171, a learned man and
   opponent of Montanism.

   [103] Jeremiah appears to be a surprising slip of memory for Isaiah
   (ch. 20:2), or for Micah (ch. 1:8); but it is possible that Calvin had
   in mind Jeremiah's journey to the Euphrates; if the prophet wore only
   his girdle and buried it there, he certainly returned "naked."
     __________________________________________________________________

IX The Church

  THE TEXT

  1. THE CONDITION OF THE CHURCH

   On the next day much people that were come to the feast, when they
   heard that Jesus was coming to Jerusalem, took branches of palm trees,
   and went forth to meet him, and cried, Hosanna! Blessed is the King of
   Israel that cometh in the name of the Lord. And Jesus, when he had
   found a young ass, sat thereon; as it is written, Fear not daughter of
   Lion; behold thy king cometh, sitting on an ass's colt. John 12:12-15.

   Branches of palm trees. Among the ancients, the palm was a symbol of
   victory and peace. Moreover, they used palm branches when they invested
   someone with sovereignty, or when they came as suppliants before a
   victorious king or general. But these folk carried palm branches as a
   sign of festive joy at the coming of the new King.

   They shouted, Hosanna! and so shouting, they voiced their conviction
   that Jesus Christ was the Messiah, promised by the fathers of old,
   their hope of deliverance and salvation. For Psalm 118, from which this
   exclamation is taken, was written about the Messiah, to the end that
   the saints might ardently hope for and continually desire his coming,
   and that they might receive him with reverence when he appeared.
   Therefore, it is a probable, if not a certain inference, that this
   prayer was common among the Jews, and was in everybody's mouth.
   Therefore, the Spirit of God moved these people to address their prayer
   to Christ; and they thus became his chosen heralds to testify that the
   Messiah had come. Hosanna is made up of two Hebrew words, which mean,
   "save, I pray Thee." The Hebrews pronounce it Hoshia-nna. The sound of
   words is often corrupted when transliterated into another language. Yet
   the Evangelists, who wrote in Greek, purposely kept the Hebrew word, to
   express properly the fact that the crowd used a solemn form of prayer
   which had come down from David and was kept by the people of God
   through the ages for the special and sacred purpose of blessing the
   Kingdom of Christ. The words which come next, Blessed is he that cometh
   in the name of the Lord, were used to the same end. For this is a
   propitious prayer for the joyful and prosperous success of Christ's
   Kingdom, upon which depends the restoration and the happiness of the
   church of God.

   And now we have to untie the knot that in this psalm David speaks of
   himself rather than of Christ; and this won't be too difficult. We know
   that a kingdom was established in the hands of David and his posterity,
   in anticipation of that everlasting Kingdom which was to appear in its
   own time. We do not need to believe that David was thinking only of
   himself. What is more, the Lord himself sent prophets who turned the
   eyes of the godly in another direction. Therefore, what David sings
   about himself is rightly applied to the Redeemer who was to come from
   his seed. . . .

   That cometh in the name of the Lord. We must first understand the
   meaning of this expression. A man comes in the name of the Lord when he
   neither rashly pushes himself forward, nor usurps honor under false
   pretenses, but when he has been called by God, accepts him as the
   author and the guide of his actions. This eulogy applies to all the
   true servants of God. A prophet comes in the name of the Lord, directed
   by the Spirit of God; and delivers to men the pure doctrine which he
   receives from heaven. So also, a king comes in the name of the Lord,
   when God governs his people by his hand. But since the Spirit of the
   Lord rested upon Christ, and since he is the Head of the church, all
   those who have ever been ordained to rule over the church are subject
   to him; they are indeed as streams flowing from a Fountain. Christ is
   said properly to have come in the name of the Lord; not only because he
   excels all others in authority, but also because God has totally
   revealed himself in Christ. For in him dwells the fullness of Deity
   bodily, as Paul says in Col. 2:9; and he himself is the living image of
   God; in short, he is truly Immanuel. He has a special right to this
   eulogy, because God manifested himself in him wholly, and not partially
   as he had done by the prophets. Therefore, if we want to honor God's
   servants, we ought to start with the Head.

   Rejoice, thou barren who didst not bear, rejoice and be glad, thou who
   hadst no children! For the sons of the widowed are more than the sons
   of the wife, saith the Lord. Enlarge the space of your tents and extend
   your tent cords. Isa. 54:1-2. (Calvin's wording.)

   After speaking of the death of Christ, the prophet rightly turns to the
   church to give us a better understanding of what Christ's death has
   done and accomplished for us. There would be no such understanding if
   Christ's death were considered by itself. Therefore we must turn to his
   body which is the church. Christ suffered for the church -- not for
   himself.

   The same order is followed in the Creed of our faith. After we confess
   that we believe in Christ who suffered for us and was crucified, we
   continue by affirming that we believe in the church which, as it were,
   flowed from his side. So Isaiah, after speaking of the death,
   resurrection, and triumph of Christ, rightly comes down to the church
   which is never to be separated from its Head. In this way, each one of
   the faithful may learn from his own experience that Christ did not
   suffer in vain.

   If this teaching had been omitted, the faithful could not fortify their
   hearts with the hope of the restoration of the church. But the
   congratulation in these verses shows plainly that when Christ comes
   forth from death as conqueror, he conquers not for himself alone, but
   also to breathe life into his body, which is the church. . . .

   Tents. The metaphor is taken from a kind of dwelling common in that
   region. The church is compared to tents because it has no solid
   structure in the world. It always appears unsettled and wandering, and
   is moved here and there in various migrations, as necessity requires.
   But I am sure the prophet was also thinking of that earlier liberation
   of God's people, when they were led through the desert and lived in
   tents forty years. In memory of that liberation, they later held yearly
   a solemn feast, according to God's commandment. And as we have said,
   the prophets habitually refer to it.

   Someone will object that the structure built by the ministers of the
   Word is too solid to be compared to a tent. But I answer: The likeness
   to a tent refers to the external appearance of the church rather than
   to its spiritual or essential (if I may use the word) existence. The
   true structure of the church is the Kingdom of God, and this is neither
   frail nor like a tent in any way. But in the meantime, the external
   church is moved here and there because it has no firm habitation in
   which it can abide. It is more solid and stronger than the
   best-fortified citadels because, relying on God's unconquerable power,
   it scorns all peril. But it is like a tent because it is not supported
   by earthly resources, wealth, and power.

   Next we come to the reason the prophet orders that the cords be
   lengthened to enlarge the tent; obviously because no ordinary sized
   place was sufficient to hold the people whom God was going to gather
   from all parts of the world into one church.

   Thus saith the Lord, the Redeemer of Israel, his Holy One, to the
   despicable of soul, to the abominable race, to the slave of masters:
   Kings will see and princes will stand up and adore, because of the
   Lord; because faithful is the Holy One of Israel and he who chose thee.
   Isa. 49:7. (Calvin's wording.)

   Isaiah continues the same theme to enable the people, who are suffering
   from a heavy disaster, to take hold of the hope of a better future. To
   strengthen their hope the more, he calls God who promises them
   deliverance, the Redeemer and the Holy One of Israel.

   Someone will object that this is a contradiction. God is called the
   Redeemer of the very people whom he has abandoned to oppression. Where
   is the redemption, where is the holiness, when the people could see
   that they were wretched and ruined? I answer, The prophet reminds them
   of their past history as a ground for confidence and hope. Since the
   Jews were overwhelmed with despair, the prophet protested and argued
   that the God who had formerly redeemed their fathers was still mighty
   and still possessed the same power as of old. Therefore, although he
   had for a time hidden his salvation in order to exercise the faith of
   the godly, believers were commanded to stand firm with uplifted hearts,
   because their redemption by God's hand was sure. Meanwhile, it was
   necessary for them to think thoughts far removed from the experience of
   the senses.

   This passage is important for us, because from it we learn how great is
   the faith we need when God speaks to us. For his promises are not
   fulfilled immediately, and he lets us suffer and endure affliction for
   a long time.

   Some translate bezoh as "despised," and some as "despicable." I prefer
   the latter. God adds to the people's misery by declaring that their
   souls are despicable in his sight. Many who are despised by others are
   still worthy of honor because they are gifted men; such people do not
   cease to swell with pride, and they trample down the pride of those who
   despise them with their own greater pride. But God says here that he
   himself despises this people no less than they are despised by their
   fellow men. But his purpose in describing the extremity of their
   disgrace and misery is to assure them that the time of their deepest
   humiliation will also be the acceptable time when he shall bring them
   his help.

   The abominable nation. I see no reason why some change the number of
   nation, goy, to the plural when the prophet uses the singular. It is
   certain that these words are addressed especially to the race of
   Abraham.

   He adds serve masters, that is, "be oppressed by strong tyrants" for
   meshalim means those who have so much strength and power that it is not
   easy to escape from their hands.

   When God says that kings shall see, he speaks magnificently of the
   liberation of his people; yet meanwhile he permits them to be tried in
   a fiery furnace, to make trial of their patience and faith. For if what
   God promised occurred immediately, before he had even finished
   speaking, there would be no place for the exercise of faith.

   The repetition in naming the rulers is customary in Hebrew. We should
   say "kings and princes shall see; they shall stand up and adore." The
   verb adore explains stand up. (Today we stand up to honor someone.)
   Briefly, the greatest princes of the world shall stand up, as they
   testify that the restoration of God's people is God's own glorious
   work, worthy of reverence

   Because he is faithful. This is the reason for the admiration and honor
   which the princes show to God. They will come to know God's
   faithfulness and constancy with regard to his promises. Moreover, God
   wishes to be known as true, not as an abstract concept, but through the
   experience of the way he preserves the people whom he has adopted.
   Therefore, let us learn that the promises of God are not to be
   estimated by our [immediate] situation, but by his truth. When nothing
   but destruction and death hangs over us, let us remember these words by
   which God constrained a despicable and contemptible people.

   Also, we must realize how great and wonderful is God's work in
   liberating the church. Proud kings who think nothing worth looking at
   or valuable are compelled to see, to wonder, to be amazed, and even
   against their will to reverence God. This new and unprecedented work of
   God is especially commended to us, and our own judgment tells us what
   and how great it is; for even if we ignore past history, we know our
   own liberation from the miserable tyranny of Antichrist. When we
   consider our own situation carefully, it must, in the psalmist's words,
   seem to us a dream (Ps. 126:1). God has done a stupendous and
   incredible work in us who bear Christ's name.

   And who hath chosen thee. At the end of the verse the prophet repeats
   what he had mentioned before, that this people had been set apart by
   God. But we must realize that election is the beginning of
   sanctification. This people was God's holy inheritance only because God
   had of his mere good pleasure thought it good to choose them, therefore
   [in these words], Isaiah points to the hidden will of God as the source
   from which sanctification flows. He thus prevents Israel from thinking
   themselves separated from others on account of their own merit; it is
   as though he had said, "The Lord who chose you confirmed his choice by
   his own work in you, and demonstrated it by its effects." In the same
   way, God's faithfulness must be known in our salvation, and our
   salvation must equally be ascribed to his election. Meanwhile, let all
   who desire to share in this great good become a part of Israel, that
   is, of the church, outside of which there can be neither salvation nor
   truth.

   For behold, in those days, and in the time, when I bring again the
   captivity of Judah and Jerusalem, then I will also gather all nations,
   and I will bring them down to the valley of Jehoshaphat. . . . Joel
   3:1-2.

   The prophet said this when the Jews were an object of hatred to all
   peoples and were, so to speak, the dregs and filth of the whole world.
   The enemies of the Jews were as many as there were nations under the
   sky. And the Jews, seeing the hostility of the whole world, were likely
   to slip into complete despair. They would think: "Even if God wishes to
   save us, there are so many obstacles that we are certain to perish. The
   Assyrians are not our only enemies; we have met still greater hatred
   from all our neighbors." For we know that the Moabites and Ammonites,
   Tyrians, Sidonians, Philistines, in fact whatever peoples were in that
   region, had been most hostile to the Jews. And since all roads to their
   country were closed [to the exiled Jews], it was difficult for them to
   imagine any hope except by the inspiration of the Lord himself.

   For this reason, the prophet said that God would be the judge of the
   whole world, and that it is within his will and power to summon all
   nations. . . .

   Moreover he says this summons will occur in those days and at that time
   when the Lord brings back the captivity of Judah and Jerusalem.
   Christian scholars force this into a prophecy of Christ's coming. But
   they twist the words away from the sense which the context demands. For
   there is no doubt that the prophet here spoke of the return [from the
   exile]. Yet he included [in his prophecy] also the Kingdom of Christ.
   And as we have said elsewhere, this was a very common and frequent
   practice. When the prophets testified that God would be the Redeemer of
   his people and promised liberation from the Babylonian exile, they also
   led the faithful to Christ's Kingdom as if by a continuous pull toward
   it.

   For what was the restoration [from exile] but the prelude of the true
   and real redemption truly manifested in the person of Christ?
   Therefore, the prophet does not speak exclusively of the coming of
   Christ, nor of the return of the Jewish people; he embraces the whole
   process of redemption, which had only begun when God led his people
   back from the Babylonian exile, and continues from Christ's first
   coming to the Last Day. And when it is said that God will redeem his
   people, we are not to think this redemption will be a brief and
   instantaneous act God will continue to exercise his grace until he has
   exacted the penalty from all the enemies of his church. . . . In brief,
   the prophet does not reveal God as a halfway redeemer. God will not
   make an end until he has finished whatever belongs to the felicity of
   his church and has perfected it in all things. . . .

   Joel is saying: "God will not pour out a thin stream of grace. He will
   bring full redemption to his people. When the whole world rises against
   them, he will prevail because he himself will undertake to protect his
   church and defend the safety of his own." Therefore, those who strive
   to delay or hinder the restoration of the church will accomplish
   nothing. God is its vindicator, and he will judge all peoples.

   Now we must see why the prophet names the Valley of Jehoshaphat. Many
   think that valley was mentioned because it had been called the "valley
   of blessing" (2 Chron. 20:26). There, as we know, Jehoshaphat had won a
   great victory with only a small force, although many peoples had joined
   together against him. When he had fought against a great army and had
   conquered marvelously (for his followers were few), the people blessed
   God there, and the name Blessing was given to the place. Therefore,
   many think that the valley was mentioned here to recall to the Jews'
   remembrance how wonderfully they had been saved in the past. For the
   memory of that would surely turn their minds to hope. . . . And this
   seems to me a probable explanation.

   Some locate the Valley of Jehoshaphat between the Mount of Olives and
   the city; but I do not know how probable that conjecture is. In my
   judgment, the important point is that the text reminds the people of
   God's past goodness so as to inspire the faithful in all ages to hope
   for their own salvation.

   Others indeed prefer to interpret Jehoshaphat from the meaning of the
   root from which it is derived. (And certainly Jeho-shaphat means "the
   judgment of God.") They translate it as "the valley of God's judgment."
   If you prefer this meaning, I do not object. Certainly the name is
   appropriate, and even if the prophet is here speaking of the holy king
   in order to encourage the Jews to follow his example, there is no doubt
   that he is also referring to the judgment of God or to the verdict he
   will deliver in favor of his people. For the next words are I will
   decide upon them there; and the verb, like the name, is from the root
   shaphat. Clearly, if the name belongs to the place and was also the
   name of the king, the prophet wished to enlarge its meaning; it is as
   if he had said, "When God dwells in the midst of his people, he will
   call all nations to judgment; and this is what he now wills to declare
   and establish."

   Some twist the passage into a reference to the Last Judgment -- but
   that is violently forced. From that misinterpretation arose the idea
   that the whole world will gather in the Valley of Jehoshaphat. But we
   know such mad dreams filled the world when the light of sane teaching
   was quenched. It is not strange, after the world had so profaned the
   worship of God, that all men became fascinated with crude absurdities.
   But when we consider the prophet's purpose, there is no doubt that he
   names the Valley of Jehoshaphat to give hope to the Jews that God
   himself will guard their safety. He says frequently that God will live
   among them; later in this very chapter we read, And God will live in
   the midst of you.

   And I fed the flock of slaughter, truly (or therefore) the poor of the
   flock; and I took for myself two staffs, the one I called Elegance (or
   Beauty) and the other I called Cords (or as some translate, Destroyers.
   This we shall discuss); and I fed the flock. Zech. 11:7. (Calvin's
   wording.)

   Here the prophet continues an earlier theme and clarifies what had not
   been sufficiently explained: namely, that the ingratitude of the
   people, especially since it was combined with obstinacy, was worthy of
   death and left no room for pardon. God's Fatherly care had been basely
   and dishonorably rejected, as well as the gracious kindness which he
   had shown to the people.

   God declares that he has fed the flock. Others take Zechariah as the
   subject; but as I said, God is enumerating the favors which in time of
   peace he had conferred on the people until he saw that they were
   unworthy of any kindness. We should remember that the prophet is
   speaking to the remnant. He is not here recounting God's ancient favors
   to Israel, but describing the state of the people after their return
   from the exile in Babylon. In an earlier passage, God seemed to entrust
   this fraction of the people to Zechariah to feed. But as I have said,
   this whole address is intended to make it obvious that all guilt
   belonged to the people who had rejected God's kindness and stubbornly
   fought against him, leaving no room or entryway for his mercy. This
   remonstrance is therefore in the name of God himself.

   Truly the poor. Some translate because of. The word lakhen may
   introduce an explanation, or we may take the phrase to mean especially
   the poor. In any case, what the prophet means is that God had looked
   after the whole people because he hoped there were some sheep left who
   deserved mercy. God says that because he hoped there were some poor
   little sheep among the corrupt flock, he did not deem it hard or
   troublesome to lead his people as their shepherd. I fed the flock of
   slaughter, truly, he says, because there were in the flock some poor
   sheep whom I was unwilling to desert. I preferred to try everything
   rather than abandon one small sheep if there was one in the whole
   flock.

   He says he took two staffs, one called no'am, the other hobelim. Those
   who translate the second "destroyers" do indeed interpret the Hebrew
   word literally if we stick to the vowel points. But since hebel and the
   plural habalim means "ropes" or cords," I have no doubt that the
   prophet means here "small cords" or "binding twine." You say, "But the
   grammar does not permit that!" As if Zechariah had written the vowel
   points, which were not then in use! I know, of course, the great care
   with which the ancient scribes worked out the points, when the language
   was no longer in ordinary and familiar use. And those who neglect the
   points or reject them entirely are certainly lacking in sense and good
   judgment. But some right of choice must be allowed. If we read
   destroyers here, the words make no sense; and if we read cords we alter
   only the two vowel points, and not a single letter. Since the context
   itself requires "cords," I am astonished that interpreters have
   slavishly allowed themselves to be coerced [by two vowel points] and
   have not seen what the prophet was talking about.

   Now the prophet says He took two staffs, but obviously not to do the
   ordinary work of a shepherd. Any shepherd is content with one crook.
   (Staff here means a shepherd's crook.) And each shepherd works with his
   own crook. But here the prophet says that two crooks or shepherd's
   staffs were needed, because when God leads his people his care of them
   surpasses that of any human shepherd.

   But I leave the rest for tomorrow.

   Yesterday we said that the name habalim, by which Zechariah called the
   second staff, ought not to be translated "destroyers," as do all the
   Hebrews. God here teaches that he has done everything which can be done
   by a good and faithful shepherd, and that his people were perishing by
   their own fault. Now since God himself was discharging the duties of a
   shepherd, he could not have been carrying a staff for destruction.
   Besides, it is obvious that the prophet has put this word (habalim)
   together with the other, no'am. And finally, he says that the staff
   called habalim was broken to annul the brotherhood between Israel and
   Judah. What connection is there between "destroy" and "unite" ? It is
   correct therefore to take the name hobelim or habalim as "cords."

   Now we must see why the prophet names one staff Elegance or Beauty and
   the other Cords. Some think the no'am stands for natural law and
   habalim for the law of Moses. And those who translate "cords" (as
   Jerome rightly does here) think that since the law bound the ancient
   people to a hard yoke, it was called a rope because it constrained
   them. Others, like Jerome himself, refer to the words of Moses, When
   the Lord cast his cord, he chose a place in Israel, etc. (Deut. 32:8).
   And therefore they think that the cord stands for "inheritance." But
   the first interpretation is too farfetched and forced. And at variance
   with the second is the prophet's use of the word in the plural which is
   not consistent with inheritance. From the context it can be assumed, as
   we said yesterday, that cords are to be understood as union. Therefore,
   the text means that God had fulfilled the office of shepherd towards
   his chosen people and had prescribed for them the best possible order.
   This I understand from no'am. For nothing could more perfectly
   exemplify the beauty of order than the rule of life which God used for
   Israel. With good reason, therefore, he compares his shepherd's crook
   to Beauty; as if he said that the rule had been so perfectly fashioned
   that nothing better could be imagined.

   For the second staff he takes Unity or Concord, and this marked the
   height of his favor; for he had gathered together the scattered
   Israelites that they might once again be one people. It is true that
   few from the Kingdom of Israel had returned to their homeland; but it
   is clear that not all of the remnant was only from Judah, Benjamin, and
   the Levites; there were others mixed in with them. Therefore, the
   appropriate interpretation of this verse is that God had not only
   established a most beautiful order [of government], but had also added
   brotherly unity so that the sons of Abraham were joined together in one
   spirit and one soul.

   Therefore, since theirs was so good a shepherd, their ingratitude was
   the more shameful and unendurable when they threw off his yoke and
   refused to be guided by his staff. Now we see why the prophet used
   these words Beauty and Union, when he described God as carrying two
   staffs.

   Its waters will roar and toss tumultuously, and the mountains will be
   shaken with its swelling. Selah.

   The streamlets of her river will make glad the city of God, the holy
   place of the tabernacles of the Most High.

   God is in the midst of her; she shall not be moved. Ps. 46:3-5.
   (Calvin's wording.)

   To understand the full meaning of this [third] verse, we should read it
   with what follows. Although the waters of the sea roar and roll wildly,
   and the mountains themselves shake at the violent impact, the City of
   God in the midst of such dreadful turmoil lies happy and calm, content
   with its narrow streams. The prophet means that the narrow channel of a
   small river is enough to give complete joy to the Holy City, even if
   the whole world should quake. I have mentioned before how useful a
   teaching this passage contains. Our faith is truly tested when in a
   time of great conflict hell seems ready to engulf us. And here we have
   pictured for us the victory of our faith over the whole world, whenever
   faith rises to conquer all fears amid confusion and threats of complete
   destruction. The sons of God do not find danger laughable, nor do they
   jest at death; but in danger they rejoice because they know that God's
   promised aid outweighs all the evils which inspire terror. The
   sentiment of Horace appears very noble when he says of the righteous
   man, conscious of his own innocence:

   Si fractus illabitur orbis

   Impavidum ferient ruinae.

   (When all the bulwarks of the earth crash suddenly to pieces he will
   face without fear the falling fragments.) But since no one has ever
   found a man such as Horace imagines, the words are empty. True courage
   is founded altogether in God's protection; and those who rely upon God
   can boast not only that they are unafraid, but that they will be safe
   and secure when ruin overtakes the whole world. The prophet says
   explicitly that the City of God will be happy, although it does not
   possess a tumultuous sea which can throw its ever-surging waves against
   the assaults [of its enemies]. All it has is a little river. The
   prophet is referring to the brook which flowed from Siloah and went
   past Jerusalem. I have no doubt that he here blames obliquely the false
   confidence of those who are fortified with earthly resources and dream
   that they are beyond the reach of hostile weapons. Those who anxiously
   gather invincible garrisons appear indeed to be able to prevent
   invasion by foreign enemies, as though they were protected on all sides
   by the sea; but it often happens that they are overwhelmed by their own
   weapons as a tempest devastates and submerges an island in a flood. But
   those who trust themselves to God, although in the eyes of the world
   they are exposed to all kinds of injuries and have no defense to ward
   off attacks, nonetheless rest in security. For this reason, Isaiah
   (8:6) blames the Jews for despising the gently flowing waters of Siloah
   and seeking for deep and rapid rivers. . . .

   In the same way today also, the Spirit encourages and inspires us to
   the same constancy: to despise the forces of those who march against us
   in splendor and confidence, to stand tranquil among all commotions and
   disturbances. Nor need we be ashamed of our nakedness if God's hand is
   outstretched to preserve us. Therefore, although God's help drips in a
   small stream like a rivulet, it brings us more of tranquillity than if
   all the powers of the world were all heaped up together at one time for
   helping us.

   God in the midst of her. Now he shows how great the security of the
   church is, because God dwells in the midst of it. The verb will be
   moved is feminine in Hebrew and cannot refer to God as if he were going
   to remain stationary in the future. The statement means simply that the
   Holy City shall not be moved from its place because God dwells in it
   and is always ready to bring it help.

   But ye shall be named the priests of the Lord. Isa. 61:6.

   With these words the prophet shows the people how much more glorious
   their condition would be than it had been before; he means, "Up to now
   the Lord has chosen you for his own, but in the future he will honor
   you with much more splendid gifts, for he will elevate you all to
   priestly honor." As we know although the whole people was called a
   priestly Kingdom, only the tribe of Levi performed the priestly office.
   The prophet here announces that in the future all will be priests. But
   this did not become manifest until the reign of Christ, although the
   restoration of the church began when the people returned from Babylon.
   At the coming of Christ, all the faithful were honored and exalted with
   priestly dignity.

   We should consider the nature of this priesthood carefully. Animals are
   no longer to be slain as sacrifices to God; it is human beings that are
   to be brought as sacrifice -- that is brought to obedience to Christ --
   as Paul said he did when by the sword of the gospel, he made an
   offering of the Gentiles that they might obey God (Rom. 15:16).

   See then how childishly the papists misinterpret this passage when they
   use it to prove their own priesthood. Priests are set up by the pope
   and his followers to sacrifice Christ, not to teach the people. But
   Christ offered himself as a sacrifice for men's eternal redemption and
   he alone officiated in that priestly act. He simply orders the fruit of
   his sacrifice to be brought to us in the teaching of the gospel. Those
   who usurp his office and wish to repeat the offering which he completed
   are sacrilegious.

   But every one of us ought to offer himself and all his possessions to
   God in sacrifice, and so to perform his rightful priestly office.
   Secondly, ministers who are especially called to the office of teaching
   should use the sword of the Word to make men a sacrifice and to
   consecrate them to God. True ministers, certainly, are those who try or
   undertake nothing of themselves, but carry out faithfully and
   resolutely the commands which they have received from God.

   And thou shalt be a crown of glory in the hand of the Lord, and a royal
   diadem in the hand of thy God. Isa. 62:3.

   A royal diadem. He calls the church God's crown because God wishes his
   glory to shine in us. When we read this, we must see and wonder at the
   inconceivable goodness of God. For although we are by nature filthy and
   corrupt and more foul than the mire of the streets, he adorns us
   bounteously and desires to have us as the diadem of his Kingdom.

  2. THE MINISTRY

   From the Introduction to the Commentary on Isaiah.

   It is usual to cover many subjects in discussing the office of the
   prophet. But no summary (or explanation) of it pleases me better than
   one which relates the prophets to the law from which they drew their
   teaching as brooks flow from their source. Since the prophets set the
   law as the rule for themselves and copied it, they may properly be
   called and counted its interpreters. There is no separation between the
   two.

   The law contains three most important divisions: first, the teaching of
   the way of life; second, threats and promises; third, the covenant of
   grace, founded in Christ and including in itself all special promises.
   The sections dealing with ceremonies were exercises by which the people
   were kept to the worship of God and religion, and were appendixes to
   the first table.

   The prophets explained the teaching of the law more extensively than
   was done in the law itself and interpreted more fully what the two
   tables covered in few words; and they made clear what the Lord
   particularly required at the moment. The threats and promises which
   Moses stated in general, they fitted to their own time and made
   specific. Finally, what related to Christ and his Kingdom, expressed
   rather obscurely by Moses, the prophets announced more plainly, bearing
   fuller and richer witness to the covenant of grace.

   If we are to understand the relationship between the prophets and the
   law, we must discuss the matter in more detail. God established the law
   itself as the perpetual rule of his church, to be always in the hands
   of men, and to be followed by all posterity. But he saw the danger that
   the teaching transmitted by Moses would not be enough for a rude and
   unruly people. And further, he saw that the people themselves could
   scarcely be restrained except by a tighter rein. Therefore, since, he
   had forbidden them to consult either magi or soothsayers, either
   astrologers or observers of animals' entrails, and had required them to
   be satisfied with his teaching alone, he added the promise that a
   prophet would never be wanting in Israel (Deut. 18:15).

   He did this with the purpose of meeting the anticipated complaint of
   the people that their situation was worse than that of any of the
   heathen, for the latter had their divining priests, pontiffs,
   interpreters of omens, casters of lots, astrologers, soothsayers, and
   such like, to whom they could go for advice; but they themselves had
   nobody to help them in case of doubt and uncertainty. To remove every
   excuse for their polluting themselves with the accursed rites of the
   nations, God promised to raise up prophets through whom he would
   disclose his purpose; they would faithfully proclaim whatever he
   commanded so that in the future the people could not complain of
   lacking anything.

   The promise of a prophet is an exchange of number, heterosis (the
   singular stands for the plural). For although the passage looks ahead
   to (Fr. applies to) Christ, as Peter clearly, most appropriately and
   emphatically, interprets it (Acts 3:22), and although Christ is the
   chief of the prophets and on him all depend in their teaching and to
   him all with one consent look, yet the words apply also to the other
   prophets who are included collectively in the singular noun. Therefore,
   when God promised prophets through whom he would disclose his mind and
   purpose, he ordered the people to assent to their interpretations [of
   the law] and to their teaching.

   God did not intend the prophets to add anything to the law. They were
   to interpret it faithfully and establish its authority. So when Malachi
   (in ch. 4) urges the people to be constant in sincere faith, and orders
   them to continue in the teaching of their religion, he says, Remember
   the law of Moses, my servant, which I commanded him in Horeb for all
   Israel. He recalls them to the one law of God and commands them to be
   content with it. Does Malachi wish the prophets to be ignored? By no
   means! But since the prophets are dependent on the law, and the law
   summarily includes everything, his statement is sufficiently inclusive.
   Those who believe the teaching of the law in its main divisions and
   devote themselves to them will not neglect the prophets. It is absurd
   to boast of zeal for the law, when one neglects the divine
   interpretation of it. So today, many insolent men boast of their zeal
   for the Word, while they in no way accept the pious counsel and
   warnings drawn from the teaching of the Word.

   When the prophets dealt with morals, they brought forward nothing new;
   they clarified the things in the law which were wrongly understood. For
   example, the people thought that when they offered sacrifices and kept
   the external ceremonies they had done their duty perfectly. For the
   world measured God by its own notions and worshiped him with material
   gifts. The prophets condemned this attitude severely and showed that
   all the ceremonies without sincerity of heart are worthless, that God
   is worshiped when men call upon him with true faith. Of course the law
   itself bears sufficient witness to this truth. But it needed to be
   taught more diligently and oftener brought to the people's attention.
   Besides, it was necessary to expose the hypocrisy which leads men to
   cover themselves with the concealing garments of ceremonies. As for the
   second table of the law, it is from there that the prophets draw when
   they exhort men to desist from all injury, violence, and fraud. Thus
   they do nothing else but keep the people to the obedience of the law.

   The prophets have a special task with regard to threats and promises.
   They note specifically, as if with a pointing finger, what Moses stated
   in general terms. Besides, they have their own vision by which the Lord
   unveils the future so that they may apply the promises and threats to
   the immediate need of the people, and bear witness more definitely and
   certainly to the will of God. Moses threatens, God will pursue you in
   battle. . . . The prophets say, Behold God will arm the Assyrians; he
   will hiss for the Egyptians.

   Also the prophets are much more clear when they speak of the covenant
   of grace, and they establish the people more firmly in it. For they
   always call the people back to it when they wish to comfort them. And
   they set before them the coming of Christ, who was both the foundation
   of the covenant and the bond of mutual communion between God and the
   people. Therefore the whole sum of the promises must be referred to
   Christ. Anyone who believes this will easily understand what to look
   for in the prophets and what their purpose was in writing as they did.
   For the present, it is enough to point it out.

   From the prophets, therefore, we should learn how we are to carry out
   the teaching of the Word. We must imitate them in seeking from the Word
   advice, judgment, threats, and consolations which are suited to the
   people in their present situation. For although the revelation given to
   us is not such that we can presume to predict the future, yet our
   teaching is valid when we exhibit the judgments of God from the history
   and example of the ancient people by comparing the ways of men in our
   time with those of theirs.

   For what God formerly punished, he will punish no less today, since he
   is forever like himself. Let wise teachers keep this insight if they
   wish to treat the teaching of the prophets fruitfully.

   And the Lord put out his hand and touched my mouth; and the Lord said
   to me, Behold, I have put my words in your mouth.

   See, I have appointed you (or set you) today over nations and kingdoms.

   And you, gird up your loins and rise, and speak. . . and fear not
   before them. Jer. 1:9-10, 17. (Calvin's wording.)

   Jeremiah is here describing his call so that his teaching may not be
   ignored as if it came from a man in his private capacity. He asserts
   that he did not come forward of his own accord, but was sent by God and
   instructed in his duty as prophet by Him. He says that for this purpose
   God put His words in his mouth.

   This passage should be carefully studied, since Jeremiah here describes
   briefly how anyone who accepts the office of a teacher in the church
   ought to decide concerning his call. He must bring to his work nothing
   of his own. So Peter also says in his first letter, If any man speak,
   let him speak as it were the oracles of God (1 Peter 4:11); that is, he
   should not speak uncertainly as if he were giving out comments of his
   own, but he should be able to speak out confidently without hesitation
   in the name of God; just as Jeremiah in this passage demands to be
   heard because, as he declares, God has put his words in his mouth. We
   can be sure that whatever comes from man's own cleverness may be
   ignored. God demands for himself alone the honor of being heard in his
   church (as I said yesterday).

   Hence it follows that none should be recognized as servants of God,
   none should be counted just and faithful prophets or teachers, unless
   God is speaking through them, unless they invent nothing by themselves
   and teach nothing by their own will, but preach only what God commands.

   For Jeremiah, a visible symbol was added to give greater assurance of
   his vocation. However, this is not to be made a general rule as if it
   were necessary for the tongues of all teachers to be touched by God's
   hand. Here the reality is combined with the external sign. It is the
   reality which gives to all the servants of God the rule not to express
   their own comments but simply to transmit, as if from hand to hand,
   what they have received from God. It was peculiar to Jeremiah that God
   stretched out his hand and touched his mouth to show plainly that the
   prophet's mouth was consecrated to God. For us, it is enough to
   understand clearly how important it is that the tongues of ministers of
   the Word are consecrated to God and that they are not to mix their own
   theories with his pure doctrine. In the person of Jeremiah, God
   intended to give us a visible sign of this consecration, by reaching
   out his hand to touch his mouth.

   After God has testified that Jeremiah's tongue is consecrated to Him
   and set apart from common and profane use, God assigns him his
   authority. See, he says, I have set you over nations and kingdoms. With
   these words, God shows the great reverence which he wishes done to his
   Word, even when delivered by mortal men. There is no one who does not
   profess that he is willing to obey God, but there is scarcely one in a
   hundred who welcomes his Word. As soon as it is spoken, men raise
   violent objections; or if they do not dare to show their fury and
   hostility, we see how they resist it, some by excuses, some by silence.
   Therefore the authority which God gives to his Word should be well
   noted.

   God says, Behold, I have appointed you, and thus encourages the prophet
   to be high-minded, to remember his vocation, and not to flatter men
   slavishly nor comply with their selfish desires. See, he says. By this
   word we should understand that teachers cannot pursue their calling
   with full vigor unless the majesty of God stands vividly before their
   eyes. For they can despise whatever splendor and power and pomp they
   find among men only when they compare them with God's glory. Experience
   teaches that when we turn our eyes on men, whatever dignity they
   possess, even though it be small, inspires us with fear.

   Why are prophets and teachers sent? Truly to call the whole world to
   order; not to spare their hearers but to denounce them freely whenever
   there is need, even to threaten them when they appear obstinate. If the
   teacher allows himself to be impressed with any sort of superiority in
   men, he will not dare to offend those whom he thinks distinguished by
   power or wealth, or by some reputation for wisdom or honor. There is no
   remedy against such fears, except for teachers to keep God before their
   eyes and to be assured that he is the author of their words. When their
   minds are raised to God, they can look down on all human heights and
   excellencies. This is the purpose of the words God uses, See, I have
   appointed you over nations and kingdoms. Here God affirms that the
   authority of his Word is so great that it makes subject to itself
   whatever is high and mighty upon earth -- even kings not excepted.

   But what God has joined together, man may not separate. It is true that
   God here exalts his prophets above the whole world, even above kings.
   But just before, he had said, Lo, I put my words in your mouth.
   Therefore, whoever would claim such great authority for himself must
   proclaim God's Word and prove himself to be a prophet in reality by
   injecting no comments of his own into it. . . . To conclude -- we see
   from the context that it is not men who are so highly exalted, even if
   they are true ministers of the heavenly doctrine, but the content of
   the teaching itself. God here claims supreme authority for his Word,
   even though its ministers are men, ordinary, despised, poor, and with
   no superiority in themselves.

   I have already explained that our text says this to give courage to
   true prophets and teachers, and to enable them to oppose kings and
   people boldly, because they are armed with the power of heavenly
   doctrine.

   Rise and speak. We see that the reason God spoke privately to his
   servant Jeremiah was to enable him to assume publicly the office of
   teacher. Hence we conclude that those who are called to direct the
   church of God cannot be acquitted of guilt if they do not preach
   sincerely and boldly whatever is commanded them. Therefore Paul says
   that he is free from bloodguilt because he has spoken from house to
   house and in public whatever he received from God (Acts 20:26 f.). And
   elsewhere he says, Woe to me if I preach not the gospel, for the duty
   is laid upon me (1 Cor. 9:16).

   When God orders the prophet to gird up his loins, this must refer to
   the garments worn in the Orient, then as now. Men wore long robes and
   whenever they began to work, or undertook some hard labor, they used to
   tuck them up. When God says, Gird your loins, he means, "Begin the
   course which I have enjoined upon you." God requires hard work from his
   servant, and he is to go at it unhampered. . . .

   Fear not before them. This exhortation was very necessary since
   Jeremiah was undertaking a most abhorrent task. He was to act as a
   herald, and to declare war against his people in the name of God.
   Jeremiah stated specifically that this calamity was the people's own
   making, because their obstinacy had been so great that God now refused
   all leniency. This was a hard word to accept -- especially when we
   remember the great pride of the Jews. They gloried in their holy race
   and further, as we shall see later, the Temple was in their minds an
   impregnable citadel, even against God himself. Sent to such a people,
   the prophet had no small need of being strengthened by God if he was to
   enter upon his work fearlessly. . . .

   This passage contains a teaching which is useful to us. From it we
   learn that courage never fails God's servants when their strength of
   heart comes from the knowledge that God himself has called them. When
   their hearts are lifted up by this assurance, God supplies them with
   indomitable strength and bravery, and they become formidable to the
   whole world. But if they are inhibited and timid, and shift back and
   forth, and are influenced by fear of men, God makes them contemptible
   and causes them to tremble at the slightest breath, and to waste away
   inwardly.

   Why? Because they are not worthy that God should exalt them and reach
   out his hand to them, and arm them with his weapons, and give them a
   courage which could frighten both the devil and the whole world.

   Truly, I am filled with power by the Spirit of the Lord, and with
   judgment and courage, to announce to Jacob his crime, to Israel his
   sin. Micah 3:8. (Calvin's wording.)

   Here Micah with heroic courage stands alone against all the false
   teachers, even though he is met with a multitude of them who, as usual,
   find their shield in their great number. He says, I am filled with
   power by the Spirit of the Lord. Such confidence befits all the
   servants of God and prevents them from yielding to the empty and windy
   boasts of their opponents who are upsetting the whole order of the
   church.

   Whenever God for a time permits pure doctrine to be perverted by false
   teachers whom he allows to prevail because of their rank or number, we
   must turn our thoughts to this memorable example and keep our minds
   unperturbed, our firmness unwavering, and the power of the Holy Spirit
   indomitable in our hearts. Then we may continue on the way of our
   vocation and learn how to set the name of God against all human
   fallacies -- provided we know that our obedience to God is approved by
   him as being faithful.

   Therefore, when Micah says that he is filled with power, it is evident
   that he is taking his stand before the eyes of the whole nation, and
   that alone, by himself, he is challenging a great throng. False
   teachers were running around everywhere. The devil always has seed
   enough, when God lets him loose. Therefore their number was not small;
   yet Micah did not hesitate to come forward. "I myself," he said (for
   the pronoun 'anokî is emphatic); "you despise me as only one man (or
   with a few others); you may imagine that I who serve God am alone. But
   I myself alone am enough for a thousand, or rather for numbers beyond
   counting, because God stands on my side, and approves of my ministry
   because it is his service. For I offer you nothing except what he has
   commanded."

   Then he expresses still more confidence by the word 'ulam. Truly, he
   says, I am filled. That word truly counters those magniloquent boasts
   by which false prophets are always winning fame and glory with the
   crowd. For Micah means that whatever they belch forth is empty wind.
   "You," he says, "are wonderful prophets! You are certainly above the
   angels if your words are to be believed. But prove to us that what you
   boast of is real. Bring some sign which validates your calling. There
   is none. Therefore it follows that you are full of wind and not of the
   Spirit. What you boast of, I possess."

   Undoubtably Micah means that he was endowed with no common and ordinary
   power to meet the need of the time. As God uses the work of his
   servants, so also he is present with them and arms them with a stronger
   defense. When a man is performing the work of teaching without any
   great opposition, an ordinary measure of the Spirit is enough for doing
   his duty. But when anyone is drawn into a hard and difficult contest,
   he is at once armed by God. We see examples of this daily. For many
   simple men who had never tasted learning have been endowed, when their
   warfare began, with the Heavenly Spirit so that they shut the mouths of
   celebrated teachers who seemed to be oracles. By such evidence God
   testifies plainly today that he is the same God who formerly gave his
   servant Micah such rare and incredible power. This is why the prophet
   says he is filled with power.

   Afterwards he adds by the Spirit of the Lord. Here he excludes every
   charge of pride and every appearance of claiming something for himself.
   He declares all to be a divine gift.

   Now we must carefully note Micah's situation. Although he rightly and
   deservedly claimed the title of teacher, yet he had nothing to
   distinguish him from the others in the eyes of the world. All his
   opponents had exercised the same office and had obtained the honor due
   to it. So much was common to all. But Micah was either alone or with
   Isaiah and a few more. And when he dared to set himself in opposition
   to the others, we see that it is not the vocation alone which must be
   considered. We know the greatness of Satan's malice as he attacks
   Christ's Kingdom. We also know the pride and ferocity of false
   teachers. Since both the devil's fury and the pride of false teachers
   are well enough known, there is no reason why the faithful should take
   bare titles seriously. If the people who lived at that time claimed, as
   the papists do today, that they did not possess the discrimination or
   the judgment to decide between impostors and God's servant, what was to
   be done? Micah was alone, and the others were very numerous. Besides,
   the others were prophets or at least had that title and reputation. As
   I said, this situation is worth considering. The vocation was common to
   them all. But the others were lying when they pretended to follow it;
   Micah alone, or with a few others, carried out faithfully whatever God
   commanded. And Micah alone is counted prophet and teacher.

   Finally, the only way the false teachers can make sail against us is by
   appearing to be endowed with the Spirit of God. But whoever desires to
   be counted a servant of God and a teacher of the church should have the
   seal which Micah offers. If he is endowed with the Spirit of God, the
   honor belongs to God. On the other hand, if a man has nothing to show
   but the title, anybody can see how trifling a thing that is in God's
   sight.

   Then the prophet adds with judgment and courage. By judgment, he
   doubtless means all uprightness; that is a common meaning of the word.
   Then he adds courage, because these two qualities are especially
   necessary for all ministers of the Word. They must have great wisdom
   and must hold fast to what is true and right; they must be endowed with
   inflexible firmness to overcome Satan and the whole world, and not to
   swerve from their course though the devil mobilize all things against
   them. We see then what these two words express. First he put koach,
   power; then he put geburah, courage or strength of mind. By the word
   power, he means in general the gifts with which those who undertake the
   office of teaching should be endowed. The first requirement of a
   teacher is general ability. Micah divides the ability of the prophets
   into two parts: first, wisdom or judgment, and second, courage, so that
   they may understand what God demands and be effective in teaching. Then
   they must be firm, so that they may not yield to every breeze, nor be
   overcome by threats and terrors, nor be swayed back and forth by the
   favor of the world. They should yield to no seductions. Therefore,
   courage is added to judgment.

   Afterwards he adds to announce to Jacob his crime and to Israel his
   sin. Here we see that a prophet does not seek the favor of the people.
   To gain favor, it was necessary to flatter with nice words people who
   sought adulation, the very ones who, corrupted by hatred and malice,
   had rejected Micah. It would have been necessary for him to please them
   with soft words; and he does not do it. In one place he says: "They
   sell their blessings to you and deceive you with the hope of peace.
   They declare war if their greed is not satisfied. They flatter you
   because you like it, and you seek teachers who promise you wine and
   strong drink. But I was sent to you for a different purpose. For God
   has not committed flatteries to me to make pleasant songs for you; he
   gave me reproofs and threats. I will therefore publish your sins and
   will not hesitate to condemn you before the whole world, because you
   deserve it." Now we understand why the prophet says he was endowed with
   courage to announce his sin to Jacob.

   From this we conclude that when we deal with wicked and criminal men,
   we need the support of heaven's own constancy. And this is the almost
   universal and perpetual situation of all the servants of God. For those
   who are sent to teach the world are sent into warfare. It is not enough
   to teach faithfully what God commands unless we also contend. Although
   the wicked rise up against us with violence, let us be of a bronze
   countenance, as Ezekiel says (3:8 f.). Let us not yield to their fury,
   but present to it unconquered constancy. Since our battle is with the
   devil, with the world and all the wicked, if we wish to do our duty
   faithfully we need to be endowed with the courage of which Micah
   speaks. And as I have shown, the servants of God ought to persist in
   this firmness no matter by what obstacles Satan attempts to delay them
   or turn them back.

   This doctrine should be taught to all the faithful so that they may
   distinguish wisely between the faithful servants of God and impostors
   who falsely claim his name. So it is that no one who truly and from his
   heart desires to obey God shall be deceived. For God will always give a
   spirit of judgment and discretion. But today unhappy souls are dragged
   to perpetual ruin, because in fact they shut their eyes, or blink
   voluntarily, or willingly involve themselves in obscurities, saying: "I
   cannot judge; I see on both sides learned or famous men, or at least
   men of some reputation and importance. Some call me to the right,
   others to the left. Where should I go? I prefer to shut my mouth and my
   ears." Thus many make ignorance a pretext for inaction.

   But we know that when God exercises our faith and tests it our eyes
   ought to be open. For this purpose it is that he allows dissensions and
   quarrels to rise in the midst of the church, with some men proposing
   one thing and some another. When God loosens Satan's rein so that
   contests of this kind and disturbances are produced in the bosom of the
   church, we have no real excuse for not following whatever the Lord
   commands, because he always guides us by his Spirit -- only we must not
   keep hugging our own indolence.

   O sword (or spear), awake above my shepherd and above the man who is my
   associate, saith the Lord. Zech. l3:7. (Calvin's wording.)

   The word 'myth ('amith) some translate "relative," some "kinsman," some
   "one who adheres to God," because they are sure that this passage can
   be understood only as referring to Christ. But, as I have already said,
   they have followed a false principle of interpretation. The Greek
   translation is ton politen, "citizen." Others translate, as does
   Theodotian, sumthulon, that is "relative." Jerome preferred "one who
   adheres to me."

   But 'amith in Hebrew means "associate," "neighbor," or "close friend,"
   in fact anyone united to us for any reason. I have no doubt that God by
   this title refers to the pastors of the church, because they are his
   representatives to the people; and as we know, the better pastor one
   is, the nearer he is to God, Similarly, kings and judges who exercise
   sovereignty are called God's sons. Thus also, pastors are called God's
   associates because they have a part in God's work of building the
   church. God is the head Shepherd, but he uses his ministers to carry
   out his work. They are called his associates, because they are
   coworkers with God, as Paul also taught. To conclude: the prophet calls
   the pastors God's associates in the same sense in which Paul called
   them sunergous (1 Cor. 3:9).

   Therefore I have also made you contemptible and base before all the
   people, according as ye have not kept my ways, but have been partial in
   the law. Mal. 2:9.

   The prophet ends by saying that the priests glory in the honor of their
   office without reason, because they have ceased to be priests of God.

   Now let us go back to the beginning. Let us have in mind the prophet's
   purpose in this discussion. He attacks the priests particularly because
   they wished to reserve for themselves a special privilege which would
   set them above all criticism, and also because if the priests
   themselves are not kept in order, ordinary and common men are deprived
   of true doctrine. There is no doubt that the priests were flattering
   the people, and attempting to destroy their reverence for the prophets
   and to put an end to the influence of prophetic teaching. This is why
   our prophet denounces them so severely. . . . Now that we understand
   his purpose, it is easy to grasp the meaning of the whole matter.

   But before I go further, we should note that in this passage [as a
   whole] we have a description of true and legitimate priesthood. The
   prophet does not argue here about the priestly office; he sets before
   our eyes a living picture which we cannot fail to understand, and from
   which those who are engaged in a pastor's work may learn what it is
   that God requires of them.

   Here I am omitting what I discussed in the first place: that God meant
   his priests to be feared; and I have already explained sufficiently
   that they ought not to abuse their authority as if unlimited power had
   been allowed them. God does not wish his church to be subjected to
   tyranny. He wills to be its only ruler, by the ministry of men. . . .

   But we must now attend to the words of the prophet: Levi executed his
   office with good faith and from the heart because the law of truth was
   in his mouth, and iniquity was not found in him. To this we should add
   the statement which follows immediately after, For the lips of the
   priest should keep knowledge (v. 7). This rule cannot be set aside.
   Those who are priests or pastors in the church must be teachers. And
   Gregory wisely applies the above rule figuratively to teaching. We know
   that little bells were to be fastened on the priest's robe, and Moses
   says specifically that the priest never walks but the bells tinkle.
   Gregory, whom I just mentioned, applies this to the matter of teaching.
   "Woe to us," he says, "if we walk without sound, that is, if we boast
   of being shepherds and are only dumb dogs. For nothing is more
   unendurable than to count a man as a pastor in the church who does not
   speak, and whose voice does not ring out clearly for the upbuilding of
   the people." This is what a Roman pope said. Let those who boast,
   proudly and with full mouths, of being his successors at least produce
   some sound so that we can hear their teaching. But since they exercise
   all their authority like barbarians, anybody can see how faithful they
   are in guarding God's covenant!

   But I come back to the words of our prophet. He says that this rule,
   prescribed by God, was not to be broken at man's pleasure, or by any
   custom. The priest should keep knowledge on his lips. Malachi explains
   further and shows that the priest is the guardian of knowledge, not to
   keep it in private for his own benefit, but to teach it to the whole
   people. He says they will ask the law at his mouth (v. 7). This is one
   point.

   Secondly, he restricts the word knowledge to the true doctrine which
   flows from the law of God; for that is the only fountain of truth. . .
   . Therefore, it is not enough for a man to keep his mouth open and be
   ready to teach everybody unless what he teaches is the pure doctrine.
   We see then that it is not just any kind of sermon which is required of
   priests, but the pure Word proceeding from the mouth of God himself, as
   is said in Ezekiel (3:17): You will take the word from my mouth and
   announce it to them from me. Here God shows that priests do not have
   the power and authority to come out with every useless thing that comes
   into their noddles, or with everything they think is fitting. They will
   be good teachers just so far as they are God's pupils. . . .

   Finally we ought to consider because the priest is the messenger of the
   Lord of hosts. These words may appear designed to honor the priesthood;
   but the prophet means that the priests have nothing of their own or
   apart from God. Therefore whatever reverence is due them belongs to God
   whose ministers they are. As I said, he is reasoning from the above
   definition, and as if that stated specifically, "Whoever wishes to be
   counted priest, let him also be a teacher." And at the same time we
   must also realize that the prophet implies a certain relationship
   between God and priest, as though he had said, "Priests can take no
   more on themselves than to be God's interpreters. . . ."

   We see, therefore, how much the prophet has included in these few
   words. First, there is no priesthood without teaching; nor is there any
   true priest who does not sincerely perform the duty of teaching.
   Secondly, he shows that God's right and power is in no way diminished
   when priests preside in the church, since God has assigned that office
   to them by the same law which also affirms that authority always
   belongs to God alone. Otherwise, the priest would not be the messenger
   of the God of hosts.

   At the same time the prophet requires of priests also sincerity in the
   performance of their duties. For we know that many apparently excel,
   and teach eloquently, and even expend much energy eagerly in their
   work; but some of these are impelled by ambition and others by avarice.
   Therefore the prophet appends here another rule, that they walk
   uprightly before God: that is, that they do not seek to satisfy men or
   receive the world's applause, but do their work with a clear
   conscience.

   So I have shown that the prophet sets here an example before us, to
   show us what God demands of us, whom he has appointed pastors of his
   church.

   And the angel of the Lord bore witness to Joshua, saying: If you walk
   in my ways and keep my watch, you also will judge (or rule) my house
   (dwn means judge, but the word is used for any kind of government,
   therefore rule my house is preside over my temple). And you will keep
   my porch and I will give you passage among those who stand by. Zech.
   3:6-7. (Calvin's wording.)

   . . . This whole passage has to do with the glory and worship of God,
   for it is profaned if it is applied to ourselves. We must especially
   guard against applying it to the church and its government. For we know
   how ready men are to divert to their own tyrannical use whatever power
   God assigns to his church.

   Of course God wishes to be heard when he speaks through his servants
   and those whom he has made teachers. But we can now see how from the
   beginning of the world ambitious and proud men have used this as a
   pretext for gaining authority for themselves, and have expelled God
   from his own dominion. In fact, the regiments of Satan claim for
   themselves full and unlimited power over all the faithful on the ground
   that God wishes the priesthood to be honored and prescribes that it
   rule over his church. Since, therefore, in all ages Satan has misused
   the glorious praise with which God has honored his church, we must
   always add the caution as the prophet does here that God had no
   intention, such as some individual man might have, of exalting men by
   abdicating his own rank and position. The whole glory of the church is
   here presented to insure the pure worship of God and the submission of
   all in the church to God's own dominion -- not only of the common
   people but also of the priest himself. Whatever excellence there may be
   in the church God will have everything to be so ordered that he alone
   is supreme. And this is as it should be.

   We now understand the prophet's purpose. And to give this teaching the
   more weight, he says, the angel bore witness. The word he uses is a
   legal term. A man bears witness when he takes a solemn oath that he is
   speaking the truth. . . . The Holy Spirit intends by this word to make
   us more attentive, to show us that this is no ordinary matter, and to
   persuade us to have greater reverence for this command, since God
   himself introduces it by an oath or something similar. . . .

   The angel teaches briefly that priests are not given their preeminence
   to enable them to run riot with their own lusts. The law is interposed
   to constrain them to do their duty faithfully and to obey God's voice.
   We see therefore that there are two things which go together: the
   dignity of the priesthood and the faith shown by God's servants who are
   called to that office. Those who wish to rule without any restraint
   prove clearly enough that they are not legitimate priests of God. . . .

   But we must also see what is meant by ways and my watch or
   guardianship. For these certainly belong to the office of the priest.
   God commands all of us in general to follow where he calls; and what he
   requires as the rule of living faithfully and rightly is called a watch
   or guardianship, because God does not let us wander freely but guards
   us against errors and shows us what rules we must observe. There is
   therefore a general guardianship which concerns all the faithful.

   But the priestly watch is, as I just said, restricted to the priestly
   office. We know that God does not resign his own Kingship when he
   elevates men. But he does give them a mandate to be his
   representatives, and they are truly his vicars when they teach from his
   Word purely and faithfully; God exercises his Kingship no less because
   he uses the work of men and employs them as his servants. We see then
   that God has established the guardianship of the priests [over the
   church] so that the church may be ruled by the pure Word of God. . . .
   In short, the pastors of the church rule by divine appointment, but
   they do not exercise their own domination. They are to govern the
   churches according to God's own command, so that God himself may guide
   them by human hands.

   I understand by the keeping of the courts not janitor service but
   whatever has to do with the worship of God. . . .

   Whatever excellence there is in the pastors of the church must not be
   separated from the service of God. God does not resign his power to
   mortal men or in any way take away from his own rightful dominion. But
   he makes men his ministers, so that he alone by their hand may govern
   his church and he alone have pre-eminence over it. Whence it follows
   that those who do not do their work with sincerity do not deserve
   respect. And if they grasp for themselves what belongs to God, they are
   to be denied the name of priest. They are then nothing but a mask of
   Satan by which he would deceive the simple folk.

   Whosesoever sins ye remit, they are remitted unto them, and whosesoever
   sins ye retain, they are retained. John 20:23.

   Here without doubt the Lord has put together the whole sum of the
   gospel. Therefore we must not separate the power of forgiving sins from
   the office of teaching, for in this passage they are tied together.
   Christ had said shortly before, "As the living Father sent me, so I
   myself send you." Now, he declares what this embassy means and
   involves. However, he insists that it was necessary for him to give
   them the Spirit, so that they would not act of themselves. This then is
   the principal purpose of the preaching of the gospel: that men be
   reconciled to God by the free remission of sins, as Paul teaches in 2
   Cor. 5:18, where for this reason the gospel is called the ministry of
   reconciliation. There is of course much else in the gospel; but what
   God means to accomplish by it above all is this: to receive men into
   his favor by not imputing their sins to them. Therefore, if we want to
   act as faithful servants of the gospel, we must heed this matter most
   seriously. It is at this point that the gospel differs most from
   philosophy, since it teaches that the salvation of men is through the
   free remission of sins. It is from this that flow the other blessings
   of God: that God illumines and regenerates us by his Spirit, restores
   us to his image, and arms us with invincible fortitude against Satan
   and the world. Thus the whole doctrine of godliness and the spiritual
   building of the church rests upon the foundation that God makes us free
   from all sins and adopts us to himself [as his sons].

   Thus Christ gives his disciples authority to remit sins; but he in no
   way yields to them what belongs to him. He alone remits sins. This
   honor, in so far as it is his due, he does not resign to the apostles.
   He commands them to testify to the remission of sins in his name, so
   that through them men may become reconciled to God. In short, properly
   speaking, he alone through his apostles remits sins.

   And whosesoever sins ye retain. Christ adds the latter clause in order
   to terrify those who despise his gospel. He would have them know that
   such pride will not go unpunished. Since the apostles are entrusted
   with the embassy of salvation and eternal life, they are also to be
   armed, as the apostle Paul says, with vengeance against the godless who
   push aside the salvation set before them (2 Cor. 10:6). But this
   consequence of preaching is given last, that its true purpose [the
   salvation of the hearers] may receive the priority. It is the proper
   function of the gospel to reconcile us with God. The eternal death of
   unbelievers which issues from the preaching of the gospel happens not
   of itself but because of unbelief.

   And it came to pass on the morrow, that Moses sat to judge the people:
   and the people stood by Moses from the morning unto the evening. . . .
   And Moses' father-in-law said unto him, The thing that thou doest is
   not good. Ex. 18:13, 17.

   This is a memorable event, and one especially profitable to know. When
   Jethro saw the government over which God presided and which he adorned
   with the rare splendor of his glory, he nonetheless criticized it
   because he found something reprehensible going on. He criticized Moses
   himself, the greatest of the prophets, with whom alone God spoke
   intimately, because he had been inconsiderate enough to exhaust himself
   and the people with too much labor.

   Moses' outstanding ability and heroic mind are evident in that he
   submitted to so many annoyances, endured so many troubles, and,
   unbeaten by weariness, every day undertook new labors. The greatness of
   his spirit can never be praised enough. He spent himself freely for a
   depraved and perverse people; and he did not desist from his purpose
   although he saw no gratitude for his kindness. . . . Surely, he
   possessed many virtues, worthy of highest praise. Yet in all that was
   praiseworthy, Jethro found a fault.

   Thus we are warned that in the most excellent deeds of men there is
   always some defect; and nothing exists so perfect that it is without
   blemish. Therefore those who are set to rule the people should know
   that however devotedly they perform their office, their best plan, if
   it be examined, leaves something to be desired. Not only kings and
   magistrates, but also the pastors of the church, should know that even
   when they stretch every nerve to fulfill their duties, there is always
   something which can be corrected and improved.

   Also, it is worth noting that no mortal possesses the maximum of every
   kind of gift or is capable of undertaking everything at once, however
   great and varied his talents. For who is the equal of Moses? Yet when
   he took upon himself the whole responsibility of ruling the people, we
   find him unequal to the burden.

   The servants of God should learn to measure their strength; when they
   greedily take on too many jobs, they may well crack up. For
   polupragmosune, "too-much-to-do," is a common disease and attacks most
   men so violently that it cannot be quickly checked. To keep us all
   within our limits, let us learn how God has designed and ordered the
   affairs of the human race, so that each individual is endowed with only
   a limited amount of gifts, on which depends also the distribution of
   duties. The world is not lighted by a single ray of the sun; light is
   produced by all its rays together, as each makes its own contribution
   at the same time. In the same way God, to keep men in mutual
   association and good will by a sacred and unbreakable bond, dispenses
   his gifts variously. He does not raise anyone inordinately above the
   rest by bestowing on him absolute perfection, and so he binds all men
   together.

   Augustine writes truly that in this story God humbled his servant. And
   Paul records that he himself was inflicted with the breath of Satan's
   messenger so that he might not be too much puffed up by the sublimity
   of God's revelation to him.

   And Joseph saw that they [Pharaoh's butler and baker] were sad. . . .
   And they said unto him, We have dreamed a dream, and there is no
   interpreter of it. And Joseph said unto them, Do not interpretations
   belong to God? Tell me then, I pray you. Gen. 40:6, 8.

   Joseph offers his services in accordance with his vocation. This should
   be noted, to keep any of us from unconsciously taking more upon himself
   than he knows God has allowed him. Paul carefully warns us that the
   gifts of the Spirit are variously distributed, that a different role is
   assigned to each one of us, and that no one should encroach greedily
   upon the gift of another or take it for himself. Each individual should
   rather confine himself to his own vocation and its prescribed limits.
   Unless such modesty prevails, everything is confused; for God's truth
   is rashly torn apart by the stupidity of many. Peace and concord are
   disturbed and in the end no kind of order will be secure. We know that
   Joseph was safe in promising to interpret the Pharaoh's dream because
   he knew that he was taught and ordained for this manifestation of God's
   grace. To this end he was given the gift of interpreting dreams. But he
   did not try to go beyond what his powers allowed. He did not divine the
   content of Pharaoh's dreams; and he confessed that it was hidden from
   him. The case of Daniel was different. Daniel was provided with the
   spirit of divination to such a degree that he was able to interpret the
   king's dream when it had escaped the latter's memory. Thus we see that
   Joseph, who was given only half [as much as Daniel], kept himself
   within its proper limits.

   Moreover, Joseph not only guarded himself from all presumption, but
   also declared that what he had was the gift of God. He said honestly
   that of himself he possessed nothing. He did not boast that he was keen
   or clever, but wished only to be known as the minister of God. Our
   vanity must be controlled, not only that God alone may be glorified and
   may not be defrauded of his due, but that the prophets, professors, and
   others who excel in heavenly gifts may humbly submit themselves to the
   direction of the Spirit.

   Further we should note that Moses says Joseph was sorry for the grief
   of those who were with him in prison. Men are subjected to misfortunes
   to keep them from despising others who are in trouble; for sharing
   misery begets sympathy. Therefore, it is not strange that God trains us
   by various hardships. For nothing is more becoming for us than sympathy
   with our brothers who lie despised and weighed down under misfortunes.
   This sympathy has to be learned by experience because our inborn
   callousness becomes thicker and thicker with prosperity.

   This book of the law shall not depart out of thy mouth; but thou shalt
   meditate therein day and night, that thou mayest observe to do
   according to all that is written therein. . . . Josh. 1:8.

   The study of the law must be assiduous; because, when it is omitted
   even for a short time, many errors slip in, and our memory grows rusty.
   Besides, when continuous study is neglected, many things become strange
   and difficult to practice. Therefore, God orders his servant to persist
   in the daily study of the law and never cease to pursue it as long as
   he lives. Whence it follows that those who show contempt for this study
   are blinded by their intolerable arrogance.

   But why does God forbid the law to depart from his mouth rather than
   from his eyes? To take mouth by synecdoche [104] for face is inane. I
   am certain that the word mouth applies primarily to a man who studies
   not only for himself but also for the benefit of a whole people whose
   government is his responsibility. So he is commanded to attend to the
   teaching of the law, in order that when he speaks about it, he may be
   able to do so with benefit to the people as a whole, as his
   responsibility requires.

   Meanwhile, he is commanded by his own teachableness to give others an
   example of obedience. For there are many who have the law in their
   mouths in public, while at the same time they are the worst keepers of
   it. Joshua is therefore given both commands: to teach others and to
   conform his own conduct and himself wholly to the same standard.

  3. PREACHING AND TEACHING

   Lift up your heads, O ye gates; and be ye lifted up, ye everlasting
   doors; and the King of glory shall come in. Who is this King of glory?
   The Lord strong and mighty, the Lord mighty in battle. Ps. 24:7-8.

   Since the magnificent splendor by which the Temple was to surpass the
   external dignity of the Tabernacle had not as yet been realized, David
   here is speaking of the future building of the Temple. In this way, he
   is encouraging the faithful to apply themselves more wholeheartedly and
   with greater faith to the ceremonies commanded in the law. God showed
   no ordinary kindness when he dwelt among them [giving them] a visible
   symbol [of his presence] and wished his heavenly abode to be seen on
   earth.

   The value of this doctrine ought to be clear to us today; because it is
   a sign of the inestimable grace of God toward us also when, due to the
   weakness of our flesh, he lifts us up to himself by way of godly
   practices. For what is the purpose of the preaching of the Word, of the
   sacraments, of religious gatherings, and of the whole external order of
   the church except to unite us with God? Not without reason does David
   give such high praise to the cult ordained by the law, for in the Ark
   of the Covenant God offers himself to the faithful and gives them a
   sure pledge of his present help as often as men call upon him.

   For God does not dwell in temples made with hands, nor does he find
   pleasure in external pomp. Yet because it pleased him to help a rude
   and, so to speak, childish people to be lifted up to God by the use of
   earthly things, David did not hesitate to propose the building of a
   splendid temple for the strengthening of their faith. He did this to
   assure the Jews that the temple is no empty theater but a place for
   worshiping God rightly according to the direction of his Word. He
   wanted the temple to stand out before their eyes so that by its effect
   they might feel the nearness of God. Hence in short, the Temple which
   God had commanded to be built on Mount Zion was meant with its greater
   splendor to surpass the Tabernacle, so that by its brilliance it might
   be a fitting mirror of the glory and power of God who dwelt among the
   Jews. Meanwhile, David himself burned with the desire for a great
   temple, and kindled the same zeal in the hearts of all the pious, so
   that aided by the rudiments of the law, they made progress in the fear
   of God.

   Who is the King of glory? These words, which are in praise of God's
   power, are meant to teach the Jews that he is not sitting idly in the
   Temple but coming in with might to bring help to his people. The
   question is twice repeated -- which shows that it is highly emphatic.
   The prophet plays the role of an astonished questioner in order to
   teach the more impressively that God comes clothed with irresistible
   power to watch over the safety of his people and that under his shadow
   the faithful are safe.

   We have already said that God did not dwell in the Temple as though his
   immeasurable essence were enclosed in it. But he was present there,
   with his power and grace, according to the promise given to Moses,
   Where I will set the memorial for my name, I will come to thee and
   bless thee (Ex. 20:24). This promise was not given in vain, for the
   faithful know that God truly stands in their midst. They do not look
   for him superstitiously, believing that he is affixed to the Temple;
   but with the aid of the outward worship of the Temple, they turn their
   spirits toward heaven. In truth, whenever the people invoked God in the
   Temple, by this very act the Ark of the Covenant was no empty or
   illusory symbol of the presence of God, for God always stretches out
   his mighty hand to protect the safety of the faithful.

   The repetition also warns us that the faithful cannot be too zealous
   and untiring in their use of this mediation. When the Son of God,
   clothed in flesh, appeared as King of glory, the Lord of Hosts himself
   entered his Temple to dwell with us, not in a shadowy metaphor, but in
   reality. Therefore, nothing prevents our boasting that we by his power
   shall be unconquered. Although today the sanctuary is not on Mount
   Zion, nor is the Ark of the Covenant the image of God who dwells above
   the cherubim, our situation is the same as that of the fathers, because
   the preaching of the Word and the sacraments unite us with God.
   Therefore, we ought to hold on to these props with reverence, for if we
   spurn them in ungodly arrogance, it cannot be but that God shall remove
   himself far from us.

   The Lord said to Cain, Why art thou wroth; why is thy countenance
   fallen? Gen. 4:6.

   Moses does not specify how God spoke. Whether he [Cain] was presented
   with a vision, or heard an oracle from heaven, or was warned by a
   secret inspiration, in any case, he felt constrained by the judgment of
   God. To drag Adam into this, and to assume that as God's prophet and
   interpreter he inveighed against his son, is forced and vapid. I
   understand the aim of various good men, no less eminent for piety than
   for doctrine, when they play about with such notions. They intend to
   glorify the visible ministry of the Word and to cut down Satan's
   sleights of hand which he passes off under the guise of revelation. I
   admit that nothing is more helpful to the church than to keep pious
   minds submissive to the authority of preaching so that they may not
   seek the Word of God in erratic speculations. But in the beginning it
   is necessary to remember that the Word of God was given in the form of
   oracles in order that later when administered by human hands it might
   be held in greater reverence.

   I admit that Adam was given the duty of teaching, and I do not doubt
   that he carefully instructed his children. But the words of Moses are
   too arbitrarily limited by those who think that God spoke only by his
   ministers.

   . . . He cried with a loud voice, Lazarus, come forth. John 11:43.

   Christ's divine power is all the more evident in that he did not touch
   him, but called him with his voice; meanwhile, in so doing, he has
   commended to us the secret and astounding efficacy of his Word. How
   indeed did Christ restore life to the dead except by his Word?
   Wherefore, in reviving Lazarus, he gave us a symbol of spiritual grace,
   which we apprehend every day by faith, as he shows that his voice gives
   life.

   And as Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness, even so must the
   Son of Man be lifted up. John 3:14.

   Here he explains more clearly why he had said that heaven was opened to
   him alone: it was certainly in order that he might bring to it all who
   are willing to follow him as their guide. Moreover, he declares that he
   will appear publicly and openly to all, and will pour out his power
   upon all men. To be lifted up means to be placed in a high and lofty
   place, so that he may be seen by all. And this occurs by the preaching
   of the gospel. Some say that this verse refers to the cross; but this
   explanation does not fit the context and has nothing to do with the
   subject on hand. The simple meaning of the words is that by the
   preaching of the gospel Christ is raised up as a standard, so that the
   eyes of all men may be turned to him, as prophesied by Isaiah (2:2).

   Then Jesus said unto them, Yet a little while I am with you, and then I
   go unto him that sent me. John 7:33.

   By these words he testifies that death will not destroy him, that,
   rather, when he puts off his mortal body, he will declare himself the
   Son of God by the victory of his glorious resurrection. It is as if he
   had said: "In spite of all you can do, when I finish the mission
   enjoined upon me, my Father will receive me into his heavenly glory.
   Thus after my death I shall not only retain my present state, but shall
   also enter one far more excellent which is all ready for me." This
   statement leads us to the larger admonition that, when Christ calls us
   to the hope of salvation by the preaching of the gospel, he is present
   with us. It is not for nothing that the preaching of the gospel is
   called Christ's descent to us (Eph. 2:17).

   . . . I speak to the world those things which I have heard from him.
   John 8:26.

   Jesus says that he advances nothing which he has not received from the
   Father. The teaching of a minister should be approved on the sole
   ground of his being able to show that what he says comes from God. We
   know that Christ at this time was in the form of a servant; therefore
   it is not strange that he demands to be heard because he presented man
   with God's mandate. Besides, by his example he set down a law for the
   whole church: namely, that no man ought to be heard except as he speak
   from the mouth of God. But while he lays low the wicked arrogance of
   men who force themselves upon others without having the Word of God, he
   instructs godly teachers who have a single-minded knowledge of their
   calling and fortifies them with an indomitable constancy, so that,
   guided by God, they may have courage to defy all mortals.

   Then Jesus said unto them, When ye have lifted up the Son of Man, then
   shall ye know that I am he and that I do nothing of myself; but as my
   Father hath taught me, I speak these things. John 8:28.

   It is true that on the cross Christ erased the handwriting of sin and
   abolished the condemnation of death, and that in so doing he triumphed
   over Satan before God and his angels. But it is only by the preaching
   of the gospel that this triumph at last began to be known by men. We
   ought to hope that what happened after the cross, namely, his coming
   out of the grave and his ascension to heaven, shall happen in our own
   day. For in spite of the fact that the impious are busy contriving how
   they may oppress Christ by way of his doctrine and his church, he not
   only rises but also turns their wicked zeal into a means of greater
   advance for his Kingdom.

   But the Comforter, which is the Holy Ghost. . . shall teach you all
   things, and bring all things to your remembrance, whatsoever I have
   said unto you. John 14:26.

   Isaiah threatens the unbelievers with the punishment that the Word of
   God shall be to them as a sealed book (Isa. 29:11). But the Lord also
   humbles many of his own people in the same way. When he does this, we
   should not reject the Word, but should wait calmly and patiently for
   his light. Besides, since Christ testified that it was the peculiar
   office of the Holy Spirit to teach the apostles whom he himself had
   already taught by word of mouth, it follows that outward preaching is
   vain and useless unless the Spirit himself acts as the teacher. God
   therefore teaches in two ways. He makes us hear his voice through the
   words of men, and inwardly he constrains us by his Spirit. These two
   occur together or separately, as God sees fit.

   But notice how he promises the Spirit will teach. He says the Spirit
   will suggest or remind. Therefore, the Spirit will not be a maker of
   new revelations. With this one statement we must refute all the lies
   which Satan has introduced into the church, with the pretext that they
   are of the Spirit. Mohammed and the pope have this principle of
   religion in common: they pretend that Scripture does not contain
   perfect doctrine, and that they receive a higher revelation from the
   Spirit. The Anabaptists [105] and the Libertines [106] in our own time
   derive their mad ideas from the same notion. But any spirit that comes
   out with some fable got someplace outside the gospel is an impostor,
   not the Spirit of Christ. Christ promises the Spirit who shall confirm
   the gospel as the very one who has written and signed it.

   Behold the Lord will proclaim to the end of the earth, Say to the
   daughter of Zion, Behold your Savior cometh. Isa. 62:11. (Calvin's
   wording.)

   When he says Say to the daughter of Zion, he leaves us in no doubt that
   the task of the ministers of the Word and of the prophets whose
   peculiar work God himself assigns is to promise freedom and security to
   the church. And we gather that these promises were not restricted to
   one age only but were to extend to the end of the world. For although a
   beginning was made by the return from Babylon to Judea, the promise
   continued in effect to the coming of Christ; for at his coming it was
   that this prophecy was finally fulfilled and redemption reached its
   goal. Moreover, the Savior comes whenever the grace of God is
   proclaimed by the gospel. In short, the prophet is announcing the
   future day when the voice of God will resound from the rising of the
   sun to its setting, and will be heard not by one people but by all
   people. The voice cries, Behold your Savior comes; and we know this
   refers properly to the gospel. Therefore the teachers of the church are
   commanded to lift up the minds of the faithful with the confidence of
   the Lord's coming, even though God seems far away from his people. In
   fact, this promise applies especially to Christ's Kingdom, in which
   these things are fully and solidly established. Christ has truly
   revealed himself the Savior of his church.

   Of righteousness, because I go to the Father, and ye see me no more.
   John 16:10.

   Of righteousness. Notice the order of Christ's words. He now says that
   the world is convicted with regard to righteousness. For men do not
   hunger and thirst after righteousness; on the contrary they reject
   whatever is said about it unless they are touched by a sense of sin. We
   must understand, about the faithful especially, that they cannot make
   progress in living according to the gospel unless first they are
   humbled; but this does not happen unless they first know they are
   sinners.

   It is the peculiar office of the law to call consciences before the
   judgment seat of God and to strike them with terror. But the gospel is
   not preached rightly unless it lead men from sin to righteousness and
   from death to life. Therefore, we must learn the meaning of the first
   clause, of sin, from the law. But we must here understand righteousness
   as communicated to us by the grace of Christ. So, it is with good
   reason that Christ makes it to depend upon his ascension to the Father.
   As Paul is witness (Rom. 4:25), He rose for our justification, and sits
   on the right hand of the Father, to exercise the dominion given him and
   thus to fill all things. In short, from the glory of heaven, he covers
   the earth with the sweet savor of his righteousness. The Spirit
   proclaims through the gospel that this is the only way we are accounted
   righteous. After the world becomes convicted of its sin, the Spirit
   convinces it of true righteousness. When Christ ascended to heaven, he
   established the Kingdom of Life; and he sits at the right hand of the
   Father to maintain true righteousness.

   And when he is come, he will convict the world of sin and of
   righteousness and of judgment. John 16:8. (Calvin's wording.)

   He will convict the world means that he will not remain enclosed in
   you, but will send forth his power from you into the whole world. He
   therefore promises his Spirit who shall judge the world and constrain
   to an orderly life those who formerly, without reverence or fear, lived
   in the frenzy of an unbridled license. But let it be clear that he is
   speaking here not of a secret revelation, but of the power of the
   Spirit which is manifested in the external teaching of the gospel, and
   that by the voice of men. But how does it happen that the voice of man
   penetrates the soul, and working at its very root, finally brings forth
   fruit, changing hearts of stone into hearts of flesh and renewing the
   whole man -- how, unless this same voice be endowed with power by the
   Spirit of Christ? Otherwise it would be a dead letter and a mere sound,
   as Paul teaches beautifully in 2 Cor. 3:6, where he glories in being a
   servant of the Spirit because God has worked mightily through his
   teaching. All this means that the apostles were to receive the Spirit,
   who would endow them with a heavenly and divine power, and would enable
   them to exercise authority throughout the world. All this is ascribed
   to the Spirit rather than to themselves, because they were to have
   nothing of their own power; they were to be servants and instruments,
   ruled by the Holy Spirit alone.

   By world, I understand all those who have been converted to Christ,
   including the hypocrites and the reprobates. There are two ways in
   which the Spirit convicts men by the preaching of the gospel. Some are
   affected seriously, so that they bow down readily and assent willingly
   to the judgment which condemns them. Others, even though convicted, are
   unable to escape condemnation, because they do not yield from the
   heart, and will not yield to the authority and dominion of the Holy
   Spirit. Even though overcome, they rage within themselves; and while
   confounded, they do not cease to revel in being obstinate. Now we
   understand how the Spirit was to convict the world through the
   apostles. God himself stands in judgment through the gospel; and thus
   it is that men begin to be disturbed in their consciences and to feel
   the grace of God.

   And the Father himself, which hath sent me, hath borne witness of me:
   ye have neither heard his voice at any time, nor seen his shape. John
   5:37.

   It is wrongheaded to limit this statement to the voice heard at his
   baptism. When he says God has testified to him in the past, he means
   that he has not come forth as somebody no one had ever heard of,
   because God had already pointed to him in the Law and the Prophets, and
   given him certain marks which he might bring with him and by which he
   might be recognized. This means that God testified to his Son when long
   ago he held out the hope of salvation to the ancient people, or
   promised the full restoration of the Kingdom of Israel. Therefore, the
   Jews should have known Christ from Scripture, even before he appeared
   in the flesh. And now, since they despise and reject Christ, it is
   obvious that they have no taste for the law; hence Christ's reproach is
   just. And yet they glory in their knowledge of the law, as if they had
   never left God's bosom.

   After Christ complains that they have not received him, he speaks even
   more bitterly of their blindness. When he says that they have not heard
   or seen God, he speaks in a metaphor and means that they are utterly
   turned aside from the knowledge of God. For as men make themselves
   known by face and speech, so God speaks by the voice of his prophets,
   and puts on a visible form in the sacraments, so that he may be known
   by us according to our own measure. Anyone who does not know God
   through the living image he himself has given us shows that he only
   worships a God of his own fabrication. Therefore Paul says that they do
   not see the glory of God in the face of Christ, because a veil is
   thrown over their eyes (2 Cor. 3:14).

   Verily, verily, I say unto you, we speak that we do know, and testify
   that we have seen. . . . John 3:11.

   Some say that we above refers to Jesus and John the Baptist. Others say
   that the plural pronoun has been put in the place of a singular. I
   myself do not doubt that Christ here speaks for all the prophets of God
   and for himself as one of them. Philosophers and other windy doctors
   often force upon us trifles which they themselves have invented. But
   here Christ vindicates himself and all the servants of God as men who
   hand down only teaching that is true and certain. God does not send his
   servants to babble of things of which they are ignorant or doubtful. He
   trains them in his own school, in order that what they have learned
   from himself they deliver to others. While with this eulogy Christ
   declares to us the certainty of his own teaching, he also prescribes
   the rule of modesty for all his servants. They are not to mouth their
   own dreams and opinions, or to offer human inventions in which there is
   nothing solid; on the contrary, they are to be faithful and bear a pure
   witness to God. Let everyone attend to what God has revealed to him,
   and let him not go beyond the bounds set by his faith. Finally, let no
   man allow himself to speak except as he hears from the Lord.

   Whose fan is in his hand, and he will thoroughly purge his floor, and
   will gather the wheat into his garner: but he will burn up the chaff
   with unquenchable fire. Matt. 3:12.

   In the former verse John dealt with the grace of Christ, so that Jews
   might turn to him and receive a new life. But now he speaks of
   judgment, in order to strike the scornful with terror. Since many
   hypocrites are proud enough to repudiate the grace which Christ offers
   them, it is necessary to proclaim the judgment which awaits them. For
   this reason John presented Christ as a dreadful judge toward
   unbelievers. We also must present our doctrine in this order, and let
   them know that their rejection of Christ will not go unpunished; they
   must be aroused from their torpor, and led to fear him as Judge, whom
   they despised as Savior.

   Besides, I have no doubt John intended to teach that Christ would
   accomplish this judgment by means of his gospel. The preaching of the
   gospel is the winnowing fan. Before God sifts us, everyone flatters
   himself that he is wheat. The whole world is in a state of confusion,
   with the good and the evil thrown together. Hence it is necessary that
   the chaff be blown away. When Christ comes in our midst with his
   gospel, when he rebukes our consciences and brings us before the
   judgment seat of God, then the chaff, which took so much space on the
   floor, is blown away with the wind. Although the gospel purifies each
   one of us from chaff, John here compares the reprobate with chaff, and
   the believers with wheat.

   Therefore, since the threshing floor is not the world, as some would
   have it, but the church, we must consider to whom it is that John
   speaks. The Jews flatter themselves that they alone were the church,
   since up to that time they alone were in it. But John tells them that
   their pride is foolish, since they would soon be thrown out on the
   threshing floor like so much chaff, and that rightly. He takes a look
   at the church at that time, which was filled with husks, straw, and
   other rubbish, and declares that it will soon be purified with the
   blowing of the gospel.

   But how is Christ to separate the chaff from the wheat when there is
   nothing but chaff in us? The answer is easy. The elect shall be made
   into wheat; in this way, freed from chaff, they shall be gathered into
   the barn. This cleansing is begun by Christ, and continued day by day;
   but its effect shall not be realized fully until the Last Day. For this
   reason, John turns our minds toward our ultimate end. But we must
   remember that even now the faithful enter by hope into God's granary
   which is their real and eternal home. The reprobate on the other hand
   even now, being under conviction of guilt, feel the heat of the fire
   which shall at the Last Day become a devouring conflagration. Many have
   given us subtle discourses about the eternal fire which shall torment
   the wicked after the Last Judgment. But many passages in Scripture make
   it plain that the word fire is a metaphor. For if the fire is real or
   as they call it material, so are the sulphur and brimstone mentioned by
   Isaiah (30:33). Surely, the fire is no different from the worm; and if,
   as everybody agrees, the worm is a metaphor, we must think the same of
   the fire. To put aside speculations with which silly people weary
   themselves for nothing, it is enough to hold that such forms of speech
   were used because of our own crudity. They were intended to convey to
   us a sense of dreadful torment which we can neither imagine nor express
   properly with our words.

   Have I any pleasure at all that the wicked should die, saith the Lord
   God, and not that he should return from his ways and live? Ezek. 18:23.

   Here the prophet reiterates in different words that God certainly
   desires nothing more than for those who are perishing and rushing
   toward death to return to the way of safety. This is why the gospel is
   today proclaimed throughout the world, for God wished to testify to all
   the ages that he is greatly inclined to pity. Even to pagans, deprived
   of the Law and the Prophets, some taste of this truth has always been
   given. They have often smothered it under many errors, yet we always
   find them being led by some hidden impulse to seek divine favor. The
   feeling is somehow ingrained in them that God is merciful to all who
   seek him.

   But God has given clearer witness to this truth in the Law and the
   Prophets. Moreover, we know in what intimate terms he appeals to us in
   the gospel when he promises his forgiveness. Indeed, this is the
   knowledge of salvation: to embrace God's mercy offered to us in Christ.
   It is in Christ that what the prophet says here is proved to be most
   true: [We know that] "God does not desire the death of the sinner,"
   because of his own will he comes forth to meet him. Not only is he
   ready to receive all who flee to his mercy, but he calls to himself
   with a loud voice those whom he sees cut off from every hope of safety.

   We must also notice how God desires all to be made safe, that is, by
   turning from their own ways. God does not wish to save all men by
   destroying the distinction between good and evil. Before forgiveness
   comes repentance. How then does he wish all to be made safe? Truly, as
   formerly through the Law and the Prophets, so also today the Spirit
   through the gospel condemns the world for sin, by righteousness and
   judgment (John 16:8). In this way God reveals to men their misery, in
   order that he may receive them to himself. He wounds that he may heal;
   he kills that he may give life. We believe and are assured that God
   does not desire the death of sinners, because he calls all equally to
   repentance and promises that if they only repent he will be ready to
   receive them.

   Then Jesus said unto them, I go my way, and ye shall seek me, and shall
   die in your sins; whither I go, ye cannot come. John 8:21.

   First, we must consider how the people to whom he speaks sought Christ.
   If their conversion had been real, they would not have sought him in
   vain, because he has promised truly that no sooner does a sinner groan
   over his sin than He shall run to his help. Therefore, Christ means
   that they have sought after him not by the proper means of faith, but
   because of a desire to escape the anxiety which is an extreme evil.
   While the unbelievers want God to look on them with favor, they do not
   cease to run away from him. God himself declares to us that by
   repentance and faith we may come to him. But they, hard of heart, turn
   against God: and broken down with despair, they cry against him. In
   short, they are so far from seeking God that they will not let him help
   them, unless he be untrue to himself, which he will never be. Thus it
   is that the scribes, however impious, were willing to receive the
   redemption promised at the hand of the Messiah, provided Christ changed
   himself to suit their own nature. Wherefore by this word Christ
   denounces all unbelievers and threatens that if they despise the
   teaching of the gospel, even if they be filled with such anguish as to
   be forced to cry to God, their howling will do them no good, because as
   we have said already, seeking, they do not seek.

   And Abraham took Ishmael his son and all that were born in his house
   and all that were bought with his money. . . and circumcised the flesh
   of their foreskins, in the selfsame day, as God had said unto him. Gen.
   17:23.

   Moses now praises the obedience of Abraham, because he circumcised his
   whole household as he had been commanded. . . . Two points are worth
   considering. First, Abraham was not deterred by the difficulty of the
   task from offering to God the sacrifice which he owed. We know that he
   had a great number of people in his household. . . . And there was
   danger of stirring up a riot in a peaceful community. But relying on
   God, he began what was an impossible task. Secondly, we see how
   well-ordered his household was. Not only the slaves born in the house,
   but also foreigners bought for money, quietly accepted the pain of
   circumcision. Obviously Abraham had taken great pains to train them in
   their duty. And since he had kept up a holy discipline, he now received
   the reward of the care he had taken. Discipline in easy things prepared
   the way for something hard.

   Today, when God wishes his gospel to be preached in the whole world, so
   that the world may be restored from death to life, he seems to ask for
   the impossible. We see how greatly we are resisted everywhere and with
   how many and what potent machinations Satan works against us, so that
   all roads are blocked by the princes themselves. Yet each man must
   perform his duty without yielding to any impediment. At the end our
   effort and our labors shall not fail; they shall receive the success
   which does not yet appear.

   These things I have spoken unto you in proverbs: but the time cometh
   when I shall no longer speak to you in proverbs, but I shall show you
   plainly of the Father. John 16:25.

   Christ's purpose at this point is to encourage his disciples. He does
   not want them to think that his teaching is of little help to them in
   their hope of progress toward the better, because there is so much in
   it they cannot follow. For, they might have suspected that Christ did
   not want to be understood, or that he was purposely keeping them in
   suspense. So, he promises them briefly that his teaching, which might
   offend them by its obscurity, will become fruitful to them. The Hebrew
   word mashal at times means "a proverb." The Hebrews called riddles and
   remarkable sayings also meshalim because, like proverbs, they contained
   similes and figures of speech; and the Greeks called them apophthegmata
   because they are usually ambiguous and obscure. Christ means therefore
   that he is speaking to them in figures and not in a simple and plain
   language, but that soon he shall speak to them with familiar words, so
   that his teaching may not be to them perplexing or difficult.

   Now we understand what I have already touched upon: namely, that he
   wants to encourage his disciples to expect further progress, and to
   keep them from rejecting his teaching because they do not understand
   it. Unless the hope of some benefit burns and glows within us, zeal for
   learning must necessarily cool off. Besides, we see clearly that Jesus
   spoke to his disciples in a simple and even homely style, and not in
   riddles; but they were so dull that they hung on to his words
   dumfounded but without understanding a thing. So the obscurity was not
   in the teaching but in their minds.

   And the same happens to us. People praise the Word of God rightly as
   our very light. But still, our own darkness obscures the Word of God to
   such an extent that we think we are only hearing allegories. The
   prophet Isaiah threatened the wicked and the unbelievers, saying that
   he would be to them as a barbarian and would speak with a stammering
   tongue (28:11); again, Paul said that the gospel is hidden from those
   whose minds are blinded by Satan (2 Cor. 4:3). So, also, to weak and
   uneducated people, Christ's words sound so confused as to be
   unintelligible. Even when their minds are not altogether darkened, as
   are those of the ungodly, they still are as it were in a cloud. And the
   Lord allows us for a while to be stupid, so that he may humble us with
   a sense of our poverty; but he enables those whom he illumines with his
   Spirit to make such progress as to know his Word and understand it.

   The same is true of the next phrase, the hour cometh: that is, "the
   hour will come when I shall no longer speak to you in figures."
   Certainly, the Spirit did not teach the apostles anything they had not
   heard from Christ's own mouth. What he did was to fill their hearts
   with a new light, and thus to drive their darkness away, so that they
   heard Christ in a new and different way, and understood what he said.

   When Jesus said that he would speak of the Father, he pointed to the
   proper goal of his teaching, which is to lead us to the Father in whom
   alone we shall find our true happiness. But another question remains,
   Why does he elsewhere say that it is given the disciples to know the
   mystery of the Kingdom of God (Matt. 13:11), whereas here he admits
   that he speaks to them in riddles? Why did he in the previous statement
   distinguish between the disciples and the crowd to whom he spoke in
   parables? I answer, The apostles were not such ignoramuses as to have
   no inkling of a notion as to what their Master was saying. Therefore,
   Christ had reason to distinguish them from crowds who were blind. But
   when in this place he says that he has spoken to them in allegory, he
   is turning their attention to the future when his gracious Spirit shall
   endow them with a new and bright light of understanding. Therefore,
   both statements are true. The apostles were far beyond those who had no
   taste for the Word of the gospel. Still, compared to the new wisdom
   which they were to receive from the Spirit, their knowledge was like
   that of children at their alphabets.

                                    INDEXES
     __________________________________________________________________

   [104] A figure of speech by which the part represents the whole.

   [105] See Ch. 1, note 1.

   [106] Libertines -- a pantheistic and antinomian sect whose members
   called themselves spiritual. There is no evidence that they were a
   power inside Geneva. Calvin's own enemies were libertines in the sense
   that they resented the moral and social discipline imposed upon the
   formerly gay city. (Opera, Vol. 7, pp. 145-248.)
     __________________________________________________________________

GENERAL INDEX

   Page numbers refer to the Westminster edition

   See also Allegory. See also Sacrifices. See Satan. See God. See Bible,
   Holy Spirit, Prophets. See Ethics, freedom. See Church. See Signs. See
   Beauty. See Church. See Christian Life. See Calling. See also History,
   value of. See also Ceremonies. See also Heaven, resurrection. See also
   Election.
     __________________________________________________________________

                                    Indexes
     __________________________________________________________________

Index of Scripture References

   Genesis

   [1]1:1   [2]1:6   [3]1:16   [4]1:26   [5]2:18   [6]4:6   [7]4:10
   [8]4:20   [9]8:19   [10]9:21   [11]9:25   [12]13:5   [13]13:7
   [14]15:2   [15]15:6   [16]17:23   [17]18:2   [18]18:17-18   [19]21:12
   [20]22:18   [21]28:12   [22]28:13   [23]35:7   [24]35:13   [25]40:6
   [26]40:8   [27]43:34   [28]45:8   [29]46:8   [30]47:31   [31]48:15
   [32]48:16   [33]49:10   [34]49:26   [35]50:13

   Exodus

   [36]7:12   [37]9:16   [38]18:13   [39]18:17   [40]20:15   [41]20:24
   [42]22:21-22   [43]22:21-23

   Leviticus

   [44]7:18   [45]17:4   [46]18:5   [47]19:33-34   [48]19:33-34

   Numbers

   [49]6:4   [50]25:7   [51]25:90

   Deuteronomy

   [52]3:4   [53]5:16   [54]7:7   [55]9:6   [56]12:32   [57]13:1
   [58]18:15   [59]25:4   [60]30:12   [61]30:14   [62]30:15   [63]30:19
   [64]32:8   [65]32:9   [66]32:9   [67]33:16

   Joshua

   [68]1:8   [69]2:11-12   [70]10:12   [71]24:32   [72]24:32

   Judges

   [73]13:5

   2 Samuel

   [74]19:19

   1 Kings

   [75]17

   2 Kings

   [76]12:15

   2 Chronicles

   [77]2:6   [78]20:26   [79]26:18

   Ezra

   [80]4:7

   Nehemiah

   [81]8:7

   Psalms

   [82]1:2   [83]2:4   [84]2:7   [85]10:31   [86]19   [87]19:7-8
   [88]22:18   [89]22:18   [90]23:1-4   [91]23:6   [92]24:7-8   [93]32:2
   [94]33:12   [95]33:13   [96]33:16   [97]33:17   [98]33:22   [99]35:16
   [100]41:10   [101]44:22   [102]46:3-5   [103]46:5   [104]48:10
   [105]50   [106]51:7   [107]55:14   [108]68:19   [109]69:4
   [110]78:39   [111]89:6   [112]91:11   [113]91:11   [114]104:14
   [115]104:15   [116]106:31   [117]110   [118]110:3   [119]112:5
   [120]115:3   [121]118   [122]118:22   [123]119   [124]119:159
   [125]119:165   [126]120:7   [127]126:1   [128]127:1-2   [129]132:14
   [130]147:20

   Proverbs

   [131]12:10

   Isaiah

   [132]1   [133]2:4   [134]2:12   [135]2:16   [136]6:1-5   [137]6:9
   [138]7:14   [139]10:5   [140]16:5   [141]19:24-25   [142]20:2
   [143]23:18   [144]28:11   [145]29:11   [146]40:6   [147]43:8
   [148]49:7   [149]53:2   [150]53:5   [151]53:6   [152]53:11
   [153]53:12   [154]54:1-2   [155]58   [156]58:7   [157]61:6
   [158]62:3   [159]62:11   [160]66

   Jeremiah

   [161]1:9-10   [162]1:17   [163]7:11   [164]7:22-23   [165]9:23-24
   [166]9:24   [167]10:10   [168]23:5   [169]26:4-5   [170]31:9
   [171]31:15   [172]31:31   [173]31:31   [174]31:31-32   [175]36:4-6
   [176]36:28

   Ezekiel

   [177]14:4   [178]16:12   [179]16:43   [180]17:1-2   [181]18:23
   [182]20   [183]20:20   [184]20:44

   Daniel

   [185]3:16-18   [186]8:22-23   [187]9:24   [188]9:25

   Hosea

   [189]6:6

   Joel

   [190]2:12   [191]3:1-2

   Amos

   [192]7

   Micah

   [193]1:8   [194]3:8   [195]4:2   [196]4:2   [197]4:3   [198]5
   [199]5:2   [200]5:2   [201]6:6-8

   Habakkuk

   [202]2:4   [203]2:4

   Zechariah

   [204]3:6-7   [205]8:5   [206]11:7   [207]13:4   [208]13:7

   Malachi

   [209]1:1   [210]1:2-6   [211]2:9   [212]4   [213]4:2

   Matthew

   [214]1:20-21   [215]2:6   [216]2:7   [217]2:17-18   [218]2:23
   [219]2:23   [220]3:3   [221]3:12   [222]4:5-8   [223]5:5   [224]5:10
   [225]5:39   [226]5:43-46   [227]5:45   [228]6:9-10   [229]6:11
   [230]6:21   [231]9:7   [232]9:10   [233]9:13   [234]9:20   [235]10:28
   [236]11:13   [237]11:21   [238]11:21   [239]11:25   [240]11:25-26
   [241]12:17   [242]13:11   [243]13:14   [244]13:17   [245]14:24
   [246]14:27-28   [247]14:31   [248]15:7   [249]16:18   [250]17:20
   [251]19:17   [252]19:23   [253]19:27-29   [254]19:29   [255]21:13
   [256]21:42   [257]22:2   [258]23:24   [259]24:9   [260]24:23
   [261]24:24   [262]24:35   [263]25:31   [264]25:34   [265]26:14
   [266]26:69-75   [267]27:35   [268]27:35

   Mark

   [269]16:1   [270]16:19   [271]16:20   [272]16:20

   Luke

   [273]1:32-33   [274]1:33   [275]2:10-11   [276]2:29-31   [277]2:34
   [278]9:55   [279]12:5   [280]12:50   [281]13:1-3   [282]17:6
   [283]17:21   [284]19:41

   John

   [285]1:1   [286]1:5   [287]1:9-10   [288]1:14   [289]1:16
   [290]1:16-17   [291]1:17   [292]1:29   [293]1:45   [294]1:47
   [295]1:49   [296]2:5   [297]2:19   [298]3:3   [299]3:11   [300]3:12
   [301]3:14   [302]3:16   [303]3:33   [304]4:23   [305]4:24   [306]4:24
   [307]4:48   [308]5:21   [309]5:24   [310]5:24   [311]5:37   [312]5:38
   [313]5:39   [314]5:45   [315]6   [316]6:7   [317]6:26   [318]6:27
   [319]6:40   [320]7:30   [321]7:33   [322]7:39   [323]7:39   [324]8:12
   [325]8:14   [326]8:19   [327]8:21   [328]8:23-24   [329]8:26
   [330]8:28   [331]8:52   [332]9:2   [333]10:18   [334]10:25
   [335]10:28   [336]10:28   [337]10:29   [338]10:30   [339]10:38
   [340]11:9   [341]11:18   [342]11:21-24   [343]11:25   [344]11:43
   [345]11:58   [346]12:12-15   [347]12:25   [348]12:27   [349]12:29
   [350]12:31   [351]12:40   [352]12:41   [353]12:45   [354]14:1
   [355]14:7   [356]14:10   [357]14:17   [358]14:19   [359]14:24
   [360]14:26   [361]14:28   [362]15:9   [363]16:7   [364]16:8
   [365]16:8   [366]16:10   [367]16:13   [368]16:25   [369]16:27
   [370]17:1   [371]17:3   [372]17:5   [373]17:7-8   [374]17:17
   [375]17:19   [376]17:20   [377]18:17   [378]19:7   [379]20:10-12
   [380]20:17   [381]20:23   [382]20:29   [383]20:31

   Acts

   [384]2:19   [385]2:23   [386]2:41   [387]3:21   [388]3:22   [389]6:22
   [390]7:16   [391]7:30   [392]7:38   [393]7:55-56   [394]14:17
   [395]16:35   [396]17:16   [397]17:28   [398]20:26   [399]20:32
   [400]22:2   [401]22:25   [402]24:10   [403]25:23   [404]26:1

   Romans

   [405]1:2   [406]1:4   [407]1:4   [408]1:16-17   [409]1:17   [410]1:17
   [411]2:5   [412]2:13   [413]3:9-10   [414]3:10   [415]4:20
   [416]4:25   [417]5:1   [418]5:10   [419]5:10   [420]6   [421]6:4
   [422]7:10   [423]8:3   [424]8:7   [425]8:10   [426]8:11   [427]8:23
   [428]8:24   [429]8:28   [430]8:28-30   [431]8:28-30   [432]8:29
   [433]8:29   [434]8:29   [435]9:17   [436]9:17   [437]9:30   [438]10:6
   [439]10:8   [440]10:8   [441]10:17   [442]11:7   [443]11:20
   [444]11:34   [445]12:1   [446]12:2   [447]12:21   [448]13:8
   [449]13:10   [450]13:14   [451]14:7-9   [452]15:16

   1 Corinthians

   [453]1:31   [454]3:9   [455]4:4   [456]4:13   [457]7:22   [458]9:10
   [459]9:16   [460]10:8   [461]10:11   [462]12:12   [463]14:11
   [464]15:19   [465]15:24   [466]15:26   [467]15:26   [468]15:28
   [469]15:52   [470]15:54

   2 Corinthians

   [471]1:8   [472]1:13   [473]1:20   [474]2:15   [475]2:16   [476]3:4
   [477]3:6   [478]3:6-10   [479]3:7   [480]3:7   [481]3:14-15
   [482]3:14-17   [483]3:17   [484]3:18   [485]4:3   [486]4:3
   [487]4:10   [488]4:10   [489]4:11-12   [490]4:16   [491]5:1
   [492]5:7   [493]5:18   [494]5:20   [495]9:7   [496]10:6   [497]10:17
   [498]12:9   [499]13:4

   Galatians

   [500]2:20   [501]3:1   [502]3:10   [503]3:11   [504]3:13   [505]4:9
   [506]4:9   [507]4:9   [508]4:29   [509]5:1   [510]5:13-14   [511]5:19

   Ephesians

   [512]1   [513]1:4-6   [514]1:5   [515]1:20   [516]2:10   [517]2:17
   [518]4:8   [519]4:8-10   [520]4:28   [521]5:4   [522]5:14   [523]6:14

   Philippians

   [524]1:12   [525]1:21   [526]1:27-28   [527]1:29   [528]2:9
   [529]3:9   [530]3:10   [531]4:12

   Colossians

   [532]1:5   [533]1:15   [534]1:24   [535]1:29   [536]2:9   [537]2:14
   [538]2:17   [539]2:18   [540]3   [541]3:3

   1 Thessalonians

   [542]1:4   [543]5:8   [544]5:23

   2 Thessalonians

   [545]1:5   [546]2:16

   1 Timothy

   [547]1:10   [548]1:18   [549]2:4   [550]3:15   [551]3:16   [552]3:16
   [553]4   [554]4:1-5

   2 Timothy

   [555]1:9-10   [556]1:9-10   [557]1:12   [558]2:1   [559]2:3-4
   [560]2:11-12   [561]3:13   [562]3:14   [563]3:16-17   [564]4:7

   Titus

   [565]1:1   [566]1:2   [567]1:2   [568]1:15

   Hebrews

   [569]1:5   [570]1:10-11   [571]1:13   [572]2:16   [573]6:19
   [574]9:1   [575]9:8-9   [576]9:10   [577]9:11-12   [578]9:13-14
   [579]9:15   [580]9:18-20   [581]9:24   [582]10:5   [583]10:7
   [584]10:25   [585]10:26-27   [586]10:36-38   [587]10:38   [588]11:1
   [589]11:7   [590]11:17   [591]11:27   [592]11:30   [593]11:31
   [594]11:32   [595]11:35   [596]12:4   [597]12:6   [598]13:8
   [599]13:8   [600]15:1

   James

   [601]1:6   [602]1:9-10

   1 Peter

   [603]1:6-7   [604]1:10-11   [605]1:11   [606]1:25   [607]2:8
   [608]3:4   [609]3:12-14   [610]3:17-18   [611]3:21   [612]4:11
   [613]4:12-13   [614]4:14   [615]4:16

   2 Peter

   [616]1:4   [617]1:19   [618]1:20

   1 John

   [619]3:2   [620]4:1   [621]4:1   [622]4:10   [623]5:1   [624]5:4
     __________________________________________________________________

Index of Greek Words and Phrases

     * alla mallon: [625]1
     * anti: [626]1
     * antitupon: [627]1
     * axenos: [628]1
     * apophthegmata: [629]1
     * anothen: [630]1
     * en auto: [631]1
     * energeia: [632]1
     * energesen: [633]1
     * energoumenen: [634]1
     * epeluseos: [635]1
     * epiluseos: [636]1
     * heterosis: [637]1
     * endeigma: [638]1
     * endeixin: [639]1
     * hegemonikon: [640]1
     * homoousios: [641]1
     * aion: [642]1
     * autopistos: [643]1
     * de: [644]1
     * diakrinethai: [645]1
     * dokimion: [646]1
     * dokimazesthai: [647]1
     * eis: [648]1
     * heuriskomai: [649]1
     * e houonoian kai philian . . : [650]1
     * kat' exochen: [651]1 [652]2
     * logos: [653]1
     * mellon kairos: [654]1
     * omegaeat: [655]1
     * parabole: [656]1
     * polupragmosune: [657]1
     * pros: [658]1
     * proorizein: [659]1
     * sumthulon: [660]1
     * staseis gar pou e ge adikia kai machas en allelois parechei. e de
       dikaiosu: [661]1
     * sunergous: [662]1
     * tele: [663]1
     * to poiema: [664]1
     * ton enestekoti: [665]1
     * ton politen: [666]1
     * mi/jic: [667]1
     * proe/gnw: [668]1
     __________________________________________________________________

Index of Latin Words and Phrases

     * De asse at partibus eius: [669]1
     * Dixit quoque Deus sit extensio: [670]1
     * Et dixit Deus sit extensio: [671]1
     * In fontibus versetur oportet, qui vellit esse vere theologus:
       [672]1
     * Quare hic locus corrigendus est: [673]1
     * Ut enim Spiritus ille divinus, mentium apostoliarum moderatur:
       [674]1
     * accenderet: [675]1
     * acsi diceret: [676]1
     * autem: [677]1
     * defecta est oratio apud Matthaeum: [678]1
     * doctorem: [679]1
     * inveniam: [680]1
     * invenior: [681]1
     * pro tempera saecularia: [682]1
     * reperior: [683]1
     * sed magis gratia: [684]1
     * sed magis gratiarum actio: [685]1
     * sub specie crucis: [686]1
     * tabula: [687]1
     * tenemus: [688]1
     * traho: [689]1
     * umbratile: [690]1
     * vera demum ac solida sapientia: [691]1
     __________________________________________________________________

Index of French Words and Phrases

     * Il n'en connoissoit gueres que les caracteres: [692]1
     * feindre et : [693]1
     * le siege: [694]1
     * transformez: [695]1
     __________________________________________________________________

Index of Pages of the Print Edition

   [696]9  [697]10  [698]11  [699]14  [700]15  [701]16  [702]17  [703]18
   [704]19  [705]20  [706]21  [707]22  [708]23  [709]24  [710]25  [711]26
   [712]27  [713]28  [714]29  [715]30  [716]31  [717]32  [718]33  [719]34
   [720]35  [721]36  [722]37  [723]38  [724]39  [725]40  [726]41  [727]42
   [728]43  [729]44  [730]45  [731]46  [732]47  [733]48  [734]49  [735]50
   [736]51  [737]52  [738]53  [739]54  [740]55  [741]56  [742]57  [743]58
   [744]59  [745]60  [746]61  [747]62  [748]63  [749]64  [750]65  [751]66
   [752]67  [753]68  [754]69  [755]70  [756]71  [757]72  [758]73  [759]74
   [760]75  [761]76  [762]77  [763]78  [764]79  [765]80  [766]81  [767]82
   [768]83  [769]84  [770]85  [771]86  [772]87  [773]88  [774]89  [775]90
   [776]91  [777]92  [778]93  [779]94  [780]95  [781]96  [782]97  [783]98
   [784]99  [785]100  [786]101  [787]102  [788]103  [789]104  [790]105
   [791]106  [792]107  [793]108  [794]109  [795]110  [796]111  [797]112
   [798]113  [799]114  [800]115  [801]116  [802]117  [803]118  [804]119
   [805]120  [806]121  [807]122  [808]123  [809]124  [810]125  [811]126
   [812]127  [813]128  [814]129  [815]130  [816]131  [817]132  [818]133
   [819]134  [820]135  [821]136  [822]137  [823]138  [824]139  [825]140
   [826]141  [827]142  [828]143  [829]144  [830]145  [831]146  [832]147
   [833]148  [834]149  [835]150  [836]151  [837]152  [838]153  [839]154
   [840]155  [841]156  [842]157  [843]158  [844]159  [845]160  [846]161
   [847]162  [848]163  [849]164  [850]165  [851]166  [852]167  [853]168
   [854]169  [855]170  [856]171  [857]172  [858]173  [859]174  [860]175
   [861]176  [862]177  [863]178  [864]179  [865]180  [866]181  [867]182
   [868]183  [869]184  [870]185  [871]186  [872]187  [873]188  [874]189
   [875]190  [876]191  [877]192  [878]193  [879]194  [880]195  [881]196
   [882]197  [883]198  [884]199  [885]200  [886]201  [887]202  [888]203
   [889]204  [890]205  [891]206  [892]207  [893]208  [894]209  [895]210
   [896]211  [897]212  [898]213  [899]214  [900]215  [901]216  [902]217
   [903]218  [904]219  [905]220  [906]221  [907]222  [908]223  [909]224
   [910]225  [911]226  [912]227  [913]228  [914]229  [915]230  [916]231
   [917]232  [918]233  [919]234  [920]235  [921]236  [922]237  [923]238
   [924]239  [925]240  [926]241  [927]242  [928]243  [929]244  [930]245
   [931]246  [932]247  [933]248  [934]249  [935]250  [936]251  [937]252
   [938]253  [939]254  [940]255  [941]256  [942]257  [943]258  [944]259
   [945]260  [946]261  [947]262  [948]263  [949]264  [950]265  [951]266
   [952]267  [953]268  [954]269  [955]270  [956]271  [957]272  [958]273
   [959]274  [960]275  [961]276  [962]277  [963]278  [964]279  [965]280
   [966]281  [967]282  [968]283  [969]284  [970]285  [971]286  [972]287
   [973]288  [974]289  [975]290  [976]291  [977]292  [978]293  [979]294
   [980]295  [981]296  [982]297  [983]298  [984]299  [985]300  [986]301
   [987]302  [988]303  [989]304  [990]305  [991]306  [992]307  [993]308
   [994]309  [995]310  [996]311  [997]312  [998]313  [999]314  [1000]315
   [1001]316  [1002]317  [1003]318  [1004]319  [1005]320  [1006]321
   [1007]322  [1008]323  [1009]324  [1010]325  [1011]326  [1012]327
   [1013]328  [1014]329  [1015]330  [1016]331  [1017]332  [1018]333
   [1019]334  [1020]335  [1021]336  [1022]337  [1023]338  [1024]339
   [1025]340  [1026]341  [1027]342  [1028]343  [1029]344  [1030]345
   [1031]346  [1032]347  [1033]348  [1034]349  [1035]350  [1036]351
   [1037]352  [1038]353  [1039]354  [1040]355  [1041]356  [1042]357
   [1043]358  [1044]359  [1045]360  [1046]361  [1047]362  [1048]363
   [1049]364  [1050]365  [1051]366  [1052]367  [1053]368  [1054]369
   [1055]370  [1056]371  [1057]372  [1058]373  [1059]374  [1060]375
   [1061]376  [1062]377  [1063]378  [1064]379  [1065]380  [1066]381
   [1067]382  [1068]383  [1069]384  [1070]385  [1071]386  [1072]387
   [1073]388  [1074]389  [1075]390  [1076]391  [1077]392  [1078]393
   [1079]394  [1080]395  [1081]396  [1082]397  [1083]398  [1084]399
   [1085]400  [1086]401  [1087]402  [1088]403  [1089]404  [1090]405
   [1091]406  [1092]407
     __________________________________________________________________

            This document is from the Christian Classics Ethereal
               Library at Calvin College, http://www.ccel.org,
                   generated on demand from ThML source.

References

   1. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=1&scrV=1#vi-p90.1
   2. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=1&scrV=6#iv-p9.4
   3. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=1&scrV=16#xii-p174.1
   4. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=1&scrV=26#xii-p185.1
   5. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=2&scrV=18#xii-p181.1
   6. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=4&scrV=6#xiii-p156.1
   7. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=4&scrV=10#x-p76.1
   8. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=4&scrV=20#xii-p165.1
   9. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=8&scrV=19#xii-p191.1
  10. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=9&scrV=21#xii-p137.1
  11. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=9&scrV=25#x-p68.1
  12. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=13&scrV=5#xii-p145.1
  13. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=13&scrV=7#xii-p145.1
  14. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=15&scrV=2#iv-p16.1
  15. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=15&scrV=6#ix-p15.1
  16. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=17&scrV=23#xiii-p196.1
  17. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=18&scrV=2#xii-p84.1
  18. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=18&scrV=17#x-p40.1
  19. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=21&scrV=12#ix-p89.1
  20. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=22&scrV=18#xi-p89.1
  21. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=28&scrV=12#vii-p21.1
  22. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=28&scrV=13#v-p32.1
  23. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=35&scrV=7#vi-p42.1
  24. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=35&scrV=13#vi-p42.1
  25. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=40&scrV=6#xiii-p141.1
  26. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=40&scrV=8#xiii-p141.1
  27. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=43&scrV=34#xii-p136.1
  28. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=45&scrV=8#x-p60.1
  29. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=46&scrV=8#iv-p45.11
  30. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=47&scrV=31#iv-p45.12
  31. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=48&scrV=15#vii-p30.1
  32. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=48&scrV=16#vii-p29.1
  33. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=49&scrV=10#iv-p137.2
  34. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=49&scrV=26#v-p153.1
  35. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=50&scrV=13#iv-p45.7
  36. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=7&scrV=12#iv-p71.1
  37. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=9&scrV=16#xi-p49.1
  38. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=18&scrV=13#xiii-p134.1
  39. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=18&scrV=17#xiii-p134.1
  40. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=20&scrV=15#xii-p57.1
  41. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=20&scrV=24#xiii-p154.1
  42. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=22&scrV=21#xii-p66.1
  43. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=22&scrV=21#xii-p70.1
  44. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=7&scrV=18#ix-p17.2
  45. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=17&scrV=4#ix-p17.3
  46. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=18&scrV=5#vii-p72.1
  47. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=19&scrV=33#xii-p66.2
  48. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=19&scrV=33#xii-p70.2
  49. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=6&scrV=4#v-p149.1
  50. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=25&scrV=7#x-p107.1
  51. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=25&scrV=90#iv-p48.2
  52. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=3&scrV=4#iv-p20.8
  53. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=5&scrV=16#xii-p58.1
  54. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=7&scrV=7#xi-p15.1
  55. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=9&scrV=6#xi-p25.1
  56. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=12&scrV=32#v-p23.1
  57. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=13&scrV=1#iv-p24.2
  58. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=18&scrV=15#xiii-p66.1
  59. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=25&scrV=4#xii-p63.1
  60. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=30&scrV=12#vii-p139.2
  61. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=30&scrV=14#v-p21.2
  62. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=30&scrV=15#v-p128.4
  63. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=30&scrV=19#v-p21.1
  64. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=32&scrV=8#xiii-p43.1
  65. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=32&scrV=9#vii-p207.1
  66. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=32&scrV=9#xi-p23.1
  67. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=33&scrV=16#v-p153.2
  68. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Josh&scrCh=1&scrV=8#xiii-p145.1
  69. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Josh&scrCh=2&scrV=11#ix-p98.1
  70. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Josh&scrCh=10&scrV=12#ix-p47.1
  71. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Josh&scrCh=24&scrV=32#iv-p45.8
  72. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Josh&scrCh=24&scrV=32#iv-p45.10
  73. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Judg&scrCh=13&scrV=5#v-p152.1
  74. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=19&scrV=19#ix-p17.4
  75. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=17&scrV=0#ix-p49.3
  76. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=12&scrV=15#ix-p17.5
  77. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=2Chr&scrCh=2&scrV=6#x-p114.1
  78. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=2Chr&scrCh=20&scrV=26#xiii-p31.1
  79. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=2Chr&scrCh=26&scrV=18#vii-p158.2
  80. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Ezra&scrCh=4&scrV=7#vii-p186.2
  81. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Neh&scrCh=8&scrV=7#vii-p186.3
  82. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=1&scrV=2#v-p5.1
  83. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=2&scrV=4#x-p113.1
  84. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=2&scrV=7#vii-p130.1
  85. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=10&scrV=31#x-p110.1
  86. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=19&scrV=0#v-p81.2
  87. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=19&scrV=7#v-p137.1
  88. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=22&scrV=18#iv-p44.3
  89. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=22&scrV=18#v-p156.1
  90. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=23&scrV=1#x-p1.1
  91. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=23&scrV=6#x-p1.1
  92. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=24&scrV=7#xiii-p149.1
  93. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=32&scrV=2#vii-p46.2
  94. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=33&scrV=12#x-p15.1
  95. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=33&scrV=13#x-p15.1
  96. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=33&scrV=16#x-p15.1
  97. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=33&scrV=17#x-p15.1
  98. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=33&scrV=22#x-p15.1
  99. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=35&scrV=16#iv-p115.1
 100. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=41&scrV=10#iv-p113.1
 101. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=44&scrV=22#viii-p69.1
 102. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=46&scrV=3#xiii-p48.1
 103. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=46&scrV=5#viii-p83.1
 104. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=48&scrV=10#vi-p35.1
 105. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=50&scrV=0#v-p85.1
 106. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=51&scrV=7#v-p102.1
 107. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=55&scrV=14#iv-p113.2
 108. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=68&scrV=19#iv-p45.2
 109. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=69&scrV=4#iv-p117.1
 110. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=78&scrV=39#vii-p102.1
 111. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=89&scrV=6#vii-p152.2
 112. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=91&scrV=11#vii-p114.1
 113. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=91&scrV=11#x-p103.1
 114. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=104&scrV=14#xii-p132.2
 115. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=104&scrV=15#xii-p138.1
 116. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=106&scrV=31#ix-p17.1
 117. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=110&scrV=0#vii-p158.1
 118. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=110&scrV=3#vii-p181.1
 119. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=112&scrV=5#iv-p23.2
 120. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=115&scrV=3#x-p113.2
 121. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=118&scrV=0#xiii-p3.1
 122. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=118&scrV=22#iv-p44.4
 123. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=119&scrV=0#v-p81.3
 124. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=119&scrV=159#xii-p51.1
 125. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=119&scrV=165#xii-p54.1
 126. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=120&scrV=7#iv-p116.2
 127. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=126&scrV=1#xiii-p23.1
 128. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=127&scrV=1#xii-p106.1
 129. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=132&scrV=14#iv-p22.4
 130. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=147&scrV=20#vii-p207.2
 131. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=12&scrV=10#xii-p65.1
 132. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=1&scrV=0#v-p85.2
 133. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=2&scrV=4#iv-p18.1
 134. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=2&scrV=12#xii-p141.1
 135. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=2&scrV=16#xii-p141.1
 136. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=6&scrV=1#vi-p1.1
 137. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=6&scrV=9#x-p84.1
 138. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=7&scrV=14#iv-p137.1
 139. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=10&scrV=5#x-p46.1
 140. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=16&scrV=5#vii-p166.1
 141. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=19&scrV=24#vii-p206.1
 142. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=20&scrV=2#xii-p160.2
 143. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=23&scrV=18#xii-p89.1
 144. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=28&scrV=11#xiii-p202.1
 145. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=29&scrV=11#xiii-p170.1
 146. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=40&scrV=6#vii-p102.2
 147. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=43&scrV=8#vii-p161.1
 148. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=49&scrV=7#xiii-p13.1
 149. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=53&scrV=2#vii-p47.1
 150. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=53&scrV=5#vii-p53.1
 151. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=53&scrV=6#vii-p60.1
 152. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=53&scrV=11#vii-p66.1
 153. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=53&scrV=12#vii-p75.1
 154. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=54&scrV=1#xiii-p6.1
 155. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=58&scrV=0#v-p85.3
 156. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=58&scrV=7#xii-p49.2
 157. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=61&scrV=6#xiii-p55.1
 158. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=62&scrV=3#xiii-p60.1
 159. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=62&scrV=11#xiii-p172.1
 160. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=66&scrV=0#v-p85.4
 161. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=1&scrV=9#xiii-p77.1
 162. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=1&scrV=17#xiii-p77.1
 163. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=7&scrV=11#iv-p44.6
 164. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=7&scrV=22#v-p1.1
 165. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=9&scrV=23#vi-p21.1
 166. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=9&scrV=24#xii-p30.2
 167. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=10&scrV=10#vi-p27.1
 168. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=23&scrV=5#vii-p197.1
 169. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=26&scrV=4#v-p18.1
 170. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=31&scrV=9#vii-p152.1
 171. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=31&scrV=15#v-p146.1
 172. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=31&scrV=31#v-p121.1
 173. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=31&scrV=31#v-p144.2
 174. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=31&scrV=31#v-p130.2
 175. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=36&scrV=4#iv-p53.2
 176. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=36&scrV=28#iv-p53.2
 177. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=14&scrV=4#iv-p54.2
 178. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=16&scrV=12#iv-p17.5
 179. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=16&scrV=43#iv-p54.1
 180. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=17&scrV=1#iv-p19.1
 181. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=18&scrV=23#xiii-p190.1
 182. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=20&scrV=0#v-p107.2
 183. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=20&scrV=20#ix-p38.1
 184. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=20&scrV=44#vi-p33.1
 185. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=3&scrV=16#ix-p71.1
 186. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=8&scrV=22#iv-p22.5
 187. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=9&scrV=24#iv-p137.3
 188. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=9&scrV=25#iv-p22.3
 189. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=6&scrV=6#vi-p82.1
 190. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Joel&scrCh=2&scrV=12#x-p57.1
 191. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Joel&scrCh=3&scrV=1#xiii-p25.1
 192. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Amos&scrCh=7&scrV=0#v-p85.6
 193. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Mic&scrCh=1&scrV=8#xii-p160.3
 194. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Mic&scrCh=3&scrV=8#xiii-p92.1
 195. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Mic&scrCh=4&scrV=2#iv-p18.2
 196. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Mic&scrCh=4&scrV=2#v-p10.1
 197. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Mic&scrCh=4&scrV=3#vii-p178.1
 198. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Mic&scrCh=5&scrV=0#v-p85.5
 199. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Mic&scrCh=5&scrV=2#v-p62.1
 200. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Mic&scrCh=5&scrV=2#iv-p137.4
 201. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Mic&scrCh=6&scrV=6#xii-p7.1
 202. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Hab&scrCh=2&scrV=4#ix-p1.1
 203. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Hab&scrCh=2&scrV=4#ix-p116.1
 204. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Zech&scrCh=3&scrV=6#xiii-p121.1
 205. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Zech&scrCh=8&scrV=5#xii-p155.1
 206. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Zech&scrCh=11&scrV=7#xiii-p35.1
 207. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Zech&scrCh=13&scrV=4#xii-p158.1
 208. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Zech&scrCh=13&scrV=7#xiii-p106.1
 209. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Mal&scrCh=1&scrV=1#xi-p4.1
 210. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Mal&scrCh=1&scrV=2#xi-p7.1
 211. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Mal&scrCh=2&scrV=9#xiii-p109.1
 212. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Mal&scrCh=4&scrV=0#xiii-p69.1
 213. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Mal&scrCh=4&scrV=2#vii-p3.1
 214. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=1&scrV=20#iv-p144.5
 215. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=2&scrV=6#v-p61.1
 216. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=2&scrV=7#iv-p14.6
 217. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=2&scrV=17#v-p145.1
 218. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=2&scrV=23#v-p148.1
 219. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=2&scrV=23#v-p152.3
 220. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=3&scrV=3#iv-p43.4
 221. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=3&scrV=12#xiii-p185.1
 222. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=4&scrV=5#vii-p109.1
 223. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=5#xii-p93.1
 224. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=10#viii-p71.1
 225. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=39#xii-p80.1
 226. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=43#xii-p73.1
 227. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=45#xii-p132.1
 228. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=9#x-p112.1
 229. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=11#xii-p134.1
 230. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=21#vii-p128.1
 231. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=9&scrV=7#iv-p144.1
 232. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=9&scrV=10#xii-p95.1
 233. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=9&scrV=13#vi-p83.1
 234. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=9&scrV=20#ix-p124.1
 235. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=10&scrV=28#x-p25.1
 236. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=11&scrV=13#v-p130.1
 237. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=11&scrV=21#iv-p70.1
 238. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=11&scrV=21#xi-p44.1
 239. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=11&scrV=25#v-p81.1
 240. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=11&scrV=25#xi-p31.1
 241. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=12&scrV=17#vi-p83.2
 242. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=13&scrV=11#xiii-p204.1
 243. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=13&scrV=14#x-p84.2
 244. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=13&scrV=17#v-p73.1
 245. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=14&scrV=24#ix-p128.1
 246. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=14&scrV=27#ix-p132.1
 247. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=14&scrV=31#ix-p137.1
 248. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=15&scrV=7#iv-p45.17
 249. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=16&scrV=18#ix-p54.1
 250. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=17&scrV=20#ix-p49.1
 251. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=19&scrV=17#v-p114.1
 252. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=19&scrV=23#iv-p97.7
 253. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=19&scrV=27#viii-p55.1
 254. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=19&scrV=29#x-p25.3
 255. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=21&scrV=13#iv-p44.7
 256. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=21&scrV=42#iv-p44.5
 257. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=22&scrV=2#iv-p48.1
 258. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=23&scrV=24#iv-p45.15
 259. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=24&scrV=9#viii-p65.1
 260. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=24&scrV=23#iv-p72.3
 261. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=24&scrV=24#xi-p55.1
 262. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=24&scrV=35#iv-p98.1
 263. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=25&scrV=31#iv-p97.8
 264. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=25&scrV=34#xi-p36.1
 265. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=26&scrV=14#iv-p69.1
 266. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=26&scrV=69#xii-p32.1
 267. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=27&scrV=35#iv-p44.2
 268. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=27&scrV=35#v-p154.1
 269. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=16&scrV=1#iv-p45.14
 270. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=16&scrV=19#iv-p86.1
 271. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=16&scrV=20#iv-p72.4
 272. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=16&scrV=20#iv-p72.8
 273. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=1&scrV=32#iv-p144.4
 274. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=1&scrV=33#vii-p174.1
 275. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=2&scrV=10#iv-p144.6
 276. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=2&scrV=29#iv-p144.7
 277. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=2&scrV=34#v-p128.2
 278. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=9&scrV=55#x-p111.1
 279. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=12&scrV=5#x-p25.2
 280. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=12&scrV=50#iv-p96.1
 281. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=13&scrV=1#x-p94.1
 282. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=17&scrV=6#ix-p49.2
 283. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=17&scrV=21#viii-p17.1
 284. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=19&scrV=41#iv-p88.1
 285. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=1#iv-p88.2
 286. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=5#vi-p51.1
 287. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=9#vi-p57.1
 288. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=14#vii-p100.1
 289. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=16#iv-p40.3
 290. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=16#v-p139.1
 291. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=17#v-p122.1
 292. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=29#iv-p144.8
 293. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=45#vii-p82.1
 294. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=47#xii-p101.1
 295. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=49#vii-p147.1
 296. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=2&scrV=5#iv-p38.6
 297. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=2&scrV=19#vii-p131.1
 298. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=3#vi-p79.1
 299. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=11#xiii-p183.1
 300. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=12#v-p58.1
 301. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=14#xiii-p161.1
 302. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=16#viii-p1.1
 303. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=33#x-p116.1
 304. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=4&scrV=23#v-p82.1
 305. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=4&scrV=24#v-p136.1
 306. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=4&scrV=24#xii-p126.1
 307. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=4&scrV=48#iv-p72.6
 308. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=21#iv-p97.1
 309. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=24#viii-p16.1
 310. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=24#ix-p29.1
 311. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=37#xiii-p180.1
 312. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=38#v-p109.1
 313. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=39#v-p111.1
 314. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=45#v-p103.1
 315. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=0#ix-p129.1
 316. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=7#iv-p38.7
 317. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=26#iv-p72.2
 318. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=27#vii-p84.1
 319. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=40#xi-p57.1
 320. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=7&scrV=30#x-p105.1
 321. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=7&scrV=33#xiii-p163.1
 322. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=7&scrV=39#vii-p143.1
 323. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=7&scrV=39#viii-p13.1
 324. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=12#vi-p87.1
 325. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=14#vii-p94.1
 326. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=19#vi-p68.1
 327. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=21#xiii-p194.1
 328. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=23#viii-p23.1
 329. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=26#xiii-p165.1
 330. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=28#xiii-p167.1
 331. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=52#viii-p35.1
 332. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=9&scrV=2#x-p99.1
 333. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=10&scrV=18#vii-p131.2
 334. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=10&scrV=25#iv-p145.1
 335. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=10&scrV=28#viii-p20.1
 336. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=10&scrV=28#xi-p56.1
 337. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=10&scrV=29#ix-p56.1
 338. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=10&scrV=30#vii-p86.1
 339. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=10&scrV=38#vi-p75.1
 340. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=11&scrV=9#x-p102.1
 341. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=11&scrV=18#iv-p72.1
 342. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=11&scrV=21#ix-p139.1
 343. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=11&scrV=25#viii-p18.1
 344. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=11&scrV=43#xiii-p159.1
 345. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=11&scrV=58#iv-p24.3
 346. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=12&scrV=12#xiii-p1.1
 347. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=12&scrV=25#xii-p20.1
 348. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=12&scrV=27#vii-p103.1
 349. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=12&scrV=29#x-p80.1
 350. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=12&scrV=31#xii-p103.1
 351. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=12&scrV=40#x-p83.1
 352. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=12&scrV=41#vi-p4.1
 353. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=12&scrV=45#iv-p43.1
 354. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=1#vi-p62.1
 355. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=7#vi-p65.1
 356. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=10#vii-p88.1
 357. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=17#vii-p130.3
 358. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=19#viii-p32.1
 359. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=24#vii-p98.1
 360. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=26#xiii-p169.1
 361. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=28#vii-p91.1
 362. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=15&scrV=9#viii-p9.1
 363. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=16&scrV=7#vii-p143.2
 364. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=16&scrV=8#xiii-p177.1
 365. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=16&scrV=8#xiii-p193.1
 366. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=16&scrV=10#xiii-p174.1
 367. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=16&scrV=13#ix-p61.1
 368. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=16&scrV=25#xiii-p199.1
 369. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=16&scrV=27#ix-p36.1
 370. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=17&scrV=1#x-p117.1
 371. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=17&scrV=3#vi-p77.1
 372. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=17&scrV=5#vii-p80.1
 373. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=17&scrV=7#vi-p71.1
 374. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=17&scrV=17#ix-p61.2
 375. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=17&scrV=19#vii-p74.1
 376. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=17&scrV=20#vii-p77.1
 377. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=18&scrV=17#iv-p82.6
 378. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=19&scrV=7#v-p55.1
 379. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=20&scrV=10#vii-p118.1
 380. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=20&scrV=17#vii-p126.1
 381. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=20&scrV=23#xiii-p130.1
 382. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=20&scrV=29#ix-p69.1
 383. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=20&scrV=31#iv-p72.7
 384. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=2&scrV=19#iv-p97.3
 385. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=2&scrV=23#x-p32.1
 386. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=2&scrV=41#vii-p163.1
 387. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=3&scrV=21#vii-p142.1
 388. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=3&scrV=22#xiii-p68.2
 389. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=6&scrV=22#viii-p84.1
 390. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=7&scrV=16#iv-p45.6
 391. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=7&scrV=30#viii-p82.1
 392. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=7&scrV=38#v-p105.1
 393. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=7&scrV=55#vii-p144.1
 394. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=14&scrV=17#vi-p30.1
 395. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=16&scrV=35#iv-p20.5
 396. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=17&scrV=16#iv-p84.2
 397. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=17&scrV=28#vi-p30.2
 398. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=20&scrV=26#xiii-p87.1
 399. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=20&scrV=32#iv-p68.1
 400. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=22&scrV=2#iv-p45.13
 401. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=22&scrV=25#iv-p20.6
 402. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=24&scrV=10#ix-p62.1
 403. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=25&scrV=23#vi-p34.4
 404. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=26&scrV=1#ix-p62.2
 405. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=1&scrV=2#xi-p90.1
 406. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=1&scrV=4#vii-p129.1
 407. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=1&scrV=4#vii-p154.1
 408. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=1&scrV=16#v-p129.2
 409. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=1&scrV=17#ix-p11.1
 410. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=1&scrV=17#ix-p119.2
 411. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=2&scrV=5#iv-p97.5
 412. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=2&scrV=13#v-p116.1
 413. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=3&scrV=9#v-p116.2
 414. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=3&scrV=10#vii-p64.1
 415. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=4&scrV=20#ix-p57.3
 416. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=4&scrV=25#xiii-p176.1
 417. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=5&scrV=1#vii-p55.1
 418. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=5&scrV=10#viii-p3.2
 419. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=5&scrV=10#ix-p37.2
 420. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=6&scrV=0#ix-p34.1
 421. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=6&scrV=4#ix-p30.1
 422. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=7&scrV=10#v-p128.5
 423. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=3#vii-p71.1
 424. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=7#x-p86.1
 425. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=10#viii-p19.1
 426. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=11#iv-p97.2
 427. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=23#viii-p75.1
 428. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=24#ix-p122.1
 429. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=28#iv-p40.2
 430. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=28#iv-p74.3
 431. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=28#xi-p72.1
 432. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=29#viii-p62.1
 433. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=29#viii-p67.1
 434. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=29#viii-p99.1
 435. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=9&scrV=17#iv-p76.1
 436. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=9&scrV=17#xi-p48.1
 437. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=9&scrV=30#xi-p41.1
 438. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=10&scrV=6#vii-p139.1
 439. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=10&scrV=8#vii-p72.2
 440. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=10&scrV=8#ix-p83.1
 441. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=10&scrV=17#ix-p127.1
 442. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=11&scrV=7#xi-p38.1
 443. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=11&scrV=20#v-p134.1
 444. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=11&scrV=34#xi-p53.1
 445. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=12&scrV=1#xii-p1.1
 446. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=12&scrV=2#xii-p24.1
 447. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=12&scrV=21#xii-p81.1
 448. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=13&scrV=8#xii-p48.1
 449. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=13&scrV=10#xii-p49.1
 450. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=13&scrV=14#xii-p140.1
 451. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=14&scrV=7#xii-p16.1
 452. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=15&scrV=16#xiii-p57.1
 453. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=31#xii-p30.1
 454. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=9#xiii-p108.2
 455. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=4#xii-p31.1
 456. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=13#iv-p38.3
 457. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=7&scrV=22#xii-p98.1
 458. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=9&scrV=10#xii-p64.1
 459. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=9&scrV=16#xiii-p87.2
 460. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=10&scrV=8#iv-p48.3
 461. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=10&scrV=11#v-p63.1
 462. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=12#viii-p62.4
 463. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=14&scrV=11#iv-p20.4
 464. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=19#iv-p96.2
 465. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=24#vii-p93.1
 466. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=26#iv-p97.4
 467. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=26#viii-p17.3
 468. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=28#viii-p37.1
 469. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=52#iv-p98.4
 470. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=54#iv-p45.5
 471. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=8#iv-p82.2
 472. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=13#iv-p38.4
 473. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=20#v-p101.1
 474. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=15#x-p85.1
 475. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=16#v-p128.1
 476. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=4#xiii-p182.1
 477. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=6#xiii-p178.1
 478. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=6#v-p118.1
 479. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=7#v-p107.1
 480. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=7#v-p137.2
 481. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=14#v-p22.2
 482. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=14#v-p132.1
 483. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=17#vii-p20.1
 484. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=18#vi-p70.1
 485. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=3#v-p22.1
 486. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=3#xiii-p202.2
 487. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=10#iv-p92.1
 488. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=10#viii-p64.2
 489. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=11#iv-p82.1
 490. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=16#viii-p19.2
 491. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=1#iv-p82.3
 492. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=7#ix-p70.3
 493. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=18#xiii-p131.1
 494. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=20#vii-p73.1
 495. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=9&scrV=7#xii-p91.1
 496. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=10&scrV=6#xiii-p133.1
 497. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=10&scrV=17#xii-p29.1
 498. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=9#viii-p30.1
 499. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=13&scrV=4#vii-p130.2
 500. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=2&scrV=20#iv-p82.4
 501. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=3&scrV=1#ix-p61.3
 502. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=3&scrV=10#v-p129.1
 503. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=3&scrV=11#ix-p119.3
 504. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=3&scrV=13#xii-p42.1
 505. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=4&scrV=9#v-p86.1
 506. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=4&scrV=9#vii-p39.1
 507. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=4&scrV=9#xi-p75.1
 508. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=4&scrV=29#x-p91.1
 509. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=5&scrV=1#xii-p41.1
 510. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=5&scrV=13#xii-p44.1
 511. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=5&scrV=19#iv-p20.3
 512. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=0#vi-p34.5
 513. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=4#xi-p60.1
 514. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=5#viii-p3.1
 515. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=20#viii-p28.1
 516. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=2&scrV=10#vii-p211.2
 517. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=2&scrV=17#xiii-p164.1
 518. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=8#iv-p45.3
 519. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=8#vii-p132.1
 520. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=28#vii-p191.1
 521. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=5&scrV=4#iv-p12.9
 522. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=5&scrV=14#vii-p11.1
 523. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=6&scrV=14#viii-p43.1
 524. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=1&scrV=12#viii-p64.1
 525. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=1&scrV=21#viii-p26.1
 526. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=1&scrV=27#viii-p44.1
 527. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=1&scrV=29#viii-p48.1
 528. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=9#iv-p38.5
 529. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=3&scrV=9#iv-p12.6
 530. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=3&scrV=10#ix-p31.1
 531. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=4&scrV=12#xii-p139.1
 532. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=1&scrV=5#ix-p61.4
 533. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=1&scrV=15#iv-p87.1
 534. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=1&scrV=24#viii-p60.1
 535. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=1&scrV=29#ix-p57.2
 536. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=2&scrV=9#xiii-p5.1
 537. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=2&scrV=14#vii-p46.1
 538. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=2&scrV=17#v-p144.1
 539. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=2&scrV=18#iv-p20.2
 540. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=3&scrV=0#viii-p99.2
 541. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=3&scrV=3#viii-p17.2
 542. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=1&scrV=4#iv-p72.5
 543. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=5&scrV=8#viii-p41.1
 544. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=5&scrV=23#xii-p5.1
 545. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=2Thess&scrCh=1&scrV=5#viii-p46.1
 546. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=2Thess&scrCh=2&scrV=16#iv-p89.1
 547. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=1&scrV=10#iv-p20.7
 548. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=1&scrV=18#viii-p31.1
 549. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=2&scrV=4#ix-p61.5
 550. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=3&scrV=15#ix-p61.6
 551. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=3&scrV=16#iv-p88.3
 552. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=3&scrV=16#iv-p88.4
 553. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=4&scrV=0#viii-p99.3
 554. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=4&scrV=1#xii-p122.1
 555. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=1&scrV=9#iv-p75.1
 556. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=1&scrV=9#xi-p84.1
 557. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=1&scrV=12#ix-p52.1
 558. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=2&scrV=1#viii-p64.3
 559. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=2&scrV=3#viii-p50.1
 560. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=2&scrV=11#ix-p35.1
 561. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=3&scrV=13#x-p90.1
 562. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=3&scrV=14#ix-p43.1
 563. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=3&scrV=16#v-p37.1
 564. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=4&scrV=7#iv-p82.5
 565. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Titus&scrCh=1&scrV=1#ix-p58.1
 566. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Titus&scrCh=1&scrV=2#iv-p75.2
 567. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Titus&scrCh=1&scrV=2#xi-p87.1
 568. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Titus&scrCh=1&scrV=15#xii-p132.3
 569. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=1&scrV=5#vii-p150.1
 570. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=1&scrV=10#vii-p78.1
 571. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=1&scrV=13#vii-p156.1
 572. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=2&scrV=16#vii-p32.1
 573. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=6&scrV=19#ix-p63.1
 574. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=9&scrV=1#v-p86.2
 575. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=9&scrV=8#vii-p35.1
 576. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=9&scrV=10#v-p83.1
 577. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=9&scrV=11#vii-p35.1
 578. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=9&scrV=13#v-p88.1
 579. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=9&scrV=15#vii-p44.1
 580. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=9&scrV=18#v-p94.1
 581. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=9&scrV=24#iv-p94.1
 582. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=10&scrV=5#iv-p45.4
 583. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=10&scrV=7#iv-p97.6
 584. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=10&scrV=25#iv-p98.3
 585. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=10&scrV=26#iv-p98.5
 586. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=10&scrV=36#ix-p113.1
 587. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=10&scrV=38#iv-p45.4
 588. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=11&scrV=1#ix-p120.1
 589. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=11&scrV=7#ix-p80.1
 590. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=11&scrV=17#ix-p87.1
 591. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=11&scrV=27#ix-p91.1
 592. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=11&scrV=30#ix-p96.1
 593. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=11&scrV=31#ix-p104.1
 594. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=11&scrV=32#ix-p106.1
 595. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=11&scrV=35#ix-p110.1
 596. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=12&scrV=4#viii-p76.1
 597. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=12&scrV=6#viii-p76.1
 598. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=13&scrV=8#vii-p1.1
 599. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=13&scrV=8#xi-p86.1
 600. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=15&scrV=1#ix-p70.2
 601. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=6#ix-p66.1
 602. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=9#xii-p97.1
 603. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=6#viii-p88.1
 604. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=10#v-p68.1
 605. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=11#viii-p96.1
 606. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=25#v-p27.1
 607. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=8#v-p128.3
 608. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=4#iv-p45.1
 609. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=12#viii-p103.1
 610. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=17#viii-p107.1
 611. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=21#iv-p84.1
 612. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=4&scrV=11#xiii-p79.1
 613. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=4&scrV=12#viii-p100.1
 614. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=4&scrV=14#viii-p71.2
 615. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=4&scrV=16#viii-p111.1
 616. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=4#iv-p20.1
 617. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=19#v-p75.1
 618. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=20#v-p49.1
 619. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=3&scrV=2#iv-p98.2
 620. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=4&scrV=1#iv-p71.2
 621. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=4&scrV=1#v-p42.1
 622. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=4&scrV=10#ix-p37.1
 623. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=5&scrV=1#iv-p144.2
 624. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=5&scrV=4#ix-p119.1
 625. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#iv-p12.7
 626. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#v-p142.2
 627. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#vii-p36.2
 628. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#xii-p86.1
 629. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#xiii-p200.1
 630. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#vi-p81.2
 631. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#xi-p70.3
 632. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#viii-p29.2
 633. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#viii-p29.1
 634. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#ix-p57.1
 635. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#v-p50.1
 636. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#v-p50.2
 637. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#xiii-p68.1
 638. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#viii-p46.3
 639. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#viii-p46.2
 640. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#xii-p26.2
 641. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#vii-p87.1
 642. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#xi-p89.3
 643. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#ix-p70.1
 644. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#xi-p73.1
 645. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#ix-p67.1
 646. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#viii-p94.2
 647. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#viii-p94.1
 648. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#xi-p70.1
 649. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#iv-p12.1
 650. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#viii-p106.3
 651. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#vi-p34.1
 652. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#vi-p34.3
 653. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#vii-p102.4
 654. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#vii-p43.1
 655. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#viii-p106.2
 656. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#vii-p36.1
 657. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#xiii-p139.1
 658. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#viii-p27.1
 659. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#xi-p78.1
 660. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#xiii-p107.2
 661. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#viii-p106.1
 662. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#xiii-p108.1
 663. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#v-p66.1
 664. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#vii-p211.1
 665. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#vii-p43.2
 666. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#xiii-p107.1
 667. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#vii-p102.5
 668. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#viii-p62.3
 669. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#iv-p38.8
 670. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#iv-p9.5
 671. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#iv-p9.6
 672. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#iv-p14.8
 673. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#iv-p45.9
 674. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#iv-p14.4
 675. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#iv-p116.1
 676. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#iv-p17.1
 677. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#xi-p73.2
 678. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#iv-p45.16
 679. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#v-p39.1
 680. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#iv-p12.2
 681. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#iv-p12.4
 682. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#xi-p89.2
 683. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#iv-p12.3
 684. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#iv-p12.11
 685. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#iv-p12.10
 686. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#iv-p65.1
 687. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#iv-p167.1
 688. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#iv-p16.3
 689. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#iv-p43.2
 690. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#iv-p44.1
 691. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#iv-p63.1
 692. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#iv-p11.1
 693. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#iv-p132.1
 694. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#iv-p144.3
 695. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#iv-p155.2
 696. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#i-Page_9
 697. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#ii-Page_10
 698. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#ii-Page_11
 699. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#iii-Page_14
 700. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#iii-Page_15
 701. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#iv-Page_16
 702. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#iv-Page_17
 703. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#iv-Page_18
 704. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#iv-Page_19
 705. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#iv-Page_20
 706. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#iv-Page_21
 707. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#iv-Page_22
 708. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#iv-Page_23
 709. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#iv-Page_24
 710. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#iv-Page_25
 711. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#iv-Page_26
 712. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#iv-Page_27
 713. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#iv-Page_28
 714. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#iv-Page_29
 715. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#iv-Page_30
 716. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#iv-Page_31
 717. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#iv-Page_32
 718. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#iv-Page_33
 719. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#iv-Page_34
 720. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#iv-Page_35
 721. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#iv-Page_36
 722. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#iv-Page_37
 723. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#iv-Page_38
 724. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#iv-Page_39
 725. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#iv-Page_40
 726. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#iv-Page_41
 727. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#iv-Page_42
 728. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#iv-Page_43
 729. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#iv-Page_44
 730. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#iv-Page_45
 731. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#iv-Page_46
 732. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#iv-Page_47
 733. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#iv-Page_48
 734. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#iv-Page_49
 735. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#iv-Page_50
 736. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#iv-Page_51
 737. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#iv-Page_52
 738. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#iv-Page_53
 739. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#iv-Page_54
 740. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#iv-Page_55
 741. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#iv-Page_56
 742. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#iv-Page_57
 743. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#iv-Page_58
 744. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#iv-Page_59
 745. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#iv-Page_60
 746. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#iv-Page_61
 747. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#iv-Page_62
 748. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#iv-Page_63
 749. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#iv-Page_64
 750. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#iv-Page_65
 751. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#iv-Page_66
 752. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#iv-Page_67
 753. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#iv-Page_68
 754. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#iv-Page_69
 755. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#iv-Page_70
 756. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#iv-Page_71
 757. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#iv-Page_72
 758. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#iv-Page_73
 759. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#iv-Page_74
 760. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#iv-Page_75
 761. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#iv-Page_76
 762. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#iv-Page_77
 763. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#iv-Page_78
 764. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#v-Page_79
 765. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#v-Page_80
 766. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#v-Page_81
 767. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#v-Page_82
 768. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#v-Page_83
 769. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#v-Page_84
 770. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#v-Page_85
 771. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#v-Page_86
 772. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#v-Page_87
 773. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#v-Page_88
 774. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#v-Page_89
 775. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#v-Page_90
 776. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#v-Page_91
 777. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#v-Page_92
 778. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#v-Page_93
 779. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#v-Page_94
 780. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#v-Page_95
 781. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#v-Page_96
 782. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#v-Page_97
 783. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#v-Page_98
 784. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#v-Page_99
 785. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#v-Page_100
 786. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#v-Page_101
 787. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#v-Page_102
 788. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#v-Page_103
 789. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#v-Page_104
 790. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#v-Page_105
 791. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#v-Page_106
 792. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#v-Page_107
 793. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#v-Page_108
 794. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#v-Page_109
 795. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#v-Page_110
 796. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#v-Page_111
 797. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#v-Page_112
 798. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#v-Page_113
 799. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#v-Page_114
 800. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#v-Page_115
 801. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#v-Page_116
 802. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#v-Page_117
 803. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#v-Page_118
 804. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#v-Page_119
 805. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#v-Page_120
 806. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#vi-Page_121
 807. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#vi-Page_122
 808. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#vi-Page_123
 809. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#vi-Page_124
 810. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#vi-Page_125
 811. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#vi-Page_126
 812. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#vi-Page_127
 813. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#vi-Page_128
 814. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#vi-Page_129
 815. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#vi-Page_130
 816. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#vi-Page_131
 817. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#vi-Page_132
 818. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#vi-Page_133
 819. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#vi-Page_134
 820. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#vi-Page_135
 821. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#vi-Page_136
 822. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#vi-Page_137
 823. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#vi-Page_138
 824. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#vi-Page_139
 825. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#vi-Page_140
 826. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#vi-Page_141
 827. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#vi-Page_142
 828. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#vii-Page_143
 829. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#vii-Page_144
 830. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#vii-Page_145
 831. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#vii-Page_146
 832. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#vii-Page_147
 833. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#vii-Page_148
 834. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#vii-Page_149
 835. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#vii-Page_150
 836. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#vii-Page_151
 837. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#vii-Page_152
 838. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#vii-Page_153
 839. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#vii-Page_154
 840. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#vii-Page_155
 841. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#vii-Page_156
 842. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#vii-Page_157
 843. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#vii-Page_158
 844. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#vii-Page_159
 845. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#vii-Page_160
 846. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#vii-Page_161
 847. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#vii-Page_162
 848. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#vii-Page_163
 849. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#vii-Page_164
 850. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#vii-Page_165
 851. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#vii-Page_166
 852. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#vii-Page_167
 853. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#vii-Page_168
 854. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#vii-Page_169
 855. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#vii-Page_170
 856. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#vii-Page_171
 857. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#vii-Page_172
 858. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#vii-Page_173
 859. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#vii-Page_174
 860. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#vii-Page_175
 861. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#vii-Page_176
 862. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#vii-Page_177
 863. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#vii-Page_178
 864. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#vii-Page_179
 865. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#vii-Page_180
 866. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#vii-Page_181
 867. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#vii-Page_182
 868. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#vii-Page_183
 869. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#vii-Page_184
 870. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#vii-Page_185
 871. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#vii-Page_186
 872. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#vii-Page_187
 873. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#vii-Page_188
 874. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#vii-Page_189
 875. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#vii-Page_190
 876. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#vii-Page_191
 877. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#vii-Page_192
 878. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#viii-Page_193
 879. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#viii-Page_194
 880. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#viii-Page_195
 881. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#viii-Page_196
 882. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#viii-Page_197
 883. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#viii-Page_198
 884. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#viii-Page_199
 885. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#viii-Page_200
 886. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#viii-Page_201
 887. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#viii-Page_202
 888. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#viii-Page_203
 889. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#viii-Page_204
 890. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#viii-Page_205
 891. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#viii-Page_206
 892. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#viii-Page_207
 893. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#viii-Page_208
 894. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#viii-Page_209
 895. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#viii-Page_210
 896. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#viii-Page_211
 897. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#viii-Page_212
 898. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#viii-Page_213
 899. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#viii-Page_214
 900. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#viii-Page_215
 901. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#viii-Page_216
 902. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#viii-Page_217
 903. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#viii-Page_218
 904. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#viii-Page_219
 905. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#viii-Page_220
 906. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#viii-Page_221
 907. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#viii-Page_222
 908. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#viii-Page_223
 909. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#ix-Page_224
 910. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#ix-Page_225
 911. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#ix-Page_226
 912. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#ix-Page_227
 913. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#ix-Page_228
 914. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#ix-Page_229
 915. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#ix-Page_230
 916. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#ix-Page_231
 917. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#ix-Page_232
 918. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#ix-Page_233
 919. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#ix-Page_234
 920. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#ix-Page_235
 921. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#ix-Page_236
 922. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#ix-Page_237
 923. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#ix-Page_238
 924. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#ix-Page_239
 925. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#ix-Page_240
 926. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#ix-Page_241
 927. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#ix-Page_242
 928. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#ix-Page_243
 929. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#ix-Page_244
 930. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#ix-Page_245
 931. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#ix-Page_246
 932. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#ix-Page_247
 933. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#ix-Page_248
 934. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#ix-Page_249
 935. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#ix-Page_250
 936. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#ix-Page_251
 937. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#ix-Page_252
 938. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#ix-Page_253
 939. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#ix-Page_254
 940. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#ix-Page_255
 941. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#ix-Page_256
 942. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#ix-Page_257
 943. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#ix-Page_258
 944. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#ix-Page_259
 945. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#ix-Page_260
 946. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#x-Page_261
 947. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#x-Page_262
 948. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#x-Page_263
 949. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#x-Page_264
 950. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#x-Page_265
 951. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#x-Page_266
 952. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#x-Page_267
 953. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#x-Page_268
 954. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#x-Page_269
 955. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#x-Page_270
 956. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#x-Page_271
 957. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#x-Page_272
 958. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#x-Page_273
 959. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#x-Page_274
 960. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#x-Page_275
 961. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#x-Page_276
 962. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#x-Page_277
 963. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#x-Page_278
 964. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#x-Page_279
 965. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#x-Page_280
 966. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#x-Page_281
 967. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#x-Page_282
 968. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#x-Page_283
 969. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#x-Page_284
 970. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#x-Page_285
 971. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#x-Page_286
 972. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#x-Page_287
 973. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#x-Page_288
 974. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#xi-Page_289
 975. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#xi-Page_290
 976. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#xi-Page_291
 977. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#xi-Page_292
 978. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#xi-Page_293
 979. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#xi-Page_294
 980. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#xi-Page_295
 981. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#xi-Page_296
 982. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#xi-Page_297
 983. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#xi-Page_298
 984. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#xi-Page_299
 985. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#xi-Page_300
 986. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#xi-Page_301
 987. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#xi-Page_302
 988. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#xi-Page_303
 989. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#xi-Page_304
 990. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#xi-Page_305
 991. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#xi-Page_306
 992. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#xi-Page_307
 993. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#xi-Page_308
 994. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#xi-Page_309
 995. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#xi-Page_310
 996. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#xi-Page_311
 997. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#xi-Page_312
 998. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#xi-Page_313
 999. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#xii-Page_314
1000. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#xii-Page_315
1001. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#xii-Page_316
1002. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#xii-Page_317
1003. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#xii-Page_318
1004. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#xii-Page_319
1005. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#xii-Page_320
1006. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#xii-Page_321
1007. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#xii-Page_322
1008. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#xii-Page_323
1009. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#xii-Page_324
1010. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#xii-Page_325
1011. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#xii-Page_326
1012. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#xii-Page_327
1013. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#xii-Page_328
1014. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#xii-Page_329
1015. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#xii-Page_330
1016. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#xii-Page_331
1017. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#xii-Page_332
1018. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#xii-Page_333
1019. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#xii-Page_334
1020. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#xii-Page_335
1021. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#xii-Page_336
1022. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#xii-Page_337
1023. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#xii-Page_338
1024. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#xii-Page_339
1025. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#xii-Page_340
1026. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#xii-Page_341
1027. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#xii-Page_342
1028. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#xii-Page_343
1029. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#xii-Page_344
1030. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#xii-Page_345
1031. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#xii-Page_346
1032. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#xii-Page_347
1033. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#xii-Page_348
1034. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#xii-Page_349
1035. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#xii-Page_350
1036. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#xii-Page_351
1037. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#xii-Page_352
1038. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#xii-Page_353
1039. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#xii-Page_354
1040. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#xii-Page_355
1041. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#xii-Page_356
1042. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#xii-Page_357
1043. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#xii-Page_358
1044. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#xii-Page_359
1045. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#xii-Page_360
1046. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#xii-Page_361
1047. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#xiii-Page_362
1048. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#xiii-Page_363
1049. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#xiii-Page_364
1050. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#xiii-Page_365
1051. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#xiii-Page_366
1052. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#xiii-Page_367
1053. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#xiii-Page_368
1054. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#xiii-Page_369
1055. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#xiii-Page_370
1056. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#xiii-Page_371
1057. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#xiii-Page_372
1058. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#xiii-Page_373
1059. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#xiii-Page_374
1060. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#xiii-Page_375
1061. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#xiii-Page_376
1062. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#xiii-Page_377
1063. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#xiii-Page_378
1064. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#xiii-Page_379
1065. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#xiii-Page_380
1066. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#xiii-Page_381
1067. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#xiii-Page_382
1068. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#xiii-Page_383
1069. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#xiii-Page_384
1070. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#xiii-Page_385
1071. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#xiii-Page_386
1072. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#xiii-Page_387
1073. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#xiii-Page_388
1074. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#xiii-Page_389
1075. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#xiii-Page_390
1076. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#xiii-Page_391
1077. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#xiii-Page_392
1078. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#xiii-Page_393
1079. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#xiii-Page_394
1080. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#xiii-Page_395
1081. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#xiii-Page_396
1082. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#xiii-Page_397
1083. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#xiii-Page_398
1084. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#xiii-Page_399
1085. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#xiii-Page_400
1086. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#xiii-Page_401
1087. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#xiii-Page_402
1088. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#xiii-Page_403
1089. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#xiii-Page_404
1090. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#xiii-Page_405
1091. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#xiii-Page_406
1092. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom/cache/calcom.html3#xiii-Page_407
