     __________________________________________________________________

           Title: Centuries of Meditations
      Creator(s): Traherne, Thomas, 1636?-1674
     Print Basis: London: private publication, 1908
          Rights: Public Domain
   CCEL Subjects: Classic; All;
      LC Call no: BV4831
     LC Subjects:

                  Practical theology

                  Practical religion. The Christian life

                  Works of meditation and devotion
     __________________________________________________________________

                            Centuries of Meditations

  by

Thomas Traherne

  London, 1908
     __________________________________________________________________

   THE FIRST CENTURY


   1

        An empty book is like an infant's soul, in which anything may be
   written. It is capable of all things, but containeth nothing. I have a
   mind to fill this with profitable wonders. And since Love made you put
   it into my hands I will fill it with those Truths you love without
   knowing them: with those things which, if it be possible, shall shew my
   Love; to you in communicating most enriching Truths: to Truth in
   exalting her beauties in such a Soul.


   2

      Do not wonder that I promise to fill it with those Truths you love
   but know not; for though it be a maxim in the schools that there is no
   Love of a thing unknown, yet I have found that things unknown have a
   secret influence on the soul, and like the centre of the earth unseen
   violently attract it. We love we know not what, and therefore
   everything allures us. As iron at a distance is drawn by the loadstone,
   there being some invisible communications between them, so is there in
   us a world of Love to somewhat, though we know not what in the world
   that should be. There are invisible ways of conveyance by which some
   great thing doth touch our souls, and by which we tend to it. Do you
   not feel yourself drawn by the expectation and desire of some Great
   Thing?


   3

      I will open my mouth in Parables, I will utter things that have been
   kept secret from the foundation of the world. Things strange yet
   common, incredible, yet known; most high, yet plain; infinitely
   profitable, but not esteemed. Is it not a great thing that you should
   be Heir of the World? Is it not a great enriching verity? In which the
   fellowship of the Mystery which from the beginning of the World hath
   been hid in God lies concealed! The thing hath been from the Creation
   of the World, but hath not so been explained as that the interior
   Beauty should be understood. It is my design therefore in such a plain
   manner to unfold it that my friendship may appear in making you
   possessor of the whole world.


   4

      I will not by the noise of bloody wars and the dethroning of kings
   advance you to glory: but by the gentle ways of peace and love. As a
   deep friendship meditates and intends the deepest designs for the
   advancement of its objects, so doth it shew itself in choosing the
   sweetest and most delightful methods, whereby not to weary but please
   the person it desireth to advance. Where Love administers physic, its
   tenderness is expressed in balms and cordials. It hateth corrosives,
   and is rich in its administrations. Even so, God designing to show His
   Love in exalting you hath chosen the ways of ease and repose by which
   you should ascend. And I after His similitude will lead you into paths
   plain and familiar, where all envy, rapine, bloodshed, complaint and
   malice shall be far removed; and nothing appear but contentment and
   thanksgiving. Yet shall the end be so glorious that angels durst not
   hope for so great a one till they had seen it.


   5

      The fellowship of the mystery that hath been hid in God since the
   creation is not only the contemplation of the work of His Love in the
   redemption, tho' that is wonderful, but the end for which we are
   redeemed; a communion with Him in all His Glory. For which cause St.
   Peter saith The God of all Grace hath called us unto His Eternal Glory
   by Jesus Christ. His Eternal Glory by the method of His Divine Wisdom
   being made ours; and our fruition of it the end for which our Saviour
   suffered.


   6

      True Love as it intendeth the greatest gifts intendeth also the
   greatest benefits. It contenteth not itself in showing great things
   unless it can make them greatly useful. For Love greatly delighteth in
   seeing its object continually seated in the highest happiness. Unless
   therefore I could advance you higher by the uses of what I give, my
   Love could not be satisfied in giving you the whole world. But because
   when you enjoy it you are advanced to the Throne of God and may see His
   Love; I rest well pleased in bestowing it. It will make you to see your
   own greatness, the truth of the Scriptures, the amiableness of Virtue,
   and the beauty of Religion. It will enable you to contemn the world,
   and to overflow with praises.


   7

      To contemn the world and to enjoy the world are things contrary to
   each other. How, then can we contemn the world, which we are born to
   enjoy? Truly there are two worlds. One was made by God, the other by
   men. That made by God was great and beautiful. Before the Fall it was
   Adam's joy and the Temple of his Glory. That made by men is a Babel of
   Confusions: Invented Riches, Pomps and Vanities, brought in by Sin:
   Give all (saith Thomas à Kempis) for all. Leave the one that you may
   enjoy the other.


   8

      What is more easy and sweet than meditation? Yet in this hath God
   commended His Love, that by meditation it is enjoyed. As nothing is
   more easy than to think, so nothing is more difficult than to think
   well. The easiness of thinking we received from God, the difficulty of
   thinking well proceeded from ourselves. Yet in truth, it is far more
   easy to think well than ill, because good thoughts be sweet and
   delightful: Evil thoughts are full of discontent and trouble. So that
   an evil habit and custom have made it difficult to think well, not
   Nature. For by nature nothing is so difficult as to think amiss.


   9

      Is it not easy to conceive the World in your Mind? To think the
   Heavens fair? The Sun Glorious? The Earth fruitful? The Air Pleasant?
   The Sea Profitable? And the Giver bountiful? Yet these are the things
   which it is difficult to retain. For could we always be sensible of
   their use and value, we should be always delighted with their wealth
   and glory.


   10

      To think well is to serve God in the interior court: To have a mind
   composed of Divine Thoughts, and set in frame, to be like Him within.
   To conceive aright and to enjoy the world, is to conceive the Holy
   Ghost, and to see His Love: which is the Mind of the Father. And this
   more pleaseth Him than many Worlds, could we create as fair and great
   as this. For when we are once acquainted with the world, you will find
   the goodness and wisdom of God so manifest therein, that it was
   impossible another, or better should be made. Which being made to be
   enjoyed, nothing can please or serve Him more, than the Soul that
   enjoys it. For that Soul doth accomplish the end of His desire in
   Creating it.


   11

      Love is deeper than at first it can be thought. It never ceaseth but
   in endless things. It ever multiplies. Its benefits and its designs are
   always infinite. Were you not Holy, Divine, and Blessed in enjoying the
   World, I should not care so much to bestow it. But now in this you
   accomplish the end of your creation, and serve God best, and please Him
   most: I rejoice in giving it. For to enable you to please GOD, is the
   highest service a man can do you. It is to make you pleasing to the
   King of Heaven, that you may be the Darling of His bosom.


   12

      Can you be Holy without accomplishing the end for which you are
   created? Can you be Divine unless you be Holy? Can you accomplish the
   end for which you were created, unless you be Righteous? Can you then
   be Righteous, unless you be just in rendering to Things their due
   esteem? All things were made to be yours; and you were made to prize
   them according to their value: which is your office and duty, the end
   for which you were created, and the means whereby you enjoy. The end
   for which you were created, is that by prizing all that God hath done,
   you may enjoy yourself and Him in Blessedness.


   13

      To be Holy is so zealously to desire, so vastly to esteem, and so
   earnestly to endeavour it, that we would not for millions of gold and
   silver, decline, nor fail, nor mistake in a tittle. For then we please
   God when we are most like Him. We are like Him when our minds are in
   frame. Our minds are in frame when our thoughts are like His. And our
   thoughts are then like His when we have such conceptions of all objects
   as God hath, and prize all things according to their value. For God
   doth prize all things rightly, which is a Key that opens into the very
   thoughts of His bosom. It seemeth arrogance to pretend to the knowledge
   of His secret thoughts. But how shall we have the Mind of God, unless
   we know His thoughts? Or how shall we be led by His divine spirit, till
   we have His Mind? His thoughts are hidden: but He hath revealed unto us
   the hidden Things of Darkness. By His works and by His attributes we
   know His Thoughts: and by thinking the same, are Divine and Blessed.


   14

      When things are ours in their proper places, nothing is needful but
   prizing to enjoy them. God therefore hath made it infinitely easy to
   enjoy, by making everything ours, and us able so easily to prize them.
   Everything is ours that serves us in its place. The Sun serves us as
   much as is possible, and more than we could imagine. The Clouds and
   Stars minister unto us, the World surrounds us with beauty, the Air
   refresheth us, the Sea revives the earth and us. The Earth itself is
   better than gold because it produceth fruits and flowers. And therefore
   in the beginning, was it made manifest to be mine, because Adam alone
   was made to enjoy it. By making one, and not a multitude, God evidently
   shewed one alone to be the end of the World and every one its enjoyer.
   For every one may enjoy it as much as he.


   15

      Such endless depths live in the Divinity, and in the wisdom of God,
   that as He maketh one, so He maketh every one the end of the World: and
   the supernumerary, persons being enrichers of his inheritance. Adam and
   the World are both mine. And the posterity of Adam enrich it
   infinitely. Souls are God's jewels, every one of which is worth many
   worlds. They are His riches because His image, and mine for that
   reason. So that I alone am the end of the World: Angels and men being
   all mine. And if others are so, they are made to enjoy it for my
   further advancement. God only being the Giver and I the Receiver. So
   that Seneca philosophized rightly when he said "Deus me dedit solum
   toti Mundo, et totem Mundum mihi soli": God gave me alone to all the
   World, and all the World to me alone.


   16

      That all the World is yours, your very senses and the inclinations
   of your mind declare. The Works of God manifest, His laws testify, and
   His word Both prove it. His attributes most sweetly make it evident.
   The powers of your soul confirm it. So that in the midst of such rich
   demonstrations, you may infinitely delight in God as your Father,
   Friend and Benefactor, in yourself as His Heir, Child and Bride, in the
   whole World, as the Gift and Token of His love; neither can anything
   but Ignorance destroy your joys. For if you know yourself, or God, or
   the World, you must of necessity enjoy it.


   17

        To know GOD is Life Eternal. There must therefore some exceeding
   Great Thing be always attained in the Knowledge of Him. To know God is
   to know Goodness. It is to see the beauty of infinite Love: To see it
   attended with Almighty Power and Eternal Wisdom; and using both those
   in the magnifying of its object. It is to see the King of Heaven and
   Earth take infinite delight in Giving. Whatever knowledge else you have
   of God, it is but Superstition. Which Plutarch rightly defineth, to be
   an Ignorant Dread of His Divine Power, without any joy in His goodness.
   He is not an Object of Terror, but Delight. To know Him therefore as He
   is, is to frame the most beautiful idea in all Worlds. He delighteth in
   our happiness more than we: and is of all other the most Lovely Object.
   An infinite Lord, who having all Riches, Honors, and Pleasures in His
   own hand, is infinitely willing to give them unto me. Which is the
   fairest idea that can be devised.


   18

        The WORLD is not this little Cottage of Heaven and Earth. Though
   this be fair, it is too small a Gift. When God made the World He made
   the Heavens, and the Heavens of Heavens, and the Angels, and the
   Celestial Powers. These also are parts of the World: So are all those
   infinite and eternal Treasures that are to abide for ever, after the
   Day of Judgment. Neither are these, some here, and some there, but all
   everywhere, and at once to be enjoyed. The WORLD is unknown, till the
   Value and Glory of it is seen: till the Beauty and the Serviceableness
   of its parts is considered. When you enter into it, it is an illimited
   field of Variety and Beauty: where you may lose yourself in the
   multitude of Wonders and Delights. But it is an happy loss to lose
   oneself in admiration at one's own Felicity: and to find GOD in
   exchange for oneself: Which we then do when we see Him in His Gifts,
   and adore His Glory.


   19

      You never know yourself till you know more than your body. The Image
   of God was not seated in the features of your face, but in the
   lineaments of your Soul. In the knowledge of your Powers, Inclinations,
   and Principles, the knowledge of yourself chiefly consisteth. Which are
   so great that even to the most learned of men, their Greatness is
   Incredible; and so Divine, that they are infinite in value. Alas the
   WORLD is but a little centre in comparison of you. Suppose it millions
   of miles from the Earth to the Heavens, and millions of millions above
   the stars, both here and over the heads of our Antipodes: it is
   surrounded with infinite and eternal space: And like a gentleman's
   house to one that is travelling; it is a long time before you come unto
   it, you pass it in an instant, and leave it for ever. The Omnipresence
   and Eternity of God are your fellows and companions. And all that is in
   them ought to be made your familiar Treasures. Your understanding
   comprehends the World like the dust of a balance, measures Heaven with
   a span, and esteems a thousand years but as one day. So that Great,
   Endless, Eternal Delights are only fit to be its enjoyments.


   20

      The laws of GOD, which are the commentaries of His works, shew them
   to be yours: because they teach you to love God with all your Soul, and
   with all your Might. Whom if you love with all the endless powers of
   your Soul, you will love Him in Himself, in His attributes, in His
   counsels, in all His works, in all His ways; and in every kind of thing
   wherein He appreareth, you will prize Him, you will Honour Him, you
   will delight in Him, you will ever desire to be with Him and to please
   Him. For to love Him includeth all this. You will feed with pleasure
   upon everything that is His. So that the world shall be a grand Jewel
   of Delight unto you: a very Paradise and the Gate of Heaven. It is
   indeed the beautiful frontispiece of Eternity; the Temple of God, and
   Palace of His children. The Laws of God discover all that is therein to
   be created for your sake. For they command you to love all that is
   good, and when you see well, you enjoy what you love. They apply the
   endless powers of your Soul to all objects: and by ten thousand methods
   make everything to serve you. They command you to love all Angels and
   Men. They command all Angels and Men to love you. When you love them,
   they are your treasures; when they love you, to your great advantage
   you are theirs. All things serve you for serving them whom you love,
   and of whom you are beloved. The entrance of His words giveth Light to
   the simple. You are magnified among Angels and men: enriched by them,
   and happy in them.


   21

      By the very right of your senses you enjoy the World. Is not the
   beauty of the Hemisphere present to your eye? Doth not the glory of the
   Sun pay tribute to your sight? Is not the vision of the World an
   amiable thing? Do not the stars shed influences to perfect the Air? Is
   not that a marvellous body to breathe in? To visit the lungs, repair
   the spirits, revive the senses, cool the blood, fill the empty spaces
   between the Earth and Heavens; and yet give liberty to all objects?
   Prize these first: and you shall enjoy the residue: Glory, Dominion,
   Power, Wisdom, Honour, Angels, Souls, Kingdoms, Ages. Be faithful in a
   little, and you shall be master over much. If you be not faithful in
   esteeming these; who shall put into your hands the true Treasures? If
   you be negligent in prizing these, you will be negligent in prizing
   all. For there is a disease in him who despiseth present mercies, which
   till it be cured, he can never be happy. He esteemeth nothing that he
   hath, but is ever gaping after more: which when he hath he despiseth in
   like manner. Insatiableness is good, but not ingratitude.


   22

        It is of the nobility of man's soul that he is insatiable. For he
   hath a Benefactor so prone to give, that He delighteth in us for
   asking. Do not your inclinations tell you that the World is yours? Do
   you not covet all? Do you not long to have it; to enjoy it; to overcome
   it? To what end do men gather riches, but to multiply more? Do they not
   like Pyrrhus, the King of Epire, add house to house and lands to lands;
   that they may get it all? It is storied of that prince, that having
   conceived a purpose to invade Italy, he sent for Cineas, a philosopher
   and the King's friend: to whom he communicated his design, and desired
   his counsel. Cineas asked him to what purpose he invaded Italy? He
   said, to conquer it. And what will you do when you, have conquered it?
   Go into France, said the King, and conquer that. And what will you do
   when you have conquered France? Conquer Germany. And what then? said
   the philosopher. Conquer Spain. I perceive, said Cineas, you mean to
   conquer all the World. What will you do when you have conquered all?
   Why then said the King we will return, and enjoy ourselves at quiet in
   our own land. So you may now, said the philosopher, without all this
   ado. Yet could he not divert him till he was ruined by the Romans. Thus
   men get one hundred pound a year that they may get another; and having
   two covet eight, and there is no end of all their labour; because the
   desire of their Soul is insatiable. Like Alexander the Great they must
   have all: and when they have got it all, be quiet. And may they not do
   all this before they begin? Nay it would be well, if they could be
   quiet. But if after all, they shall be like the stars, that are seated
   on high, but have no rest, what gain they more, but labour for their
   trouble? It was wittily feigned that that young man sat down and cried
   for more worlds to conquer. So insatiable is man, that millions will
   not please him. They are no more than so many tennis-balls, in
   comparison of the Greatness and Highness of his Soul.


   23

        The noble inclination whereby man thirsteth after riches and
   dominion, is his highest virtue, when rightly guided; and carries him
   as in a triumphant chariot, to his sovereign happiness. Men are made
   miserable only by abusing it. Taking a false way to satisfy it, they
   pursue the wind: nay, labour in the very fire, and after all reap but
   vanity. Whereas, as God's love, which is the fountain of all, did cost
   us nothing: so were all other things prepared by it to satisfy our
   inclinations in the best of manners, freely, without any cost of ours.
   Seeing therefore all satisfactions are near at hand, by going further
   we do but leave them; and wearying ourselves in a long way round about,
   like a blind man, forsake them. They are immediately near to the very
   gates of our senses. It becometh the bounty of God to prepare them
   freely: to make them glorious, and their enjoyment easy. For because
   His love is free, so are His treasures. He therefore that will despise
   them because he hath them is marvellously irrational: the way to
   possess them is to esteem them. And the true way of reigning over them,
   is to break the world all into parts, to examine them asunder: And if
   we find them so excellent that better could not possibly be made, and
   so made they could not be more ours, to rejoice in all with pleasure
   answerable to the merit of their Goodness. We being then Kings over the
   whole world, when we restore the pieces to their proper places, being
   perfectly pleased with the whole composure. This shall give you a
   thorough grounded contentment, far beyond what troublesome wars or
   conquests can acquire.


   24

      Is it not a sweet thing to have all covetousness and ambition
   satisfied, suspicion and infidelity removed, courage and joy infused?
   Yet is all this in the fruition of the World attained. For thereby God
   is seen in all His wisdom, power, goodness, and glory.


   25

      Your enjoyment of the World is never right, till you so esteem it,
   that everything in it, is more your treasure than a King's exchequer
   full of Gold and Silver. And that exchequer yours also in its place and
   service. Can you take too much joy in your Father's works? He is
   Himself in everything. Some things are little on the outside, and rough
   and common, but I remember the time when the dust of the streets were
   as pleasing as Gold to my infant eyes, and now they are more precious
   to the eye of reason.


   26

        Theservices of things and their excellencies are spiritual: being
   objects not of the eye, but of the mind: and you more spiritual by how
   much more you esteem them. Pigs eat acorns, but neither consider the
   sun that gave them life, nor the influences of the heavens by which
   they were nourished, nor the very root of the tree from whence they
   came. This being the work of Angels, who in a wide and clear light see
   even the sea that gave them moisture: And feed upon that acorn
   spiritually while they know the ends for which it was created, and
   feast upon all these as upon a World of Joys within it: while to
   ignorant swine that eat the shell, it is an empty husk of no taste nor
   delightful savour.


   27

        You never enjoy the world aright, till you see how a sand
   exhibiteth the wisdom and power of God: And prize in everything the
   service which they do you, by manifesting His glory and goodness to
   your Soul, far more than the visible beauty on their surface, or the
   material services they can do your body. Wine by its moisture quencheth
   my thirst, whether I consider it or no: but to see it flowing from His
   love who gave it unto man, quencheth the thirst even of the Holy
   Angels. To consider it, is to drink it spiritually. To rejoice in its
   diffusion is to be of a public mind. And to take pleasure in all the
   benefits it doth to all is Heavenly, for so they do in Heaven. To do
   so, is to be divine and good, and to imitate our Infinite and Eternal
   Father.


   28

      Your enjoyment of the world is never right, till every morning you
   awake in Heaven; see yourself in your Father's Palace; and look upon
   the skies, the earth, and the air as Celestial Joys: having such a
   reverend esteem of all, as if you were among the Angels. The bride of a
   monarch, in her husband's chamber, hath too such causes of delight as
   you.


   29

      You never enjoy the world aright, till the Sea itself floweth in
   your veins, till you are clothed with the heavens, and crowned with the
   stars: and perceive yourself to be the sole heir of the whole world,
   and more than so, because men are in it who are every one sole heirs as
   well as you. Till you can sing and rejoice and delight in God, as
   misers do in gold, and Kings in sceptres, you never enjoy the world.


   30

      Till your spirit filleth the whole world, and the stars are your
   jewels; till you are as familiar with the ways of God in all Ages as
   with your walk and table: till you are intimately acquainted with that
   shady nothing out of which the world was made: till you love men so as
   to desire their happiness, with a thirst equal to the zeal of your own:
   till you delight in God for being good to all: you never enjoy the
   world. Till you more feel it than your private estate, and are more
   present in the hemisphere, considering the glories and the beauties
   there, than in your own house: Till you remember how lately you were
   made, and how wonderful it was when you came into it: and more rejoice
   in the palace of your glory, than if it had been made but to-day
   morning.


   31

      Yet further, you never enjoy the world aright; till you so love the
   beauty of enjoying it, that you are covetous and earnest to persuade
   others to enjoy it. And so perfectly hate the abominable corruption of
   men in despising it, that you had rather suffer the flames of Hell than
   willingly be guilty of their error. There is so much blindness and
   ingratitude and damned folly in it. The world is a mirror of infinite
   beauty, yet no man sees it. It is a Temple of Majesty, yet no man
   regards it. It is a region of Light and Peace, did not men disquiet it.
   It is the Paradise of God. It is more to man since he is fallen than it
   was before. It is the place of Angels and the Gate of Heaven. When
   Jacob waked out of his dream, he said "God is here, and I wist it not.
   How dreadful is this place! This is none other than the House of God,
   and the Gate of Heaven."


   32

        Can any ingratitude be more damned than that which is fed by
   benefits? Or folly greater than that which bereaveth us of infinite
   treasures? They despise them merely because they have them: And invent
   ways to make themselves miserable in the presence of riches. They study
   a thousand newfangled treasures, which God never made: and then grieve
   and repine that they be not happy. They dote on their own works, and
   neglect God's, which are full of majesty, riches, and wisdom. And
   having fled away from them because they are solid, divine, and true,
   greedily pursuing tinselled vanities, they walk on in darkness, and
   will not understand. They do the works of darkness, and delight in the
   riches of the Prince of Darkness, and follow them till they come into
   Eternal Darkness. According to that of the psalmist All the foundations
   of the Earth are out of course.


   33

        The riches of darkness are those which men have made, during their
   ignorance of God Allmighty's treasures: That lead us from the love of
   all, to labour and contention, discontentment and vanity. The works of
   darkness are Repining, Envy, Malice, Covetousness, Fraud, Oppression,
   Discontent and Violence. All which proceed from the corruption of Men
   and their mistake in the choice of riches: for having refused those
   which God made, and taken to themselves treasures of their own, they
   invented scarce and rare, insufficient, hard to be gotten, little,
   movable and useless treasures. Yet as violently pursued them as if they
   were the most necessary and excellent things in the whole world. And
   though they are all mad, yet having made a combination they seem wise;
   and it is a hard matter to persuade them either to Truth or Reason.
   There seemeth to be no way, but theirs: whereas God knoweth they are as
   far out of the way of Happiness, as the East is from the West. For, by
   this means, they have let in broils and dissatisfactions into the
   world, and are ready to eat and devour one another: particular and
   feeble interests, false proprieties, insatiable longings, fraud,
   emulation, murmuring and dissension being everywhere seen; theft and
   pride and danger, and cousenage, envy and contention drowning the peace
   and beauty of nature, as waters cover the sea. Oh how they are ready to
   sink always under the burden and cumber of devised wants! Verily, the
   prospect of their ugly errors, is able to turn one's stomach: they are
   so hideous and deformed.


   34

      Would one think it possible for a man to delight in gauderies like a
   butterfly, and neglect the Heavens? Did we not daily see it, it would
   be incredible. They rejoice in a piece of gold more than in the Sun;
   and get a few little glittering stones and call them jewels. And admire
   them because they be resplendent like the stars, and transparent like
   the air, and pellucid like the sea. But the stars themselves which are
   ten thousand times more useful, great, and glorious they disregard. Nor
   shall the air itself be counted anything, though it be worth all the
   pearls and diamonds in ten thousand worlds. A work of God so Divine by
   reason of its precious and pure transparency, that all worlds would be
   worth nothing without such a treasure.


   35

      The riches of the Light are the Works of God which are the portion
   and inheritance of His sons, to be seen and enjoyed in Heaven and
   Earth, the sea, and all that is therein: the Light and the Day, great
   and fathomless in use and excellency, true, necessary, freely given,
   proceeding wholly from His infinite love. As worthy as they are easy to
   be enjoyed: obliging us to love Him and to delight in Him, filling us
   with gratitude, and making us to overflow with praises and
   thanksgivings. The works of contentment and pleasure are of the Day. So
   are the works which flow from the understanding of our mutual
   serviceableness to each other: arising from the sufficiency and
   excellency of our treasures, Contentment, Joy, Peace, Unity, Charity,
   &c., whereby we are all knit together, and delight in each others'
   happiness. For while every one is Heir of all the World, and all the
   rest his superadded treasures, all the World serves him in himself, and
   he delights in them as His superadded treasures.


   36

        The common error which makes it difficult to believe all the World
   to be wholly ours, is to be shunned as a rock of shipwreck: or a
   dangerous quicksands. For the poison which they drank hath infatuated
   their fancies, and now they know not, neither will they understand,
   they walk on in Darkness. All the foundations of the World are out of
   course. It is safety not to be with them: and a great part of Happiness
   to be freed from their seducing and enslaving errors. That while others
   live in a Golgotha or Prison, we should be in Eden, is a very great
   Mystery. And a mercy it is that we should be rejoicing in the Temple of
   Heaven, while they are toiling and lamenting in Hell, for the world is
   both a Paradise and a Prison to different persons.


   37

      The brightness and magnificence of this world, which by reason of
   its height and greatness is hidden from men, is Divine and Wonderful.
   It addeth much to the Glory of the Temple in which we live. Yet it is
   the cause why men understand it not. They think it too great and wide
   to be enjoyed. But since it is all filled with the Majesty of His Glory
   who dwelleth in it; and the Goodness of the Lord filleth the World, and
   His wisdom shineth everywhere within it and about it; and it aboundeth
   in an infinite variety of services; we need nothing but open eyes, to
   be ravished like the Cherubims. Well may we bear the greatness of the
   World, since it is our storehouse and treasury. That our treasures
   should be endless is an happy inconvenience: that all regions should be
   full of Joys: and the room infinite wherein they are seated.


   38

      You never enjoy the World aright, till you see all things in it so
   perfectly yours, that you cannot desire them any other way: and till
   you are convinced that all things serve you best in their proper
   places. For can you desire to enjoy anything a better way than in God's
   Image? It is the Height of God's perfection that hideth His bounty: And
   the lowness of your base and sneaking Spirit, that make you ignorant of
   His perfection. (Every one hath in him a Spirit, with which he may be
   angry.) God's bounty is so perfect that He giveth all Things in the
   best of manners: making those to whom He giveth so Noble, Divine, and
   Glorious, that they shall enjoy in His Similitude. Nor can they be fit
   to enjoy in His presence, or in communion with Him, that are not truly
   Divine and Noble. So that you must have Glorious Principles implanted
   in your nature; a clear eye able to see afar off, a great and generous
   heart, apt to enjoy at any distance: a good and liberal Soul prone to
   delight in the felicity of all, and an infinite delight to be their
   Treasure: neither is it any prejudice to you that this is required, for
   there is great difference between a Worm and a Cherubim. And it more
   concerneth you to be an Illustrious Creature, than to have the
   possession of the whole world.


   39

      Your enjoyment is never right, till you esteem every Soul so great a
   treasure as our Saviour doth: and that the laws of God are sweeter than
   the honey and honeycomb because they command you to love them all in
   such perfect manner. For how are they God's treasures? Are they not the
   riches of His love? Is it not His goodness that maketh Him glorious to
   them? Can the Sun or Stars serve him any other way, than by serving
   them? And how will you be the Son of God, but by having a great Soul
   like unto your Father's? The Laws of God command you to live in His
   image: and to do so is to live in Heaven. God commandeth you to love
   all like Him, because He would have you to be His Son, all them to be
   your riches, you to be glorious before them, and all the creatures in
   serving them to be your treasures, while you are His delight, like Him
   in beauty, and the darling of His bosom.


   40

      Socrates was wont to say--They are most happy and nearest the gods
   that needed nothing. And coming once up into the Exchange at Athens,
   where they that traded asked him, What will you buy; what do you lack?
   After he had gravely walked up into the middle, spreading forth his
   hands and turning about,Good Gods, saith he, who would have thought
   there were so many things in the world which I do not want! And so left
   the place under the reproach of Nature. He was wont to say: That
   Happiness consisted not in having many, but in needing the fewest
   things: for the Gods needed nothing at all, and they were most like
   them that least needed. We needed Heaven and Earth, our senses, such
   souls and such bodies, with infinite riches in the Image of God to be
   enjoyed: Which God of His mercy having freely prepared, they are most
   happy that so live in the enjoyment of those, as to need no accidental
   trivial things, no Splendours, Pomps, and Vanities. Socrates, perhaps,
   being an heathen, knew not that all things proceeded from God to man,
   and by man returned to God: but we that know it must need all things as
   God doth, that we may receive them with joy, and live in His image.


   41

      As pictures are made curious by lights and shades, which without
   shades could not be: so is felicity composed of wants and supplies;
   without which mixture there could be no felicity. Were there no needs,
   wants would be wanting themselves, and supplies superfluous: want being
   the parent of Celestial Treasure. It is very strange; want itself is a
   treasure in Heaven: and so great an one that without it there could be
   no treasure. God did infinitely for us, when He made us to want like
   Gods, that like Gods we might be satisfied. The heathen Deities wanted
   nothing, and were therefore unhappy, for they had no being. But the
   Lord God of Israel the Living and True God, was from all Eternity, and
   from all Eternity wanted like a God. He wanted the communication of His
   divine essence, and persons to enjoy it. He wanted Worlds, He wanted
   Spectators, He wanted Joys, He wanted Treasures. He wanted, yet He
   wanted not, for He had them.


   42

      This is very strange that God should want. For in Him is the fulness
   of all Blessedness: He overfloweth eternally. His wants are as glorious
   as infinite: perfective needs that are in His nature, and ever Blessed,
   because always satisfied. He is from eternity full of want, or else He
   would not be full of Treasure. Infinite want is the very ground and
   cause of infinite treasure. It is incredible, yet very plain Want is
   the fountain of all His fulness. Want in God is treasure to us. For had
   there been no need He would not have created the World, nor made us,
   nor manifested His wisdom, nor exercised His power, nor beautified
   Eternity, nor prepared the Joys of Heaven. But he wanted Angels and
   Men, Images, Companions: And these He had from all Eternity.


   43

      Infinite Wants satisfied produce infinite Joys; and in the
   possession of those joys are infinite joys themselves. The Desire
   Satisfied is a Tree of Life. Desire imports something absent: and a
   need of what is absent. God was never without this Tree of Life. He did
   desire infinitely, yet He was never without the fruits of this Tree,
   which are the joys it produced. I must lead you out of this, into
   another World, to learn your wants. For till you find them you will
   never be happy: Wants themselves being Sacred Occasions and Means of
   Felicity.


   44

      You must want like a God that you may be satisfied like God. Were
   you not made in His Image? He is infinitely Glorious, because all His
   wants and supplies are at the same time in his nature, from Eternity.
   He had, and from Eternity He was without all His Treasures. From
   Eternity He needed them, and from Eternity He enjoyed them. For all
   Eternity is at once in Him, both the empty durations before the World
   was made, and the full ones after. His wants are as lively as His
   enjoyments: and always present with Him. For His life is perfect, and
   He feels them both. His wants put a lustre upon His enjoyments and make
   them infinite. His enjoyments being infinite crown His wants, and make
   them beautiful even to God Himself. His wants and enjoyments being
   always present are delightful to each other, stable, immutable,
   perfective of each other, and delightful to Him. Who being Eternal and
   Immutable, enjoyeth all His wants and treasures together. His wants
   never afflict Him, His treasures never disturb Him. His wants always
   delight Him; His treasures never cloy Him. The sense of His wants is
   always as great, as if His treasures were removed: and as lively upon
   Him. The sense of His wants, as it enlargeth His life, so it infuseth a
   value, and continual sweetness into the treasures He enjoyeth.


   45

      This is a lesson long enough: which you may be all your life in
   learning, and to all Eternity in practising. Be sensible of your wants,
   that you maybe sensible of your treasures. He is most like God that is
   sensible of everything. Did you not from all Eternity want some one to
   give you a Being? Did you not want one to give you a Glorious Being?
   Did you not from all Eternity want some one to give you infinite
   Treasures? And some one to give you Spectators, Companions, Enjoyers?
   Did you not want a Deity to make them sweet and honourable by His
   infinite Wisdom? What you wanted from all Eternity, be sensible of to
   all Eternity. Let your wants be present from everlasting. Is not this a
   strange life to which I call you? Wherein you are to be present with
   things that were before the world was made? And at once present even
   like God with infinite wants and infinite Treasures: Be present with
   your want of a Deity, and you shall be present with the Deity. You
   shall adore and admire Him, enjoy and prize Him; believe in Him, and
   Delight in Him, see him to be the Fountain of all your joys, and the
   Head of all your Treasures.


   46

      It was His wisdom made you need the Sun. It was His goodness made
   you need the sea. Be sensible of what you need, or enjoy neither.
   Consider how much you need them, for thence they derive their value.
   Suppose the sun were extinguished: or the sea were dry. There would be
   no light, no beauty, no warmth, no fruits, no flowers, no pleasant
   gardens, feasts, or prospects, no wine, no oil, no bread, no life, no
   motion. Would you not give all the gold and silver in the Indies for
   such a treasure? Prize it now you have it, at that rate, and you shall
   be a grateful creature: Nay, you shall be a Divine and Heavenly person.
   For they in Heaven do prize blessings when they have them. They in
   Earth when they have them prize them not, they in Hell prize them when
   they have them not.


   47

      To have blessings and to prize them is to be in Heaven; to have them
   and not to prize them is to be in Hell, I would say upon Earth: To
   prize them and not to have them, is to be in Hell. Which is evident by
   the effects. To prize blessings while we have them is to enjoy them,
   and the effect thereof is contentation, pleasure, thanksgiving,
   happiness. To prize them when they are gone, envy, covetousness,
   repining, ingratitude, vexation, misery. But it was no great mistake to
   say, that to have blessings and not to prize them is to be in Hell. For
   it maketh them ineffectual, as if they were absent. Yea, in some
   respect it is worse than to be in Hell. It is more vicious, and more
   irrational.


   48

      They that would not upon earth see their wants from all Eternity,
   shall in Hell see their treasures to all Eternity: Wants here may be
   seen and enjoyed, enjoyments there shall be seen, but wanted. Wants
   here may be blessings; there they shall be curses. Here they may be
   fountains of pleasure and thanksgiving, there they will be fountains of
   woe and blasphemy. No misery is greater than that of wanting in the
   midst of enjoyments, of seeing, and desiring yet never possessing. Of
   beholding others happy, being seen by them ourselves in misery. They
   that look into Hell here may avoid it hereafter. They that refuse to
   look into Hell upon earth, to consider the manner of the torments of
   the damned, shall be forced in Hell, to see all the earth, and remember
   the felicities which they had when they were living. Hell itself is a
   part of God's Kingdom, to wit His prison. It is fitly mentioned in the
   enjoyment of the world. And is itself by the happy enjoyed, as a part
   of the world.


   49

      The misery of them who have and prize not, differeth from others,
   who prize and have not. The one are more odious and, less sensible;
   more foolish, and more vicious: the senses of the other are exceeding
   keen and quick upon them; yet are they not so foolish and odious as the
   former: The one would be happy and cannot, the other may be happy and
   will not. The one are more vicious, the other more miserable. But how
   can that be? Is not he most miserable that is most vicious? Yes, that
   is true. But they that prize not what they have are dead; their senses
   are laid asleep, and when they come to Hell they wake: And then they
   begin to feel their misery. He that is most odious is most miserable,
   and he that is most perverse is most odious.


   50

       They are deep instructions that are taken out of hell, and heavenly
   documents that are taken from above. Upon Earth we learn nothing but
   vanity. Where people dream, and loiter, and wander, and disquiet
   themselves in vain, to make a vain show; but do not profit because they
   prize not the blessings they have received. To prize what we have is a
   deep and heavenly instruction. It will make us righteous and serious,
   wise and holy; divine and blessed. It will make us escape Hell and
   attain Heaven, for it will make us careful to please Him from whom we
   have received all, that we map live in Heaven.


   51

       Wants are the bands and cements between God and us. Had we not
   wanted we could never have been obliged. Whereas now we are infinitely
   obliged, because we want infinitely. From Eternity it was requisite
   that we should want. We could never else have enjoyed anything: Our own
   wants are treasures. And if want be a treasure, sure everything is so.
   Wants are the ligatures between God and us, the sinews that convey
   Senses from him into us, whereby we live in Him, and feel His
   enjoyments. For had we not been obliged by having our wants satisfied,
   we should not have been created to love Him. And had we not been
   created to love Him, we could never have enjoyed His eternal
   Blessedness.


   52

      Love has a marvellous property of feeling in another. It can enjoy
   in another, as well as enjoy him. Love is an infinite treasure to its
   object, and its object is so to it. God is Love, and you are His
   object. You are created to be His Love: and He is yours. He is happy in
   you, when you are happy: as parents in their children. He is afflicted
   in all your afflictions. And whosoever toucheth you, toucheth the apple
   of His eye. Will not you be happy in all His enjoyments? He feeleth in
   you; will not you feel in Him? He hath obliged you to love Him. And if
   you love Him, you must of necessity be Heir of the World, for you are
   happy in Him. All His praises are your joys, all His enjoyments are
   your treasures, all His pleasures are your enjoyments. In God you are
   crowned, in God you are concerned. In Him you feel, in Him you live,
   and move, and have your being, in Him you are blessed. Whatsoever
   therefore serveth Him; serveth you and in Him you inherit all things.


   53

      O the nobility of Divine Friendship! Are not all His treasures
   yours, and yours His? Is not your very Soul and Body His: is not His
   life and felicity yours is not His desire yours? Is not His will yours?
   And if His will be yours, the accomplishment of it is yours, and the
   end of all is your perfection. You are infinitely rich as He is: being
   pleased in everything as He is. And if His will be yours, yours is His.
   For you will what He willeth, which is to be truly wise and good and
   holy. And when you delight in the same reasons that moved Him to will,
   you will know it. He willed the Creation not only that He might Appear
   but Be: wherein is seated the mystery of the Eternal Generation of His
   Son. Do you will it as He did, and you shall be glorious as He. He
   willed the happiness of men and angels not only that He might appear,
   but be good and wise and glorious. And He willed it with such infinite
   desire, that He is infinitely good: infinitely good in Himself, and
   infinitely blessed in them. Do you will the happiness of men and angels
   as He did, and you shall be good, and infinitely blessed as He is. All
   their happiness shall be your happiness as it is His. He willed the
   glory of all ages, and the government and welfare of all Kingdoms, and
   the felicity also of the highest cherubims. Do you extend your Will
   like Him and you shall be great as He is, and concerned and happy in
   all these. He willed the redemption of mankind, and therefore is His
   Son Jesus Christ an infinite treasure. Unless you will it too, He will
   be no treasure to you. Verily you ought to will these things so
   ardently that God Himself should be therefore your joy because He
   willed them. Your will ought to be united to His in all places of His
   dominion. Were you not born to have communion with Him? And that cannot
   be without this heavenly union. Which when it is what it ought is
   Divine and Infinite. You are God's joy for willing what He willeth. He
   loves to see you good and blessed. And will not you love to see Him
   good? Verily, if ever you would enjoy God, you must enjoy His goodness:
   All His goodness to all His hosts in Heaven and Earth. And when you do
   so, you are the universal heir of God and all things. God is yours and
   the whole world. You are His, and you are all; or in all, and with all.


   54

      He that is in all, and with all, can never be desolate. All the joys
   and all the treasures, all the counsels, and all the perfections; all
   the angels, and all the saints of God are with him. All the kingdoms of
   the world, and the glory of them are continually in his eye. The
   patriarchs, prophets, and Apostles are always before Him. The councils
   and the fathers, the bishops and the doctors minister unto him. All
   temples are open before him, the melody of all quires reviveth him, the
   learning of all universities doth employ him, the riches of all palaces
   delight him, the joys of Eden ravish him, the revelations of St. John
   transport him, the creation and the day of Judgment please him, the
   Hosannas of the church militant and the Hallelujahs of the Saints
   Triumphant fill him, the splendour of all coronations entertain him,
   the joys of Heaven surround him, and our Saviour's cross, like the
   Centre of Eternity, is in him; it taketh up his thoughts, and
   exerciseth all the powers of his soul, with wonder, admiration, joy and
   thanksgiving. The Omnipotence of God is his House, and Eternity his
   habitation.


   55

      The contemplation of Eternity maketh the Soul immortal. Whose glory
   it is, that it can see before and after its existence into endless
   spaces. Its Sight is its presence. And therefore in the presence of the
   understanding endless, because its Sight is so. O what glorious
   creatures should we be could we be present in spirit with all Eternity!
   How wise, would we esteem this presence of the understanding, to be
   more real than that of our bodies! When my soul is in Eden with our
   first parents, I myself am there in a blessed manner. When I walk with
   Enoch, and see his translation, I am transported with him. The present
   age is too little to contain it. I can visit Noah in his ark, and swim
   upon the waters of the deluge. I can see Moses with his rod, and the
   children of Israel passing through the sea; I can enter into Aaron's
   Tabernacle, and admire the mysteries of the holy place. I can travel
   over the Land of Canaan, and see it overflowing with milk and honey; I
   can visit Solomon in his glory, and go into his temple, and view the
   sitting of his servants, and admire the magnificence and glory of his
   kingdom. No creature but one like unto the Holy Angels can see into all
   ages. Sure this power was not given in vain, but for some wonderful
   purpose; worthy of itself to enjoy and fathom. Would men consider what
   God hath done, they would be ravished in spirit with the glory of His
   doings. For Heaven and Earth are full of the majesty of His glory. And
   how happy would men be could they see and enjoy it! ?But above all
   these our Saviour's cross is the throne of delights. That Centre of
   Eternity, that Tree of Life in the midst of the Paradise of God!


   56

        There are we entertained with the wonder of all ages. There we
   enter into the heart of the universe. There we behold the admiration of
   Angels. There we find the price and elixir of our joys. As on every
   side of the earth all heavy things tend to the centre; so all nations
   ought on every side to flow in unto it. It is not by going with the
   feet, but by journeys of the Soul, that we travel thither. By
   withdrawing our thoughts from wandering in the streets of this World,
   to the contemplation and serious meditation of His blood sufferings.
   Where the carcase is thither will the eagle be gathered together. Our
   eyes must be towards it, our hearts set upon it, our affections drawn,
   and of thoughts and minds United to it. When I am lifted up, saith the
   Son of Man, I will draw all men unto me. As fishes are drawn out of the
   water, as Jeremie was drawn out of the dungeon, as St. Peter's sheet
   was drawn up into Heaven; so shall we be drawn by that sight from
   Ignorance and Sin, and Earthly vanities, idle sports, companions, feast
   and pleasures, to the joyful contemplation of that Eternal Object. But
   by what cords? The cords of a man, and the cords of Love.


   57

        As eagles are drawn by the scent of a carcase, as children are
   drawn together by the sight of a lion, as people flock to a coronation,
   and as a man is drawn to his beloved object, so ought we. As the sick
   drawn by the credit of a physician, as the poor drawn by the liberality
   of a King, as the devout drawn by the fame of the Holy, and as the
   curious drawn by the noise of a miracle, so ought we. As stones were
   drawn to the building of Thebes by Melody of Amphion, as the hungry are
   drawn with desire of a feast, and the pitiful, drawn to a woe
   spectacle, so ought we. What visible chains or cords draw these? What
   invisible links allure? Theyfollow all, or flock together of their own
   accord. And shall not we much more! Who would not be drawn to the Gate
   of Heaven, were it open to receive him? Yet nothing compels him, but
   that which forceth the Angels, Commodity and Desire. For those are
   things which the Angels desire to look into. And of men it is written,
   They shall look an Him whom they have pierced. Verily the Israelites
   did not more clearly see the brazen serpent upon the pole in the
   wilderness, than we may our Saviour upon the Cross. The serpent was
   seen with their eyes, the slayer of the serpent is seen with our Souls.
   They had less need to see the one, than we to see the other.


   58

      The Cross is the abyss of wonders, the centre of desires, the school
   of virtues, the house of wisdom, the throne of love, the theatre of
   joys, and the place of sorrows; It is the root of happiness, and the
   gate of Heaven.


   59

      Of all the things in Heaven and Earth it is the most peculiar. It is
   the most exalted of all objects. It is an Ensign lifted up for all
   nations, to it shall the Gentiles seek, His rest shall be glorious: the
   dispersed of Judah shall be gathered together to it, from the four
   corners of the earth. If Love be the weight of the Soul, and its object
   the centre, all eyes and hearts may convertand turn unto this Object:
   cleave unto this centre, and by it enter into rest. There we might see
   all nations assembled with their eyes and hearts upon it. There we may
   see God's goodness, wisdom and power: yea His mercy and anger
   displayed. There we may see man's sin and infinite value. His hope and
   fear, his misery and happiness. There we might see the Rock of Ages,
   and the Joys of Heaven. There we may see a Man loving all the world,
   and a God dying for mankind. There we may see all types and ceremonies,
   figures and prophecies. And all kingdoms adoring a malefactor: An
   innocent malefactor, yet the greatest in the world. There we may see
   the most distant things in Eternity united: all mysteries at once
   couched together and explained. The only reason why this Glorious
   Object is so publicly admired by Churches and Kingdoms, and so little
   thought of by particular men, is because it is truly the most glorious:
   It is the Rock of Comforts and the Fountain of Joys. It is the only
   supreme and sovereign spectacle in all Worlds. It is a Well of Life
   beneath in which we may see the face of Heaven above: and the only
   mirror, wherein all things appear in their proper colours: that is,
   sprinkled in the blood of our Lord and Saviour.


   60

      The Cross of Christ is the Jacob's ladder by which we ascend into
   the highest heavens. There we see joyful Patriarchs, expecting Saints,
   Prophets ministering Apostles publishing, and Doctors teaching, all
   Nations concentering, and Angels praising. That Cross is a tree set on
   fire with invisible flame, that Illuminateth all the world. The flame
   is Love: the Love in His bosom who died on it. In the light of which we
   see how to possess all the things in Heaven and Earth after His
   similitude. For He that suffered on it was the Son of God as you are:
   tho' He seemed only a mortal man. He had acquaintance and relations as
   you have, but He was a lover of Men and Angels. Was he not the Son of
   God; and Heir of the whole world? To this poor, bleeding, naked Man did
   all the corn and wine, and oil, and gold and silver in the world
   minister in an invisible manner, even as He was exposed lying and dying
   upon the Cross.


   61

      Here you learn all patience, meekness, self-denial, courage,
   prudence, zeal, love, charity, contempt of the world, penitence,
   contrition, modesty, fidelity, constancy, perseverance, contentation,
   holiness, and thanksgiving: With whatsoever else is requisite for a
   Man, a Christian, or a King. This Man bleeding here was tutor to King
   Charles the Martyr: and Great Master to St. Paul, the convert who
   learned of Him activity, and zeal unto all nations. Well therefore may
   we take up with this prospect, and from hence behold all the things in
   Heaven and Earth. Here we learn to imitate Jesus in His love unto all.


   62

       LORD JESUS what love shall I render unto Thee, for Thy love unto
   me! Thy eternal love! Oh what fervour, what ardour, what humiliation,
   what reverence, what joy, what adoration, what zeal, what thanksgiving!
   Thou that art perfect in Beauty, Thou that art the King of Eternal
   Glory, Thou that reignest in the Highest Heavens camest down from
   Heaven to die for me! And shall not I live unto Thee? O my Joy! O my
   Sovereign Friend! O my life and my all! I beseech Thee let those
   trickling drops of blood that ran down Thy flesh drop upon me. O let
   Thy love enflame me. Which is so deep and infinite, that Thou didst
   suffer the wrath of GOD for me: And purchase all nations and Kingdoms
   to be my treasures. O Thou that redeemed me from Hell, and when Thou
   hadst overcome the sharpness of Death didst open the Kingdom of Heaven
   to all believers; what shall I do unto Thee? What shall I do for Thee,
   O Thou preserver of Men? Live, Love, and Admire; and learn to become
   such unto Thee as Thou unto me. O Glorious Soul; whose comprehensive
   understanding at once contains all Kingdoms and Ages! O Glorious Mind!
   Whose love extendeth to all creatures! O miraculous and eternal
   Godhead, now suffering on the cross for me: As Abraham saw thy Day and
   was glad, so didst Thou see me and this Day from all Eternity, and
   seeing me wast Gracious and Compassionate towards me. (All transient
   things are permanent in God.) Thou settest me before Thy face forever.
   O let me this day see Thee, and be united to Thee in Thy Holy
   Sufferings. Let me learn, O God, such lessons from Thee, as may make me
   wise, and blessed as an Angel of GOD!


   63

        Why, Lord Jesus, dost Thou love men; why are they all Thy
   treasures? What wonder is this, that Thou shouldst so esteem them as to
   die for them? Shew me the reasons of Thy love, that I may love them
   too. O Goodness ineffable! They are the treasures of Thy goodness. Who
   so infinitely lovest them that Thou gavest Thyself for them. Thy
   Goodness delighted to be communicated to them whom Thou hast saved. O
   Thou who art more glorious in Goodness, make me abundant in this
   Goodness like unto Thee. That I may as deeply pity others misery, and
   as ardently thirst for their happiness as Thou dost. Let the same mind
   be in me that is in Jesus Christ. For he that is not led by the spirit
   of Christ is none of His. Holy Jesus I admire Thy love unto me also. O
   that I could see it through all those wounds! O that I could feel it in
   all those stripes! O that I could hear it in all those groans! O that I
   could taste it beneath the gall and vinegar! O that I could smell the
   savour of Thy sweet ointments, even in this Golgotha, or place of a
   skull. I pray Thee teach me first Thy love unto me, and then unto
   mankind! But in Thy love unto mankind I am beloved.


   64

        These wounds are in themselves orifices too small to let in my
   sight, to the vast comprehensions of Thine eternal love. Those wounds
   engraven in Thy hands but shady impressions, unless I see the Glory of
   Thy Soul, in which the fullness of the GODHEAD dwelleth bodily. These
   bloody characters are too dim to let me read it, in its lustre and
   perfection till I see Thy person, and know Thy ways! O Thou that
   hangest upon this Cross before mine eyes, whose face is bleeding, and
   covered over with tears and filth and blows! Angels adore the Glory of
   Thy GODHEAD in the highest heavens. Who in every thought and in every
   work didst Glorious things for me from Everlasting. What could I, O my
   Lord, desire more than such a World! Such Heavens and such an Earth!
   Such beasts and fowls and fishes made for me. All these do homage unto
   me, and I have dominion over them from the Beginning! The Heavens and
   the Earth minister unto me, as if no man were greater, but I alone. I
   willingly acknowledge it to be thy Gift! thy bounty unto me! How many
   thousand ways do men also minister unto me! O what riches hast Thou
   prepared out of nothing for me! All creatures labor for my sake, and I
   am made to enjoy all Thy creatures. O what praises shall I return unto
   Thee, the wisdom of the Father, and the brightness of the glory of His
   Eternal Goodness!, Who didst make all for me before Thou didst redeem
   me.


   65

      Had I been alive in Adam's stead, how should I have admired the
   Glories of the World! What a confluence of Thoughts and wonders, and
   joys, and thanksgivings would have replenished me in the sight of so
   magnificent a theatre, so bright a dwelling place; so great a temple,
   so stately a house replenished with all kind of treasure, raised out of
   nothing and created for me and for me alone. Shall I now despise them?
   When I consider the heavens which Thou hast made, the moon and stars,
   which are the works of Thy fingers: what is man that Thou art mindful
   of him, or the son of man that Thou visiteth him! Thou bast made him a
   little lower than the angels, and crowned him with glory and honour. O
   what love must that needs be, that prepared such a palace! Attended
   with what power! With what wisdom illuminated! Abounding with what
   zeal! And how glorious must the King be, that could out of nothing
   erect such a curious, so great, and so beautiful a fabric! It was
   glorious while new: and is as new as it was glorious.


   66

      But this is small. What O my Lord, could I desire to be which Thou
   hast not made me! If Thou hast expressed Thy love in furnishing the
   house, how gloriously doth it shine in the possessor! My limbs and
   members when rightly prized, are comparable to the fine gold, but that
   they exceed it. The topaz of Ethiopia and the gold of Ophir are not to
   be compared to them. What diamonds are equal to my eyes; what
   labyrinths to my ears; what gates of ivory, or ruby leaves to the
   double portal of my lips and teeth? Is not sight a jewel? Is not
   hearing a treasure? Is not speech a glory? O my Lord pardon my
   ingratitude, and pity my dullness who am not sensible of these gifts.
   The freedom of thy bounty hath deceived me. These things were too near
   to be considered. Thou presentedst me with Thy blessings, and I was not
   aware. But now I give thanks and adore and praise Thee for Thine
   inestimable favors. I believe Thou lovest me, because Thou hast endued
   me with those sacred and living treasures. Holy Father, henceforth I
   more desire to esteem them than Palaces of Gold! Yea, though they were
   given me by Kings, I confess unto Thee that I am richer in them. O what
   Joy, what Delight and Jubilee should there always be, would men prize
   the Gifts of God according to their value!


   67

        But what creature could I desire to be which I am not made? There
   are Angels and Cherubim. I rejoice, O Lord, in their happiness, and
   that I am what I am by Thy grace and favour. Suppose, O my Soul, there
   were no creature made at all, and that God making Thee alone offered to
   make thee what Thou wouldst: What could Thou desire; or what wouldst
   Thou wish, or crave to be? Since GOD is the most Glorious of all
   Beings, and the most blessed, couldst thou wish any more than to be His
   IMAGE! O my Soul, He hath made thee His Image. Sing, O ye Angels, and
   laud His name, ye Cherubims: Let all the Kingdoms of the the Earth be
   glad, and let all the Host of Heaven rejoice for He hath made His
   Image, the likeness of Himself, His own similitude. What creature, what
   being, what thing more glorious could there be! God from all Eternity
   was infinitely blessed, and desired to make one infinitely blessed, and
   desired to make one infinitely blessed. He was infinite Love, and being
   lovely in being so, would prepare for Himself a most lovely object.
   Having studied from all Eternity, He saw none more lovely than the
   Image of His Love, His own Similitude. O Dignity unmeasurable! Triumph,
   O my Soul, and rejoice for ever! I see that I am infinitely beloved.
   For infinite Love hath exprest and pleased itself in creating an
   infinite object. God is Love, and my Soul is Lovely! God is loving, and
   His Image amiable. O my Soul these are the foundations of an Eternal
   Friendship between God and Thee. He is infinitely prone to love, and
   thou art like Him. He is infinitely lovely and Thou art like Him. What
   can more agree than that which is infinitely lovely, and that which is
   infinitely prone to love! Where both are so lovely, and so prone to
   love, joys and affections will be excited between them! What infinite
   treasures will they be to each other! O my God Thou hast glorified
   Thyself, and Thy creature infinitely, in making Thine Image! That is
   fitted for the Throne of God! It is meet to be Thy companion! It is so
   sublime and wonderful and amiable, that all Angels and Men were created
   to admire it: As it was created to admire Thee, and to live in
   communion with Thee for ever.


   68

      Being made alone, O my soul, thou wouldst be in thy body like God in
   the World, an invisible mystery, too great to be comprehended by all
   creatures. Thou wouldst have all the Goodness of God towards thee to
   enjoy, in that thy Creation. Whatever is in Him would be thy Treasure.
   But had He determined to create no more: there had been no witnesses of
   thy Glory, no spectators of thy communion with God, no other treasures
   beside God and thou. One would think those were sufficient. But
   Infinite Goodness loves to abound, and to overflow infinitely with
   infinite treasures. Love loves to do somewhat for its object more than
   to create it: It is always more stately being surrounded with power,
   and more delightful being inaccessible in a multitude of treasures, and
   more honourable in the midst of admirers; and more glorious when it
   reigneth over many attendants. Love therefore hath prepared all these
   for itself and its object. And because it is always more great by how
   much the greater they are that minister unto it, it maketh its
   attendants the most Glorious that can be, and infinitely delighteth in
   giving them all with all its treasures to its beloved. Had God created
   thee alone He had not been so good as He is. He is good to innumerable
   millions now whom He createth besides. And He glorifieth His eternal
   Wisdom, in making His goodness unto all them wholly thine, and wholly
   infinite unto each of them, yet wholly and solely thine in all.
   Friendship will manifest itself in doing all it can for its beloved.
   Since therefore God will make some other creatures, what kind of
   creatures doth thy Soul desire? Wish wisely thou shalt receive a grant.
   Since Love is so sweet, and thou art by God's Love so infinitely
   exalted: what canst thou desire but creatures like unto Thy creator?
   Behold therefore Angels and Men produced by His goodness and made to
   delight thee.


   69

        O Adorable Trinity! What hast Thou done for me? Thou hast made me
   the end of all things, and all the end of me. I in all, and all in me.
   In every soul whom Thou hast created, Thou hast given me the Similitude
   of Thyself to enjoy! Could my desires have aspired unto such treasures?
   Could my wisdom have devised such sublime enjoyments? Oh! Thou hast
   done more for us than we could ask or think. I praise and admire, and
   rejoice in Thee who art infinitely infinite in all Thy doings.


   70

       But what laws O my Soul wouldst thou desire, by which the lives of
   those creatures should be guided towards Thee? A friend commandeth all
   in his jurisdiction to love his friend; and therein supremely
   manifesteth his love. God Himself exalteth thee, and causeth thee to
   reign in His soul. He exalteth thee by His laws and causeth thee to
   reign in all others. The world and souls are like His, thy heavenly
   mansions, The Law-giver of Heaven and Earth employeth all His authority
   for thee. He promoteth thee in His eternal palace, and maketh thee His
   friend, and telleth His nobles and all His subjects, Whatsoever ye do
   unto him ye do unto Me. Joseph was not so great in Pharaoh's Court, nor
   Haman in the court of Ahasuerus, as thou art in Heaven. He tendereth
   thee as the apple of His eye. He hath set His heart upon thee: Thou art
   the sole object of His eye, and the end of all His endeavours.


   71

       But what life wouldst thou lead? And by what laws wouldst thou
   thyself be guided? For none are so miserable as the lawless and
   disobedient. Laws are the rules of blessed living. Thou must therefore
   be guided by some laws. What wouldst thou choose? Surely since thy
   nature and God's are so excellent, the Laws of Blessedness, and the
   Laws of Nature are the most pleasing. God loved thee with an infinite
   love, and became by doing so thine infinite treasure, Thou art the end
   unto whom He liveth. For all the lines of His works and counsels end in
   thee, and in thy advancement. Wilt not thou become to Him an infinite
   treasure, by loving Him according to His desert? It is impossible but
   to love Him that loveth. Love is so amiable that it is irresistible.
   There is no defence against that arrow, nor any deliverance in that
   war, nor any safeguard from that charm. Wilt thou not live unto Him?
   Thou must of necessity live, unto something. And what so glorious as
   His infinite Love? Since therefore, laws are requisite to lead thee,
   what laws can thy soul desire, than those that guide thee in the most
   amiable paths to the highest end? By Love alone is God enjoyed, by Love
   alone delighted in, by Love alone approached or admired. His Nature
   requires Love, thy nature requires Love. The law of Nature commands
   thee to Love Him: the Law of His nature, and the Law of thine.


   72

        There is in love two strange perfections, that make it infinite in
   Goodness. It is infinitely diligent in doing good, and it infinitely
   delighteth in that Goodness. It taketh no pleasure comparable in
   anything to that it taketh in exalting and blessing. And therefore hath
   it made thee a comprehension infinite to see all ages, and an affection
   endless to love all Kingdoms, and a power fathomless to enjoy all
   Angels. And a thirst insatiable to desire and delight in them. And a
   never-wearied faculty all-sufficient to love; number, take in, prize,
   and esteem all the varieties of creatures and their excellencies in all
   worlds, that thou mayest enjoy them in communion with Him. It is all
   obligation, that He requires it. What life wouldst thou lead? Wouldst
   thou love God alone? God alone cannot be beloved. He cannot be loved
   with a finite love, because He is infinite. Were He beloved alone, His
   love would be limited. He must be loved in all with an unlimited love,
   even in all His doings, in all His friends, in all His creatures.
   Everywhere in all things thou must meet His love. And this the Law of
   Nature commands. And it is thy glory that thou art fitted for it. His
   love unto thee is the law and measure of thine unto Him: His love unto
   all others the law and obligation of thine unto all.


   73

      His nature requireth that thou love all those whom He loveth, and
   receive Him in all those things wherein He giveth Himself unto thee.
   Their nature loveth to be beloved and being amiable require love, as
   well as delight in it. They require it both by desert and desire. Thy
   nature urgeth it. For without loving thou art desolate, and by loving
   thou enjoyest. Yea by loving thou expandest and enlargest thyself, and
   the more thou lovest art the more glorious. Thou lovest all thy
   friends' friends; and needest not to fear any dearth of love or danger
   of insufficiency. For the more thou lovest thy friend, thy Sovereign
   Friend, the more thou lovest all His Friends. Which showeth the endless
   proneness of love to increase and never to decay. O my Soul thou livest
   in all those whom thou lowest: and in them enjoyest all their
   treasures.


   74

        Miraculous are the effects of Divine Wisdom. He loveth every one,
   maketh every one infinitely happy and is infinitely happy in every one.
   He giveth all the world to me, He giveth it to every one in giving it
   to all, and giveth it wholly to me in giving it to every one for
   everyone's sake. He is infinitely happy in every one as many times
   therefore as there are happy persons He is infinitely happy. Every one
   is infinitely happy in every one, every one therefore is as many times
   infinitely happy as there are happy persons. He is infinitely happy
   above all their happiness in comprehending all. And I, comprehending
   His and theirs, am Oh, how happy! Here is love! Here is a kingdom!
   Where all are knit in infinite unity. All are happy in each other. All
   are like Deities. Every one the end of all things, everyone supreme,
   every one a treasure, and the joy of all, and every one most infinitely
   delighted in being so. All things are ever joys for every one's sake
   and infinitely richer to every one for the sake of all. The same thing
   is multiplied by being enjoyed. And He that is greatest is most my
   treasure. This is the effect of making Images, and by all their love is
   every Image infinitely exalted. Comprehending in his nature all Angels,
   all Cherubims, all Seraphims, all Worlds, all Creatures, and GOD over
   all Blessed for ever.


   75

      Being to lead this Life within, I was placed in Paradise without,
   with some advantages which the Angels have not: And being designed to
   immortality and an endless life, was to abide with God from everlasting
   to everlasting in all His ways. But I was deceived by my appetite, and
   fell into Sin. Ungratefully I despised Him that gave me my being. I
   offended in an apple against Him that gave me the whole world: But Thou
   O Saviour art here upon the Cross suffering for my Sins. What shall I
   render unto Thee for so great a Mercy! All thanksgiving is too weak,
   and all expression too feeble. I give Thee myself, my Soul and Body I
   offer unto Thee. It is unworthy of Thee, but Thou lovest me. Wash me
   with Thy blood from all my Sins: And fill me with Thy Holy Spirit that
   I may be like unto Thee. So shall I praise Thy Name acceptably for ever
   more. Amen.


   76

      And now, O Lord, Heaven and Earth are infinitely more valuable than
   they were before, being all bought with Thy precious blood. And Thou, O
   Jesus, art a treasure unto me far greater than all those. At what rate
   or measure shall I esteem Thee? Thou hast restored me again to the
   friendship of God, to the enjoyment of the World, to the hope of
   Eternal Glory, to the love of Angels, Cherubims, and Men. To the
   enjoyment and obedience of Thy Holy Laws: which alone are sweeter to me
   than the honey and the honeycomb, and more precious than thousands of
   gold and silver. Thou hast restored me above all to the Image of God.
   And Thou hast redeemed all Ages and Kingdoms for me alone, who am
   commanded to love them as Thou dost. O that I might be unto them as
   Thou art! O that I might be unto Thee as Thou art to me, as glorious
   and as rich in Love! O that I might die for Thee! O that I might ever
   live unto Thee! In every thought, in every action of my life, in every
   moment I bless Thee for renewing the old commandment; upon new
   obligations among Sinners,-- As I have loved you, so do ye also love
   one another. O let Thy love be in me that Thy joy may be fulfilled in
   me for evermore.


   77

        Now O Lord I see the greatness of Thy love wherewith Thou diedst.
   And by Thy actions more than by Thy sufferings admire Thee. But
   henceforth I will more admire Thee by Thy sufferings; for considering
   that such actions went before; what love must move Thee to come into
   the place of guilty Sinners!


   78

      Lord I lament and abhor myself that I have been the occasion of
   these Thy sufferings. I had never known the dignity of my nature, hadst
   not Thou esteemed it: I had never seen or understood its glory, hadst
   not Thou assumed it. Be Thou pleased to unite me unto Thee in the bands
   of an Individual Love, that I may ever more live unto Thee, and live in
   Thee. And by how much the more vile I have been, let my love be so
   much, O Lord, the more violent henceforth, and fervent unto Thee. O
   Thou who wouldst never have permitted sin, hadst Thou not known how to
   bring good out of evil, have pity upon me: hear my prayer. O my God
   since pity embalms love, let Thine come enriched, and be more precious
   to me, miserable Sinner. Let the remembrance of all the glory wherein I
   was created make me more serious and humble, more deep and penitent,
   more pure and holy before Thee. And since the World is sprinkled with
   Thy blood, and adorned with all Kingdoms and Ages for me: which are
   Heavenly Treasures and vastly greater than Heaven and Earth, let me see
   Thy glory in the preparation of them, and Thy goodness in their
   government. Open unto me the Gate of Righteousness, that I may enter in
   to the New Jerusalem.


   79

      My Lord, Thou head of the Holy Catholic Church, I admire and praise
   Thee for purchasing to Thyself such a glorious Bride and for uniting us
   all by the blood of Thy Cross, I beseech Thee let my love unto all be
   regular like Thine, and pure, and infinite. Make it Divine and make it
   Holy. I confess I can see, but I cannot moderate, nor love as I ought.
   I pray Thee for Thy loving kindness sake supply my want in this
   particular. And so make me to love all, that I may be a blessing to
   all: and well pleasing to Thee in all, Teach me wisdom, how to expend
   my blood, estate, life, and time in Thy service for the good of all,
   and make all them that are round about me wise and holy as Thou art,
   That we might all be knit together in Godly Love, and united in Thy
   service to Thy Honour and Glory.


   80

        My excellent friend, you see that there are treasures in Heaven
   and Earth fit to be enjoyed, besides those of King's Courts, and
   Taverns. The joys of the Temple are the greatest joys were they
   understood; they are the most magnificent, solemn and divine. There are
   glorious entertainments in this miserable world, could we find them
   out. What more delightful can be imagined, than to see a Saviour at
   this distance, dying on the Cross to redeem a man from Hell, and to see
   oneself the beloved of God and all Kingdoms, yea, the admired of ages,
   and the heir of the whole world? Hath not His blood united you and me,
   cannot we see and love and enjoy each other at a hundred miles
   distance? In Him is the only sweet and divine enjoyment. I desire but
   an amiable Soul in any part of all Eternity, and can love it
   unspeakably: And if love it, enjoy it. For love implies pleasure,
   because it is ever pleased with what is beloved. Love God and Jesus
   Christ and Angels and Men, which you are made to do as naturally as the
   sun is made to shine, and the beauty of the Holy Ghost dwelling in you
   will make you my delight, the treasure of the Holy Angels. You will at
   last be seen by me and all others, in all your thoughts and in all your
   motions. In the mean time, delight only in the love of Jesus, and
   direct all your love unto Him. Adore Him, rejoice in Him, admire His
   love and praise Him; secretly and in the congregation. Enjoy His Saints
   that are round about you, make yourself amiable that you may be
   admitted to their enjoyment, by meekness, temperance, modesty,
   humility, charity, chastity, devotion, cheerfulness, gratitude, joy,
   thanksgiving. Retire from them that you may be the more precious, and
   come out unto them the more wise. So shall you make the place wherein
   you live a nest of sweet perfumes, and every Soul that is round about
   you will be a bed of Honour, and sweet repose unto you. [1]


   81

        My goodness extendeth not to Thee, O Lord, but to Thy Saints, and
   to the excellent in the Earth in whom is all my delight. To delight in
   the Saints of God is the way to Heaven. One would think it exceeding
   easy and reasonable to esteem those whom Jesus purchased with His
   precious blood. And if we do so how can we help but inherit all things.
   All the Saints of all Ages and all Kingdoms are His inheritance, His
   treasures, His jewels. Shall they not be yours since they are His whom
   you love so infinitely? There is not a cup of cold water given to a
   disciple in the name of a disciple, but He accepteth it as done to
   Himself. Had you been with Mary Magdalen, would you not have anointed
   His feet, and washed them in tears, and wiped them with the hairs of
   your head? His poor servants, His contemptible and disguised members
   here upon earth are his feet, yea more the apple of His eye: yea more
   for He gave His eyes and heart and hands and feet for them. O therefore
   universally in all places tender them, and at all times be ready and
   willing to minister unto them. And that with infinite joy, knowing the
   excellency of your duty. For you are enjoying the world, and
   communicating yourself like God unto them. You are laying up treasure
   in Heaven, and enlarging your Soul, beautifying your life, and
   delighting the Holy Angels, offering up sacrifices unto God, and
   perfuming the world; embracing Jesus Christ and caressing your Saviour,
   while you are dispensing charities among them. Every alms deed is a
   precious stone in the Crown of Glory.


   82

      But there are a sort of Saints meet to be your companions, in
   another manner, but that they be concealed. You must therefore make
   yourself exceeding virtuous that by the very splendour of your fame you
   may find them out. While the wicked are like heaps of rubbish, these
   few jewels lie buried in the ruins of mankind: and must diligently be
   digged for. You may know them by their lustre, and by the very desire
   and esteem they have of you when you are virtuous. For as it is the
   glory of the sun that darkness cannot approach it, because it is always
   encompassed with its own beams; so it is the privilege of Holy Souls,
   that they are always secure in their own light, which driveth away
   devils and evil men: and is accessible by none, but lovers of virtue.
   Beginners and desirers will give you the opportunity of infusing
   yourself and your principles into them. Practicers and growers will
   mingle souls and be delightful companions. The sublime and perfect, in
   the lustre of their spirit, will show you the Image of Almighty God and
   the joys of Heaven. They will allure, protect, encourage, comfort,
   teach, honour and delight you. But you must be very good, for that is
   the way to find them. And very patient to endure some time, and very
   diligent to observe where they are.


   83

      They will praise our Saviour with you, and turn the world into
   Heaven. And if you find those of noble and benevolent natures, discreet
   and magnanimous, liberal and cheerful, wise and holy as they ought to
   be, you will have in them treasures greater than all relations
   whatsoever. They will exchange Souls with you, divide estates,
   communicate comforts, counsels and honours, and in all tenderness,
   constancy, fidelity, and love be more yours than their own. There are
   exceeding few such Heavenly Lovers as Jesus was, who imparted His own
   soul unto us. Yet some may doubtlessly be found. And half a dozen such
   as these wisely chosen will represent unto us the New Jerusalem,
   entertain us always with divine discourses, please us always with
   Heavenly affections, delight us always with melody and praise, and ever
   make us near unto our Saviour.


   84

      Yet you must arm yourself with expectations of their infirmities,
   and resolve nobly to forgive them: not in a sordid and cowardly manner,
   by taking no notice of them, nor in a dim and lazy manner, by letting
   them alone: but in a divine and illustrious manner by chiding them
   meekly, and vigourously rendering and showering down all kind of
   benefits. Cheerfully continuing to do good, and whatever you suffer by
   your piety and charity, confidence or love, to be like our Saviour,
   unwearied: who when He was abused and had often been evil-intreated
   among men, proceeded courageously through all treacheries and deceits
   to die for them. So shall you turn their very vices, into virtues, to
   you, and, as our Saviour did, make of a wreath of thorns a crown of
   glory. But set the splendour of virtues before you, and when some fail,
   think with yourself, there are some sincere and excellent, and why
   should not I be the most virtuous?


   85

        With all their eyes behold our Saviour, with all their hearts
   adore Him, with all their tongues and affections praise him. See how in
   all closets, and in all temples; in all cities and in all fields; in
   all nations and in all generations, they are lifting up their hands and
   eyes unto His cross; and delight in all their adorations. This will
   enlarge your Soul and make you to dwell in all kingdoms and ages:
   strengthen your faith and enrich your affections: fill you with their
   joys and make you a lively partaker in communion with them. It will
   make you a possessor greater than the world. Men do mightily wrong
   themselves when they refuse to be present in all ages: and neglect to
   see the beauty of all kingdoms, and despise the resentments of every
   soul, and busy themselves only with pots and cups and things at home,
   or shops and trades and things in the street: but do not live to God
   manifesting Himself in all the world, nor care to see (and be present
   with Him in) all the glory of His Eternal Kingdom. By seeing the Saints
   of all Ages we are present with them: by being present with them become
   too great for our own age, and near to our Saviour.


   86

      O Jesu, Thou King of Saints, whom all adore: and, the Holy imitate,
   I admire the perfection of Thy Love in every soul! Thou lovest every
   one wholly as if him alone. Whose soul is so great an Image of Thine
   Eternal Father, that Thou camest down from Heaven to die for him, and
   to purchase mankind that they might be His treasures. I admire to see
   Thy cross in every understanding, Thy passion in every memory Thy crown
   of thorns in every eye, and Thy bleeding, naked wounded body in every
   soul. Thy death liveth in every memory, Thy crucified person is
   embalmed in every affection, Thy pierced feet, are bathed in every
   one's tears, Thy blood all droppeth on every soul: Thou wholly
   communicatest Thyself to every soul in all kingdoms, and art wholly
   seen in every saint, and wholly fed upon by every Christian. It is my
   privilege that I can enter with Thee into every soul, and in every
   living temple of Thy manhood and Thy Godhead, behold again, and enjoy
   Thy glory.


   87

        O how do Thine affections extend like the sunbeams unto all stars
   in heaven and to all the kingdoms in the world. Thine at once enlighten
   both hemispheres: quicken us with life, enable us to digest the
   nourishment of our Souls, cause us to see the greatness of our nature,
   the Love of God, and the joys of heaven melt us into tears, comfort and
   enflame us, and, do all in a celestial manner, that the Sun can do in a
   terrene and earthly. O let me so long eye Thee, till I be turned into
   Thee, and look upon me till Thou art formed in me, that I may be a
   mirror of Thy brightness, an habitation of Thy Love, and a temple of
   Thy glory. That all Thy Saints might live in me, and I in them:
   enjoying all their felicities, joys, and treasures.


   88

      O Thou Sun of Righteousness, eclipsed on the Cross; overcast with
   sorrows, and crowned with the shadow of death, remove the veil of Thy
   flesh that I may see Thy glory. Those cheeks are shades, those limbs
   and members clouds, that hide the glory of Thy mind, Thy knowledge and
   Thy love from us. But were they removed those inward excellencies would
   remain invisible. As therefore we see Thy flesh with our fleshly eyes,
   and handle Thy wounds with our bodily senses, let us see Thy
   understanding with our understandings, and read Thy love with our own.
   Let our souls have communion with Thy soul, and let the eye of our mind
   enter into Thine. Who art Thou who bleeding here causest the ground to
   tremble and the locks to rend, and the graves to open? Hath Thy death
   influence so high as the highest Heavens? That the Sun also mourneth
   and is clothed in sables? Is Thy spirit present in the temple, that the
   veil rendeth in twain at Thy passion? O let me leave Kings Courts to
   come unto Thee, I choose rather in a cave to serve Thee, than on a
   throne to despise Thee, O my Dying Gracious Lord, I perceive the virtue
   of Thy passion everywhere. Let it, I beseech Thee, enter into my Soul.
   and rent my rocky, stony heart, and tear the veil of my flesh, that I
   may see into the Holy of Holies! O darken the Sun of pride and
   vain-glory. Yea, let the sun itself be dark in comparison of Thy Love!
   And open the grave of my flesh, that my soul may arise to praise Thee.
   Grant this for Thy mercy's sake. Amen!


   89

        Is this He that was transfigured upon Mount Tabor? Pale, withered,
   extended, tortured, soiled with blood, and sweat, and dust, dried,
   parched! O sad, O dismal spectacle. All His joints are dissolved, all
   His blood is shed, to the last drop, all His moisture is consumed! What
   is here but a heap of desolations, a deformed carcase, a disfigured
   countenance! A mass of miseries and silence, footsteps of innumerable
   sufferings! Can this be a joy? Can this be an entertainment? Can this
   delight us? O Jesus, the more vile I here behold Thee, the more I
   admire Thee. Into what low abysses didst Thou descend, into what depths
   of misery dost Thou now lie! Oh what confusions, what stripes and
   wounds, what desolations and deformities didst Thou suffer for our
   sakes! In all the depths of Thy humiliation I here adore Thee! I prize
   and desire always to see those stripes and those deformities. It is
   sweeter to be with Thee in Thy sufferings, than with princes on their
   Thrones, and more do I rejoice with, Thee in Thy misery, than in all
   their solemnities. I tremble also; to, see Thy condescencions, the
   great effects and, expressions of Thy love! Thou wast slain for me:
   and, shalt I leave Thy body in the field, O Lord? Shall I go away and
   be merry, while the Love of my soul, and my only Lover is dead upon the
   cross. Groans, here, in the sight and apprehension of Thy love are
   beyond all melody, and the solemn sorrows of a loving Soul, a faithful
   Friend, a tender Spouse, a deep and compassionate true Lover, beyond
   all the entertainments in the world. Thine O Jesus will I ever be while
   I have any Being.


   90

        This Body is not the cloud, but the pillar assumed to manifest His
   love unto us. In these shades doth this sun break forth most oriently.
   In this death is His love painted in most lively colours. God never
   shewed Himself more a God than when He appeared man; never gained more
   glory than when He lost all glory: was never more sensible of our sad
   estate, than when He was bereaved of all sense. O let Thy goodness
   shine, in me! I will love all, O Lord, by Thy grace assisting as Thou
   dost: And in death, itself, will I find life, and in conquest victory.
   This Sampson by dying killed all his enemies: and then carried the
   Gates of Hell and Death away, when being dead, Himself was borne to His
   grave. Teach me, O Lord, these mystterious ascencions. By descending
   into Hell for the sake of others, let me ascend into the glory of the
   Highest Heavens. Let the fidelity and efficacy of my love appear, in
   all my care and suffering for Thee.


   91

        O Jesu, Lord of Love and Prince of Life! who even being dead, art
   greater than all angels, cherubims, and men, let my love unto Thee be
   as strong as Death and so deep that no waters may be able to drown it.
   O let it be ever endless and invincible! O that I could really so love
   Thee, as rather to suffer with St. Anselm the pains of Hell than to sin
   against Thee. O that no torments, no powers in heaven or earth, no
   stratagems, no allurements might divide me from Thee. Let the length
   and breadth and height and depth of my love unto Thee be like Thine
   unto me. Let undrainable fountains, and unmeasurable abysses be hidden
   in it. Let it be more vehement than flame, more abundant than the sea,
   more constant than the candle in Aaron's tabernacle that burned day and
   night. Shall the sun shine for me; and be a light from the beginning of
   the world to this very day that never goeth out, and shall my love
   cease or intermit, O Lord, to shine or burn? O let it be a perpetual
   fire on the altar of my heart, and let my soul itself be Thy living
   sacrifice.


   92

        It is an inestimable joy that I was raised out of nothing to see
   and enjoy this glorious world: It is a Sacred Gift whereby the children
   of men are made my treasures, but O Thou who art fairer than the
   children of men, how great and unconceivable is the joy of Thy love!
   That I who was lately raised out of the dust, have so great a Friend,
   that I who in this life am born to mean things according to the world
   should be called to inherit such glorious things in the way of heaven:
   Such a Lord, so great a Lover, such heavenly mysteries, such doings and
   such sufferings, with all the benefit and pleasure of them in Thy
   intelligible kingdom: it amazeth me, it transporteth and ravisheth me.
   I will leave my father's house and come unto Thee; for Thou art my
   Lord, and I will worship Thee, That all ages should appear so visibly
   before me, and all Thy ways be so lively, powerful, and present with
   me, that the land of Canaan should be so near; and all the joys in
   heaven and earth be so sweet to comfort me! This, O Lord, declareth Thy
   wisdom, and sheweth Thy power. But O the riches of thine infinite
   goodness in making my Soul an interminable Temple, out of which nothing
   can be, from which nothing is removed, to which nothing is afar off;
   but all things immediately near, in a real, true, and lively manner. O
   the glory of that endless life, that can at once extend to all
   Eternity! Had the Cross been twenty millions of ages further, it had
   still been equally near, nor is it possible to remove it, for it is
   with all distances in my understanding, and though it be removed many
   thousand millions of ages more is as clearly seen and apprehended. This
   soul for which Thou diedst, I desire to know more perfectly, O my
   Saviour, that I may praise Thee for it, and believe it worthy, in its
   nature, to be an object of Thy love; though unworthy by reason of sin:
   and that I may use it in Thy service, and keep it pure to Thy glory.


   93

      As my body without my Soul is a Carcase, so is any soul without Thy
   Spirit, a chaos, a dark obscure heap of empty faculties: ignorant of
   itself, unsensible of Thy goodness, blind to Thy glory: dead in sins
   and trespasses. Having eyes I see not, having eyes I hear not, having
   an heart I understand not the glory of Thy works and the glory of Thy
   Kingdom. O Thou who art the Root of my being, and the Captain of my
   salvation, look upon me. Quicken me, O Thou lifegiving and quickening
   Seed. Visit me with Thy light and Thy truth; let them lead me to Thy
   Holy Hill and make me to see the greatness of Thy love in all its
   excellencies, effects, emanations, gifts and operations; O my Wisdom! O
   my Righteousness, Sanctification and Redemption; let Thy wisdom
   enlighten me, let Thy knowledge illuminate me, let Thy blood redeem me,
   wash me and clean me, let Thy merits justify me, O Thou who art equal
   unto God, and didst suffer for me. Let Thy righteousness clothe me. Let
   Thy will imprint the form of itself upon mine; and let my will become
   conformable to thine: that Thy will and mine, may be united, and made
   one for evermore.


   94

      Thy will, O Christ, and Thy Spirit in essence are one. As therefore
   Thy human will is conformable to Thy Divine; let my will be conformable
   to Thine. Thy divine Will is all wisdom, goodness, holiness, glory, and
   blessedness. It is all light and life and love. It extendeth to all
   things in heaven and earth. It illuminateth all eternity, it beautifies
   the omnipresence of God with glory without dimensions. It is infinite
   in greatness and magnifieth all that are united to it. Oh that my will
   being made great by Thine, might become divine, exalted, perfected! O
   Jesu, without Thee I can do nothing. O Thou in whom the fulness of the
   Godhead dwelleth, I desire to learn of Thee, to become in spirit like
   unto Thee, I desire not to learn of my relations, acquaintance,
   tradesmen, merchants or earthly princes to be like unto them; but like
   unto Thee, the King of Glory, and to those who are Thy sons and friends
   in another World. Grant therefore, O Thou of whom the whole family in
   heaven and earth is named, that being strengthened with might by Thy
   spirit in the inner man, I may be able to comprehend with all Saints,
   what is the breadth and length and depth and heighth, and to know that
   Love of Christ which passeth knowledge, that I may be filled with all
   the fulness of God.


   95

        O Thou who ascendedst up on high, and ledst captivity captive, and
   gavest gifts unto men, as after Thy ascension into heaven Thou didst
   send Thy Holy Spirit down upon Thine Apostles in the form of a rushing
   mighty wind, and in the shape of cloven fiery tongues; send down the
   Holy Ghost upon me: Breathe upon me, inspire me, quicken me, illuminate
   me, enflame me, fill me with the Spirit of God; that I may overflow
   with praises and thanksgivings as they did. Fill me with the riches of
   Thy glory, that Christ may dwell in my heart by faith, that I being
   rooted and grounded in Love may speak the wonderful Works of God. Let
   me be alive unto them: let me see them all, let me feel them all, let
   me enjoy them all: that I may admire the greatness of Thy love unto my
   soul, and rejoice in communion with Thee for evermore. How happy, O
   Lord, am I, who am called to a communion with God the Father, Son, and
   Holy Ghost, in all their works and ways, in all their joys, in all
   their treasures, in all their glory! Who have such a Father, having in
   Him the Fountain of Immortality, Rest and Glory, and the joy of seeing
   Him creating all things for my sake! Such a Son, having in Him the
   means of peace and felicity, and the joy of seeing Him redeeming my
   soul, by His sufferings on the cross, and doing all things that pertain
   to my salvation between the Father and me: Such a Spirit and such a
   Comforter dwelling in me to quicken, enlighten, and enable me, and to
   awaken all the powers of my soul that night and day the same mind may
   be in me that was in Christ Jesus!


   96

        O Thou who hast redeemed me to be a Son of God, and called me from
   vanity to inherit all things, I praise Thee, that having loved me and
   given Thyself for me, Thou commandest us saying, As I have loved you,
   so do ye also love one another. Wherein Thou hast commanded all men, so
   to love me, as to lay down their lives for my peace and welfare. Since
   Love is the end for which heaven and earth was made, enable me to see
   and discern the sweetness of so great a treasure. And since Thou hast
   advanced me into the Throne of God, in the bosom of all Angels and men;
   commanding them by this precept, to give me an union and communion with
   Thee in their dearest affection; in their highest esteem; and in the
   most near and inward room and seat in their hearts; give me the grace
   which Saint Paul prayed for, that I may be acceptable to the Saints,
   fill me with Thy Holy Spirit, and make my soul and life beautiful, make
   me all wisdom, goodness and love, that I may be worthy to be esteemed
   and accepted of them. That being delighted also with their felicity, I
   may be crowned with Thine, and with their glory.


   97

        O Jesu, who having prepared all the joys in heaven and earth for
   me, and redeemed me to inherit Thy Father's treasures; hast prepared
   for me the most glorious companions, in whose presence and society I
   may enjoy them: I bless Thee for the communion of Saints: and for Thy
   adorning the same, with all manner of beauties, excellencies,
   perfections, and delights. O what a glorious assembly is the Church of
   the first-born, how blessed and divine! What perfect lovers! How great
   and honorable! How wise! How sweet and delightful! Every one being the
   end, every one the King of Heaven; every one the Son of God in
   greatness and glory; every one the entire and perfect friend of all the
   residue; every one the light and ornament of Thy Kingdom; every one Thy
   peculiar friend, yet loving every one as Thy peculiar friend: and
   rejoicing in the pleasures and delights of every one! O my God, make me
   one of that happy assembly. And let me love every one for whom Christ
   died, with a love as great and lively as His, That I may dwell in Him,
   and He in me: and that we all may be made perfect in me, even as Thou,
   O Jesus, art in the Father, and the Father is in Thee: that Thy love
   may be in us, and Thou in me for evermore.


   98

        Wisely, O Jesu, didst Thou tell Thy disciples, when Thou
   promisedst them the Comforter, that the world cannot receive the Spirit
   of Truth: because it seeth Him not neither knoweth Him. But ye know
   Him, for He dwelleth with you, and shall be in you. O let the Spirit of
   Truth dwell with me, and then little matter for any other comforter.
   When I see myself beloved of the Father; when I know the perfection of
   thy love, when the Father and the Son loveth me, and both manifest
   themselves unto me; when they are near unto me and abide with me for
   ever and ever, little harm can death do, or sickness and poverty. I can
   never be alone because the Father and Son are with me. No reproaches
   can discomfort me, no enemies can hurt me. O let me know Thee Thou
   Spirit of Truth, be Thou always with me, and dwell within me. How is it
   possible, but Thou shouldst be an infinite Comforter; who givest me a
   being as wide as eternity; a well-being as blessed as the Deity; a
   temple of glory in the omnipresence of God, and a light wherein to
   enjoy the New Jerusalem! An immovable inheritance, and an everlasting
   Kingdom that cannot be shaken! Thou art He who shewest me all the
   treasures in heaven and earth, who enablest me to turn afflictions into
   pleasures, and to enjoy mine enemies: Thou enablest me to love as I am
   beloved, and to be blessed in God: Thou sealest me up unto the Day of
   Redemption, and givest me a foretaste of heaven upon earth. Thou art my
   God and my exceeding joy, my Comforter and my strength for evermore.
   Thou representest all things unto me which the Father and the Son have
   done for me. Thou fillest me with courage against all assaults, and
   enablest me to overcome in all temptations; Thou makest me immovable by
   the very treasures and the joys which Thou showest to me. O never leave
   me nor forsake me, but remain with me, and be my comfort forever!


   99

        Wisely doth St. John say, We are the Sons of God; but the world
   knoweth us not because it knew Him not. He that knoweth not the Spirit
   of God, can never know a Son of God, nor what it is to be His child. He
   made us the sons of God in capacity by giving us a power to see
   Eternity, to survey His treasures, to love His children, to know and to
   love as He doth, to become righteous and holy as He is. The Holy Ghost
   maketh us the Sons of God in act, when we are righteous as He is
   righteous, and Holy as He is holy. When we prize all the things in
   Heaven and Earth, as He prizeth Him, and make a conscience of doing it
   as He doth after His similitude; then are we actually present with
   them, and blessed in them, being righteous and holy as He is. Then the
   Spirit of God dwelleth in us, and then are we indeed the Sons of God, a
   chosen generation, a royal priesthood, an Holy nation, a peculiar
   people, zealous of good works, shewing forth the praises of Him, who
   hath called us out of Darkness, into His marvellous Light.


   100

      Christ dwelling in our hearts by Faith is an Infinite Mystery, which
   may thus be understood: An object seen, is in the faculty seeing it,
   and by that in the Soul of the seer, after the best of manners: Whereas
   there are eight [2] manners of in?being, the in?being of an object in a
   faculty is the best of all. Dead things are in a room containing them
   in a vain manner; unless they are objectively in the Soul of a seer.
   The pleasure of an enjoyer is the very end why things placed are in any
   place. The place and the thing placed in it, being both in the
   understanding of a spectator of them. Things dead in dead place effect
   nothing. But in a living Soul, that seeth their excellencies, they
   excite a pleasure answerable to their value, a wisdom to embrace them,
   a courage not to forsake them, a love of their Donor, praises and
   thanksgivings; and a greatness and a joy equal to their goodness. And
   thus all ages are present in my soul, and all kingdoms, and God blessed
   forever. And thus Jesus Christ is seen in me, and dwelleth in me, when
   I believe upon Him. And thus all Saints are in me, and I in them. And
   thus all Angels and the Eternity and Infinity of God are in me for
   evermore. I being the living temple and comprehensor of them. Since
   therefore all other ways of In-being would be utterly vain, were it not
   for this: And the Kingdom of God (as our Saviour saith) is within you,
   let us ever meditate and think on Him, that His conception, nativity,
   life and death may be always within us. Let heaven and earth, men and
   angels, God and His creatures be always within us, that is in our
   sight, in our sense, in our love and esteem: that in the light of the
   Holy Ghost we may see the glory of His Eternal Kingdom, and sing the
   song of Moses, and the song of the Lamb saying, Great and marvellous
   are Thy works, Lord God Almighty, just and true are Thy ways, Thou King
   of Saints.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [1] This section is crossed through in the original MS, as though the
   author intended it to be omitted.

   [2] This is apparently the author's word, but it may possibly be read
   as "right."
     __________________________________________________________________

   THE SECOND CENTURY


   1

        THE Services which the world doth you, are transcendent to all
   imagination. Did it only sustain your body and preserve your life and
   comfort your senses, you were bound to value it as much as those
   services were worth: but it discovers the being of God unto you, it
   opens His nature, and shews you His wisdom, goodness and power, it
   magnifies His love unto you, it serves Angels and men for you, it
   entertains you with many lovely and glorious objects, it feeds you with
   joys, and becomes a theme that furnishes you with perpetual praises and
   thanksgivings, it enflameth you with the love of God, and in the link
   of your union and communion with Him. It is the temple wherein you are
   exalted to glory and honour, and the visible porch or gate of Eternity:
   a sure pledge of Eternal joys, to all them that walk before God and are
   perfect in it.


   2

        If you desire directions how to enjoy it, place yourself in it as
   if no one were created besides yourself, and consider all the services
   it doth even to you alone. Prize those services with a joy answerable
   to the value of them, be truly thankful, and as grateful for them, as
   their merit deserves. And remember always how great soever the world
   is, it is the beginning of Gifts, the first thing which God bestows to
   every infant, by the very right of his nativity. Which because men are
   blind, they cannot see, and therefore know not that God is bountiful.
   From that first error they proceed and multiply their mistaking all
   along. They know not themselves or their own glory, they understand not
   His commandments, they see not the sublimity of righteous actions, they
   know not the beauty of Truth, nor are acquainted with the glory of the
   Holy Scriptures.


   3

        Till you see that the world is yours, you cannot weigh the
   greatness of sin, nor the misery of your fall, nor prize your
   redeemer's love. One would think these should be motives sufficient to
   stir us up to the contemplation of God's works, wherein all the riches
   of His Kingdom will appear. For the greatness of sin proceedeth from
   the greatness of His love whom we have offended, from the greatness of
   those obligations which were laid upon us, from the great blessedness
   and glory of the estate wherein we were placed, none of which can be
   seen, till Truth is seen, a great part of which is, that the World is
   ours. So that indeed the knowledge of this is the very real light,
   wherein all mysteries are evidenced to us.


   4

      The misery of your fall ariseth naturally from the greatness of your
   sin. For to sin against infinite love; is to make oneself infinitely
   deformed: to be infinitely deformed, is to be infinitely odious in His
   eyes who once loved us with infinite love: to have sinned against all
   obligations, and to have fallen from infinite glory and blessedness is
   infinite misery: but cannot be seen, till the glory of the estate from
   which we are fallen is discerned. To be infinitely odious in His eyes
   who infinitely loved us, maketh us unavoidably miserable: because it
   bereaveth us of the end for which we were created, which was to enjoy
   His love: and of the end also of all the creatures which were made only
   to manifest the same. For when we are bereaved of these, we live to no
   purpose; and having lost the end to which we were created, our life is
   cumbersome and irksome to us.


   5

      The counsel which our Saviour giveth in the Revelation to the Church
   of Ephesus, is by all churches, and by every Soul diligently to be
   observed: Remember from whence thou art fallen, and repent. Which
   intimates our duty of remembering our happiness in the estate o!
   innocence. For without this we can never prize our Redeemer's love: He
   that knows not to what he is redeemed cannot prize the work of
   redemption. The means cannot there be valued, where the end is
   despised. Since therefore by the Second Adam, we are restored to that
   we lost in the first: unless we value that we lost in the first, we
   cannot truly rejoice in the second. But when we do, then all things
   receive an infinite esteem, and an augmentation infinitely infinite,
   that follows after. Our Saviour's love, His incarnation, His life and
   death, His resurrection, His ascension into Heaven, His intercession
   for us being then seen, and infinitely prized, in a glorious light: as
   also our deliverance from Hell, and our reconciliation unto God.


   6

        The consideration also of this truth, that the world is mine,
   confirmeth my faith. God having placed the evidences of Religion in the
   greatest and highest joys. For as long as I am ignorant that the World
   is mine, the love of God is defective to me. How can I believe that He
   gave His Son to die for me, who having power to do otherwise gave me
   nothing but rags and cottages? But when I see once that He gave Heaven
   and Earth to me, and made me in His image to enjoy them in His
   similitude, I can easily believe that He gave His Son also for me.
   Especially since He commanded all. Angels and Men to love me as
   Himself: and so highly honoreth me, that whatsoever is done unto me, He
   accounteth done unto Him.


   7

      Place yourself therefore in the midst of the world, as if you were
   alone, and meditate upon all the services which it doth unto you.
   Suppose the Sun were absent; and conceive the world to be a dungeon of
   darkness and death about you: you will then find his beams more
   delightful than the approach of Angels: and loath the abomination of
   that sinful blindness, whereby you see not the glory of so great and
   bright a creature, because the air is filled with its beams. Then you
   will think that all its light shineth for you, and confess that God
   hath manifested Himself indeed, in the preparation of so divine a
   creature. You will abhor the madness of those who esteem a purse of
   gold more than it. Alas, what could a man do with a purse of gold in an
   everlasting dungeon? And shall we prize the sun less than it, which is
   the light and fountain of all our pleasures? You will then abhor the
   preposterous method of those, who in an evil sense are blinded with its
   beams, and to whom the presence of the light is the greatest darkness.
   For they who would repine at God without the sun, are unthankful,
   having it: and therefore only despise it, because it is created.


   8

        It raiseth corn to supply you with food, it melteth waters to
   quench your thirst, it infuseth sense into all your members, it
   illuminates the world to entertain you with prospects, it surroundeth
   you with the beauty of hills and valleys. It moveth and laboureth night
   and day for your comfort and service; it sprinkleth flowers upon the
   ground for your pleasure; and in all these things sheweth you the
   goodness and wisdom of a God that can make one thing so beautiful,
   delightful and serviceable, having ordained the same to innumerable
   ends. It concocteth minerals, raiseth exhalations, begetteth clouds,
   sendeth down the dew and rain and snow, that refresheth and repaireth
   all the earth. And is far more glorious in its diurnal motion, than if
   there were two suns to make on either side a perpetual day: the
   swiftness whereby it moves in twenty-four hours about so vast an
   universe manifesteth the power and care of a Creator, more than any
   station or quiet could do. And producing innumerable effects it is more
   glorious, than if millions of Angels diversly did do them.


   9

        Did the Sun stand still that you might have perpetual day, you
   would not know the sweetness of repose: the delightful vicissitudes of
   night and day, the early sweetness and spring of the morning, the
   perfume and beauty in the cool of the evening, would all be swallowed
   up in meridian splendour: all which now entertain you with delights.
   The antipodes would be empty, perpetual darkness and horror there, and
   the Works of God on the other side of the world in vain.


   10

      Were there two suns, that day might be alike in both places,
   standing still, there would be nothing but meridian splendour under
   them, and nothing but continual morning in other places; they would
   absume and dry up all the moisture of the earth, which now is repaired
   as fast as it decayeth: and perhaps when the nature of the sun is
   known, it is impossible there should be two: At least it is impossible
   they should be more excellent than this one; that we might magnify the
   Deity and rest satisfied in Him, for making the best of all possible
   works for our enjoyment.


   11

      Had the Sun been made one infinite flame it had been worse than it
   is, for there had been no living; it had filled all space, and devoured
   all other things. So that it is far better being finite, than if it
   were infinite.

   Even as the sea within a finite shore

   Is far the better cause it is no more.

   Whence we may easily perceive the Divine Wisdom hath achieved things
   more than infinite in goodness and beauty, as a sure token of their
   perfect excellency.


   12

      Entering thus far into the nature of the sun, we may see a little
   Heaven in the creatures. And yet we shall say less of the rest in
   particular: tho' every one in its place be as excellent as it: and this
   without these cannot be sustained. Were all the earth filthy mires, or
   devouring quicksands, firm land would be an unspeakable treasure. Were
   it all beaten gold it would be of no value. It is a treasure therefore
   of far greater value to a noble spirit than if the globe of the earth
   were all gold. A noble spirit being only that which can survey it all,
   and comprehend its uses. The air is better being a living miracle as it
   now is than if it were crammed and filled with crowns and sceptres. The
   mountains are better than solid diamonds, and those things which
   scarcity maketh jewels (when you enjoy these) are yours in their
   places. Why should you not render thanks to God for them all? You are
   the Adam or the Eve that enjoy them. Why should you not exult and
   triumph in His love who hath done so great things for you? Why should
   you not rejoice and sing His praises? Learn to enjoy what you have
   first, and covet more if you can afterwards..


   13

      Could the seas serve you were you alone more than now they do? Why
   do you not render thanks for them? They serve you better than if you
   were in them: everything serving you best in its proper place Alone you
   were lord over all: bound to admire His eternal love who raised you out
   of nothing into this glorious world which He created for you. To see
   infinite wisdom, goodness and power making the heavens and the earth,
   the seas, the air, the sun and stars! What wonder, what joy, what
   glory, what triumph, what delight should this afford! It is more yours
   than if you had been made alone.


   14

       The Sun is but a little spark of His infinite love: the Sea is but
   one drop of His goodness. But what flames of love ought that spark to
   kindle in your soul: what seas of affection ought to flow for that drop
   in your bosom! The heavens are the canopy, and the earth is the
   footstool of your throne: who reign in communion with God: or at least
   are called so to do. How lively should His divine goodness appear unto
   you; how continually should it rest upon you; how deeply should it be
   impressed in you! Verily its impressions ought to be so deep, as to be
   always remaining, always felt, always admired, always seen and rejoiced
   in. You are never truly great till all the world is yours: and the
   goodness of your Donor so much your joy, that you think upon it all day
   long. Which King David the Royal Man well understood, when he said: My
   lips shall de filled with Thy praise, and Thy honor all the day. I will
   make mention of Thy loving kindness in Thy Holy Temple.


   15

       The world serves you, as in serving those cattle which you feed
   upon, so in serving those men, that build and plough, and plant, and
   govern for you. It serves you in those that pray and adore, and praise
   for you, that fill the world with beauty and virtue; that are made to
   love and honour you, to please and advance you with all the services
   that the art of man can devise. So that you are alone in the world,
   though there are millions in it beside. You are alone to enjoy and
   rejoice in all, being the adequate object of His eternal love, and the
   end of all. Thus the world serves to promote and advance you.


   16

       Those services are so great, that when you enter into them, they
   are ample fields and territories of joy though on the outside they seem
   so contemptible, that they promise nothing. The magnified pleasures of
   this corrupted world, are like the Egyptian Temples in old time, that
   were Magnifica in frontispicio Ridicula in penetrali: They have a Royal
   frontispiece, but are ridiculous when you come in. These hidden
   pleasures, because they are great, common, and simple, are not
   understood.


   17

       Besides these immediate pleasures here beneath, there are many
   sublime and celestial services which the world doth do. It is a
   glorious mirror wherein you may see the verity of all religion: enjoy
   the remainders of Paradise, and talk with the Deity. Apply yourself
   vigorously to the enjoyment of it, for in it you shall see the face of
   God, and by enjoying it, be wholly converted to Him.


   18

      You shall be glorified, you shall live in communion with Him, you
   shall ascend into the Throne of the highest Heavens; you shall be
   satisfied, you shall be made greater than the Heavens, you shall be
   like Him, when you enjoy the world as He doth; you shall converse with
   His wisdom, goodness, and power above all worlds, and therefore shall
   know Him. To know Whom is a sublime thing; for it is Life Eternal.


   19

      They that quarrel at the manner of God's revealing Himself are
   troubled because He is invisible. Yet is it expedient that He should be
   so: for whatsoever is visible is a body; whatsoever is a body excludeth
   other things out of the place where itself is. If God therefore being
   infinite were visible He would make it impossible for anything to have
   a being. Besides, bulk as such in itself is dead. Whatsoever is visible
   is so in like manner. That which inspireth bulk with motion, life, and
   sense is invisible; and in itself distinct from the bulk which it
   inspireth. Were God therefore pure bulk, He could neither move, nor
   will, nor desire anything; but being invisible; He leaveth room for and
   effecteth all things. He filleth nothing with a bodily presence, but
   includeth all. He is pure Life, Knowledge, and Desire, from which all
   things flow: pure Wisdom, Goodness, and Love to which all things
   return.


   20

      Hence we may know why God appeareth not in a visible manner, is
   because He is invisible. Those who are angry with the Deity for not
   showing Himself to their bodily eyes are not displeased with the manner
   of revelation, but that He is such a God as He is. But though He is
   invisible, yet say they, He may assume a body, and make Himself visible
   therein. We ask them therefore what kind of body they desire, for if He
   should take upon Himself a visible body, that body must represent some
   of His perfections. What perfections then would they have that body to
   express? If His infinity, that body then must be infinite. Upon which
   the same absurdity would follow as before, for being infinite it would
   exclude all Being beside out of place. If His Eternity, that cannot by
   a body be represented. Neither is any sense able to judge of infinity
   or eternity. For if He should represent Himself by an infinite wall;
   sight being too short might apprehend itself defective, and be assured
   that it could not apprehend the ends of that wall; but whether it had
   ends, which itself was not able to discern, it could not be satisfied,
   Would you therefore have it to express some other of His perfections;
   as particularly that of His beauty? Beauty being a thing consisting of
   variety, that body could not be one simple being, but must be sweetly
   tempered of a manifold and delightful mixture of figures and colours:
   and be some such thing as Ezekiel saw in his vision. For uniform beauty
   the Sun is the most delightful, yet is not that Sun the most delightful
   thing that is possible. A body more beautiful than it may be made.
   Suppose therefore the most beautiful that is possible were created.
   What would follow? Being a silent and quiet object of the eye, would be
   no more noted than if it had not a being, The most beautiful object
   being always present, grows common and despised. Even as a picture is
   at first admired, but at length no more regarded than the bare wall.
   Since therefore the most beautiful thing that is possible, being always
   continued, would grow into contempt; how do we know, but the world is
   that body, which the Deity bath assumed to manifest His Beauty and by
   which He maketh Himself as visible, as it is possible He should?


   21

      When Amasis the King of Egypt sent to the wise men of Greece, to
   know, Quid Pulcherrimum? upon due and mature consideration they
   answered, The World. The world certainly being so beautiful that
   nothing visible is capable of more. Were we to see it only once, the
   first appearance would amaze us. But being daily seen., we observe it
   not. Ancient philosophers have thought God to be the Soul of the.
   World. Since therefore this visible World is the body of God, not His
   natural body, but which He hath assumed; let us see how glorious His
   wisdom is in manifesting Himself thereby. It hath not only represented
   His infinity and eternity which we thought impossible to, be
   represented by a body, but His beauty also, His wisdom, goodness,
   power, life and glory, His righteousness, love, and blessedness: all
   which as out of a plentiful treasury, may be taken and collected out of
   this world.

        First, His infinity; for the dimensions of the world are
   unsearchable. An infinite wall is a poor thing to express His infinity.
   A narrow endless length is nothing: might be, and if it were, were
   unprofitable. But the world is round, and endlessly unsearchable every
   way. What astronomer, what mathematician, what philosopher did ever
   comprehend the measures of the world? The very Earth alone being round
   and globous, is illimited. It hath neither walls nor precipices, nor
   bounds, nor borders. A man may lose himself in the midst of nations and
   kingdoms. And yet it is but a centre compared to the universe. The
   distance of the sun, the altitude of the stars, the wideness of the
   heavens on every side passeth the reach of sight, and search of the
   understanding. And whether it be infinite or no, we cannot tell. The
   Eternity of God is so apparent in it, that the wisest of philosophers
   thought the world eternal. We come into it, leave it, as if it had
   neither beginning nor ending. Concerning its beauty I need say nothing.
   No man can turn unto it, but must be ravished with its appearance. Only
   thus much, since these things are so beautiful, how much more beautiful
   is the author of them? Which was the note and observation of the wise
   man in the Book of*___. But the beauty of God is invisible, it is all
   Wisdom, Goodness, Life and Love, Power, Glory, Blessedness &c. How
   therefore shall these be expressed in a material world? His wisdom is
   expressed in manifesting His infinity in such a commodious manner. He
   hath made a penetrable body in which we may stand, to wit the air, and
   see the Heavens and the regions of the Earth, at wonderful distances.
   His goodness is manifest in making that beauty so delightful, and its
   varieties so profitable. The air to breathe in, the sea for moisture,
   the earth for fertility, the heavens for influences, the Sun for
   productions, the stars and trees wherewith it is adorned for
   innumerable uses. Again His goodness is seen, in the end to which He
   guideth all this profitableness, in making it serviceable to supply our
   wants, and delight our senses: to enflame us with His love, and make us
   amiable before Him, and delighters in His blessedness. God having not
   only shewed us His simple infinity in an endless wall, but in such an
   illustrious manner, by an infinite: variety, that He hath drowned our
   understanding in a


   *There is a blank here in the original MS.

   multitude of wonders: transported us with delights and enriched us with
   innumerable diversities of joys and pleasures. The very greatness of
   our felicity convinceth us that there is a God.


   22

      His power is evident by upholding it all. But how shall His life
   appear in that which is dead? Life is the root of activity and motion:
   Did I see a man sitting in a chair, as long as he was quiet, I could
   not tell but his body was inanimate: but if he stirred, if he moved his
   legs, or stretched forth his arms, if he breathed or twinkled with his
   eyes, I could easily tell he had a soul within him. Motion being a far
   greater evidence of life, than all lineaments whatsoever. Colours and
   features may be in a dead picture, but motion is always attended with
   life. What shall I think therefore when the winds blow, the seas roar,
   the waters flow, the vapours ascend, the clouds fly, the drops of rain
   fall, the stars march forth in armies, the sun runneth swiftly round
   about the world? Can all these things move so without a life, or spring
   of motion? But the wheels in watches move, and so doth the hand that
   pointeth out the figures: this being a motion of dead things. Therefore
   hath God created living ones: that by lively motions, and sensible
   desires, we might be sensible of a Deity. They breathe, they see, they
   feel, they grow, they flourish, they know, they love. O what a world of
   evidences! We are lost in abysses, we now are absorpt in wonders, and
   swallowed up of demonstrations. Beasts, fowls, and fishes teaching and
   evidencing the glory of their creator. But these by an endless
   generation might succeed each other from everlasting. Let us therefore
   survey their order, and see by that whether we cannot discern their
   governor. The sun, and moon, and stars shine, and by shining minister
   influences to herbs and flowers. These grow and feed the cattle: the
   seas also and springs minister unto them, as they do unto fowls and
   fishes. All which are subservient unto man, a more noble creature
   endued with understanding to admire his Creator. Who being king and
   lord of this world, is able to prize all in a reflexive manner, and
   render praises for all with joy, living blessedly in the fruition of
   them. None can question the being of a Deity but one that is ignorant
   of man's excellencies, and the glory of his dominion over all the
   creatures.


   23

      Above all, man discovereth the glory of God; who being himself
   Immortal, is the divinest creature. He hath a dominion over all the
   rest, and God over him: By him, the fountain of all these things is the
   end of them: for he can return to their Author deserved praises. Senses
   cannot resemble that which they cannot apprehend; nor express that
   which they, cannot resemble, but in a shady manner. But man is made in
   the Image of God, and therefore is a mirror and representative of Him.
   And therefore in himself he may see God, which is his glory and
   felicity. His thoughts and desires can run out to everlasting. His love
   can extend to all objects, his understanding is an endless light, and
   can infinitely be present in all places, and see and examine all
   beings, survey the reasons, surmount the greatness, exceed the
   strength, contemplate the beauty, enjoy the benefit, and reign over all
   it sees and enjoys like the Eternal Godhead. Here is an invisible
   power, an indivisible omnipresence, a spiritual supremacy, an inward,
   hidden, unknown being greater than all, a sublime and sovereign
   creature meet to live in communion with God, in the fruition of them.


   24

      That you are a man should fill you with joys, and make you to
   overflow with praises. The privilege of your nature being infinitely
   infinite. And that the world serves you in this fathomless manner,
   exhibiting the Deity, and ministering to your blessedness, ought daily
   to transport you with a blessed vision, into ravishments and ecstasies.
   What knowledge could you have had of God by an unprofitable wall though
   endless and infinite? For though as things now are, nothing can be, but
   it exhibits a Deity; as the Apostle saith, By things that are seen the
   invisible things of God are manifested, even His power and Godhead,
   because everything is a demonstration of His goodness and power; by its
   existence and the end to which it is guided: yet an endless wall could
   never manifest His being, were it present with you alone: for it would
   deny that infinity by its unprofitableness, which it showeth by its
   endlessness. The true exemplar of God's infinity is that of your
   understanding, which is a lively pattern and idea of it. It excludeth
   nothing, and containeth all things, being a power that permitteth all
   objects to be, and is able to enjoy them. Here is a profitable
   endlessness of infinite value, because without it infinite joys and
   blessings would be lost, which by it are enjoyed. How great doth God
   appear, in wisely preparing such an understanding to enjoy His
   creatures; such an endless, invisible, and mysterious receiver! And how
   blessed and divine are you, to whom God hath not only simply appeared,
   but whom He hath exalted as an Immortal King among all His creatures!


   25

        You are able to see His righteousness, and blessedness, and glory,
   which are invisible. Yea, which is infinitely more, to resemble and
   attain them, to express them in yourself, enjoying them and the
   similitude of them. No beast can see what righteousness is: nor is any
   brute capable of imitating it. You are: being admitted into the
   fellowship and order of Angels. Which have neither eyes nor ears, and
   yet see and understand things, which are infinitely higher than the
   sphere of senses. You are able to discern, that in all these things He
   is Love to you; and that Love is a fountain of infinite benefits, and
   doth all that is possible for its beloved object. It endlessly desireth
   to delight itself, and its delight is to magnify its beloved. You are
   able to see the righteousness of Love in this. For in doing the best of
   all possible things it is right wise to itself and to all other beings.
   Right wise to itself in glorifying itself in the best of manners, and
   to all other things in making them most excellent. Right wise to itself
   in preparing for itself the best of treasures, and to its object in
   like manner, in making its beloved the most blessed. Right wise unto
   itself, in satisfying itself in its infinite desire of becoming
   delightful to its object, in preparing for itself infinite pleasures,
   and in making for itself the most delightful object that can possibly
   be made. Right wise unto you, in making you that object: and providing
   all the treasures of itself for you, and making itself infinitely
   joyous and delightful to you.--Nothing is so righteous, or right wise
   as Love. For by making itself glorious it becometh infinite: and by
   loving its object infinitely it enableth itself to delight infinitely
   in its object's happiness: and wisely prepareth infinite treasures.
   Right wisely thereby at once enriching itself and its object. So that
   you are able evidently to discern that God is Love, and therein to
   contemplate all His perfections.


   26

        You are able therein to see the infinite glory of your high
   estate. For if God is Love, and Love be so restless a principle in
   exalting its object: and so secure that it always promoteth, and
   glorifieth and exalteth itself thereby, where will there be any bounds
   in your exaltation? How dreadful, how amiable, how blessed, how great,
   how unsearchable, how incomprehensible must you be in your true real
   inward happiness! The object of Love is infinitely exalted. Love is
   infinitely delightful to its object, God by all His works manifesteth
   Himself to be Love, and you being the end of them, are evidently its
   object. Go where you will, here alone shall you find your happiness.
   Contemplate therefore the works of God, for they serve you not only in
   manifesting Him, but in making you to know yourself and your
   blessedness.


   27

      As Love is righteous in glorifying itself and making its object
   blessed: so is it in all its dealings and dispensations towards it.
   Having made it amiable, it cannot but love it, which it is righteous in
   doing, for to love what is lovely is a righteous thing. To make it
   infinitely amiable is a righteous thing to infinite Love: and to love
   it infinitely, being infinitely amiable. For thereby infinite Love doth
   right to itself and its measure: yea, to itself and its object. To
   tender what is amiable is a righteous thing: to hurt it is evil. Love
   therefore is infinitely righteous in being infinitely tender of its
   object's welfare: and in hating infinitely the sin of hurting it. It is
   righteous in commanding others to promote it, and in punishing those
   that injure or offend it. And thus have you a Gate, in the prospect
   even of this world, whereby you may see into God's Kingdom. For by His
   works you see that God is Love, and: by His Love see the nature of all
   righteousness opened and unfolded: with the ground and foundations of
   rewards and punishments.


   28

      But God being infinite is infinitely righteous. His love therefore
   is righteous to itself and all its works as well as its object. To
   itself in requiring that it be infinitely esteemed, of which it is
   infinitely desirous. The contemners of it therefore it infinitely
   punisheth. To its works not only in making them the best that may be,
   but in requiring an exact and due esteem, from the enjoyers of them. Is
   not Love jealous of the honour of its gifts? Doth not a contempt of its
   presents, rebound upon itself? The world therefore serveth you
   abundantly in teaching you your duty. They daily cry in a living
   manner, with a silent and yet most loud voice, We are all His gifts: We
   are tokens and presents of His Love. You must therefore esteem us
   according to the beauty and worth that is in us, and the Love from
   whence we came. Which to do, is certainly the most blessed thing in all
   worlds, as not to do it is most wicked and most miserable.


   29

       Love further manifests itself in joining righteousness and
   blessedness together: for wherein can Love appear more than in making
   our duty most blessed. Which here is done by making obedience the
   fruition of one's blessedness. God cannot therefore but be infinitely
   provoked, when we break His laws. Not only because Love is jealous and
   cruel as the grave, but because also our duty being so amiable, which
   it imposeth on us with infinite obligations, they are all despised: His
   Love itself, our most beautiful duty and all its obligations. So that
   His wrath must be very heavy, and His indignation infinite.


   30

       Yet Love can forbear, and Love can forgive, though it can never be
   reconciled to an unlovely object. And, hence it is that though you have
   so little considered the Works of God, and prized His Love; yet you are
   permitted to live: and live at ease, and enjoy your pleasure. But Love
   can never be reconciled to  an unlovely object, and you are infinitely
   unlovely by despising God and His Love so long. Yea, one act only of
   despite done to the smallest creature made you infinitely deformed.
   What shall become of you therefore since God cannot be reconciled to an
   ugly object? Verily you are in danger of perishing eternally. He cannot
   indeed be reconciled to an ugly object as it is ugly, but as it is
   capable of being otherwise He may. He can never therefore be reconciled
   to your sin, because sin itself is incapable of being altered: but He
   may be reconciled to your person, because that maybe restored and,
   which is an infinite wonder, to greater beauty and splendour than
   before.


   31

      By how much the greater His love was, by so much the greater may His
   sorrow be at the loss of His object: and by so much the greater His
   desire also of its restoration. His Love therefore being infinite, may
   do infinite things for an object infinitely valued. Being infinite in
   Wisdom, it is able also to devise a way inscrutable to us, whereby to
   sever the sin from the sinner and to satisfy its righteousness in
   punishing the transgression, yet satisfy itself in saving the
   transgressor: And to purge away the dross and incorporated filth and
   leprosy of sin: restoring the Soul to its primitive beauty, health, and
   glory. But then it doth this at an infinite expense, wherein also it is
   more delighted, and especially magnified, for it giveth Another equally
   dear unto itself to suffer in its stead. And thus we come again by the
   Works of God to our Lord JESUS CHRIST.


   32

      Whoever suffereth innocently and justly in another's stead, must
   become a surety by his voluntary act. And this an Angel or a Cherubim
   might have done. He might also perhaps have suffered an infinite
   punishment in the removal of that Love of God which he infinitely
   prized: and perhaps also he might have paid an obedience which he owed
   not. For the Angels are bound to love God with all their might, and men
   as themselves, while they are innocent: and to live by loving them in
   their blessedness and glory; yet they are not bound by virtue of this
   law to die for men being wicked and deformed; and therefore in
   undertaking this might have undertaken more than was their duty: and
   perhaps loving God infinitely, (had they seen His love to man) they
   would. Yea, perhaps also they might have suffered in our nature; and
   been able to have sustained infinite wrath; which are all the
   conditions usually reckoned up and numbered by Divines, as requisite in
   a Mediator and Redeemer of others. For they might have been
   hypostatically united to our nature, and though they were creatures,
   yet Almighty Power can sustain a creature under as great a punishment
   as Almighty Power can inflict. Almighty Power upholding it being like
   the nether millstone, and Almighty Power punishing like the upper
   millstone, between which two it is infinitely tormented. We must
   therefore search higher into the causes of our Saviour's prelation
   above them.


   33

      One great cause why no Angel was admitted to this office, was
   because it was an honour infinitely too great and sublime for them, God
   accounting none but His own Son worthy of that dignity. Wherefore, it
   is written, no man taketh this honour to himself, but He that is called
   of God, as was Aaron. Neither did Jesus (though He were the Son of God)
   make Himself an High Priest, but He that said unto Him, Thou art a
   priest for ever after the order of Melchisedec. Nor yet was it forced
   or imposed upon Him, but He voluntarily undertook it. For which cause
   God hath highly exalted Him, and given Him a name which is above every
   name in Heaven and Earth, because being in the form of God, he thought
   it not robbery to be equal with God, yet took upon Him the form of a
   servant, and being found in the fashion of a man would humble Himself
   to the Death of the Cross for our sakes.

   Where we learn several strange and admirable things: First, how high an
   honour it is to suffer for God in this world: Secondly, in what an
   infinite dignity man is exalted for whom God counted none worthy to
   suffer but His own Son: And thirdly the equity of God's proceeding in
   chastising another for our sins: (against the Socinians who, being
   blind in this mystery, are the enemies of our Saviour's Deity in this
   world.) For had He imposed this task upon one that was unwilling, it
   had been injustice: had He imposed it upon one that was unable to
   perform it, it had been folly: had He imposed it upon any one to his
   harm, cruelty; but laying it upon one that was willing and able, to His
   highest benefit, it was righteousness, wisdom, and glory. All mercy
   goodness and love on every side.


   34

      How vile are they, and blind and ignorant, that will not see every
   one to be the heir of the world, for whose sake all this was done! He
   that spared not His own Son but gave Him up for us all, how shall He
   not with Him also freely give us all things? Is not he an object of
   infinite Love for whom our Saviour died? Shall not all things in Heaven
   and Earth serve him in splendour and glory, for whom the Son of God
   came down to minister in agonies and sufferings? O here contemplate the
   glory of man, and his high exaltation in the Throne of God. Here
   consider how you are beloved, and be transported with excess of joy at
   this wonderful mystery. Leave the trash and vanities of the world, to
   live here in communion with the blessed Trinity. Imitate St. Paul who
   counted all things but dross and dung, for the excellency of the
   knowledge of God in Christ. And thus the Works of God serve you in
   teaching you the knowledge of our Lord and Saviour.


   35

      Another reason for which our Redemption was denied to Angels and
   reserved only to be wrought by our Saviour, is the dignity of Man; for
   the redemption of their Soul is precious and it ceaseth forever. None
   of them can by any means redeem him, nor give to God a ransom for him.
   Having sinned, he must be clothed in the righteousness of God or perish
   for ever. All the Angels and Cherubims in Heaven, though their
   righteousness should be imputed to him could not justify him. No
   created righteousness is able to cover him, the exceeding glory of his
   primitive estate being so great, that it made his sin infinitely
   infinite.


   36

        Yet further, another reason why this office was delegated to none
   of them, was this: He that died for us must by his own merits save us.
   Being therefore our Saviour was to merit for us, by His own actions, it
   was necessary that He should be such an one, who, by His own power,
   could sustain infinite punishments, and offer them up to God on our
   behalf with infinite Love as a voluntary obedience. Which only Christ
   was able to do out of the treasury of His own fullness. For the divine
   essence in Him could overcome infinite punishments, and infinitely love
   the Inflicter of them: without any repining, despondency, or hatred,
   returned for the same. Where it is curious to observe, how fully our
   Saviour satisfied for us. We hated God when He loved us: our Saviour
   not only loved God, while God loved Him but loved Him also with
   infinite love, even while He expressed hatred against Him.


   37

      Finally another reason was the dignity of our Saviour's person, who,
   being infinitely more excellent than all Angels, was, in His
   condescentions infinitely more acceptable. Which excellency both of His
   person and condescention is not a little magnified by His Eternity. By
   His sufferings He brought in eternal righteousness. That He should
   stoop down for our sakes was infinitely meritorious. And since the Will
   before God is the Highest Deed: accepting this from all Eternity, it is
   as if from all Eternity He had suffered for us. His love to God and
   man, in this Act was infinite and eternal. And therefore is it said,
   that He through the Eternal Spirit, offered up Himself a sacrifice to
   God for us. His Eternal Spirit from everlasting offered up itself, when
   He said, Lo, I come in the volume of the Book is it written of me: to
   do Thy will, O God; and He offered up Himself through the Eternal
   Spirit in time when He was slain upon the Cross. Now no creature can
   offer up itself eternally, because it was not from everlasting. Nor can
   anything work Eternal Righteousness for us, but God alone.


   38

        How then should we be saved? since eternal righteousness must be
   paid for our temporal iniquity since one must suffer by His own
   strength on our behalf; and out of His own fullness defray our debt of
   infinite charity, and that in the midst of sufferings; which no Angel
   or Seraphin is able: Since He must pay an obedience which He did not
   owe: both in loving men when themselves were hateful, and in loving God
   when He was hated of Him: since none but God could do this, and it was
   inconvenient for God to do it: whither shall we fly for refuge? Verily,
   we are in a great strait: but in the midst of these exigencies Love
   prepareth for itself an offering. One mighty to save, concerning whom
   it is written, This day have I begotten Thee.


   39

        God by loving begot His Son. For God is Love, and by loving He
   begot His Love. He is of Himself, and by loving He is what He is,
   INFINITE LOVE. God is not a mixt and compounded Being, so that His Love
   is one thing and Himself another: but the most pure and simple of all
   Beings, all Act, and pure Love in the abstract. Being Love therefore
   itself, by loving He begot His Love. Had He not Loved, He had not been
   what He now is, The God of Love, the most righteous of all beings, in
   being infinitely righteous to Himself, and all. But by loving He is
   infinitely righteous to Himself and all. For He is of Himself,
   Infinitely Blessed and most Glorious; and all His creatures are of Him,
   in whom they are infinitely delighted and Blessed and Glorious.


   40

       In all Love there is a love begetting, and a love begotten, and a
   love proceeding. Which though they are one in essence subsist
   nevertheless in three several manners. For love is benevolent affection
   to another: Which is of itself, and by itself relateth to its object.
   It floweth from itself and resteth in its object. Love proceedeth of
   necessity from itself, for unless it be of itself it is not Love.
   Constraint is destructive and opposite to its nature. The Love from
   which it floweth is the fountain of Love. The Love which streameth from
   it, is the communication of Love, or Love communicated. The Love which
   resteth in the object is the Love which streameth to it. So that in all
   Love, the Trinity is clear. By secret passages without stirring it
   proceedeth to its object, and is as powerfully present as if it did not
   proceed at all. The Love that lieth in the bosom of the Lover, being
   the love that is perceived in the spirit of the Beloved: that is, the
   same in substance, tho' in the manner of substance, or subsistence,
   different. Love in the bosom is the parent of Love, Love in the stream
   is the effect of Love, Love seen, or dwelling in the object proceedeth
   from both. Yet are all these, one and the Selfsame Love: though three
   Loves.


   41

      Love in the fountain and Love in the stream are both the same. And
   therefore are they both equal in Time and Glory. For love
   cominunicateth itself: And therefore love in the fountain is the very
   love communicated to its object. Love in the fountain is love in the
   stream, and love in the stream equally glorious with love in the
   fountain. Though it streameth to its object it abideth in the lover,
   and is the love of the lover.


   42

        Where Love is the Lover, Love streaming from the Lover, is the
   Lover; the Lover streaming from himself, and existing in another
   Person.


   43

        This Person is the Son of God: who as He is the Wisdom of the
   Father, so is He the Love of the Father, For the Love of the Father is
   the Wisdom of the Father. And this Person did God by loving us, beget,
   that He might be the means of all our glory.


   44

        This Person differs in nothing, from the Father, but only in this
   that He is begotten of Him. He is Eternal with the Father, as glorious
   and as intelligent. He is of the same mind in everything in all worlds,
   loveth the same objects in as infinite a measure. Is the means by which
   the Father loveth, acteth, createth, redeemeth, governeth, and
   perfecteth all things. And the means also by which we see and love the
   Father: our strength and our eternity. He is the Mediator between God
   and His creatures. God therefore being willing to redeem us by His own
   blood, ( Acts 20 ) by Him redeemed us, and in His person died for us.


   45

      How wonderful is it that God by being Love should prepare a Redeemer
   to die for us? But how much more wonderful, that by this means Himself
   should be, and be God by being Love! By this means also He refineth our
   nature, and enableth us to purge out the poison and the filthy plague
   of Sin. For love is so amiable and desirable to the Soul that it cannot
   be resisted: Love is the Spirit of God. In Himself it is the Father, or
   else the Son, for the Father is in the Son, and the Son is in the
   Father: In us it is the Holy Ghost. The Love of God being seen, being
   God in us: Purifying, illuminating, strengthening, and comforting the
   soul of the seer. For God by spewing communicateth Himself to men and
   angels. And when He dwelleth in the soul, dwelleth in the sight. And
   when He dwelleth in the sight achieving all that love can do for such a
   soul. And thus the world serveth you as it is a mirror wherein you
   contemplate the Blessed Trinity. For it plainly sheweth that God is
   Love, and in His being Love you see the unity of the Blessed Trinity,
   and a glorious Trinity in the Blessed Unity.


   46

        In all Love there is some Producer, some Means, and some End: all
   these being internal in the thing itself. Love loving is the Producer,
   and that is the Father Love produced is the Means, and that is the Son
   For Love is the means by which a lover loveth. The End of these Means
   is Love: for it is love by loving: and that is the Holy Ghost. The End
   and the Producer being both the same, by the Means attained. For by
   loving Love attaineth itself and being. The Producer is attained by
   loving, and is the End of Himself. That Love is the end of itself, and
   that God loveth that He might be Love, is as evident to him that
   considers spiritual things, as the Sun. Because it is impossible there
   should be a higher end, or a better proposed. What can be more
   desirable than the most delightful operation; what more eligible, than
   the most glorious being; what further can be proposed than the most
   blessed and perfect life? Since God therefore chooseth the most perfect
   life, what can be more perfect than that life and that Being which is
   at once the Fountain, and the End of all things? There being in it the
   perpetual joy of giving and receiving infinite treasures. To be the
   Fountain of joys and blessings is delightful. And by being Love God is
   the Fountain of all worlds. To receive all and to be the End of all is
   equally delightful, and by being Love God receiveth, and is the End of
   all. For all the benefits that are done unto all, by loving all,
   Himself receiveth: What good could Heaven and Earth do Him, were it not
   for His Love to the children of men? By being what He is, which is Love
   unto all, He enjoyeth all.


   47

       What life can be more pleasant, than that which is delighted in
   itself, and in all objects; in which also all objects infinitely
   delight? What life can be more pleasant, than that which is blessed in
   all, and glorious before all? Now this life is the life of Love. For
   this end therefore did He desire to Love, that He might be Love.
   Infinitely delightful to all objects, infinitely delighted in all, and
   infinitely pleased in Himself, for being infinitely delightful to all,
   and delighted in all. All this He attaineth by Love. For Love is the
   most delightful of all employments. All the objects of Love are
   delightful to it, and Love is delightful to all its objects. Well then
   may Love be the end of loving, which is so complete. It being a thing
   so delightful, that God infinitely rejoiceth in Himself for being Love.
   And thus you see how God is the end of Himself. He doth what He doth,
   that He may be what He is. Wise and glorious and bountiful and blessed
   in being Perfect Love.


   48

       Love is so divine and perfect a thing, that it is worthy to be the
   very end and being of the Deity. It is His goodness, and it is His
   glory. We therefore so vastly, delight in Love, because all these
   excellencies and all other whatsoever lie within it. By Loving a Soul
   does propagate and beget itself. By Loving it does dilate and magnify
   itself. By Loving it does enlarge and delight itself. By Loving also it
   delighteth others, as by Loving it doth honour and enrich itself. But
   above all by Loving it does attain itself. Love also being the end of
   Souls, which are never perfect till they are in act what they are in
   power. They were made to love, and are dark and vain and comfortless
   till they do it. Till they love they are idle, or misemployed. Till
   they love they are desolate; without their objects, and narrow and
   little, and dishonourable: but when they shine by Love upon all
   objects, they are accompanied with them and enlightened by them. Till
   we become therefore all Act as God is, we can never rest, nor ever be
   satisfied.


   49

        Love is so noble that it enjoyeth others' enjoyments, delighteth
   in giving all unto its object, and in seeing all given to its object.
   So that whosoever loveth all mankind, he enjoyeth all the goodness of
   God to the whole world: and endeavoureth the benefit of Kingdoms and
   Ages, with all whom He is present by Love, which is the best manner of
   presence that is possible.


   50

      God is present by Love alone. By Love alone He is great and
   glorious. By Love alone He liveth and feeleth in other persons. By Love
   alone He enjoyeth all the creatures, by Love alone He is pleasing to
   Himself, by love alone He is rich and blessed. O why dost not thou by
   Love alone seek to achieve all these, by Love alone attain another
   self, by Love alone live in others, by Love attain thy glory? The Soul
   is shrivelled up and buried in a grave that does not Love. But that
   which does love wisely and truly is the joy and end of all the world,
   the King of Heaven, and the Friend of God, the shining Light and Temple
   of Eternity: The Brother of Christ Jesus, and one Spirit with the Holy
   Ghost.


   51

      Love is a far more glorious Being than flesh and bones. If thou wilt
   it is endless, and infinitely more sweet than thy body can be to thee
   and others. Thy body is confined, and is a dull lump of heavy clay, by
   which thou art retarded, rather than dost move: It was given thee to be
   a lantern only to the candle of Love that shineth in thy Soul; by it
   thou dost see and feel and eat and drink: but the end of all is that
   thou mightest be as God is: a joy and blessing by being Love. Thy Love
   is illimited. Thy Love can extend to all objects. Thy Love can see God
   and accompany His Love throughout all Eternity. Thy Love is infinitely
   profitable to thyself and others. To thyself, for thereby mayest thou
   receive infinite good things. To others, for thereby thou art prone to
   do infinite good to all. Thy body can receive but few pleasures. Thy
   Love can feed upon all: take into itself all worlds, and all Eternities
   above all worlds and all the joys of God before and after. Thy flesh
   and bones can do but little good: nor that little unless as by Love it
   is inspired and directed. A poor carcase thy body is; but love is
   delightful and profitable to thousands. O live therefore by the more
   noble part. Be like Him who baptizeth with fire. Feel thy spirit,
   awaken thy Soul, be an enlarged Seraphim, an infinite Good, or like
   unto Him.


   52

      The true WAY we may go unto His Throne, and can never exceed, nor be
   too high. All hyperboles are but little pigmies, and diminutive
   expressions, in comparison of the Truth. All that Adam could propose to
   himself or hope for was laid up in store for him, in a better way than
   he could ask or think: but in seeking for it a false way he lost all;
   what he had in hope, and what he had in fruition. To be as God, we are
   prompted to desire by the instinct of nature. And that we shall be by
   Loving all that He doth. But by loving Him what, O what, shall we be?
   By loving Him according to the greatness of His love unto us, according
   to His amiableness, as we ought, and according to the obligations that
   lie upon us, we shall be no man can devise what. We shall love Him
   infinitely more than ourselves, and therefore live infinitely more in
   Him than in ourselves, and be infinitely more delighted with His
   Eternal Blessedness than our own. We shall infinitely more delight*____
   than ourselves. All worlds, all Angels, all men, all kingdoms, all
   creatures will be more ours in Him than in ourselves: so will His
   Essence and Eternal Godhead. Oh Love what hast Thou done!


   53

      And He will so love us, when all this beauty of Love is within us,
   that though we by our love to Him seem more blessed in His blessedness
   than He, He is infinitely more blessed than we even in our blessedness.
   We being so united to each other by living in each other that nothing
   can divide us for evermore.


   54

        Love is infinitely delightful to its object, and the more violent
   the more glorious. It is infinitely high, nothing can hurt it. And
   infinitely great in all extremes of beauty and excellency. Excess is
   its true moderation: Activity its rest: and burning fervency its only
   refreshment. Nothing is more glorious, yet nothing more humble. Nothing
   more precious, yet nothing more cheap. Nothing more familiar, yet
   nothing so inaccessible. Nothing more nice, yet nothing more laborious.
   Nothing more liberal, yet nothing more


   *There is a word here which I cannot decipher.

   covetous. It doth all things for its object's sake, yet it is the most
   self-ended thing in the whole world; for of all things in nature it can
   least endure to be displeased. Since therefore it containeth so many
   miracles it may well contain this one more, that it maketh every one
   greatest, and among lovers every one is supreme and sovereign.


   55

      God by Love wholly ministereth to others, and yet wholly ministereth
   to Himself, Love having this wonder in it also, that among innumerable
   millions, it maketh every one the sole and single end of all things: It
   attaineth all unattainables; and achieveth impossibles, that is,
   seeming impossibles to our inexperience, and real impossibles to any
   other means or endeavours. For indeed it maketh every one more than the
   end of all things: and infinitely more than the sole supreme and
   sovereign of all. For it maketh him so first in himself: and then in
   all. For while all things in Heaven and Earth fall out after my desire,
   I am the end and sovereign of all: which conspiring always to crown my
   friends with glory and happiness, and pleasing all in the same manner
   whom I love as myself: I am in every one of them the end of all things
   again: being as much concerned in their happiness as my own.


   56

        By Loving a Soul does propagate and beget itself, because before
   it loved it lived only in itself: after it loved, and while it loveth
   it liveth in its object. Nay, it did not so much as live in itself,
   before it loved. For as the sun would be unseen, and buried in itself,
   did it not scatter, and spread abroad its beams, by which alone it
   becometh glorious: so the Soul without extending, and living in its
   object, is dead within itself: An idle chaos of blind and confused
   powers, for which when it loveth, it gaineth Three Subsistences in
   itself by the Act of Loving: A glorious Spirit that abideth within, a
   glorious Spirit that floweth in the stream: A glorious Spirit that
   resideth in the object. Insomuch that now it can enjoy a sweet
   communion with itself: in contemplating what it is in itself, and to
   its object.


   57

      Love is so vastly delightful in the Lover, because it is the
   communication of His Goodness. For the natural end of Goodness is to be
   enjoyed: it desireth to be another's happiness. Which Goodness of God
   is so deeply implanted in our natures, that we never enjoy ourselves
   but when we are the joy of others. Of all our desires the strongest is
   to be good to others. We delight in receiving, more in giving. We love
   to be rich, but then it is that we thereby might be more greatly
   delightful. Thus we see the seeds of Eternity sparkling in our natures.


   58

      Love is so vastly delightful to Him that is Beloved, because it is
   the fountain of all affections, services, and endeavours; a spring of
   honour and liberality, and a secure pledge of future benefits. It is
   the sole title by which we reign in another's bosom, and the only
   throne by which we are exalted, The body and soul of him that loves is
   his that is beloved, What then can Love deny? All greatness, power and
   dominion, befalleth him that is beloved, in the Soul that loveth him.
   So that while all the glorious creatures in all worlds love you, you
   reign in all Souls, are the image of God, and exalted like God in every
   bosom.


   59

      Though no riches follow, yet we are all naturally delighted with
   Love: both for what we receive, and for what we give. When we are
   beloved we receive the quintessence and glory of another's Soul, the
   End of Heaven and Earth, the cream and flower of all perfections, the
   tribute of God Almighty, peace and welfare, pleasure and honour, help
   and safety, all in readiness. And something infinitely more, and which
   we are not able to express. When we are beloved, we attain the End of
   riches in an immediate manner, and having the end need not regard the
   means. For the end of riches is that we may be beloved. We receive
   power to see ourselves amiable in another's soul; and to delight and
   please another person. For it is impossible to delight a luke-warm
   person, or an alienated affection with giving crowns and sceptres, so
   as we may a person that violently loves us with our very presence and
   affections.


   60

        By this we may discern what strange power God hath given to us by
   loving us infinitely. He giveth us a power more to please Him, than if
   we were able to create worlds and present them unto Him.


   61

        How happy we are that we may live in all, as well as one; and how
   all-sufficient Love is, we may see by this: The more we live in all,
   the more we live in one. For while He seeth us to live in all, we are a
   more great and glorious object unto Him; the more we are beloved of
   all, the more we are admired by Him; the more we are the joy of all,
   the more blessed we are to Him. The more blessed we are to Him, the
   greater is our blessedness. We are all naturally ambitious of being
   magnified in others, and of seeming great in others. Which inclination
   was implanted in us that our happiness might be enlarged by the
   multitude of spectators.


   62

        Love is the true means by which the world is enjoyed: Our love to
   others, and others' love to us. We ought therefore above all things to
   get acquainted with the nature of Love. For Love is the root and
   foundation of nature: Love is the Soul of Life and Crown of rewards. If
   we cannot be satisfied in the nature of Love we can never be satisfied
   at all. The very end for which God made the world, was that He might
   manifest His Love. Unless therefore we can be satisfied with His Love
   so manifested, we can never be satisfied. There are many glorious
   excellencies in the material World, but without Love they are all
   abortive. We might spend ages in contemplating the nature of the sun,
   and entertain ourselves many years with the beauty of the stars, and
   services of the sea: but the Soul of Man is above all these, it
   comprehendeth all ages in a moment; and unless it perceive something
   more excellent, is very desolate. All worlds being but a silent
   wilderness, without some living thing more sweet and blessed after
   which it aspireth. Love in the fountain, and love in the end is the
   glory of the world and the Soul of Joy. Which it infinitely preferreth
   above all worlds, and delighteth in, and loveth to contemplate, more
   than all visible beings that are possible. So that you must be sure to
   see causes wherefore infinitely to be delighted with the Love of God,
   if ever you would be happy.


   63

        See causes also wherefore to be delighted in your love to men, and
   in the love of men to you. For the world serves you to this end, that
   you might love them and be beloved of them. And unless you are pleased
   with the end for which the world serves you, you can never be pleased
   with the means leading to that end. Above all things therefore
   contemplate the glory of loving men, and of being beloved of them. For
   this end our Saviour died, and for this end He came into the world,
   that you might be restored from hatred, which is the greatest misery.
   From the hatred of God and men which was due for sin, and from the
   misery of hating God and men; for to hate and be hated is the greatest
   misery. The necessity of hating God and men being the greatest bondage
   that Hell can impose.


   64

        When you love men, the world quickly becometh yours: and yourself
   become a greater treasure than the world is. For all their persons are
   your treasures, and all the things in Heaven and Earth that serve them,
   are yours. For those are the riches of Love, which minister to its
   Object.


   65

        You are as prone to love, as the sun is to shine; it being the
   most delightful and natural employment of the Soul of Man: without
   which you are dark and miserable. Consider therefore the extent of
   Love, its vigour and excellency, For certainly he that delights not in
   Love makes vain the universe, and is of necessity to himself the
   greatest burden. The whole world ministers to you as the theatre of
   your Love: It sustains you and all objects that you may continue to
   love them. Without which it were better for you to have no being. Life
   without objects is sensible emptiness, and that is a greater misery
   than Death or Nothing. Objects without Love are a delusion of life. The
   Objects of Love are its greatest treasures: and without Love it is
   impossible they should be treasures. For the Objects which we love are
   the pleasing Objects, and delightful things. And whatsoever is not
   pleasing and delightful to you can be no treasure: nay it is
   distasteful, and worse than nothing, since we had rather it should have
   no being.


   66

        That violence wherewith sometimes a man doteth upon one creature,
   is but a little spark of that love, even towards all, which lurketh in
   his nature. We are made to love, both to satisfy the necessity of our
   active nature, and to answer the beauties in every creature. By Love
   our Souls are married and solder'd to the creatures and it is our Duty
   like God to be united to them all. We must love them infinitely, but in
   God, and for God and God in them: namely all His excellencies
   manifested in them. When we dote upon the perfections and beauties of
   some one creature, we do not love that too much, but other things too
   little. Never was anything in this world loved too much, but many
   things have been loved in a false way: and all in too short a measure.


   67

        Suppose a river, or a drop of water, an apple or a sand, an ear of
   corn, or an herb: God knoweth infinite exellencies in it more than we:
   He seeth how it relateth to angels and men; how it proceedeth from the
   most perfect Lover to the most perfectly Beloved; how it representeth
   all His attributes; how it conduceth in its place, by the best of means
   to the best of ends: and for this cause it cannot be beloved too much.
   God the Author and God the End is to be beloved in it; Angels and men
   are to be beloved in it; and it is highly to be esteemed for all their
   sakes. O what a treasure is every sand when truly understood! Who can
   love anything that God made too much? What a world would this be, were
   everything beloved as it ought to be!


   68

        Suppose a curious and fair woman. Some have seen the beauties of
   Heaven in such a person. It is a vain thing to say they loved too much.
   I dare say there are ten thousand beauties in that creature which they
   have not seen: They loved it not too much, but upon false causes. Nor
   so much upon false ones, as only upon some little ones. They love a
   creature for sparkling eyes and curled hair, lily breasts and ruddy
   cheeks which they should love moreover for being God's Image, Queen of
   the Universe, beloved by Angels, redeemed by Jesus Christ, an heiress
   of Heaven, and temple of the Holy Ghost: a mine and fountain of all
   virtues, a treasury of graces, and a child of God. But these
   excellencies are unknown. They love her perhaps, but do not love God
   more: nor men as much: nor Heaven and Earth at all. And so, being
   defective to other things, perish by a seeming excess to that. We
   should be all Life and Mettle and Vigour and Love to everything; and
   that would poise us. I dare confidently say that every person in the
   whole world ought to be beloved as much as this: And she if there be
   any cause of difference more than she is. But God being beloved
   infinitely more, will be infinitely more our joy, and our heart will be
   more with Him, so that no man can be in danger by loving others too
   much, that loveth God as he ought.


   69

      The sun and stars please me in ministering to you. They please me in
   ministering to a thousand others as well as you. And you please me
   because you can live and love in the Image of God: not in a blind and
   brutish manner, as beasts do; by a mere appetite and rude propensity,
   but with a regulated well-ordered Love, upon clear causes, and with a
   rational affection, guided to divine and celestial ends. Which is to
   love with a Divine and Holy Love, Glorious and Blessed. We are all
   prone to love; but the art lies in managing our love: to make it truly
   amiable and proportionable. To love for God's sake, and to this end,
   that we may be well-pleasing unto Him: to love with a design to imitate
   Him, and to satisfy the principles of intelligent nature, and to become
   honorable, is to love in a Blessed and Holy manner.


   70

        In one soul we may be entertained and taken up with innumerable
   beauties. But in the Soul of Man there are innumerable infinities. One
   soul in the immensity of its intelligence, is greater and more
   excellent than the whole world. The Ocean is but the drop of a bucket
   to it, the Heavens but a centre, the Sun obscurity, and all Ages but as
   one day. It being by its understanding a Temple of Eternity, and God's
   omnipresence, between which and the whole world there is no proportion.
   Its Love is a dominion greater than that which Adam had in Paradise:
   and yet the fruition of it is but solitary. We need spectators, and
   other diversities of friends and lovers, in whose souls we might
   likewise dwell, and with whose beauties we might be crowned and
   entertained. In all whom we can dwell exactly, and be present with them
   fully. Lest therefore the other depths and faculties of our souls
   should be desolate and idle, they also are created to entertain us. And
   as in many mirrors we are so many other selves, so are we spiritually
   multiplied when we meet ourselves more sweetly, and live again in other
   persons.


   71

      Creatures are multiplied, that our treasures may be multiplied, and
   their places enlarged, that the territories of our joys might be
   enlarged. With all which our souls may be present in immediate manner.
   For since the Sun which is a poor little dead thing, can at once shine
   upon many kingdoms, and be wholly present, not only in many cities and
   realms upon earth, but in all the stars in the firmament of Heaven;
   surely the soul which is a far more perfect sun, nearer unto God in
   excellency and nature, can do far more. But that which of all wonders
   is the most deep and incredible is, that a soul, whereas one would
   think it could measure but one soul, which is as large as it: can
   exceed that, and measure all souls, wholly and fully. This is an
   infinite wonder indeed. For admit that the powers of one soul were
   fathomless and infinite: are not the powers so also of another? One
   would think therefore that one soul should be lost in another: and that
   two souls should be exactly adequate. Yet indeed my soul can examine
   and search all the chambers and endless operations of another: being
   prepared to see innumerable millions.


   72

        Here is a glorious creature! But that which maketh the wonder
   infinitely infinite, is this: That one soul, which is the object of
   mine, can see all souls, and all the secret chambers, and endless
   perfections in every soul: yea, and all souls with all their objects in
   every soul: Yet mine can accompany all these in one soul and without
   deficiency exceed that soul and accompany all these in every other
   soul. Which shows the work of God to be deep and infinite.


   73

        Here upon Earth perhaps where our estate is imperfect this is
   impossible: but in Heaven where the soul is all Act it is necessary:
   for the soul is there all that it can be: Here it is to rejoice in what
   it may be. Till therefore the mists of error, and clouds of ignorance,
   that confine this sun be removed, it must be present in all kingdoms
   and ages virtually, as the Sun is by night, if not by clear sight and
   love, at least by its desire. Which are its influences and its beams,
   working in a latent and obscure manner on earth, above in a strong and
   clear.


   74

        The world serveth you therefore, in maintaining all people in all
   kingdoms, which are the Father's treasures, and your as yet invisible
   joys, that their multitudes at last may come to Heaven, and make those
   innumerable thousands, whose hosts and employments will be your joy.
   Whose order, beauty, melody, and glory will be your eternal delights.
   And of whom you have many a sweet description in the Revelation. These
   are they of whom it is said: After this I beheld, and lo, a great
   multitude which no man could number, of all nations and kindred and
   people and tongues stood before the Throne and before the Lamb, clothed
   with white robes and palms in their hands, and they cried with a loud
   voice, saying, Salvation to our God which sitteth upon the Throne, and
   to the Lamb: of which it is said, They fell down before the Lamb,
   having every one of them harps and golden vials full of odors which are
   the prayers of the Saints, and they sung a new song saying Thou art
   worthy to take the Book, and to open the Seals thereof: for Thou wast
   slain, and hast redeemed us to God by Thy blood, out of every kindred,
   and tongue, and people, and nation, and hast made us unto our God Kings
   and Priests. Of whom it is said, I saw a sea of glass, and they, that
   had gotten the victory over the Beast standing on it, and they sing the
   song of Moses the servant of God, and the song of the Lamb, saying,
   Great and marvellous are Thy works, Lord God Almighty, just and true
   are Thy ways Thou King of Saints. Who shall not fear Thee, O Lord, and
   glorify Thy name. For Thou only art holy; for all Nations shall came
   and worship before Thee, because Thy judgments are made manifest.


   75

        That all the powers of your Soul shall be turned into Act in the
   Kingdom of Heaven is manifest by what Saint John writeth, in the Isle
   Patmos: And I beheld and I heard the voice of many Angels round about
   the throne: and the Beasts and the Elders, and the number of them was
   ten thousand times ten thousand, and thousands of thousands: Saying,
   with a loud voice, Worthy is the Lamb that was slain, to receive power,
   and riches, and wisdom, and strength and honour, and glory, and
   blessing, And every creature which is in Heaven and on Earth, and under
   the earth, and such as are in the Sea, And all that are in them, heard
   I saying, Blessing, and Honour, and Glory, and Power, be unto Him that
   sitteth upon the Throne and unto the Lamb for ever and ever.


   76

        These things shall never be seen with your bodily eyes, but in a
   more perfect manner: You shall be present with them in your
   understanding. You shall be in them to the very centre and they in you.
   As light is in a piece of crystal, so shall you be with every part and
   excellency of them. An Act of the understanding is the presence of the
   Soul, which being no body but a living Act, is a pure spirit and
   mysteriously fathomless in its true dimensions. By an act of the
   understanding therefore be present now with all the creatures among
   which you live; and hear them in their beings and operations praising
   God in an heavenly manner. Some of them vocally, others in their
   ministry all of them naturally and continually. We infinitely wrong
   ourselves by laziness and confinement. All creatures in all nations,
   and tongues, and people praise God infinitely; and the more, for being
   your sole and perfect treasures. You are never what you ought till you
   go out of yourself and walk among them.


   77

        Were all your riches here in some little place: all other places
   would be empty. It is necessary therefore for your contentment and true
   satisfaction, that your riches be dispersed everywhere. Whether is more
   delightful; to have some few private riches in one, and all other
   places void; or to have all places everywhere filled with our proper
   treasures? Certainly to have treasures in all places. For by that means
   we are entertained everywhere with pleasures, are everywhere at home
   honored and delighted, everywhere enlarged and in our own possessions.
   But to have a few riches in some narrow bounds, though we should
   suppose a kingdom full, would be to have our delights limited, and
   infinite spaces dark and empty, wherein we might wander without
   satisfaction. So that God must of necessity to satisfy His love give us
   infinite treasures. And we of necessity seek for our riches in all
   places.


   78

        The Heavens and the Earth serve you, not only in shewing unto you
   your Father's Glory, as all things without you are your riches and
   enjoyments, but as within you also, they magnify, beautify and
   illuminate your soul. For as the Sun-beams illuminate the air and all
   objects, yet are themselves also illuminated by them, so fareth it with
   the powers of your soul. The rays of the sun carry light in them as
   they pass through the air, but go on in vain till they meet an object:
   and there they are expressed. They illuminate a mirror, and are
   illuminated by it. For a looking-glass without them would be in the
   dark, and they without the glass unperceived. There they revive and
   overtake themselves, and represent the effigies from whence they came;
   both of the sun and heavens; and trees and mountains, if the glass be
   seated conveniently to receive them. Which were it not that the glass
   were present there, one would have thought even the ideas of them
   absent from the place. Even so your soul in its rays and powers is
   unknown: and no man would believe it present everywhere, were there no
   objects there to be discerned. Your thoughts and inclinations pass on
   and are unperceived, but by their objects are discerned to be present:
   being illuminated by them. For they are present with them and active
   about them. They receive and feel themselves, and by those objects live
   in employment, being turned into the figure and idea of them. For as
   light varieth upon all objects whither it cometh, and returneth with
   the form and figure of them: so is the soul transformed into the Being
   of its object. Like light from the Sun, its first effigies is simple
   life, the pure resemblance of its primitive fountain, but on the object
   which it meeteth it is quickly changed, and by understanding becometh
   all Things.


   79

        Objective treasures are always delightful: and though we travail
   endlessly, to see them all our own is infinitely pleasant and the
   further we go the more delightful. If they are all ours wholly and
   solely, and yet nevertheless every one's too, it is the most delightful
   accident that is imaginable, for thereby two contrary humours are at
   once delighted, and two inclinations, that are both in our natures, yet
   seem contradictory, are at once satisfied. The one is the avaricious
   humour and love of propriety, whereby we refer all unto ourselves and
   naturally desire to have all alone in our private possession, and to be
   the alone and single end of all things. This we perceive ourselves
   because all universally and everywhere is ours. The other is the
   communicative humour that is in us, whereby we desire to have
   companions in our enjoyments to tell our joys, and to spread abroad our
   delights, and to be ourselves the joy and delight of other persons. For
   thousands enjoy all as well as we, and are the end of all: and God
   communicateth all to them as well as us. And yet to us alone, because
   He communicateth them to us, and maketh them our rich and glorious
   companions: to whom we may tell our joys, and be blessed again. How
   much ought we to praise God, for satisfying two such insatiable humours
   that are contrary to each other! One would think it impossible that
   both should be pleased, and yet His Divine Wisdom hath made them
   helpful and perfective to each other.


   80

       Infinite Love cannot be expressed in finite room: but must have
   infinite places wherein to utter and shew itself. It must therefore
   fill all Eternity and the Omnipresence of God with joys and treasures
   for my fruition. And yet it must be expressed in a finite room by
   making me able in a centre to enjoy them. It must be infinitely exprest
   in the smallest moment by making me able in every moment to see them
   all. It is both ways infinite, for my Soul is an infinite sphere in a
   centre. By this way you know that you are infinitely beloved: God hath
   made your spirit a centre in eternity comprehending all, and filled all
   about you in an endless manner with infinite riches: which shine before
   you and surround you with Divine and Heavenly enjoyments.


   81

        Few will believe the soul to be infinite: yet infinite* is the
   first thing which is naturally known. Bounds and limits are discerned
   only in a secondary manner. Suppose a man were born deaf and blind. By
   the very feeling of his soul, he apprehends infinite about him,
   infinite space, infinite darkness. He thinks not of wall and limits
   till he feels them and is stopped by them. That things are finite
   therefore we learn by our senses. But infinity we know and feel by our
   souls: and feel it so naturally, as if it were the very


   *(?)Infinity.

   essence and being of the soul. The truth of it is, it is individually
   in the soul: for God is there, and more near to us than we are to
   ourselves. So that we cannot feel our souls, but we must feel Him, in
   that first of properties, infinite space. And this we know so
   naturally, that it is the only primo et necessario cognitum in rerum
   naturâ: of all things the only first and most necessarily known. For we
   can unsuppose Heaven, and Earth and annihilate the world in our
   imagination, but the place where they stood will remain behind, and we
   cannot unsuppose or annihilate that, do what we can. Which without us
   is the chamber of our infinite treasures, and within us the repository
   and recipient of them.


   82

        What shall we render unto God for this infinite space in our
   understandings? Since in giving us this He hath laid the foundation of
   infinite blessedness, manifested infinite love, and made us in capacity
   infinite creatures, In this He hath glorified and gratified infinite
   goodness exerted infinite power and made Himself thereby infinitely
   delightful, and infinitely great, in being Lord and Upholder of such
   infinite creatures. For being wholly everywhere, His omnipresence was
   wholly in every centre: and He could do no more than that would bear:
   Communicate Himself wholly in every centre. His nature and essence
   being the foundation of His power, and of our happiness: of His glory
   and our greatness: of His goodness, and our satisfaction. For we could
   never believe that He loved us infinitely unless He exerted all His
   power. For kata Dunamin (kata dunamin) one of the principal properties
   of Love: as well as ekeinou eneka (ekeinou eneka). To the utmost of its
   power, as well as for His sake.


   83

        He therefore hath not only made us infinite treasures only in
   extent: and souls infinite to see and enjoy them, which is to measure
   and run parallel with them but in depth also they are everywhere
   infinite being infinite in excellency. And the soul is a miraculous
   abyss of infinite abysses, an undrainable ocean, an unexhausted
   fountain of endless oceans, when it will exert itself to fill and
   fathom them. For if it were otherwise man is a creature of such noble
   principles and severe expectations, that could he perceive the least
   defect to be in the Deity, it would infinitely displease him: The
   smallest distaste, spreading like a cloud from a hand over all the
   Heavens. Neither will any pretence serve the turn to cover our
   cowardice, which we call modesty, in not daring to say or expect this
   of the Deity. Unless we expect this with infinite ardency, we are a
   lazy kind of creatures good for nothing. Tis man's holiness and glory
   to desire absolute perfection in God, with a jealousy and care
   infinitely cruel: for when we so desire it, that without this we should
   be infinitely displeased, and altogether lost and desperate forever:
   finding God to have exceeded all our desires: it becometh the
   foundation of infinite Love. In the fruition of the fruits of which we
   are to live in communion with Him for evermore.


   [Between 83 and 84 in the original MS. the following is written:]

   Space perfects its stature

   Affections its colors

   Objects its lineaments

   Actions its graces.


   84

        Your soul being naturally very dark, and deformed and empty when
   extended through infinite but empty space, the world serves you in
   beautifying and filling it with amiable ideas; for the perfecting of
   its stature in the eye of God. For the thorough understanding of which
   you must know, that God is a being whose power from all Eternity was
   prevented with Act. And that He is one infinite Act of KNOWLEDGE and
   WISDOM, which is infinitely beautified with many consequences of Love
   &c. Being one Act of Eternal Knowledge, He knows all which He is able
   to know, all objects in all worlds being seen in His understanding, His
   greatness is the presence of His soul with all objects in infinite
   spaces: and His brightness the light of Eternal Wisdom. His essence
   also is the Light of Things. For He is all eye and all ear. Being
   therefore perfect, and the mirror of all perfection, He hath commanded
   us to be perfect as He is perfect. And we are to grow up into Him till
   we are filled with the fulness of His Godhead. We are to be conformed
   to the Image of His glory: till we become the resemblance of His great
   exemplar. Which we then are, when our power is converted into Act, and
   covered with it, we being an Act of KNOWLEDGE and WISDOM as He is: When
   our Souls are present with all objects, and beautified with the ideas
   and figures of them all. For then shall we be MENTES as He is MENS. We
   being of the same mind with Him who is an infinite eternal mind. As
   both Plato and Cato with the Apostle, term Him.

   Si Deus est Animus sit pura Mente Colendus.

   If God, as verses say, a Spirit be

   We must in Spirit like the Deity

   Become: we must the Image of His mind

   And union with it, in our Spirit find.

   Heaven and Earth, Angels and Men, God and all things must be contained
   in our souls, that we may become glorious personages, and like unto Him
   in all our actions.


   85

        You know that Love receives a grandeur of value and esteem from
   the greatness of the person, from whom it doth proceed. The love of a
   King is naturally more delightful than the love of a beggar: the love
   of God more excellent than the love of a King. The love of a beautiful
   person is more pleasing than that of one deformed. The love of a wise
   man is far more precious than the love of a fool. When you are so great
   a creature as to fill ages and kingdoms with the beauty of your soul,
   and to reign over them like the Wisdom of the Father filling Eternity
   with Light and Glory, your love shall be acceptable and sweet and
   precious. The world therefore serveth you, not only in furnishing you
   with riches, and making you beautiful, and great and wise, when it is
   rightly used: but in doing that which doth infinitely concern you, in
   making your love precious. For above all things in all worlds you
   naturally desire most violently that your love should be prized: and
   the reason is, because that being the best thing you can do or give,
   all is worthless that you can do besides: and you have no more power
   left to be good, or to please, or to do anything, when once your love
   is despised.


   86

        Since therefore Love does all it is able, to make itself accepted,
   both in increasing its own vehemence, and in adorning the person of the
   Lover: as well as in offering up the most choice and perfect gifts,
   with what care ought you to express your love in beautifying yourself
   with this wisdom, and in making your person acceptable? Especially
   since your person is the greatest gift your love can offer up to God
   Almighty. Clothe yourself with Light as with a garment, when you come
   before Him: put on the greatness of Heaven and Earth, adorn yourself
   with the excellencies of God Himself. When you prepare yourself to
   speak to Him, be all the knowledge and light you are able, as great, as
   clear, and as perfect as is possible. So at length shall you appear
   before God in Sion: and as God converse with God for evermore.


   87

        God hath made it easy to convert our soul into a Thought
   containing Heaven and Earth, not that it should be contemptible because
   it is easy: but done because it is Divine. Which Thought is as easily
   abolished, that by a perpetual influx of life it may be maintained. If
   He would but suspend His power, no doubt but Heaven and Earth would
   straight be abolished, which He upholds in Himself as easily and as
   continually as we do the idea of them in our own mind. Since therefore
   all things depending so continually upon His care and love, the
   perpetual influx of His almighty power is infinitely precious and His
   Life exercised incessantly in the manifestation of Eternal Love, in
   that every moment throughout all generations He continueth without
   failing to uphold all things for us, we likewise ought to show our
   infinite love by upholding Heaven and Earth, Time and Eternity, God and
   all things in our Souls, without wavering or intermission: by the
   perpetual influx of our life. To which we are by the goodness of all
   things infinitely obliged. Once to cease is to draw upon ourselves
   infinite darkness, after we have begun to be so illuminated: for it
   shows a forgetfulness and defect in love, and it is an infinite wonder
   that we are afterward restored.


   88

   [This number is omitted in the original MS.]


   89

        Being that we are here upon Earth turmoiled with cares, and often
   shaken with winds and by disturbances distracted: it is the infinite
   Mercy of God that we are permitted to breathe and be diverted. For all
   the things in Heaven and Earth attend upon us while we ought to answer
   and observe them, by upholding their beauty within: But we are spared
   and God winketh at our defect, all the World attending us while we are
   about some little trifling business. But in the Estate of Glory the
   least intermission would be an eternal apostacy: But there by reason of
   our infinite union with God it is impossible.


   90

        We could easily show that the idea of Heaven and Earth in the Soul
   of Man, is more precious with God than the things themselves and more
   excellent in nature. Which because it will surprise you a little, I
   will. What would Heaven and Earth be worth, were there no spectator, no
   enjoyer? As much therefore as the end is better than the means, the
   thought of the World whereby it is enjoyed is better than the World. So
   is the idea of it in the Soul of Man, better than the World in the
   esteem of God: it being the end of the World, without which Heaven and
   Earth would be in vain. It is better to you, because by it you receive
   the World, and it is the tribute you pay. It more immediately
   beautifies and perfects your nature. How deformed would you be should
   all the World stand about you and you be idle: Were you able to create
   other worlds, God had rather you should think on this. For thereby you
   are united to Him. The sun in your eye is as much to you as the sun in
   the heavens. For by this the other is enjoyed. It would shine on all
   rivers, trees, and beasts in vain to you could you not think upon it.
   The sun in your understanding illuminates your soul, the sun in the
   heavens enlightens the hemisphere. The world within you is an offering
   returned, which is infinitely more acceptable to God Almighty, since it
   came from Him, that it might return unto Him. Wherein the mystery is
   great. For God hath made you able to create worlds in your own mind
   which are more precious unto Him than those which He created; and to
   give and offer up the world unto Him, which is very delightful in
   flowing from Him, but much more in returning to Him. Besides all which
   in its own nature also a Thought of the World, or the World in a
   Thought, is more excellent than the World, because it is spiritual and
   nearer unto God. The material world is dead and feeleth nothing, but
   this spiritual world, though it be invisible, hath all dimensions, and
   is a divine and living Being, the voluntary Act of an obedient Soul.


   91

        Once more, that I might close up this point with an infinite
   wonder: As among divines, it is said, That every moment's preservation
   is a new creation: and therefore blessings continued must not be
   despised, but be more and more esteemed: because every moment's
   preservation is another obligation: even so in the continual series of
   thoughts whereby we continue to uphold the frame of Heaven and Earth in
   the Soul towards God, every thought is another world to the Deity as
   acceptable as the first. Yea, the continuance puts an infinite worth
   and lustre on them. For to be desultory and inconstant is the part of a
   fickle and careless soul, and makes the imagination of it worthless and
   despised. But to continue serious in upholding these thoughts for God's
   sake, is the part of a faithful and loving Soul: which as it thereby
   continues great and honorable with God, so is it thereby Divine and
   Holy: and every act of it of infinite importance: and the continuance
   of its life transcendently esteemed. So that though you can build or
   demolish such worlds as often as you please; yet it infinitely
   concerneth you faithfully to continue them, and wisely to repair them.
   For though to make them suddenly be to a wise man very easy: yet to
   uphold them always is very difficult, a work of unspeakable diligence,
   and an argument of infinite love.


   92

        As it becometh you to retain a glorious sense of the world,
   because the Earth and the Heavens and the Heaven of Heavens are the
   magnificent and glorious territories of God's Kingdom, so are you to
   remember always the unsearchable extent and unlimited greatness of your
   own soul; the length and breadth and depth, and height of your own
   understanding. Because it is the House of God, a Living Temple, and a
   Glorious Throne of the Blessed Trinity: far more magnificent and great
   than the heavens; yea a person that in Union and Communion with God, is
   to see Eternity, to fill His Omnipresence, to possess His greatness, to
   admire His love; to receive His gifts, to enjoy the world, and to live
   in His Image. Let all your actions proceed from a sense of this
   greatness, let all your affections extend to this endless wideness, let
   all your prayers be animated by this spirit and let all your praises
   arise and ascend from this fountain. For you are never your true self,
   till you live by your soul more than by your body, and you never live
   by your soul till you feel its incomparable excellency, and rest
   satisfied and delighted in the unsearchable greatness of its
   comprehension.


   93

        The world does serve you, not only as it is the place and
   receptacle of all your joys, but as it is a great obligation laid upon
   all mankind, and upon every person in all ages to love you as himself;
   as it also magnifieth all your companions, and showeth your heavenly
   Father's glory. Yea, as it exalteth you in the eyes of the illuminate,
   and maketh you to be honored and reverenced by the Holy. For there is
   not a man in the whole world that knows God, or himself, but he must
   honour you. Not only as an Angel or a Cherubim, but as one redeemed by
   the blood of Christ, beloved by all Angels, Cherubims, and Men, an heir
   of the world, and as much greater than the Universe, as he that
   possesseth the house is greater than the house. O what a holy and
   blessed life would men lead, what joys and treasures would they be to
   each other, in what a sphere of excellency would every man move, how
   sublime and glorious would their estate be, how full of peace and quiet
   would the world be, yea of joy and honour, order and beauty, did men
   perceive this of themselves, and had they this esteem for one another!


   94

        As the world serves you by shewing the greatness of God's love to
   you, so doth it serve you as fuel to foment and increase your praises.
   Men's lips are closed because their eyes are blinded: their tongues are
   dumb because their ears are deaf: and there is no life in their mouths,
   because death is in their hearts. But did they all see their Creator's
   glory, which appeareth chiefly in the greatness of His bounty; did they
   all know the blessedness of their estate, O what a place full of joys,
   what an amiable region and territory of praises would the world become;
   yea, what a sphere of light and glory! As no man can breathe out more
   air than he draweth in: so no man can offer up more praises than he
   receiveth benefits, to return in praises. For praises are transformed
   and returning benefits. And therefore doth God so greatly desire the
   Knowledge of Him, because God when He is known is all Love: and the
   praises which He desires are the reflection of His beams which will not
   return till they are apprehended. The world therefore is not only the
   Temple of these praises, and the Altar whereon they are offered, but
   the fuel also that enkindles them, and the very matter that composeth
   them. Which so much the more serves you, because it enkindles a desire
   in you that God should be praised, and moves you to take delight in all
   that praise Him. So that as it incites yours, it gives you an interest
   in others' praises: and is a valley of vision, wherein you see the
   Blessed Sight of all men's praises ascending, and of all God's
   blessings coming down upon them.


   95

        The World serves you, as it teaches you more abundantly to prize
   the love of Jesus Christ. For since the inheritance is so great to
   which you are restored, and no less than the whole world is the benefit
   of your Saviour's Love, how much are you to admire that person that
   redeemed you from the lowest Hell to the fruition of it? Your
   forfeiture was unmeasurable and your Sin infinite, your despair
   insupportable, and your danger eternal: how happy are you therefore,
   that you have so great a Lord, whose love rescued you from the
   extremest misery! Had you seen Adam turned into Hell, and going out of
   this fair mansion which the Lord had given him into everlasting
   torments, or eternal darkness, you would have thought the World a
   glorious place, which was created for him, and the Light of Eden would
   have appeared in greater lustre than it did before: and His love by
   whom he was recovered the greatest jewel. It is a heavenly thing to
   understand His love, and to see it well. Had Adam had no esteem for the
   place to which he was restored he had not valued the benefit of his
   restitution. But now looking upon it with those eyes wherewith noble
   men look upon their territories and palaces, when they are going to
   die, His mercy who died for him, that he after his condemnation might
   return again into his dear enjoyments, maketh Him by whom they were
   purchased the best and greatest of all enjoyments. Darius when he had
   conquered Babylon, by the art of Zopyrus, who cut off his nose and ears
   and lips, that making the Babylonians to confide in him, he might
   deliver up the city into the King's hands; admiring the fidelity and
   love of Zopyrus protested, that he had rather have one Zopyrus whole,
   than ten Babylons. Even so we, were our spirits Divine, and noble, and
   genuine, should by the greatness of the benefit be excited above
   ourselves, and to exceed the gift, in the Love of our Saviour. Being
   afterwards asked upon the sight of a pomegranate slit in the midst,
   what thing he would above all other desire, might he have as many of
   them as there were seeds in that pomegranate, answered, Tot Zopyrorum:
   As many Zopyruses. One Saviour is worth innumerable worlds.


   96

        The World is a pomegranate indeed, which God hath put into man's
   heart, as Solomon observeth in the Ecclesiastes, because it containeth
   the seeds of grace and the seeds of glory. All virtues lie in the
   World, as seeds in a pomegranate: I mean in the fruition of it, out of
   which when it is sown in man's heart they naturally arise. The fidelity
   of Zopyrus and the love of Darius are included in it. For when we
   consider, how great a Lord gave us so great a dominion: we shall think
   it abominable to be treacherous and unfaithful in the midst of His
   dominions. When we consider we cannot choose but sin, if we sin at all,
   being surrounded with His gifts, and that the land we tread on is of
   His munificence: how can we err against Him who gave it to us? Can we
   forsake Him, whose gifts we cannot leave? The whole world is better
   than Babylon; and at greater expense than Zopyrus' lips was it
   purchased for us.


   97

        This visible World is wonderfully to be delighted in, and highly
   to be esteemed, because it is the theatre of God's righteous Kingdom.
   Who as Himself was righteous, because He made it freely, so He made it
   that we might freely be righteous too. For in the Kingdom of Glory it
   is impossible to fall. No man can sin that clearly seeth the beauty of
   God's face because no man can sin against his own happiness; that is,
   none can when he sees it clearly, willingly, and wittingly forsake it,
   tempter, temptation, loss, and danger being all seen: but here we see
   His face in a glass, and more dimly behold our happiness as in a
   mirror; by faith therefore we are to live, and to sharpen our eye that
   we may see His glory, we are to be studious and intent in our desires
   and endeavours. For we may sin, or we may be holy. Holiness therefore
   and righteousness naturally flow out of our fruition of the World: for
   who can vilify and debase himself by any sin, while he actually
   considers he is the heir of it? It exalts a man to a sublime and
   honorable life: it lifts him above lusts and snakes him angelical.


   98

        It makes him sensible of the reality of Happiness: it feeds him
   with contentment, and fills him with gratitude, it delivers him from
   the love of money which is the root of all evil, it causes him to reign
   over the perverse customs and opinions that are in the world: it opens
   his eyes, and makes him to see man's blindness and errors. It sateth
   his covetousness, feedeth his curiosity and pleaseth his ambition. It
   makes him too great for preferments and allurements. It causeth him to
   delight in retirement: and to be in love with prayer and communion with
   God. It lifteth him up above men's scandals and censures. It maketh him
   zealous of the salvation of all. It filleth him with courage on the
   behalf of God. It makes him to rejoice in a present, visible, immovable
   treasure to which the rest of the world is blind, and strengthens his
   faith and hope of Invisible. Yea it makes him wise, and many invisible
   joys doth he see in this. Glory and Dominion are invisible joys. And so
   is that great interest a man hath to all Kingdoms and Ages, which a
   true possessor of the World is more sensible of, than of his houses and
   lands. It makes him meek in pardoning all injuries, because he is above
   the reach of all his enemies: and infinitely secure in the midst of his
   fruitions. How great a thing is the enjoyment of the world, how highly
   to be esteemed and how zealously to be thirsted after, that eminently
   containeth all these! Verily it is a Thing so Divine and Heavenly, that
   it makes vices and virtues almost visible to our very eyes.


   99

        Varro citeth opinions of philosophers concerning happiness: they
   were so blind in the knowledge of it, and so different in their
   apprehensions. All which opinions fall in here, as all rivers fall into
   the sea, and agree together. Some placed happiness in riches, and some
   in honour, some in pleasure, and some in the contempt of all riches,
   honor, and pleasure; some in wisdom and some in firm stability of mind,
   some in empire and some in, love. Some in bare and naked contentment,
   some in contemplation, and some in action; some in rest and some in
   sufferings, and some in victory and triumph. All which occur here, for
   here is victory and triumph over our lusts, that we might live the life
   of clear reason, in the fruition of all riches, honours, and pleasures,
   which are by wisdom to be seen, and by love to be enjoyed in the
   highest empire, with great contentation, in solitude alone, in
   communion with all, by action and contemplation, attaining it by
   sufferings, and resting in the possession, with perfect victory and
   triumph over the world and evil men, or sin, death and hell, maugre all
   the oppositions of men and devils. Neither angels, nor principalities,
   nor power, nor height nor depth, nor things present nor things to come,
   being able to separate us, from the love of God which is in Christ
   Jesus our Lord.


   100

        Felicity is a thing coveted of all. The whole world is taken with
   the beauty of it: and he is no man, but a stock or stone that does not
   desire it. Nevertheless great offence hath been done by the
   philosophers and scandal given, through their blindness, many of them,
   in making Felicity to consist in negatives. They tell us it doth not
   consist in riches, it doth not consist in honors, it doth not consist
   in pleasures. Wherein then, saith a miserable man, doth it consist? Why
   in contentment, in self sufficiency, in virtues, in the right
   government of our passions, &c. Were it not better to show the
   amiableness of virtues, and the benefit of the right government of our
   passions, the objects of contentment, and the grounds of self
   sufficiency, by the truest means? Which these never do. Ought they not
   to distinguish between true and false riches as our Saviour doth;
   between real and feigned honours; between clear and pure pleasures and
   those which are muddy and unwholesome? The honour that cometh from
   above, the true treasures, those rivers of pleasure that flow at his
   right hand for evermore, are by all to be sought and by all to be
   desired. For it is the affront of nature, a making vain the powers, and
   a baffling the expectations of the soul, to deny it all objects, and a
   confining it to the grave, and a condemning of it to death, to tie it
   to the inward unnatural mistaken self-sufficiency and contentment they
   talk of. By the true government of our passions, we disentangle them
   from impediments, and fit and guide them to their proper objects. The
   amiableness of virtue consisteth in this, that by it all happiness is
   either attained or enjoyed. Contentment and rest ariseth from a full
   perception of infinite treasures. So that whosoever will profit in the
   mystery of Felicity, must see the objects of his happiness, and the
   manner how they are to be enjoyed, and discern also the powers of his
   soul by which he is to enjoy them, and perhaps the rules that shall
   guide him in the way of enjoyment. All which you have here, GOD, THE
   WORLD, YOUR SELF, ALL THINGS in Time and Eternity being the objects of
   your Felicity, God the Giver, and you the receiver.
     __________________________________________________________________


   THE THIRD CENTURY


   1

        WILL you see the infancy of this sublime and celestial greatness?
   Those pure and virgin apprehensions I had from the womb, and that
   divine light wherewith I was born are the best unto this day, wherein I
   can see the Universe. By the Gift of God they attended me into the
   world, and by His special favour I remember them till now. Verily they
   seem the greatest gifts His wisdom could bestow, for without them all
   other gifts had been dead and vain. They are unattainable by book, and
   therefore I will teach them by experience. Pray for them earnestly: for
   they will make you angelical, and wholly celestial. Certainly Adam in
   Paradise had not more sweet and curious apprehensions of the world,
   than I when I was a child.


   2

        All appeared new, and strange at first, inexpressibly rare and
   delightful and beautiful. I was a little stranger, which at my entrance
   into the world was saluted and surrounded with innumerable joys. My
   knowledge was Divine. I knew by intuition those things which since my
   Apostasy, I collected again by the highest reason. My very ignorance
   was advantageous. I seemed as one brought into the Estate of Innocence.
   All things were spotless and pure andglorious: yea, and infinitely
   mine, and joyful and precious, I knew not that there were any sins, or
   complaints or laws. I dreamed not of poverties, contentions or vices.
   All tears and quarrels were hidden from mine eyes. Everything was at
   rest, free and immortal. I knew nothing of sickness or death or rents
   or exaction, either for tribute or bread. In the absence of these I was
   entertained like an Angel with the works of God in their splendour and
   glory, I saw all in the peace of Eden; Heaven and Earth did sing my
   Creator's praises, and could not make more melody to Adam, than to me:
   All Time was Eternity, and a perpetual Sabbath. Is it not strange, that
   an infant should be heir of the whole World, and see those mysteries
   which the books of the learned never unfold?


   3

        The corn was orient and immortal wheat, which never should be
   reaped, nor was ever sown. I thought it had stood from everlasting to
   everlasting. The dust and stones of the street were as precious as
   gold: the gates were at first the end of the world. The green trees
   when I saw them first through one of the gates transported and ravished
   me, their sweetness and unusual beauty made my heart to leap, and
   almost mad with ecstasy, they were such strange and wonderful things:
   The Men! O what venerable and reverend creatures did the aged seem!
   Immortal Cherubims! And young men glittering and sparkling Angels, and
   maids strange seraphic pieces of life and beauty! Boys and girls
   tumbling in the street, and playing, were moving jewels. I knew not
   that they were born or should die; But all things abided eternally as
   they were in their proper places. Eternity was manifest in the Light of
   the Day, and something infinite behind everything appeared which talked
   with my expectation and moved my desire. The city seemed to stand in
   Eden, or to be built in Heaven. The streets were mine, the temple was
   mine, the people were mine, their clothes and gold and silver were
   mine, as much as their sparkling eyes, fair skins and ruddy faces. The
   skies were mine, and so were the sun and moon and stars, and all the
   World was mine; and I the only spectator and enjoyer of it. I knew no
   churlish proprieties, nor bounds, nor divisions: but all proprieties*
   and divisions were mine: all treasures and the possessors of them. So
   that with much ado I was corrupted, and made to learn the dirty devices
   of this world. Which now I unlearn, and become, as it were, a little
   child again that I may enter into the Kingdom of God.


   * This word is used here and elsewhere in its original sense, where we
   should now say "properties."


   4

        Upon those pure and virgin apprehensions which I had in my
   infancy, I made this poem:


   1

      That childish thoughts such jogs inspire,

   Doth make my wonder, and His glory higher,

      His bounty, and my wealth more great

   It chews His Kingdom, and His work complete.

      In which there is not anything,

   Not meet to be the joy of Cherubim.


   2

      He in our childhood with us walks,

   And with our thoughts mysteriously He talks;

      He often visiteth our minds,

   But cold acceptance in us ever finds:

      We send Him often grieved away,

   Who else would show us all His Kingdom's joy.


   3

      O Lord, I wonder at Thy Love,

   Which did my infancy so early move:

      But more at that which did forbear

   And move so long, though slighted many a year:

      But most of all, at last that Thou

   Thyself shouldst me convert, I scarce know how.


   4

      Thy gracious motions oft in vain

   Assaulted me: my heart did hard remain

      Longtime! I sent my God away

   Grieved much, that He could not give me His joy.

      I careless was, nor did regard

   The End for which He all those thoughts prepared.


   5

      But now, with new and open eyes,

   I see beneath, as if above the skies,

      And as I backward look again

   See all His thoughts and mine most clear arid plain.

      He did approach, He me did woo;

   I wonder that my God this thing would do,


   6

      From nothing taken first ,I was;

   What wondrous things His glory brought to pass!

      Now in the World I Him behold,

   And me, enveloped in precious gold;

      In deep abysses of delights,

   In present hidden glorious benefits.


   7

      These thoughts His goodness long before

   Prepared as precious and celestial store

      With curious art in me inlaid,

   That childhood might itself alone be said

      My Tutor, Teacher, Guide to be,

   Instructed then even by the Deitie.


   5

        Our Saviour's meaning, when He said, He must be born again and
   become a little child that will enter into the Kingdom of Heaven is
   deeper far than is generally believed. It is not only in a careless
   reliance upon Divine Providence, that we are to become little children,
   or in the feebleness and shortness of our anger and simplicity of our
   passions, but in the peace and purity of all our soul. Which purity
   also is a deeper thing than is commonly apprehended. For we must
   disrobe ourselves of all false colours, and unclothe our souls of evil
   habits; all our thoughts must be infant-like and clear; the powers of
   our soul free from the leaven of this world, and disentangled from
   men's conceits and customs. Grit in the eye or yellow jaundice will not
   let a man see those objects truly that are before it. And therefore it
   is requisite that we should be as very strangers to the thoughts,
   customs, and opinions of men in this world, as if we were but little
   children. So those things would appear to us only which do to children
   when they are first born. Ambitions, trades, luxuries, inordinate
   affections, casual and accidental riches invented since the fall, would
   be gone, and only those things appear, which did to Adam in Paradise,
   in the same light and in the same colours: God in His works, Glory in
   the light, Love in our parents, men, ourselves, and the face of Heaven:
   Every man naturally seeing those things, to the enjoyment of which he
   is naturally born.


   6

        Every one provideth objects, but few prepare senses whereby, and
   light wherein, to see them. Since therefore we are born to be a burning
   and shining light, and whatever men learn of others, they see in the
   light of others' souls: I will in the light of my soul show you the
   Universe. Perhaps it is celestial, and will teach you how beneficial we
   may be to each other. I am sure it is a sweet and curious light to me:
   which had I wanted I would have given all the gold and silver in all
   worlds to have purchased. But it was the Gift of God and could not be
   bought with money. And by what steps and degrees I proceeded to that
   enjoyment of all Eternity which now I possess I will likewise shew you.
   A clear and familiar light it may prove unto you.


   7

        The first Light which shined in my Infancy in its primitive and
   innocent clarity was totally eclipsed insomuch that I was fain to learn
   all again. If you ask me how it was eclipsed? Truly by the customs and
   manners of men, which like contrary winds blew it out: by an
   innumerable company of other objects, rude, vulgar and worthless
   things, that like so many loads of earth and dung did overwhelm and
   bury it by the impetuous torrent of wrong desires in all others whom I
   saw or knew that carried me away and alienated me from it: by a whole
   sea of other matters and concernments that covered and drowned it:
   finally by the evil influence of a bad education that did not foster
   and cherish it. All men's thoughts and words were about other matters,
   They all prized new things which I did not dream of. I was a stranger
   and unacquainted with them; I was little and reverenced their
   authority; I was weak, and easily guided by their example; ambitious
   also, and desirous to approve myself unto them. And finding no one
   syllable in any man's mouth of those things, by degrees they vanished,
   my thoughts (as indeed what is more fleeting than a thought?) were
   blotted out; and at last all the celestial, great, and stable treasures
   to which I was born, as wholly forgotten, as if they had never been.


   8

      Had any man spoken of it, it had been the most easy thing in the
   world, to have taught me, and to have made me believe that Heaven and
   Earth was God's House, and that He gave it me. That the Sun was mine,
   and that men were mine, and that cities and kingdoms were mine also:
   that Earth was better than gold, and that water, every drop of it was a
   precious jewel. And that these were great and living treasures and that
   all riches whatsoever else was dross in comparison. From whence I
   clearly find how docible our Nature is in natural things, were it
   rightly entreated. And that our misery proceedeth ten thousand times
   more from the outward bondage of opinion and custom, than from any
   inward corruption or depravation of Nature: And that it is not our
   parents' loins, so much as our parents' lives, that enthrals and blinds
   us. Yet is all our corruption derived from Adam inasmuch as all the
   evil examples and inclinations of the world arise from his sin. But I
   speak it in the presence of God and of our Lord Jesus Christ, in my
   pure primitive virgin Light, while my apprehensions were natural, and
   unmixed, I cannot remember but that I was ten thousand times more prone
   to good and excellent things than evil. But I was quickly tainted and
   fell by others.


   9

      It was a difficult matter to persuade me that the tinseled ware upon
   a hobby-horse was a fine thing. They did impose upon me, and obtrude
   their gifts that made me believe a ribbon or a feather curious. I could
   not see where was the curiousness or fineness: And to teach me that a
   purse of gold was at any value seemed impossible, the art by which it
   becomes so, and the reasons for which it is accounted so, were so deep
   and hidden to my inexperience. So that Nature is still nearest to
   natural things, and farthest off from preternatural; and to esteem that
   the reproach of Nature, is an error in them only who are unacquainted
   with it. Natural things are glorious, and to know them glorious but to
   call things preternatural, natural, monstrous. Yet all they do it, who
   esteem gold, silver, houses, lands, clothes, &c., the riches of Nature,
   which are indeed the riches of invention. Nature knows no such riches:
   but art and error make them. Not the God of Nature, but Sin only was
   the parent of them. The riches of Nature are our Souls and Bodies, with
   all their faculties, senses, and endowments. And it had been the
   easiest thing in the whole world to teach me that all felicity
   consisted in the enjoyment of all the world, that it was prepared for
   me before I was born, and that nothing was more divine and beautiful.


   10

        Thoughts are the most present things to thoughts, and of the most
   powerful influence. My soul was only apt and disposed to great things;
   but souls to souls are like apples to apples, one being rotten rots
   another. When I began to speak and go, nothing began to be present to
   me, but what was present to me in their thoughts. Nor was anything
   present to me any other way, than it was so to them. The glass of
   imagination was the only mirror, wherein anything was represented or
   appeared to me. All things were absent which they talked not of. So I
   began among my play-fellows to prize a drum, a fine coat, a penny, a
   gilded book, &c., who before never dreamed of any such wealth. Goodly
   objects to drown all the knowledge of Heaven and Earth! As for the
   Heavens and the Sun and Stars they disappeared, and were no more unto
   me than the bare walls, So that the strange riches of man's invention
   quite overcame the riches of Nature, being learned more laboriously and
   in the second place.


   11

        By this let nurses, and those parents that desire Holy Children
   learn to make them possessors of Heaven and Earth betimes; to remove
   silly objects from before them, to magnify nothing but what is great
   indeed, and to talk of God to them, and of His works and ways before
   they can either speak or go. For nothing is so easy as to teach the
   truth because the nature of the thing confirms the doctrine: As when we
   say the sun is glorious, a man is a beautiful creature, sovereign over
   beasts and fowls and fishes, the stars minister unto us, the world was
   made for you, &c. But to say this house is yours, and these lands are
   another man's, and this bauble is a jewel and this gew-gaw a fine
   thing, thus rattle makes music, &c., is deadly barbarous and uncouth to
   a little child; and makes him suspect all you say, because the nature
   of the thing contradicts your words. Yet doth that blot out all noble
   and divine ideas, dissettle his foundation, render him uncertain in all
   things, and divide him from God. To teach him those objects are little
   vanities, and that though God made them, by the ministry of man, yet
   better and more glorious things are more to be esteemed, is natural and
   easy.


   12

        By this you may see who are the rude and barbarous Indians: For
   verily there is no savage nation under the cope of Heaven, that is more
   absurdly barbarous than the Christian World. They that go naked and
   drink water and live upon roots are like Adam, or Angels in comparison
   of us. But they indeed that call beads and glass buttons jewels, and
   dress themselves with feather, and buy pieces of brass and broken hafts
   of knives of our merchants are somewhat like us. But we pass them in
   barbarous opinions, and monstrous apprehensions, which we nick-name
   civility and the mode, amongst us. I am sure those barbarous people
   that go naked, come nearer to Adam, God, and Angels in the simplicity
   of their wealth, though not in knowledge.


   13

        You would not think how these barbarous inventions spoil your
   knowledge. They put grubs and worms in men's heads that are enemies to
   all pure and true apprehensions, and eat out all their happiness. They
   make it impossible for them, in whom they reign, to believe there is
   any excellency in the Works of God, or to taste any sweetness in the
   nobility of Nature, or to prize any common, though never so great a
   blessing. They alienate men from the Life of God, and at last make them
   to live without God in the World. To live the Life of God is to live to
   all the Works of God, and to enjoy them in His Image, from which they
   are wholly diverted that follow fashions. Their fancies are corrupted
   with other gingles.


   14

        Being swallowed up therefore in the miserable gulf of idle talk
   and worthless vanities, thenceforth I lived among dreams and shadows,
   like a prodigal son feeding upon husks with swine. A comfortless
   wilderness full of thorns and troubles the world was, or worse: a waste
   place covered with idleness and play, and shops, and markets, and
   taverns. As for Churches they were things I did not understand, and
   schools were a burden so that there was nothing in the world worth the
   having, or enjoying, but my game and sport, which also was a dream, and
   being passed wholly forgotten. So that I had utterly forgotten all
   goodness, bounty, comfort, and glory: which things are the very
   brightness of the Glory of God for lack of which therefore He was
   unknown.


   15

        Yet sometimes in the midst of these dreams, I should come a little
   to myself, so far as to feel I wanted something, secretly to
   expostulate with God for not giving me riches, to long after an unknown
   happiness, to grieve that the World was so empty, and to be
   dissatisfied with my present state because it was vain and forlorn. I
   had heard of Angels, and much admired that here upon earth nothing
   should be but dirt and streets and gutters; for as for the pleasures
   that were in great men's houses I had not seen them: and it was my real
   happiness they were unknown. For because nothing deluded me, I was the
   more inquisitive.


   16

        Once I remember (I think I was about 4 years old when) I thus
   reasoned with myself, sitting in a little obscure room in my father's
   poor house: If there be a God, certainly He must be infinite in
   Goodness: and that I was prompted to, by a real whispering instinct of
   Nature. And if He be infinite in Goodness, and a perfect Being in
   Wisdom and Love, certainly He must do most glorious things, and give us
   infinite riches; how comes it to pass therefore that I am so poor? Of
   so scanty and narrow a fortune, enjoying few and obscure comforts? I
   thought I could not believe Him a God to me, unless all His power were
   employed to glorify me. I knew not then my Soul, or Body; nor did I
   think of the Heavens and the Earth, the rivers and the stars, the sun
   or the seas: all those were lost, and absent from me. But when I found
   them made out of nothing for me, then I had a God indeed, whom I could
   praise, and rejoice in.


   17

      Sometimes I should be alone, and without employment, when suddenly
   my Soul would return to itself, and forgetting all things in the whole
   world which mine eyes had seen, would be carried away to the ends of
   the earth: and my thoughts would be deeply engaged with enquiries: How
   the Earth did end? Whether walls did bound it, or sudden precipices? Or
   whether the Heavens by degrees did come to touch it; so that the face
   of the Earth and Heaven were so near, that a man with difficulty could
   creep under? Whatever I could imagine was inconvenient, and my reason
   being posed was quickly wearied. What also upheld the Earth (because it
   was heavy) and kept it from falling; whether pillars, or dark waters?
   And if any of these, what then upheld those, and what again those, of
   which I saw there would be no end? Little did I think that the Earth
   was round, and the world so full of beauty, light, and wisdom. When I
   saw that, I knew by the perfection of the work there was a God, and was
   satisfied, and rejoiced. People underneath, and fields and flowers,
   with another sun and another day, pleased me mightily: but more when I
   knew it was the same sun that served them by night, that served us by
   day.


   18

        Sometimes I should soar above the stars, and enquire how the
   Heavens ended, and what was beyond them? Concerning which by no means
   could I receive satisfaction. Sometimes my thoughts would carry me to
   the Creation, for I had heard now, that the World which at first I
   thought was eternal, had a beginning: how therefore that beginning was,
   and why it was, why it was no sooner, and what was before, I mightily
   desired to know. By all which I easily perceive that my Soul was made
   to live in communion with God, in all places of His dominion, and to be
   satisfied with the highest reason in all things, After which it so
   eagerly aspired, that I thought all the gold and silver in the world
   but dirt, in comparison of satisfaction in any of these. Sometimes I
   wondered why men were made no bigger? I would have had a man as big as
   a giant, a giant as big as a castle, and a castle as big as the
   Heavens. Which yet would not serve: for there was infinite space beyond
   the Heavens, and all was defective and but little in comparison; and
   for him to be made infinite, I thought it would be to no purpose, and
   it would be inconvenient. Why also there was not a better sun, and
   better stars, a better sea, and better creatures I much admired. Which
   thoughts produced that poem upon moderation, which afterwards was
   written. Some part of the verses are these,


   19

      In making bodies Love could not express

   Itself, or art, unless it made them less.

   O what a monster had in man been seen,

   Had every thumb or toe a mountain been!

   What worlds must he devour when he did eat?

   What oceans drink! yet could not all his meat,

   Or stature, make him like an angel shine;

   Or make his Soul in Glory more Divine.

   A Soul it is that makes us truly great,

   Whose little bodies make us more complete.

   An understanding that is infinite,

   An endless, wide, and everlasting sight,

   That can enjoy all things and nought exclude,

   Is the most sacred greatness may be viewed.

   'Twas inconvenient that his bulk should be

   An endless hill; he nothing then could see:

   No figure have, no motion, beauty, place,

   No colour, feature, member, light, or grace.

   A body like a mountain is but cumber.

   An endless body is but idle lumber:

   It spoils converse, and time itself devours,

   While meat in vain, in feeding idle powers;

   Excessive bulk being most injurious found,

   To those conveniences which men have crowned:

   His wisdom did His power here repress,

   God made man greater while He made him less.


   20

        The excellencies of the Sun I found to be of another kind than
   that splendour after which I sought, even in unknown and invisible
   services: and that God by moderation wisely bounding His almighty
   power, had to my eternal amazement and wonder, made all bodies far
   greater than if they were infinite: there not being a sand nor mote in
   the air that is not more excellent than if it were infinite. How rich
   and admirable then is the Kingdom of God, where the smallest is greater
   than an infinite treasure! Is not this incredible? Certainly to the
   placets and doctrines of the schools: Till we all consider, That
   infinite worth shut up in the limits of a material being, is the only
   way to a real infinity. God made nothing infinite in bulk, but
   everything there where it ought to be. Which, because moderation is a
   virtue observing the golden mean, in some other parts of the former
   poem, is thus expressed.


   21

      His Power bounded, greater is in might,

   Than if let loose, twere wholly infinite.

   He could have made an endless sea by this,

   But then it had not been a sea of bliss.

   Did waters from the centre to the skies

   Ascend, 'twould drown whatever else we prize.

   The ocean bounded in a finite shore,

   Is better far because it is no more.

   No use nor glory would in that be seen,

   His power made it endless in esteem.

   Had not the Sun been bounded in its sphere,

   Did all the world in one fair flame appear,

   And were that flame a real Infinite

   'Twould yield no profit, splendor, nor delight.

   Its corps confined, and beams extended be

   Effects of Wisdom in the Deity.

   One star made infinite would all exclude,

   An earth made infinite could ne'er be viewed:

   But one being fashioned for the other's sake,

   He, bounding all, did all most useful make

   And which is best, in profit and delight

   Tho' not in bulk, they all are infinite.


   22

        These liquid, clear satisfactions were the emanations of the
   highest reason, but not achieved till a long time afterwards. In the
   meantime I was sometimes, though seldom, visited and inspired with new
   and more vigorous desires after that bliss which Nature whispered and
   suggested to me. Every new thing quickened my curiosity, and raised my
   expectation. I remember once the first time I came into a magnificent
   or noble dining room, and was left there alone, I rejoiced to see the
   gold and state and carved imagery, but when all was dead, and there was
   no motion, I was weary of it, and departed dissatisfied. But
   afterwards, when I saw it full of lords and ladies, and music and
   dancing, the place which once seemed not to differ from a solitary den,
   had now entertainment, and nothing of tediousness but pleasure in it.
   By which I perceived (upon a reflection made long after) that men and
   women are when well understood a principal part of our true felicity.
   By this I found also that nothing that stood still, could by doing so
   be a part of Happiness: and that affection, though it were invisible,
   was the best of motions. But the august and glorious exercise of
   virtue, was more solemn and divine, which Yet I saw not. And that all
   Men and Angels should appear in heaven.


   23

      Another time in a lowering and sad evening, being alone in the
   field, when all things were dead and quiet, a certain want and horror
   fell upon me, beyond imagination. The unprofitableness and silence of
   the place dissatisfied me; its wideness terrified me; from the utmost
   ends of the earth fears surrounded me. How did I know but dangers might
   suddenly arise from the East, and invade me from the unknown regions
   beyond the seas? I was a weak and little child, and had forgotten there
   was a man alive in the earth. Yet something also of hope and
   expectation comforted me from every border. This taught me that I was
   concerned in all the world: and that in the remotest borders the causes
   of peace delight me, and the beauties of the earth when seen were made
   to entertain me: that I was made to hold a communion with the secrets
   of Divine Providence in all the world: that a remembrance of all the
   joys I had from my birth ought always to be with me: that the presence
   of Cities, Temples, and Kingdoms ought to sustain me, and that to be
   alone in the world was to be desolate and miserable. The comfort of
   houses and friends, the clear assurance of treasures everywhere, God's
   care and love, His goodness, wisdom, and power, His presence and
   watchfulness in all the ends of the earth, were my strength and
   assurance for ever: and that these things being absent to my eye, were
   my joys and consolations, as present to my understanding as the
   wideness and emptiness of the Universe which I saw before me.


   24

        When I heard of any new kingdom beyond the seas, the light and
   glory of it pleased me immediately, it rose up within me, and I was
   enlarged wonderfully. I entered into it, I saw its commodities,
   rarities, springs, meadows, riches, inhabitants, and became possessor
   of that new room, as if it had been prepared for me, so much was I
   magnified and delighted in it. When the Bible was read, my spirit was
   present in other ages. I saw the light and splendour of them: the land
   of Canaan, the Israelites entering into it, the ancient glory of the
   Amorites, their peace and riches, their cities, houses, vines and
   fig-trees, the long prosperity of their kings, their milk and honey,
   their slaughter and destruction, with the joys and triumphs of God's
   people; all which entered into me, and God among them. I saw all and
   felt all in such a lively manner, as if there had been no other way to
   those places, but in spirit only. This showed me the liveliness of
   interior presence, and that all ages were for most glorious ends,
   accessible to my understanding, yea with it, yea within it. For without
   changing place in myself I could behold and enjoy all those: Anything
   when it was proposed, though it was a thousand ages ago, being always
   before me.


   25

        When I heard any news I receivd it with greediness and delight,
   because my expectation was awakened with some hope that my happiness
   and the thing I wanted was concealed in it. Glad tidings, you know,
   from a far country brings us our salvation: and I was not deceived. In
   Jury was Jesus killed, and from Jerusalem the Gospel came. Which when I
   once knew, I was very confident that every kingdom contained like
   wonders and causes of joy, though that was the fountain of them. As it
   was the firstfruits, so was it the pledge of what I shall receive in
   other countries. Thus also when any curious cabinet, or secret in
   chemistry geometry, or physic was offered to me, I diligently looked
   into it, but when I saw it to the bottom and not my happiness I
   despised it. These imaginations and this thirst of news occasioned
   these reflections.


   26

   ON NEWS


   1

      News from a foreign country came,

   As if my treasure and my wealth lay there:

      So much it did my heart enflame

   'Twas wont to call my soul into mine ear!

   Which thither went, to meet

      The approaching sweet:

      And on the threshold stood,

   To entertain the unknown good.

      It hovered there,

      As if twould leave mine ear,

   And was so eager to embrace

   The joyful tidings as they came,

   'Twould almost leave its dwelling place,

      To entertain the same.


   2

      As if the tidings were the things,

   My very joys themselves, my foreign treasure,

      Or else did bear them on their wings;

   With so much joy they came, with so much pleasure.

      My soul stood at the gate

      To recreate

      Itself with bliss: and to

      Be pleased with speed. A fuller view

      It fain would take

      Yet journeys back would make

   Unto my heart: as if twould fain

   Go out to meet, yet stay within

   To fit a place, to entertain,

      And bring the tidings in.



   3

      What sacred instinct did inspire

   My soul in childhood with a hope so strong?

      What secret force moved my desire,

   To expect my joys beyond the seas, so young?

      Felicity I knew

      Was out of view

      And being here alone,

   I saw that happiness was gone

      From me! For this

      I thirsted absent bliss,

   And thought that sure beyond the seas,

   Or else in something near at hand

   I knew not yet, (since nought did please

      I knew,) my bliss did stand.


   4

      But little did the Infant dream

   That all the treasures of the World were by:

      And that himself was so the cream

   And crown of all, which round about did lie:

      Yet thus it was. The gem,

      The diadem,

      The ring enclosing all

   That stood upon this earthly ball;

      The heavenly eye,

      Much wider than the sky,

   Wherein they all included were

   The glorious soul that was the king

   Made to possess them, did appear

      A small and little thing!


   27

        Among other things there befel me a most infinite desire of a book
   from Heaven. For observing all things to be rude and superfluous here
   upon earth, I thought the ways of felicity to be known only among the
   Holy Angels: and that unless I could receive information from them, I
   could never be happy. This thirst hung upon me a long time; till at
   last I perceived that the God of Angels had taken care of me, and
   prevented my desires. For He had sent the book I wanted before I was
   born: and prepared it for me, and also commended and sent it unto me,
   in a far better manner than I was able to imagine. Had some Angel
   brought it to me, which was the best way wherein I could then desire
   it, it would have been a peculiar favour, and I should have thought
   myself therein honoured above all mankind. It would have been the Soul
   of this world, the light of my Soul, the spring of life, and a fountain
   of Happiness. You cannot think what riches and delights I promised
   myself therein. It would have been a mint of rarities, curiosities and
   wonders, to have entertained the powers of my Soul, to have directed me
   in the way of life, and to have fed me with pleasures unknown to the
   whole world.


   28

        Had some Angel brought it miraculously from heaven, and left it at
   my foot, it had been a present meet for Seraphims. Yet had it been a
   dream in comparison of the glorious way wherein God prepared it. I
   must, have spent time in studying it, and with great diligence have
   read it daily to drink in the precepts and instructions it contained.
   It had in a narrow, obscure manner come unto me, and all the world had
   been ignorant of felicity but I. Whereas now there are thousands in the
   world, of whom I, being a poor child, was ignorant, that in temples,
   universities, and secret closets; enjoy felicity, whom I saw not in
   shops, or schools, or trades; whom I found not in streets or at feasts,
   or taverns, and therefore thought not to be in the world, who enjoy
   communion with God, and have fellowship with the Angels every day. And
   these I discerned to be a great help unto me.


   29

        This put me upon two things: upon enquiring into the matter
   contained in the Bible, and into the manner wherein it came unto me. In
   the matter I found all the glad tidings my soul longed after in its
   desire of news; in the manner, that the Wisdom of God was infinitely
   greater than mine, and that He had appeared in His Wisdom exceeding my
   desires. Above all things I desired some Great Lord, or Mighty King,
   that having power in His hand, to give me all Kingdoms, Riches, and
   Honours, was willing to do it. And by that book I found that there was
   an eternal God, who loved me infinitely, that I was His son, that I was
   to overcome death and to live for ever, that He created the world for
   me, that I was to reign in His throne and to inherit all things. Who
   would have believed this had not that Book told me? It told me also
   that I was to live in communion with Him, in the image of His life and
   glory, that I was to enjoy all His treasures and pleasures, in a more
   perfect manner than I could devise, and that all the truly amiable and
   glorious persons in the world were to be my friends and companions.


   30

        Upon this I had enough. I desired no more the honours and
   pleasures of this world, but gave myself to the illimited and clear
   fruition of that: and to this day see nothing wanting to my Felicity
   but mine own perfection. All other things are well; I only, and the
   sons of men about me, are disordered. Nevertheless could I be what I
   ought, their very disorders would be my enjoyments. For all things
   should work together for good to them that love God. And if the
   disorders, then certainly the troubles, and if the troubles, much more
   the vanities of men would be mine. Not only their enjoyments, but their
   very errors and distractions increasing my Felicity. So that being heir
   of the whole world alone, I was to walk in it, as in a strange,
   marvellous, and amiable possession, and alone to render praises unto
   God for its enjoyment.


   31

        This taught me that those fashions and tinseled vanities, which
   you and I despise erewhile, fetching a little course about, became
   ours. And that the Wisdom of God in them also was very conspicuous. For
   it becometh His Goodness to make all things treasures: and His Power is
   able to bring Light out of Darkness, and Good out of Evil. Nor would
   His love endure, but that I also should have a wisdom, whereby I could
   draw order out of confusion. So that it is my admiration and joy, that
   while so many thousand wander in Darkness, I am in the Light, and that
   while so many dote upon false treasures and pierce themselves through
   with many sorrows, I live in peace, and enjoy the delights of God and
   Heaven.


   32

      In respect of the matter, I was very sure that Angels and Cherubims
   could not bring unto me better tidings than were in the Scriptures
   contained, could I but believe them to be true, but I was dissatisfied
   about the manner, and that was the ground of my unbelief. For I could
   not think that God being Love would neglect His Son, and therefore
   surely I was not His son, nor He Love: because He had not ascertained*
   me more carefully, that the Bible was His book from Heaven. Yet I was
   encouraged to hope well, because the matter


   *This word, though it seems peculiar to us, is here used quite properly
   and according to its derivation.

   was so excellent, above my expectation. And when I searched into it, I
   found the Way infinitely better than if all the Angels in Heaven had
   brought it to me.



   33

        Had the Angels brought it to me alone, these several
   inconveniences had attended the vision:--(1) It had been but one sudden
   act wherein it was sent me whereas now God hath been all ages in
   preparing it: (2) It had been done by inferior. ministers; whereas now
   it is done by God Himself: (3) Being Satan is able to transform himself
   into an Angel of Light, I had been still dubious, till having recourse
   to the excellency of the matter; by it I was informed and satisfied:
   (4) Being corrupted, that one miracle would have been but like a single
   spark upon green wood, it would have gone out immediately: whereas I
   needed a thousand miracles to seal it, yea and to awaken me to the
   meditation of the matter that was revealed to me: (5) Had it been
   revealed no other way, all the world, had been dark and empty round
   about me: whereas now it is my joy and my delight and treasure, being
   full of knowledge and light and glory: (6) Had it been revealed at no
   other time, God had now only been good unto me; whereas He hath
   manifested His love in all ages; and been carefully and most wisely
   revealing it from the beginning of the world: (7) Had He revealed it to
   no other person, I had been weak in faith, being solitary and sitting
   alone like a sparrow upon the house-top, who now have the concurrent
   and joint affections of Kingdoms and ages, Yea, notwithstanding the
   disadvantage of this weakness, I must have gone abroad; and published
   this faith to others; both in love to God, and love to men. For I must
   have done my duty, or the book would have done me no good, and love to
   God and men must have been my duty, for without that I could never be
   happy. Yea finally, had not the Book been revealed before, neither had
   God been glorious, nor I blessed, for He had been negligent of other
   persons, His goodness had been defective to all ages, whom now I know
   to be God by the universality of His love unto Mankind, and the
   perfection of His wisdom to every person.


   34

        To talk now of the necessity of bearing all calamities and
   persecutions in preaching is little; to consider the reproaches,
   mockings and derisions I must have endured of all the world, while they
   scoffed at me for pretending to be the only man that had a Book from
   Heaven is nothing: nor is it much to mention the impossibility of
   convincing others, all the world having been full of darkness, and God
   always silent before. All ages had been void of treasure had not the
   Bible been revealed till the other day, wherein now I can expatiate
   with perfect liberty, and everywhere see the Love of God to all mankind
   Love to me alone. All the world being adorned with miracles, prophets,
   patriarchs, apostles, martyrs, revelations from Heaven, lively
   examples, holy Souls, divine affairs for my enjoyment. The Glory of God
   and the Light of Heaven appearing everywhere, as much as it would have
   done in that seeming instant, had the Book I desired come unto me any
   other way.


   35

      You will not believe what a world of joy this one satisfaction and
   pleasure brought me. Thenceforth I thought the Light of Heaven was in
   this world: I saw it possible, and very probable, that I was infinitely
   beloved of Almighty God, the delights of Paradise were round about me,
   Heaven and Earth were open to me, all riches were little things; this
   one pleasure being so great that it exceeded all the joys of Eden. So
   great a thing it was to me, to be satisfied in the manner of God's
   revealing Himself unto mankind. Many other enquiries I had concerning
   the manner of His revealing Himself, in all which I am infinitely
   satisfied.


   36

      Having been at the University, and received there the taste and
   tincture of another education, I saw that there were things in this
   world of which I never dreamed; glorious secrets, and glorious persons
   past imagination. There I saw that Logic, Ethics, Physics, Metaphysics,
   Geometry, Astronomy, Poesy, Medicine, Grammar, Music, Rhetoric all
   kinds of Arts, Trades, and Mechanisms that adorned the world pertained
   to felicity; at least there I saw those things, which afterwards I knew
   to pertain unto it: and was delighted in it. There I saw into the
   nature of the Sea, the Heavens, the Sun, the Moon and Stars, the
   Elements, Minerals, and Vegetables. All which appeared like the King's
   Daughter, all glorious within; and those things which my nurses, and
   parents, should have talked of there were taught unto me.


   37

        Nevertheless some things were defective too. There was never a
   tutor that did professly teach Felicity, though that be the mistress of
   all other sciences. Nor did any of us study these things but as aliena,
   which we ought to have studied as our enjoyments. We studied to inform
   our knowledge, but knew not for what end we so studied. And for lack of
   aiming at a certain end we erred in the manner. Howbeit there we
   received all those seeds of knowledge that were afterwards improved;
   and our souls were awakened to a discerning of their faculties, and
   exercise of their powers.


   38

        The manner is in everything of greatest concernment. Whatever good
   thing we do, neither can we please God, unless we do it well: nor can
   He please us, what. ever good He does, unless He do it well. Should He
   give us the most perfect things in Heaven and Earth to make us happy,
   and not give them to us in the best of all possible manners, He would
   but displease us; and it were impossible for Him to make us happy. It
   is not sufficient therefore for us to study the most excellent things
   unless we do it in the most excellent of manners. And what that is, it
   is impossible to find, till we are guided thereunto by the most
   excellent end, with a desire of which I flagrantly burned.


   39

        The best of all possible ends is the Glory of God, but happiness
   was that I thirsted after. And yet I did not err, for the Glory of God
   is to make us happy. Which can never be done but by giving us most
   excellent natures and satisfying those natures: by creating all
   treasures of infinite value, and giving them to us in an infinite
   manner, to wit, both in the best that to omnipotence was possible. This
   led me to enquire whether all things were excellent, and of perfect
   value, and whether they were mine in propriety?


   40

        It is the Glory of God to give all things to us in the best of all
   possible manners. To study things therefore under the double notion of
   interest and treasure, is to study all things in the best of all
   possible manners. Because in studying so we enquire after God's Glory,
   and our own happiness. And indeed enter into the way that leadeth to
   all contentments, joys, and satisfactions, to all praises triumphs and
   thanksgivings, to all virtues, beauties, adorations and graces, to all
   dominion, exaltation, wisdom, and glory, to all Holiness, Union, and
   Communication with God, to all patience, and courage and blessedness,
   which it is impossible to meet any other way. So that to study objects
   for ostentation, vain knowledge or curiosity is fruitless impertinence,
   tho' God Himself and Angels be the object. But to study that which will
   oblige us to love Him, and feed us with nobility and goodness toward
   men, that is blessed. And so is it to study that which will lead us to
   the Temple of Wisdom, and seat us in the Throne of Glory.


   41

      Many men study the same things which have not the taste of, nor
   delight in them. And their palates vary according to the ends at which
   they aim. He that studies polity, men and manners, merely that he may
   know how to behave himself, and get honour in this world, has not that
   delight in his studies as he that contemplates these things that he
   might see the ways of God among them, and walk in communion with Him.
   The attainments of the one are narrow, the other grows a celestial King
   of all Kingdoms. Kings minister unto him, temples are his own, thrones
   are his peculiar treasure. Governments, officers, magistrates and
   courts of judicature are his delights, in a way ineffable, and a manner
   inconceivable to the other's imagination. He that knows the secrets of
   nature with Albertus Magnus, or the motions of the heavens with
   Galileo, or the cosmography of the moon with Hevelius, or the body of
   man with Galen, or the nature of diseases with Hippocrates, or the
   harmonies in melody with Orpheus, or of poesy with Homer, or of Grammar
   with Lilly, or of whatever else with the greatest artist; he is
   nothing, if he knows them merely for talk or idle speculation, or
   transient and external use. But he that knows them for value, and knows
   them his own shall profit infinitely. And therefore of all kinds of
   learnings, humanity and divinity are the most excellent.


   42

        By humanity we search into the powers and faculties of the Soul,
   enquire into the excellencies of human nature, consider its wants,
   survey its inclinations, propensities and desires, ponder its
   principles, proposals, and ends, examine the causes and fitness of all,
   the worth of all, the excellency of all. Whereby we come to know what
   man is in this world, what his sovereign end and happiness, and what is
   the best means by which he may attain it. And by this we come to see
   what wisdom is: which namely is a knowledge exercised in finding out
   the way to perfect happiness, by discerning man's real wants and
   sovereign desires. We come moreover to know God's goodness, in seeing
   into the causes wherefore He implanted such faculties and inclinations
   in us, and the objects and ends prepared for them. This leadeth us to
   Divinity. For God gave man an endless intellect to see all things, and
   a proneness to covet them, because they are His treasures; and an
   infinite variety of apprehensions and affections, that he might have an
   all sufficiency in himself to enjoy them; a curiosity profound and
   unsatiable to stir him up to look into them: an ambition great and
   everlasting to carry him to the highest honours, thrones, and
   dignities: an emulation whereby he might be animated and quickened by
   all examples, a tenderness and compassion whereby he may be united to
   all persons, a sympathy and love to virtue; a tenderness of his credit
   in every soul, that he might delight to be honoured in all persons; an
   eye to behold Eternity and the omnipresence of God, that he might see
   Eternity, and dwell within it; a power of admiring, loving, and
   prizing, that seeing the beauty and goodness of God, he might be united
   to it for evermore.


   43

        In Divinity we are entertained with all objects from everlasting
   to everlasting: because with Him whose outgoings from everlasting:
   being to contemplate God, and to walk with Him in all His ways; and
   therefore to be entertained with all objects, as He is the fountain,
   governor, and end of them. We are to contemplate God in the unity of
   His essence, in the trinity of persons, in His manifold attributes, in
   all His works, internal and external, in His counsels and decrees, in
   the work of creation, and in His works of providence. And man, as he is
   a creature of God, capable of celestial blessedness, and a subject, in
   His Kingdom, in his fourfold estate of innocency, misery, grace and
   glory. In the estate of innocency we are to contemplate the nature and
   manner of his happiness, the laws under which he was governed, the joys
   of paradise, and the immaculate powers of his immortal soul. In the
   estate of misery, we have his fall, the nature of Sin, original and
   actual; his manifold punishments, calamity, sickness, death, &c. In the
   estate of grace; the tenour of the new covenant, the manner of its
   exhibition under the various dispensations of the Old and New
   Testament, the Mediator of the covenant, the conditions of it, faith
   and repentance, the sacraments or seals of it, the Scriptures,
   ministers, and sabbaths, the nature and government of the Church, its
   histories and successions from the beginning to the end of the world,
   &c. In the state of Glory, the nature of separate Souls, their
   advantages, excellencies and privileges, the resurrection of the body,
   the day of judgment, and life everlasting. Wherein further we are to
   see and understand the communion of Saints, Heavenly joys, and our
   society with Angels. To all which I was naturally born, to the fruition
   of all, which I was by Grace redeemed, and in the enjoyment of all
   which I am to live eternally.


   44

        Natural philosophy teaches us the causes and effects of all bodies
   simply and in themselves. But if you extend it a little further, to
   that indeed which its name imports, signifying the love of nature, it
   leads us into a diligent inquisition into all natures, their qualities,
   affections, relations, causes and ends, so far forth as by nature and
   reason they may be known. And this noble science, as such, is most
   sublime and perfect: it includes all Humanity and Divinity together.
   God, Angels, Men, Affections, Habits, Actions, Virtues, everything as
   it is a solid, entire object singly proposed, being a subject of it, as
   well as material and visible things. But taking it as it is usually
   bounded in its terms, it treateth only of corporeal things, as Heaven,
   Earth, Air, Water, Fire, the Sun and Stars, Trees, Herbs, Flowers,
   Influences, Winds, Fowls, Beasts, Fishes, Minerals, and Precious
   Stones, with all other beings of that kind. And as thus it is taken it
   is nobly subservient to the highest ends: for it openeth the riches of
   God's Kingdom and the natures of. His territories, works, and creatures
   in a wonderful manner, clearing and preparing the eyes of the enjoyer.


   45

        Ethics teach us the mysteries of morality, and the nature of
   affections, virtues, and manners, as by them we may be guided to our
   highest happiness. The former for speculation, this for practice. The
   former furnisheth us with riches, this with honours and delights, the
   former feasteth us, and this instructeth us. For by this we are taught
   to live honourably among men, and to make ourselves noble and useful
   among them. It teacheth us how to manage our passions, to exercise
   virtues, and to form our manners, so as to live happily in this world.
   And all these put together discover the materials of religion to be so
   great, that it plainly manifesteth the Revelation of God to be deep and
   infinite. For it is impossible for language, miracles, or apparitions
   to teach us the infallibility of God's word, or to shew us the
   certainty of true religion, without a clear sight into truth itself,
   that is unto the truth of things. Which will themselves when truly
   seen, by the very beauty and glory of them, best discover, and prove
   religion.


   46

        When I came into the country, and being seated among silent trees,
   and meads and hills, had all my time in mine own hands, I resolved to
   spend it all, whatever it cost me, in the search of happiness, and to
   satiate that burning thirst which Nature had enkindled in me from my
   youth. In which I was so resolute, that I chose rather to live upon ten
   pounds a year, and to go in leather clothes, and feed upon bread and
   water, so that I might have all my time clearly to myself, than to keep
   many thousands per annum in an estate of life where my time would be
   devoured in care and labour. And God was so pleased to accept of that
   desire, that from that time to this, I have had all things plentifully
   provided for me, without any care at all, my very study of Felicity
   making me more to prosper, than all the care in the whole world. So
   that through His blessing I live a free and a kingly life as if the
   world were turned again into Eden, or much more, as it is at this day.


   47

   1

        A life of Sabbaths here beneath!

        Continual jubilees and joys!

        The days of Heaven, while we breathe

        On Earth! where Sin all Bliss destroys:

        This is a triumph of delights

        That doth exceed all appetites:

        No joy can be compared to this,

        It is a life of perfect Bliss.


   2

        Of perfect Bliss! How can it be?

        To conquer Satan, and to reign

        In such a vale of misery,

        Where vipers, stings, and tears remain,

        Is to be crowned with victory.

        To be content, divine, and free,

        Even here beneath is great delight

        And next the Beatific Sight.


   3

        But inward lusts do oft assail,

        Temptations work us much annoy

        We'll therefore weep, and to prevail

        Shall be a more celestial joy.

        To have no other enemy

        But one; and to that one to die:

        To fight with that and conquer it,

        Is better than in peace to sit.


   4

        Tis better for a little time;

        For he that all his lusts doth quell,

        Shall find this life to be his prime

        And vanquish Sin, and conquer Hell.

        The next shall be his double joy;

        And that which here seemed to destroy

        Shall in the other life appear

        A root of bliss; a pearl each tear.


   48

        Thus you see I can make merry with calamities, and while I grieve
   at Sins, and war against them, abhorring the world, and myself more,
   descend into the abyss of humility, and there admire a new offspring
   and torrent of joys--God's Mercies. Which accepteth of our fidelity in
   bloody battles, though every wound defile and poison; and when we slip
   or fall, turneth our true penitent tears into solid pearl, that shall
   abide with Him for evermore. But oh let us take heed that we never
   willingly commit a sin against so gracious a Redeemer, and so great a
   Father:


   49

   1

                                         Sin!

                           O only fatal woe,

                    That mak'st me sad and mourning go!

                           That all my joys dost spoil,

                    His Kingdom and my Soul defile!

                           I never can agree

                                      With thee!


   2

                                       Thou!

                           Only thou! O thou alone,

                    And my obdurate heart of stone,

                           The poison and the foes

                    Of my enjoyments and repose,

                           The only bitter ill,

                                      Dost kill!


   3

                                        Oh!

                           I cannot meet with thee,

                    Nor once approach thy memory,

                           But all my joys are dead,

                    And all my sacred Treasures fled

                           As if I now did dwell

                                      In Hell.


   4

                                        Lord

                         O hear how short I breathe 1

                  See how I tremble here beneath

                         A Sin! Its ugly face

                  More terror, than its dwelling place

                             Contains (O dreadful Sin!)

                                      Within!


   50

   THE RECOVERY

                       Sin! wilt thou vanquish me?

                               And shall I yield the victory?

                       Shall all my joys be spoil'd,

                               And pleasures soil'd

                                        By thee?

                                    Shall I remain

                                 As one that's slain

         And never more lift up the head?

              Is not my Saviour dead?

         His blood, thy bane, my balsam, bliss, joy, wine,

         Shall thee destroy; heal, feed, make me divine.


   51

        I cannot meet with Sin, but it kills me, and tis only by Jesus
   Christ that I can kill it, and escape. Would you blame me to be
   confounded, when I have offended my Eternal Father, who gave me all the
   things in Heaven and Earth? One sin is a dreadful stumbling-block in
   the way to heaven. It breeds a long parenthesis in the fruition of our
   joys. Do you not see, my friend, how it disorders and disturbs my
   proceeding? There is no calamity but Sin alone.


   52

        When I came into the country, and saw that I had all time in my
   own hands, having devoted it wholly to the study of Felicity, I knew
   not where to begin or end; nor what objects to choose, upon which most
   profitably I might fix my contemplation. I saw myself like some
   traveller, that had destined his life to journeys, and was resolved to
   spend his days in visiting strange places: who might wander in vain,
   unless his undertakings were guided by some certain rule, and that
   innumerable millions of objects were presented before me, unto any of
   which I might take my journey. Fain would I have visited them all, but
   that was impossible. What then should I do? Even imitate a traveller,
   who because he cannot visit all coasts, wildernesses, sandy deserts,
   seas, hills, springs and mountains, chooseth the most populous and
   flourishing cities, where he might see the fairest prospects, wonders,
   and rarities, and be entertained with greatest courtesy: and where
   indeed he might most benefit himself with knowledge, profit and
   delight: leaving the rest, even the naked and empty places unseen. For
   which cause I made it my prayer to God Almighty that He, whose eyes are
   open upon all things, would guide me to the fairest and divinest.


   53

        And what rule do you think I walked by? Truly a strange one, but
   the best in the whole world. I was guided by an implicit faith in God's
   goodness: and therefore led to the study of the most obvious and common
   things. For thus I thought within myself God being, as we generally
   believe, infinite in goodness, it is most consonant and agreeable with
   His nature, that the best things should be most common. For nothing is
   more natural to infinite goodness, than to make the best things most
   frequent; and only things worthless scarce. Then I began to enquire
   what things were most common: Air, Light, Heaven and Earth, Water, the
   Sun, Trees, Men and Women, Cities, Temples, &c. These I found common
   and obvious to all: Rubies, Pearls, Diamonds, Gold and Silver, these I
   found scarce, and to the most denied. Then began I to consider and
   compare the value of them which I measured by their serviceableness,
   and by the excellencies which would be found in them, should they be
   taken away. And in conclusion, I saw clearly, that there was a real
   valuableness in all the common things; in the scarce, a feigned.


   54

        Besides these common things I have named, there were others as
   common, but invisible. The Laws of God, the Soul of Man, Jesus Christ
   and His Passion on the Cross, with the ways of God in all Ages. And
   these by the general credit they had obtained in the world confirmed me
   more. For the ways of God were transient things, they were past and
   gone; our Saviour's sufferings were in one particular, obscure place,
   the Laws of God were no object of the eye, but only found in the minds
   of men: these therefore which were so secret in their own nature, and
   made common only by the esteem men had of them, must of necessity
   include unspeakable worth for which they were celebrated of all, and so
   generally remembered. As yet I did not see the wisdom and depths of
   knowledge, the clear principles, and certain evidences whereby the wise
   and holy, the ancients and the learned that were abroad in the world
   knew these things but was led to them only by the fame which they had
   vulgarly received. Howbeit I believed that there were unspeakable
   mysteries contained in them, and tho' they were generally talked of
   their value was unknown. These therefore I resolved to study, and no
   other, But to my unspeakable wonder, they brought me to all the things
   in Heaven and in Earth, in Time and Eternity, possible and impossible,
   great and little, common and scarce; and discovered them all to be
   infinite treasures.


   55

   That anything may be found to be in infinite treasure, its place must
   be found in Eternity and in God's esteem. For as there is a .time, so
   there is a place for all things. Everything in its place is admirable,
   deep, and glorious; out of its place like a wandering bird, is desolate
   and good for nothing. How therefore it relateth to God and all
   creatures must be seen before it can be enjoyed. And this I found by
   many instances. The Sun is good, only as it relateth to the stars, to
   the seas, to your eye, to the fields, &c. As it relateth to the stars
   it raiseth their influences; as to the Seas, it melteth them and maketh
   the waters flow; as to your eye, it bringeth in the beauty of the
   world; as to the fields, it clotheth them with fruits and flowers. Did
   it not relate to others it would not be good. Divest it of these
   operations, and divide it from these objects, it is useless and good
   for nothing, and therefore worthless, because worthless and useless go
   together. A piece of gold cannot be valued, unless we know how it
   relates to clothes, to wine, to victuals, to the esteem of men and to
   the owner. Some little piece, in a kingly monument, severed from the
   rest, hath no beauty at all. It enjoys its value in its place, by the
   ornament it gives to, and receives from all the parts. By this I
   discerned, that even a little knowledge could not be had in the mystery
   of Felicity, without a great deal. And that that was the reason why so
   many were ignorant of its nature, and why so few did attain it. For by
   the labour required to much knowledge they were discouraged, and for
   lack of much did not see any glorious motives to allure them.


   56

        Therefore of necessity they must at first believe that Felicity is
   a glorious though an unknown thing. And certainly it was the infinite
   wisdom of God that did implant by instinct so strong a desire of
   Felicity in the Soul, that we might be excited to labour after it,
   though we know it not, the very force wherewith we covet it supplying
   the place of understanding. That there is a Felicity, we all know by
   the desires after, that there is a most glorious Felicity we know by
   the strength and vehemence of those desires. And that nothing but
   Felicity is worthy of our labour, because all other things are the
   means only which conduce unto it. I was very much animated by the
   desires of philosophers, which I saw in heathen books aspiring after
   it. But the misery is It was unknown. An altar was erected to it like
   that in Athens with this inscription: TO THE UNKNOWN GOD.


   57

        Two things in perfect Felicity I saw to be requisite and that
   Felicity must be perfect, or not Felicity. The first was the perfection
   of its objects, in nature, serviceableness, number, and excellency. The
   second was the perfection of the manner wherein they are enjoyed, for
   sweetness, measure, and duration. And unless in these I could be
   satisfied, I should never be contented: Especially about the latter.
   For the manner is always more excellent than the thing. And it far more
   concerneth us that the manner wherein we enjoy be complete and perfect,
   than that the matter which we enjoy be complete and perfect. For the
   manner, as we contemplate its excellency, is itself a great part of the
   matter of our enjoyment.


   58

        In discovering the matter or objects to be enjoyed, I was greatly
   aided by remembering that we were made in God's Image. For thereupon it
   must of necessity follow that God's Treasures be our Treasures, and His
   joys our joys. So that by enquiring what were God's, I found the
   objects of our Felicity, God's Treasures being ours. For we were made
   in His Image that we might live in His similitude. And herein I was
   mightily confirmed by the Apostle's blaming the Gentiles, and charging
   it upon them as a very great fault that they were alienated from the
   life of God, for hereby I perceived that we were to live the life of
   God, when we lived the true life of nature according to knowledge: and
   that by, blindness and corruption we had strayed from it. Now God's
   Treasures are His own perfections, and all His creatures.


   59

        The Image of God implanted in us, guided me to the manner wherein
   we were to enjoy. For since we were made in the similitude of God, we
   were made to enjoy after His similitude. Now to enjoy the treasures of
   God in the similitude of God, is the most perfect blessedness God could
   devise. For the treasures of God are the most perfect treasures, and
   the manner of God is the most perfect manner. To enjoy therefore the
   treasures of God after the similitude of God is to enjoy the most
   perfect treasures in the most perfect manner. Upon which I was most
   infinitely satisfied in God, and knew there was a Deity because I was
   satisfied. For in exerting Himself wholly in achieving thus an infinite
   Felicity He was infinitely delightful, great and glorious, and my
   desires so august and insatiable that nothing less than a Deity could
   satisfy them.


   60

        This spectacle once seen, will never be forgotten. It is a great
   part of the beatific vision. A sight of Happiness is Happiness. It
   transforms the Soul and makes it Heavenly, it powerfully calls us to
   communion with God, and weans us from the customs of this world. It
   puts a lustre upon God and all His creatures and makes us to see them
   in a Divine and Eternal Light. I no sooner discerned this but I was (as
   Plato saith, In summâ Rationis arce quies habitat) seated in a throne
   of repose and perfect rest. All things were well in their proper
   places, I alone was out of frame and had need to be mended. For all
   things were God's treasures in their proper places, and I was to be
   restored to God's Image. Whereupon you will not believe, how I was
   withdrawn from all endeavours of altering and mending outward things.
   They lay so well, methought, they could not be mended: but I must be
   mended to enjoy them.


   61

        The Image of God is the most perfect creature. Since there cannot
   be two Gods the utmost endeavour of Almighty Power is the Image of God.
   It is no blasphemy to say that God cannot make a God: the greatest
   thing that He can make is His Image: a most perfect creature, to enjoy
   the most perfect treasures, in the most perfect manner. A creature
   endued with the most divine and perfect powers, for measure, kind,
   number, duration, and excellency is the most perfect creature: able to
   see all eternity with all its objects, and as a mirror to contain all
   that it seeth: able to love all it contains, and as a Sun to shine upon
   its caves: able by shining to communicate itself in beams of affection
   and to illustrate all it illuminates with beauty and glory: able to be
   wise, holy, glorious, blessed in itself, as God is; being adorned
   inwardly with the same kind of beauty, and outwardly superior to all
   creatures.


   62

        Upon this I began to believe that all other creatures were such
   that God was Himself in their creation, that is Almighty Power wholly
   exerted: and that every creature is indeed as it seemed in my infancy,
   not as it is commonly apprehended. Every thing being sublimely rich and
   great and glorious. Every spire of grass is the work of His hand: And I
   in a world where everything is mine, and far better than the greater
   sort of children esteem diamonds and pearls to be. Gold and silver
   being the very refuse of Nature, and the worst things in God's Kingdom:
   Howbeit truly good in their proper places.


   63

        To be satisfied in God is the highest difficulty in the whole
   world, and yet most easy to be done. To make it possible that we should
   be satisfied in God was an achievement of infinite weight, before it
   was attempted, and the most difficult thing in all worlds before it was
   achieved. For we naturally expect infinite things of God: and can be
   satisfied only with the highest reason. So that the best of all
   possible things must be wrought in God, or else we shall remain
   dissatisfied: But it is most easy at present, because God is. For God
   is not a being compounded of body and soul, or substance and accident,
   or power and act, but is all act; pure act, a Simple Being whose
   essence is to be, whose Being is to be perfect so that He is most
   perfect towards all and in all. He is most perfect for all and by all.
   He is in nothing imperfect, because His Being is to be perfect. It is
   impossible for Him to be God and imperfect: and therefore do we so
   ardently and infinitely desire His absolute perfection.


   64

        Neither is it possible to be otherwise. All His power being turned
   into Act, it is all exerted: infinitely and wholly. Neither is there
   any power in Him which He is not able and willing to use: or which He
   cannot wisely guide to most excellent ends. So that we may expect most
   angelical and heavenly rarities in all the creatures. Were there any
   power in God unemployed He would be compounded of Power and Act. Being
   therefore God is all Act, He is a God in this, that Himself is Power
   exerted. An infinite Act because infinite power infinitely exerted. An
   Eternal Act because infinite power eternally exerted. Wherein
   consisteth the generation of His Son, the perfection of His Love, and
   the immutability of God. For God by exerting Himself begot His Son, and
   doing it wholly for the sake of His creatures, is perfect Love; and
   doing it wholly from all Eternity, is an Eternal Act, and therefore
   unchangeable.


   65

        With this we are delighted because it is absolutely impossible
   that any Power dwelling with Love should continue idle. Since God
   therefore was infinitely and eternally communicative, all things were
   contained in Him from all Eternity. As Nazianzen in his 38th Oration
   admirably expressed it in these words, "Because it was by no means
   sufficient for GOODNESS to move only in the contemplation of itself:
   but it became what was GOOD to be diffused and propagated, that more
   might be affected with the benefit (for this was the part of the
   Highest GOODNESS:) first He thought upon angelical and celestial
   virtues, and that thought was the work which he wrought by the WORD and
   fulfilled by the SPIRIT. Atque ita Secundi Splendores procreati primi
   splendoris Administri. And so were there second splendours created, and
   made to minister to the first splendour, so that all motions,
   successions, creatures, and operations with their beginnings and ends
   were in Him from Everlasting. To whom nothing can be added because from
   all Eternity He was whatsoever to all Eternity He can be. All things
   being now to be seen and contemplated in His bosom; and advanced
   therefore into a Diviner Light, being infinitely older, and more
   precious than we were aware. Time itself being in God eternally.


   66

        Little did I imagine that, while I was thinking these things, I
   was conversing with God. I was so ignorant that I did not think any man
   in the World had had such thoughts before. Seeing them therefore so
   amiable I wondered not a little, that nothing was spoken of them in
   former ages: but as I read the Bible I was here and there surprised
   with such thoughts, and found by degrees that these things had been
   written of before, not only in the Scriptures, but in many of the
   Fathers, and that this was the way of communion with God in all Saints,
   as I saw clearly in the person of David. Methought a new light darted
   in into all his psalms, and finally spread abroad over the whole Bible.
   So that things which for their obscurity I thought not in being were
   there contained: things which for their greatness were incredible were
   made evident, and things obscure plain. God by this means bringing me
   into the very heart of His Kingdom.


   67

      There I saw Moses blessing the Lord for the precious things of
   Heaven, for the dew and for the deep that coucheth beneath: and for the
   precious fruits brought forth by the Sun, and for the precious things
   put forth by the moon: and for the chief things of the ancient
   mountains, and for the precious things of the lasting hills; and for
   the precious things of the earth, and fulness thereof. There I saw
   Jacob with awful apprehensions admiring the glory of the world, when
   awaking out of his dream, he said, How dreadful is this place. This is
   none other than the House of God, and the Gate of Heaven. There I saw
   God leading forth Abraham, and showing him the stars of Heaven; and all
   the countries round about him, and saying, All these will I give thee,
   and thy seed after thee. There I saw Adam in Paradise, surrounded with
   the beauty of Heaven and Earth, void of all earthly comforts, to wit,
   such as were devised, gorgeous apparel, palaces, gold and silver,
   coaches, musical instruments, &c; and entertained only with celestial
   joys, the sun and moon and stars, beasts and fowls and fishes, trees
   and fruits, and flowers, with the other naked and simple delights of
   nature. By which I evidently saw that the way to become rich and
   blessed was not by heaping accidental and devised riches to make
   ourselves great in the vulgar manner, but to approach more near, or to
   see more clearly with he eye of our understanding, the beauties and
   glories of the whole world: and to have communion with the Deity in the
   riches of God and Nature.


   68

        I saw moreover that it did not so much concern us what objects
   were before us, as with what eyes we beheld them, with what affections
   we esteemed them, and what apprehensions we had about them. All men see
   the same objects, but do not equally understand them. Intelligence is
   the tongue that discerns and tastes them, Knowledge is the Light of
   Heaven, Love is the Wisdom and Glory of God, Life extended to all
   objects is the sense that enjoys them. So that Knowledge, Life, and
   Love are the very means of all enjoyment, which above all things we
   must seek for and labour after. All objects are in God Eternal: which
   we by perfecting our faculties are made to enjoy. Which then are turned
   into Act, when they are exercised about their objects; but without them
   are desolate and idle; or discontented and forlorn. Whereby I perceived
   the meaning of the definition wherein Aristotle describeth Felicity,
   when he saith, Felicity is the perfect exercise of perfect virtue in a
   perfect Life. For that life is perfect when it is perfectly extended to
   all objects, and perfectly sees them, and perfectly loves them: which
   is done by a perfect exercise of virtue about them.


   69

   1

                In Salem dwelt a glorious King,

                Raised from a shepherd's lowly state;

         That did His praises like an angel sing

                      Who did the World create.

                By many great and bloody wars

                He was advanced unto Thrones

                But more delighted in the stars

         Than in the splendour of his precious stones;

         Nor gold nor silver did his eye regard

         The Works of God were his sublime reward,


   2

                A warlike champion he had been,

                And many feats of chivalry

         Had done: in kingly courts his eye had seen

                      A vast variety

                Of earthly joys: Yet he despis'd

                Those fading honours, and false pleasures

                Which are by mortals so much prized;

         And placed his happiness in other treasures

         No state of life which in this world we find

         Could yield contentment to his greater mind.


   3

                His fingers touched his trembling lyre,

                And every quavering string did yield

         A sound that filled all the Jewish quire,

                      And echoed in the field.

                No pleasure was so great to him

                As in a silent night to see

                The moon and stars: A cherubim

         Above them, even here, he seem'd to be:

         Enflam'd with Love it was his great desire,

         To sing, contemplate, ponder, and admire.


   4

                He was a prophet, and foresaw

                Things extant in the world to come:

         He was a judge, and ruled by a law

                      That than the honeycomb


         Was sweeter far: he was a sage,

                And all his people could advise;

                An oracle, whose every page

         Contained in verse the greatest mysteries;

         But most he then enjoyed himself when he

         Did as a poet praise the Deity.


   5

                A shepherd, soldier, and divine,

                A judge, a courtier, and a king,

         Priest, angel, prophet, oracle, did shine

                      At once when he did sing.

                Philosopher and poet too

                Did in his melody appear;

                All these in him did please the view

         Of those that did his heavenly music hear

         And every drop that from his flowing quill

         Came down, did all the world with nectar fill


   6

                He had a deep and perfect sense

                Of all the glories and the pleasures

         That in God's works are hid: the excellence

                      Of such transcendent treasures

                Made him on earth an heavenly king,

                And filled his solitudes with joy;

                He never did more sweetly sing

        Than when alone, though that doth mirth destroy:*


   * In this line "removed from all annoy" was first written, but
   afterwards crossed out, and the above reading substituted.

        Sense did his soul with heavenly life inspire,

        And made him seem in God's celestial quire.


   7

                Rich, sacred, deep and precious things

                    Did here on earth the man surround:

         With all the Glory of the King of Kings

                      He was most strangely crowned.

                His clear soul and open sight

                Among the Sons of God did see

                Things filling Angels with delight:

         His ear did hear their heavenly melody,

         And when he was alone he all became

         That Bliss implied, or did increase his fame.


   8

                All arts he then did exercise;

                And as his God he did adore

         By secret ravishments above the skies

                      He carried was before

                He died. His soul did see and feel

                What others know not; and became,

                While he before his God did kneel,

         A constant, heavenly, pure, seraphic flame.

         Oh that I might unto his throne aspire,

         And all his joys above the stars admire!



   70

        When I saw those objects celebrated in his psalms which God and
   Nature had proposed to me, and which I thought chance only presented to
   my view, you cannot imagine how unspeakably I was delighted, to see so
   glorious a person, so great a prince, so divine a sage, that was a man
   after God's own heart, by the testimony of God Himself, rejoicing in
   the same things, meditating on the same, and praising God for the same.
   For by this I perceived we were led by one Spirit, and that following
   the clue of Nature into this labyrinth, I was brought into the midst of
   celestial joys: and that to be retired from earthly cares and fears and
   distractions that we might in sweet and heavenly peace contemplate all
   the Works of God, was to live in Heaven, and the only way to become
   what David was, a man after God's own heart. There we might be enflamed
   with those causes for which we ought to love Him: there we might see
   those viands which feed the Soul with Angels' food: there we might
   bathe in those streams of pleasure that flow at His right hand for
   evermore.


   71

        That hymn of David in the eighth Psalm was supposed to be made by
   night, wherein he celebrateth the Works of God; because he mentioneth
   the moon and stars, but not the sun in his meditation. When I consider
   the Heavens which Thou hast made, the moon and stars, which are the
   work of Thy fingers, what is man that Thou art mindful of him, or the
   Son of man that Thou visitest him? Thou hast made him a little lower
   than the Angels, and past crowned him with glory and honour. Thou hast
   given him dominion over the works of Thy hands, Thou hast Put all
   things in subjection under his feet; all sheep and oxen, yea and the
   beasts of the fields; the fowls of the air, and the fishes of the sea,
   and whatsoever passeth through the paths of the sea. This glory and
   honour wherewith man is crowned ought to affect every person that is
   grateful, with celestial joy: and so much the rather because it is
   every man's proper and sole inheritance.


   72

        His joyful meditation in the nineteenth psalm directeth every man
   to consider the glory of Heaven and Earth.The Heavens declare the glory
   of God, and the firmament showeth Ht's handiwork. Day unto day uttereth
   speech, and night unto night showeth knowledge. There is no speech nor
   language where their voice is not heard. Their line is gone throughout
   all the earth, and their voice to the end of the world. In them hath He
   set a tabernacle for the sun, which is as a bridegroom corning out of
   his chamber, and rejoiceth as a strong man to run his race. His going
   forth is from the end of the heaven and his circuit to the ends of it;
   and nothing is hid from the heat thereof. From thence he proceedeth to
   the laws of God, as things more excellent in their nature than His
   works. The Law of the Lord is perfect, converting the Soul; the
   testimony of the Lord is sure, making wise the simple. The statutes of
   the Lord are right, rejoicing the heart; the commandment of the Lord is
   pure, enlightening the eyes. The fear of the Lord is clean, enduring
   for ever; the judgments of the Lord are true and righteous altogether.
   More to be desired are they than gold, yea, than much fine gold;
   sweeter also than honey and the honeycomb. Whereby he plainly showeth
   that Divine and Kingly delights are in the laws and works of God to be
   taken by all those that would be angelical and celestial creatures. For
   that in the Kingdom of Heaven every one being disentangled from
   particular relations and private riches, as if he were newly taken out
   of nothing to the fruition of all Eternity, was in these alone to
   solace himself as his peculiar treasures.


   73

        Ye that fear the Lord, praise Him; all ye seed of Jacob, glorify
   Him, and fear Him all ye seed of Israel. For He hath not despised nor
   abhorred the affliction of the afflicted, neither hath He hid His Face
   from him, but when he cried unto Him He heard. My praise shall be of
   Thee in the great Congregation; I will pay my vows before them that
   fear Him. The meek shall eat and be satisfied. They shall praise the
   Lord that seek Him; your heart shall live for ever fill the ends of the
   World shall remember and turn unto the Lord, all the kindreds of the
   Nations shall worship before Thee. For the Kingdom is the Lord's, and
   He is the governor among the Nations. All they that be fat upon Earth
   shall eat and worship: all they that go down to the deed shall bow bore
   Him, and none can keep alive his own Soul. A seed shall serve Him, it
   shall be counted to the Lord for a generation. They shall come and
   declare His righteousness to a people that shall be born, that He hath
   done this. Here he sheweth that it was his desire and delight to have
   all Nations praising God: and that the condescension of the Almighty in
   stooping down to the poor and needy was the joy of his soul. He
   prophesieth also of the conversion of the Gentiles to the knowledge of
   Jesus Christ, which to see was to him an exceeding pleasure.


   74

        The Earth is the Lord's and the fulness thereof, the round world
   and they that dwell therein. He observeth here that God by a
   comprehensive possession, and by way of eminence, enjoyeth the whole
   world; all mankind and all the Earth, with all that is therein, being
   His peculiar treasures. Since therefore we are made in the image of
   God, to live in His similitude, as they are His, they must be our
   treasures, We being wise and righteous over all as He is. Because they
   regard not the Works of the Lord, nor the operations of His hands,
   therefore shall He destroy them, and not build them up.


   75

        By the Word of the Lord were the Heavens made, and all the Host of
   them by the breath of His mouth. He gathereth the waters of the sea
   together, He layeth up the depth in storehouses. Let all the Earth fear
   the Lord, let all the inhabitants of the world stand in awe of Him. For
   He spake, and it was done; He commanded, and it stood fast. He
   frequently meditateth upon the Works of God, ands affirmeth the
   contemplation of them to beget His fear in our hearts. For that He
   being great in strength, not one faileth.


   76

        All my bones shall say, Lord, who is like unto Thee, who delivered
   the poor from him that is too strong for him; yea, the door and the
   needy from him that spoileth him! Thy mercy, O Lord, is above the
   Heavens, and Thy faithfulness reacheth to the clouds. Thy righteousness
   is like the great mountains, Thy judgnaents are a great deed: O Lord,
   thou preservest man and beast. How excellent is Thy loving kindness, O
   God! Therefore the children of men but their trust in the shadow of Thy
   wings. They shall be abundantly satisfied with the fatness of Thy
   house; and Thou shalt make them drink of the river of Thy pleasures:
   For with Thee is the Fountain of Life. In Thy light we shall see light.
   The judgments of God, and His loving kindness, His mercy and
   faithfulness, are the fatness of His house, and His righteousness being
   seen in the Light of Glory is the torrent of pleasure at His right hand
   for evermore.


   77

        Hearken, O Daughter, and consider and incline thine ear, forget
   also Mine own people and thy father's house. So shall the King greatly
   desire thy beauty, for He is thy Lord, and worship thou Him. The King's
   daughter is all glorious within, her clothing is of wrought gold. She
   shall be brought unto the King in raiment of needlework, the virgins
   her companions that follow her shall be brought unto Thee. With
   gladness and rejoicing shall they be brought, they shall enter into the
   King's Palace. Instead of thy fathers shall be thy children, whom thou
   mayest make princes in all the Earth. The psalmist here singeth an
   Epithalamium upon the marriage between Christ and His Church: whom he
   persuadeth to forsake her country and her father's house together with
   all the customs and vanities of this World: and to dedicate herself
   wholly to our Saviour's Service. Since she is in exchange to enter into
   His palace, and become a bride to so glorious a person. The Bridegroom
   and the Bride, the Palace (which is all the world) with all that is
   therein, being David's joy and his true possession. Nay every child of
   this Bride is if a male, a Prince over all the earth; if a female,
   Bride to the King of Heaven. And every Soul that is a spouse of Jesus
   Christ, esteemeth all the Saints her own children and her own bowels.


   78

        There is a river, the streams whereof shall make glad the City of
   God, the holy place of the tabernacle of the Most High. He praiseth the
   means of grace which in the midst of this world are great consolations,
   and in all distresses, refresh our souls. Come behold the Works of the
   Lord, what desolations He hath made in the Earth. He exhorteth us to
   contemplate God's Works, which are so perfect, that when His secret and
   just judgments are seen, the very destruction of Nations, and laying
   waste of Cities, shall be sweet and delightful.


   79

        O clap your hands, all ye people, shout unto Cod with the voice of
   triumph. For the Lord most high is terrible, He is a Great King over
   all the Earth. He shall choose our inheritance for us, the excellency
   of Jacob whom He loved. Beautiful for situation, the joy of the whole
   earth is Mount Sion; on the sides of the north, the city of the Great
   King. God is known in her palaces for a refuge. Walk about Sion and go
   round about her, tell the towers thereof; mark ye well her bulwarks,
   consider her palaces, that ye may tell it to the generation following
   For this God is our God for ever and ever. He will be our guide even
   unto death.


   80

        As in the former psalms he propeseth true and celestial joys, so
   in this following he discovereth the vanity of false imaginations. They
   that trust in their wealth, and boast themselves in the multitude of
   their riches, none of them can by any means redeem his brother, or give
   unto God a ransom for him. For the redemption of their soul is precious
   and it ceaseth forever. For he seeth that wise men die, likewise the
   fool and brutish person perish; and leave their wealth to others. Their
   inward thought is, that their houses shall continue forever, and their
   dwelling places to all generations. They call their lands after their
   own names. This their way is their folly, yet their Posterity reprove
   their sayings. Like sheep they are laid in the grave, death shall feed
   sweetly on them, and the upright shall have dominion over them in the
   morning, and their beauty shall consume in the grave from their
   dwelling. Man that is in honour and understandeth not, is like the
   beast that perisheth.


   81

       Hear, O my people, and I will speak; O Israel, and I will testify
   against thee. I am God, even thy God. I will not reprove thee for thy
   sacrifices or thy burnt oferings, to have been continually before me. I
   will take no bullock out of thy house, nor he-goats out of thy folds.
   For every beast of the forest is mine, and the cattle upon a thousand
   hills. I know all the fowls of the mountains, and the wild beasts of
   the field are mine. If I were hungry I would not tell thee; for the
   World is mine, and the fulness thereof. Will I eat the flesh of bulls
   or drink the blood of goats? Offer unto God thanksgiving, and pay thy
   vows to the Most High. And call upon me in the day of trouble; I will
   deliver thee, and thou shalt glorify me. When I was a little child, I
   thought that everyone that lifted up his eyes to behold the sun, did me
   in looking on it, wonderful service. And certainly being moved thereby
   to praise my Creator, it was in itself a service wonderfully
   delightful. For since God so much esteemeth praises, that He preferreth
   them above thousands of rams and tens of thousands of rivers of oil: if
   I love Him with that inflamed ardour and zeal I ought His praises must
   needs be delightful to me above all services and riches whatsoever.
   That which hinders us from seeing the glory and discerning the
   sweetness of praises hinders us also from knowing the manner how we are
   concerned in them. But God knoweth infinite reasons, for which He
   preferreth them. If I should tell you what they are, you would be apt
   to despise them. Divine and heavenly mysteries being thirsted after
   till they are known, but by corrupted nature undervalued. Howbeit since
   grace correcteth the perverseness of nature, and tasteth in a better
   manner, it shall not be long, till somewhere we disclose them.


   82

        Are not praises the very end for which the world was created? Do
   they not consist as it were of knowledge, complacency, and
   thanksgiving? Are they not better than all the fowls and beasts and
   fishes in the world? What are the cattle upon a thousand hills but
   carcases, without creatures that can rejoice in God, and enjoy them? It
   is evident that praises are infinitely more excellent than all the
   creatures because they proceed from men and angels. For as streams do,
   they derive an excellency from their fountains, and are the last
   tribute that can possibly be paid to the Creator. Praises are the
   breathings of interior love, the marks and symptoms of a happy life,
   overflowing gratitude, returning benefits, an oblation of the soul, and
   the heart ascending upon the wings of divine affection to the Throne of
   God. God is a Spirit and cannot feed on carcases: but He can be
   delighted with thanksgivings, and is infinitely pleased with the
   emanations of our joy, because Himself is admired and His works are
   esteemed. What can be more acceptable to love than that it should be
   prized and magnified? Because therefore God is love, and His measure
   infinite, He infinitely desires to be admired and beloved, and so our
   praises enter into the very secret of His Eternal Bosom, and mingle
   with Him who dwelleth in that light which is inaccessible. What
   strengths are there even in flattery to please a great affection? Are
   not your bowels moved, and your affections melted with delight and
   pleasure, when your soul is precious in the eye of those you love? When
   your affection is pleased, your love prized, and they satisfied? To
   prize love is the highest service in the whole world that can be done
   unto it. But there are a thousand causes moving God to esteem our
   praises, more than we can well apprehend. However, let these inflame
   you, and move you to praise Him night and day forever.


   83

        Of our Saviour it is said, Sacrifice and offering Thou wouldst
   not, but a body hast Thou prepared me, all Sacrifices being but types
   and figures of Himself, and Himself infinitely more excellent than they
   all. Of a broken heart also it is said, Thou desirest not sacrifice
   else I would give it. Thou delightest not in burnt offering. The
   sacrifices of God are a broken spirit; a broken and contrite heart, O
   God, Thou wilt not despise. One deep and serious groan is more
   acceptable to God than the creation of a world. In spiritual things we
   find the greatest excellency. As praises, because they are the pledges
   of our mutual affection, so groans, because they are pledges of a due
   contrition, are the greatest sacrifices. Both proceed from love, and in
   both we manifest and exercise our friendship. In contrition we show our
   penitence for having offended, and by that are fitted to rehearse His
   praises. All the desire wherewith He longs after a returning sinner,
   makes Him to esteem a broken heart. What can more melt and dissolve a
   lover than the tears of an offending and returning friend? Here also is
   the sailing verified, The falling out of lovers is the beginning of
   love, the renewing, the repairing, and the strengthening of it.


   84

        An enlarged soul that seeth all the world praising God, or
   penitent by bewailing their offences and converting to Him, hath his
   eye fixed upon the joy of Angels. It needeth nothing but the sense of
   God to inherit all things. We must borrow and derive it from Him by
   seeing His, and aspiring after it. Do but clothe yourself with Divine
   resentments and the world shall be to you the valley of vision, and all
   the nations and kingdoms of the world shall appear in splendour and
   celestial glory.


   85

        The righteous shall rejoice when he seeth the vengeance, he shall
   wash his feet in the blood of the wicked. But I will sing of Thy power,
   yea I will sing aloud of Thy mercy in the morning. For Thou host been
   my defence in the day of my trouble. The deliverances of your former
   life are objects of your felicity, and so is the vengeance of the
   wicked. With both which in all times and places you are ever to be
   present in your memory and understanding. For lack of considering its
   objects the soul is desolate.


   86

        My soul thirsteth for Thee, my flesh longeth for Thee in a dry and
   thirsty land where no water is. To see Thy power and Thy glory so as I
   have seen Thee in the Sanctuary. Because Thy loving-kindness is better
   than life, my lips shall praise Thee. Thus will I bless Thee while I
   live, I will lift up mine hands in Thy name. My soul shall be satisfied
   as with marrow and fatness, and my mouth shall raise Thee with joyful
   lips. O Thou that Nearest prayer, unto Thee shall all flesh come.
   Blessed is the man whom Thou choosest and causest to approach unto
   Thee, that he may dwell in Thy courts. We shall be satisfied with the
   goodness of this house, even of this Holy Temple. See how is the 65th
   psalm he introduceth the: meditation of God's visible works sweetly
   into the Tabernacle and maketh them to be the fatness of His house,
   even of His Holy Temple. God is seen when His love is manifested. God
   is enjoyed when His love is prized. When we see the glory of His wisdom
   and goodness and His power exerted, then we see His glory. And these we
   cannot see till we see their works. When therefore we see His works, in
   them as in a mirror we see His glory.


   87

        Make a joyful noise unto God, all ye lands, sing forth the honour
   of His name, make His praise glorious. Say unto God,, how terrible art
   Thou in Thy works? Through the greatness of Thy power shall Thine
   enemies submit themselves unto Thee. All the earth shall worship Thee,
   and sing unto Thee, they shall sing to Thy name. Come and see the works
   of God, He is terrible in his doing towards the children of man. The
   prospect of all. Nations praising Him is far sweeter than the prospect
   of the fields or silent Heavens serving them, though you see the skies
   adorned with stars, and the fields covered with corn and flocks of
   sheep and cattle. When the eye of your understanding shineth upon them,
   they are yours in Him, and all your joys.


   88

        God is my King, of old working salvation in the midst of the
   Earth. He divided the sea by His strength. He brake the heads of
   Leviathan in pieces. His heart is always abroad in the midst of the
   earth; seeing and rejoicing in His wonders there. His soul is busied in
   the ancient works of God for His people Israel. The day is thine, the
   night also is thine, Thou hast prepared the Light and the Sun. Thou
   hast set all the borders of the earth. Thou hast made summer and
   winter. He proposeth more objects of our felicity in which we ought to
   meet the goodness of God, that we might rejoice before Him. The day and
   night, the light and the sun are God's treasures, and ours also.


   89

        In the 78th psalm, he commandeth all ages to record the ancient
   ways of God, and recommendeth them to our meditation, shewing the
   ordinance of God, that fathers should teach their children, and they
   another generation: which certainly since they are not to be seen in
   the visible world, but only in the memory and minds of men. The memory
   and mind are a strange region of celestial light, and a wonderful
   place, as well as a large and sublime one, in which they may be seen.
   What is contained in the souls of men being as visible to us as the
   very heavens.


   90

        In the 84th psalm he longeth earnestly after the Tabernacle of
   God, and preferreth a day in His courts above a thousand. Because
   there, as Deborah speaketh in her song, was the place of drawing
   waters, that is of repentance; and of rehearsing the righteous acts of
   the Lord, which it is more blessed to do than to inherit the palaces of
   wicked men.


   91

        Among the Gods there is none like unto Thee. Neither are there any
   works like unto Thy works. All nations whom Thou hast made, shall come
   and worship Thee, O Lord, and shall glorify Thy name. For Thou art
   great, and doest wondrous things. Thou art God alone. This is a
   glorious meditation, wherein the psalmist gives himself liberty to
   examine the excellency of God's works, and finding them infinitely
   great and above all that can be besides, rejoiceth and admireth the
   goodness of God, and resteth satisfied with complacency in them. That
   they were all his, he knew well, being the gifts of God made unto him,
   and that he was to have communion with God in the enjoyment of them.
   But their excellency was a thing unsearchable and their
   incomparableness above all imagination, which he found by much study to
   his infinite delectation.


   92

        In his other psalms he proceedeth to speak of the works of God
   over and over again: sometimes stirring up all creatures to praise God
   for the very delight he took in their admirable perfections, sometimes
   shewing. God's goodness and mercy by them, and sometimes rejoicing
   himself and triumphing in them. By all this teaching us what we ought
   to do, that we might become divine and heavenly. In the 103rd psalm he
   openeth the nature of God's present mercies, both towards himself in
   particular, and towards all in general, turning emergencies in this
   world into celestial joys. In the 104th psalm he insisteth wholly upon
   the beauty of God's works in the creation, making all things in Heaven
   and Earth, and in the heaven of heavens, in the wilderness and the sea
   his private and personal delights. In the 105th and 106th psalms he
   celebrateth the ways of God in former ages with as much vehemency, zeal
   and pleasure as if they were new things, and as if he were present with
   them seeing their beauty and tasting their delight that very moment. In
   the 107th psalm he contemplates the ways of God in the dispensations of
   His providence, over travellers, sick men, seamen, &c., shewing that
   the way to be much in heaven is to be much employed here upon Earth in
   the meditation of divine and celestial things. For such are these,
   though they seem terrestrial. All which he concludeth thus: Whoso
   considereth these things, even he shall understand this lovingkindness
   of the Lord. In the 119th psalm, like an enamoured person, and a man
   ravished in spirit with joy and pleasure, he treateth upon Divine laws,
   and over and over again maketh mention of their beauty and perfection.
   By all which we may see what inward life we ought to lead with God in
   the Temple. And that to be much in the meditation of God's works, and
   laws, to see their excellency, to taste their sweetness; to behold
   their glory, to admire, and rejoice and overflow with praises is to
   live in Heaven. But unless we have a communion with David in a rational
   knowledge of their nature and excellency, we can never understand the
   grounds of his complacency, or depth of his resentments*.


   93

        In our outward life towards men the psalmist also is an admirable
   precedent: In weeping for those that forget God's law, in publishing
   His praises in the congregation of the righteous, in speaking of His
   testimonies without cowardice or shame even before princes, in
   delighting in the saints, in keeping promises though made to his hurt,
   in tendering the life of his enemies, and clothing himself with
   sack-cloth when they were sick, in showing mercy to the poor, in
   enduring the songs and mockings of the drunkards, in taking care to
   glorify the Author of all Bounty; with a splendid temple arid musical
   instruments in this world, in putting his


   *This word is here and elsewhere used in its original and proper sense
   of a deep feeling or sentiment.?Ed.

   trust and confidence in God among all his enemies, evermore promoting
   His honour and glory, instructing others in the excellency of His ways,
   and endeavouring to establish His worship in Israel. Thus ought we to
   the best of our power to express our gratitude and friendships to so
   great a benefactor in all the effects of love and fidelity, doing His
   pleasure with all our might, and promoting His honour with all our
   power.


   94

        There are psalms more clear wherein he expresseth the joy he
   taketh in God's works and the glory of them. Wherein he teacheth us at
   divers times and in divers manner to ponder on them. Among which the
   145th psalm (and so onward to the last) are very eminent. In which he
   openeth the nature of God's Kingdom, and so vigorously and vehemently
   exciteth all creatures to praise Him, and all men to do it with all
   kind of musical instruments by all expressions, in all nations for all
   things, as ten thousand vents were not sufficient to ease his fulness,
   as if all the world were but one Celestial Temple in which he was
   delighted, as if all nations were present before him, and he saw God
   face to face in this earthly Tabernacle, as if his soul like an
   infinite ocean were full of joys, and all these but springs and
   channels overflowing. So purely, so joyfully, so powerfully he walked
   with God, all creatures, as they brought a confluence of joys unto him,
   being pipes to ease him.


   95

        His soul recovered its pristine liberty, and saw through the mud
   walls of flesh and blood. Being alive, he was in the spirit all his
   days. While his body therefore was inclosed in this world, his soul was
   in the temple of Eternity, and clearly beheld the infinite life and
   omnipresence of God: Having conversation with invisible, spiritual, and
   immaterial things, which were its companions, itself being invisible,
   spiritual and immaterial. Kingdoms and Ages did surround him, as
   clearly as the hills and mountains: and therefore the Kingdom of God
   was ever round about him. Everything was one way or other his sovereign
   delight and transcendent pleasure, as in Heaven everything will be
   everyone's peculiar treasure.


   96

        He saw these things only in the light of faith, and yet rejoiced
   as if he had seen them by the Light of Heaven, which argued the
   strength and glory of his faith. And whereas he so rejoiced in all the
   nations of the earth for praising God, he saw them doing it in the
   light of prophesy, not of history: Much more therefore should we
   rejoice, who see these prophecies fulfilled, since the fulfilling of
   them is so blessed, divine, and glorious, that the very prevision of
   their accomplishment transported and ravished this glorious person. But
   we wither and for lack of sense shrivel up into nothing, who should be
   filled with the delights of ages.


   97

        By this we understand what it is to be the Sons of God, and what
   it is to live in communion with Him, what it is to be advanced to His
   Throne, and to reign in His Kingdom, with all those other glorious and
   marvellous expressions that are applied to men in the Holy Scriptures.
   To be the Sons of God is not only to enjoy the privileges and the
   freedom of His house, and to bear the relation of children to so great
   a Father, but it is to be like Him, and to share with Him in all His
   glory, and in all His treasures. To be like Him in spirit and
   understanding, to be exalted above all creatures as the end of them, to
   be present as He is by sight and love, without limit and without
   bounds, with all His works, to be Holy towards all and wise towards
   all, as He is. Prizing all His goodness in all with infinite ardour,
   that as glorious and eternal kings being pleased in all, we might reign
   over all for evermore.


   98

        This greatness both of God towards us, and of ourselves towards
   Him, we ought always as much as possible to retain in our
   understanding. And when we cannot effectually keep it alive in our
   senses, to cherish the memory of it in the centre of our hearts, and do
   all things in the power of it. For the Angels when they come to us, so
   fulfill their outward ministry, that within they nevertheless maintain
   the beatific vision ministering before the Throne of God, and among the
   sons of men at the same time. The reason where of St. Gregory with is
   this: The the Spirit of an Angel be limited and circumscribed in
   itself, yet the Supreme Spirit, which is God, is uncircumscribed. He is
   everywhere and wholly everywhere: which makes their knowledge to be
   dilated everywhere. For being wholly everywhere, they are immediately
   present with His omnipresence in everyplace and wholly. It filleth them
   for ever.


   99

        This sense that God is so great in goodness, and we so great in
   glory, as to be His sons, and so rich as to live in communion with Him,
   and so individually united to Him, that He is in us, and we in Him,
   will make us do all our duties not only with incomparable joy but
   courage also. It will fill us with zeal andfidelity, and make us to
   overflow with praises. For if which one cause alone the knowledge of it
   ought infinitely to be esteemed. For to be ignorant of this, is to sit
   in darkness, and to be a child of darkness: it maketh us to be without
   God in the world, exceeding weak, timorous, and feeble, comfortless and
   barren, dead and unfruitful, lukewarm, indifferent, dumb, unfaithful.
   To which I may add, that it makes us uncertain. For so glorious is the
   face of God and true religion, that it is impossible to see it, but in
   transcendent splendour. Nor can we know that God is till we see Him
   infinite in goodness. Nothing therefore will make us certain of His
   Being but His Glory.


   100

        To enjoy communion with God is to abide with Him in the fruition
   of His Divine and Eternal Glory, in all His attributes, in all His
   thoughts, in all His creatures, in His Eternity, Infinity, Almighty
   Power, Sovereignty, &c. In all those works which from all Eternity He
   wrought in Himself; as the generation of His Son, the proceeding of the
   Holy Ghost, the eternal union and communion of the blessed Trinity, the
   counsels of His bosom, the attainment of the end of all His endeavours,
   wherein we shall see ourselves exalted and beloved from all Eternity.
   We are to enjoy communion with Him in the creation of the world, in the
   government of Angels, in the redemption of mankind, in the
   dispensations of His providence, in the incarnation of His Son, in His
   passion, resurrection and ascension, in His shedding abroad the Holy
   Ghost, in His government of the Church, in His judgment of the world,
   in the punishment of His enemies, in the rewarding of His friends, in
   Eternal Glory. All these therefore particularly ought to be near us,
   and to be esteemed by us as our riches; being those delectable things
   that adorn the house of God which is Eternity; and those living
   fountains, from whence we seek forth the streams of joy, that
   everlastingly overflow to refresh our souls.

     __________________________________________________________________

   THE FOURTH CENTURY


   1

        HAVING spoken so much concerning his entrance and progress in
   Felicity, I will in this century speak of the principles with which
   your friend endued himself to enjoy it. For besides contemplative,
   there is an active happiness, which consisteth in blessed operations.
   And as some things fit a man for contemplation, so there are others
   fitting him for action: which as they are infinitely necessary to
   practical happiness, so are they likewise infinitely conducive to
   contemplative itself.


   2

        He thought it a vain thing to see glorious principles lie buried
   in books, unless he did remove them into his understanding; and a vain
   thing to remove them unless he did revive them, and raise them up by
   continual exercise. Let this therefore be the first principle of your
   soul That to have no principles or to live beside them, is equally
   miserable. And that philosophers are not those that speak but do great
   things.


   3

        He thought that to be a Philosopher, a Christian, and a Divine,
   was to be one of the most illustrious creatures in the world; and that
   no man was a man in act, but only in capacity, that was not one of
   these, or rather all. For either of these three include the other two.
   A Divine includes a Philosopher and a Christian; a Christian includes a
   Divine and a Philosopher; a Philosopher includes a Christian and a
   Divine. Since no man therefore can be a man unless he be a Philosopher,
   nor a true Philosopher unless he be a Christian, nor a perfect
   Christian, unless he be a Divine, every man ought to spend his time, in
   studying diligently Divine Philosophy.


   4

        This last principle needs a little explication. Not only because
   Philosophy is condemned for vain, but because it is superfluous among
   inferior Christians, and impossible, as some think, unto them. We must
   distinguish therefore of philosophy and of Christians also. Some
   philosophy, as Saint Paul says, is vain, but then it is vain
   philosophy. But there is also a Divine Philosophy, of which no books in
   the world are more full than his own. That we are naturally the Sons of
   God (I speak of primitive and upright nature,) that the Son of God is
   the first beginning of every creature, that we are to be changed from
   glory to glory into the same Image, that we are spiritual Kings, that
   Christ is the express Image of His Father's person, that by Him all
   things are made whether they are visible or invisible, is the highest
   Philosophy in the world; and so is it also to treat, as he does, of the
   nature of virtues and Divine Laws. Yet no man, I suppose, will account
   these superfluous, or vain, for in the right knowledge of these Eternal
   Life consisteth. And till we see into the beauty and blessedness of
   God's Laws, the glory of His works, the excellency of our soul, &c. we
   are but children of darkness, at least but ignorant and imperfect:
   neither able to rejoice in God as we ought, nor to live in communion
   with Him. Rather we should remember that Jesus Christ is the Wisdom of
   the Father, and that since our life is hid with Christ in God, we
   should spend our days in studying Wisdom, that we might be like unto
   Him:that the treasures of Heaven are the treasures of Wisdom, and that
   they are hid in Christ. As it is written, In Him are hid all the
   treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge.


   5

        In distinguishing of Christians we ought to consider that
   Christians are of two sorts, perfect or imperfect, intelligent and
   mature, or weak and inexperienced: (I will not say ignorant, for an
   ignorant Christian is a contradiction in nature. I say not that an
   imperfect Christian is the most glorious creature in the whole world,
   nor that it, is necessary for him, if he loves to be imperfect, to be a
   Divine Philosopher. But he that is perfect is a Divine Philosopher, and
   the most glorious creature in the whole world. Is not a Philosopher a
   lover of wisdom? That is the signification of the very word, and sure
   it is the essence of a Christian, or very near it, to be a lover of
   wisdom. Can a Christian be so degenerate as to be a lover of
   imperfection? Does not your very nature abhor imperfection? Tis true a
   Christian so far as he is defective and imperfect may be ignorant, yet
   still he is a lover of wisdom and a studier of it. He may be defective,
   but so far as he is defective he is no Christian, for a Christian is
   not a Christian in his blemishes, but his excellencies. Nor is a man
   indeed a man in his ignorances, but his wisdom. Blemishes may mar a
   man, and spoil a Christian, but they cannot make him. Defects may be in
   him and cleave unto him, but they are to be shaken off and repented.
   Every man therefore according to his degree, so far forth as he is a
   Christian, is a Philosopher.


   6

        Furthermore doth not St. Paul command us in understanding to be
   men? That implies that with little understanding we are but children,
   and without understanding are not men, but dreams and shadows,
   insignificant shells and mere apparitions. Doth he not earnestly pray,
   that their hearts may be comforted, being knit together in Love, unto
   all the riches of the full assurance of understanding, to the
   acknowledgment of the mystery of God, and of the Father, and of Christ?
   This plainly shows, that though a weak Christian may believe great
   things by an implicit faith, yet it is very desirable his faith should
   be turned into assurance, and that cannot be but by the riches of
   knowledge and understanding. For he may believe that God is, and that
   Jesus Christ is his Saviour, and that his soul is immortal, and that
   there are joys in heaven, and that the scriptures are God's Word, and
   that God loves him, &c., so far as to yield obedience in some measure,
   but he can never come to a full assurance of all this, but by seeing
   the riches of the full assurance, i.e., those things which are called
   the riches of the full assurance; for being known they give us
   assurance of the truth of all things: the glory of God's laws, the true
   dignity of his own soul, the excellency of God's ways, the magnificent
   goodness of His works, and the real blessedness of the state of grace.
   All which a man is so clearly to see, that he is not more sensible of
   the reality of the sunbeams. How else should he live in communion with
   God, to wit, in the enjoyment of them? For a full assurance of the
   reality of his joys is infinitely necessary to the possession of them.


   7

        This digression steals me a little further. Is it not the shame
   and reproach of Nature, that men should spend so much time in studying
   trades, and be so ready skilled in the nature of clothes, of grounds,
   of gold and silver, &c., and to think it much to spend a little time in
   the study of God, themselves, and happiness? What have men to do in
   this world, but to make themselves happy? Shall it ever be praised, and
   despised? Verily, happiness being the sovereign and supreme of our
   concerns, should have the most peculiar portion of our time, and other
   things what she can spare. It more concerns me to be Divine than to
   have a purse of gold. And therefore as Solomon said, We must dig for
   her as for gold and silver, and that is the way to understand the fear
   of the Lord, and to find the knowledge of God. It is a strange thing
   that men will be such enemies to themselves. Wisdom is the principal
   thing, yet all neglect her. Wherefore get wisdom, and with all thy
   getting get understanding. Exalt her and she shalt promote thee, she
   shall bring thee to honour when thou dost embrace her. She shall give
   to thy head an ornament of grace, a crown of glory shall she deliver to
   thee. Had you certain tidings of a mine of gold, would the care of your
   ordinary affairs detain you, could you have it for the digging? Nothing
   more ruins the world than a conceit that a little knowledge is
   sufficient. Which is a mere lazy dream to cover our sloth or enmity
   against God. Can you go to a mine of gold, and not to wisdom, (to dig
   for it) without being guilty, either of a base despondency and distrust
   of wisdom that she will not bring you to such glorious treasures as is
   promised; or else of a vile and lazy humour that makes you despise
   them, because of the little but long labour you apprehend between?
   Nothing keeps men out of the Temple of Honour, but that the Temple of
   Virtue stands between, But this was his principle that loved Happiness,
   and is your friend: I came into this world only that I might be happy.
   And whatsoever it cost me, I will be happy. A happiness there is, and
   it is my desire to enjoy it.


   8

        Philosophers are not only those that contemplate happiness, but
   practise virtue. He is a Philosopher that subdues his vices, lives by
   reason, orders his desires, rules his passions, and submits not to his
   senses, nor is guided by the customs of this world. He despiseth those
   riches which men esteem, he despiseth those honours which men esteem,
   he forsaketh those pleasures which men esteem. And having proposed to
   himself a superior end than is commonly discerned, bears all
   discouragements, breaks through all difficulties and lives unto it:
   that having seen the secrets and the secret beauties of the highest
   reason, orders his conversation, and lives by rule: though in this age
   it be held never so strange that he should do so. Only he is Divine
   because he does this upon noble principles; because God is, because
   Heaven is, because Jesus Christ hath redeemed him, and because he loves
   Him: not only because virtue is amiable, and felicity delightful, but
   for that also.


   9

        Once more we will distinguish of Christians. There are Christians
   that place and desire all their happiness in another life, and there is
   another sort of Christians that desire happiness in this. The one can
   defer their enjoyment of Wisdom till the World to come, and dispense
   with the increase and perfection of knowledge for a little time: the
   other are instant and impatient of delay, and would fain see that
   happiness here, which they shall enjoy hereafter. Not the vain
   happiness of this world, falsely called happiness, truly vain: but the
   real joy and glory of the blessed, which consisteth in the enjoyment of
   the whole world in communion with God; not this only, but the invisible
   and eternal, which they earnestly covet to enjoy immediately: for which
   reason they daily pray Thy kingdom come, and travail towards it by
   learning Wisdom as fast as they can. Whether the first sort be
   Christians indeed, look you to that. They have much to say for
   themselves. Yet certainly they that put off felicity with long delays
   are to be much suspected. For it is against the nature of love and
   desire to defer. Nor can any reason be given why they should desire it
   at last, and not now. If they say because God hath commanded them, that
   is false: for He offereth it now, now they are commanded to have their
   conversation in Heaven, now they may be full of joy and full of glory.
   Ye are not straitened in me, but in your own bowels. Those Christians
   that can defer their felicity may be contented with their ignorance.


   10

      He that will not exchange his riches now will not forsake them
   hereafter. He must forsake them but will hardly be persuaded to do it
   willingly. He will leave them but not forsake them, for which cause two
   dishonours cleave unto him; and if at death, eternally. First, he comes
   off the stage unwillingly, which is very unhandsome: and secondly, he
   prefers his riches above his happiness. Riches are but servants unto
   happiness; when they are impediments to it they cease to be riches. As
   long as they are conducive to Felicity they are desirable; but when
   they are incompatible are abominable. For what end are riches
   endeavoured, why do we desire them, but that we may be more happy? When
   we see the pursuit of riches destructive to Felicity, to desire them is
   of all things in nature the most absurd and the most foolish. I ever
   thought that nothing was desirable for itself but happiness, and that
   whatever else we desire, it is of value only in relation, and order to
   it.


   11

      That maxim also which your friend used is of very great and Divine
   concernment: I will first spend a great deal of time in seeking
   Happiness, and then a great deal more in enjoying it. For if Happiness
   be worthy to be sought, it is worthy to be enjoyed. As no folly in the
   world is more vile than that pretended by alchemists, of having the
   Philosopher's Stone and being contented without using it: so is no
   deceit more odious, than that of spending many days in studying, and
   none in enjoying, happiness. That base pretence is an argument of
   falsehood and mere forgery in them, that after so much toil in getting
   it they refuse to use it. Their pretence is that they are so abundantly
   satisfied in having it, that they care not for the use of it. So the
   neglect of any man that finds it, shows that indeed he hath lost of
   happiness. That which he hath found is counterfeit ware, if he neglect
   to use it: tis only because he cannot; true happiness being too
   precious to be despised. Shall I forsake all riches and pleasures for
   happiness, and pursue it many days and months and years, and then
   neglect and bury it when I have it? I will now spend days and nights in
   possessing it, as I did before in seeking it. It is better being happy
   than asleep.


   12

        Happiness was not made to be boasted, but enjoyed. Therefore tho
   others count me miserable, I will not believe them if I know and feel
   myself to be happy; nor fear them. I was not born to approve myself to
   them, but God. A man may enjoy great delights, without telling them.


        Tacitus si pasci potuisset Corvus, haberet

        Plus dapis & rixae minus invidiaeque.

        Could but the crow in lonely silence eat,

        She then would have less envy and more meat.

   Heaven is a place where our happiness shall be seen of all. We shall
   there enjoy the happiness of being seen in happiness, without the
   danger of ostentation: but here men are blind and corrupted, and cannot
   see; if they could, we are corrupted, and in danger of abusing it. I
   knew a man that was mightily derided in his pursuit of happiness, till
   he was understood, and then admired; but he lost all by his
   miscarriage.


   13

      One great discouragement to Felicity, or rather to great souls in
   the pursuit of Felicity, is the solitariness of the way that leadeth to
   her temple. A man that studies happiness must sit alone like a sparrow
   upon the house-top, and like a pelican in the wilderness. And the
   reason is because all men praise happiness and despise it. Very few
   shall a man find in the way of wisdom: and few indeed that having given
   up their names to wisdom and felicity, that will persevere in seeking
   it. Either he must go on alone, or go back for company. People are
   tickled with the name of it, and some are persuaded to enterprise a
   little, but quickly draw back when they see the trouble, yea, cool of
   themselves without any trouble. Those mysteries which while men are
   ignorant of, they would give all the gold in the world for, I have seen
   when known to be despised. Not as if the nature of happiness were such
   that it did need a veil: but the nature of man is such that it is
   odious and ungrateful. For those things which are most glorious when
   most naked, are by men when most nakedly revealed, most despised. So
   that God is fain for His very name's sake lest His beauties should be
   scorned, to conceal her beauties: and for the sake of men, which
   naturally are more prone to pry into secret and forbidden things, than
   into open and common. Felicity is amiable under a veil, but most
   amiable when most naked. It hath its times and seasons for both. There
   is some pleasure in breaking the shell: and many delights in our
   addresses previous to the sweets in the possession of her, It is some
   part of Felicity that we must seek her.


   14

        In order to this, he furnished himself with this maxim: It is a
   good thing to be happy alone. It is better to be happy in company, but
   good to be happy alone. Men owe me the advantage of their society, but
   if they deny me that just debt, I will not be unjust to myself, and
   side with them in bereaving me. I will not be discouraged, lest I be
   miserable for company. More company increases happiness, but does not
   lighten or diminish misery.


   15

       In order to interior or contemplative happiness, it is a good
   principle: that apprehensions within are better than their objects.
   Mornay's simile of the saw is admirable If a man would cut with a saw,
   he must not apprehend it to be a knife, but a thing with teeth,
   otherwise he cannot use it. He that mistakes his knife to be an auger,
   or his hand to be his meat, confounds himself by misapplications. These
   mistakes are ocular. But far more absurd ones are unseen. To mistake
   the world, or the nature of one's soul, is a more dangerous error. He
   that thinks the Heavens and the Earth not his, can hardly use them; and
   he that thinks the sons of men impertinent to his joy and happiness can
   scarcely love them. But he that knows them to be instruments and what
   they are, will delight in them; and is able to use them. Whatever we
   misapprehend we cannot use; nor well enjoy what we cannot use. Nor can
   anything be our happiness we cannot enjoy. Nothing therefore can be our
   happiness, but that alone which we rightly apprehend. To apprehend God
   our enemy destroys our happiness. Inward apprehensions are the very
   light of blessedness, and the cement of souls and their objects.


   16

       Of what vast importance right principles are we may see by
   this,?Things prized are enjoyed. All things are ours; all things serve
   us and minister to us, could we find the way: nay they are ours, and
   serve us so perfectly, that they are best enjoyed in their proper
   places: even from the sun to a sand, from a cherubim to a worm. I will
   not except gold and silver, and crowns and precious stones, nor any
   delights or secret treasures in closets and palaces. For if otherwise
   God would not be perfect in bounty. But suppose the world were all
   yours, if this principle be rooted in you, to prize nothing that is
   yours, it blots out all at one dash, and bereaves you of a whole world
   in a moment.


   17

        If God be yours, and all the joys and inhabitants in Heaven,, if
   you, be resolved to prize nothing great and excellent, nothing, sublime
   and eternal, you lay waste your possessions, and make vain your
   enjoyment of all permanent and glorious things. So that you must be
   sure to inure yourself frequently to these principles and to impress
   them deeply; I will prize all I have, and nothing shall with me be less
   esteemed, because it is excellent. A daily joy shall be more my joy,
   because it is continual. A common joy is more my delight because it is
   common. For all mankind are my friends, and everything is enriched in
   serving them. A little grit in the eye destroyeth the sight of the very
   heavens, and a little malice or envy a world of joys. One wry principle
   in the mind is of infinite consequence. I will ever prize what I have,
   and so much the more because I have it. To prize a thing when it is
   gone breedeth torment and repining; to prize it while we have it joy
   and thanksgiving.


   18

      All these relate to enjoyment, but those principles that relate to
   communication are more excellent. These are principles of retirement
   and solitude; but the principles that aid us in conversation are far
   better and help us, though not so immediately to enjoyment, in a far
   more blessed and divine manner. For it is more blessed to give than to
   receive; and we are more happy in communication than enjoyment, but
   only that communication is enjoyment; as indeed what we give we best
   receive. For the joy of communicating and the joy of receiving maketh
   perfect happiness. And therefore are the sons of men our greatest
   treasures, because they can give and receive: treasures perhaps
   infinite as well as affections. But this I am sure they are our
   treasures, and therefore is conversation so delightful, because they
   are the greatest.


   19

        The world is best enjoyed and most immediately while we converse
   blessedly and wisely with men. I am sure it were desirable that they
   could give and receive infinite treasures: and perhaps they can. For
   whomsoever I love as myself, to him I give myself, and all my
   happiness; which I think is infinite: and I receive him and all his
   happiness, Yea, in him I receive God, for God delighteth me for being
   his blessedness: so that a man obligeth me infinitely that maketh
   himself happy; and by making himself happy, giveth me himself and all
   his happiness. Besides this he loveth me infinitely, as God doth; and
   he dare do no less for God's sake. Nay he loveth God for loving me, and
   delighteth in Him for being good unto me. So that I am magnified in his
   affections, represented in his understanding, tenderly beloved,
   carressed and honoured: and this maketh society delightful. But here
   upon earth it is subject t changes. And therefore this principle is
   always to be firm, as the foundation of Bliss; God only is my sovereign
   happiness and friend in the World. Conversation is full of dangers, and
   friendships are mortal among the sons of men. But communion with God is
   infinitely secure, and He my Happiness.


   20

        He from whom I received these things, always thought, that to be
   happy in the midst of a generation of vipers was become his duty: for
   men and he are fallen into sin. Were all men wise and innocent, it were
   easy to be happy, for no man would injure and molest another. But he
   that would be happy now, must be happy among ingrateful and infurious
   persons. That knowledge which would make a man happy among just and
   holy persons, is unuseful now: and those principles only profitable
   that will make a man happy, not only in peace, but blood, On every side
   we are environed with enemies, surrounded with reproaches, encompassed
   with wrongs, besieged with offences, receiving evil for good, being
   disturbed by fools, and invaded with malice. This is the true estate of
   this world, which lying in wickedness, as our Saviour witnesseth,
   yieldeth no better fruits, than the bitter clusters of folly and
   perverseness, the grapes of Sodom, and the seeds of Gomorrah. Blind
   wretches that wound themselves offend me. I need therefore the oil of
   pity and the balm of love to remedy and heal them. Did they see the
   beauty of Holiness or the face of Happiness, they would not do so. To
   think the world therefore a general Bedlam, or place of madmen, and
   oneself a physician, is the most necessary point of present wisdom: an
   important imagination, and the way to Happiness.


   21

        He thought within himself that this world was far better than
   Paradise had men eyes to see its glory, and their advantages. For the
   very miseries and sins and offences that are in it are the materials of
   his joy and triumph and glory. So that he is to learn a diviner art
   that will now be happy, and that is like a royal chemist to reign among
   poisons, to turn scorpions into fishes, weeds into flowers, bruises
   into ornaments, poisons into cordials. And he that cannot learn this
   art, of extracting good out of evil, is to be accounted nothing.
   Heretofore, to enjoy beauties, and be grateful for benefits was all the
   art that was required to felicity, but now a man must, like a God,
   bring Light out of Darkness, and order out of confusion. Which we are
   taught to do by His wisdom, that ruleth in the midst of storms and
   tempests.


   22

        He generally held, that whosoever would enjoy the happiness of
   Paradise must put on the charity of Paradise, And that nothing was his
   Felicity but his Duty. He called his house the house of Paradise: not
   only because it was the place wherein he enjoyed the whole world, but
   because it was every one's house in the whole world. For observing the
   methods and studying the nature of charity in Paradise, he found that
   all men would be brothers and sisters throughout the whole world, and
   evermore love one another as their own selves, though they had never
   seen each other before. From whence it would proceed that every man
   approaching him, would be as welcome as an Angel, and the coming of a
   stranger as delightful as the Sun; all things in his house being as
   much the foreigner's as they were his own: Especially if he could
   infuse any knowledge or grace unto him.


   23

        To establish himself thoroughly is this principle, he made much of
   another. For he saw that in Paradise a great help to this kind of life,
   was the cheapness of commodities, and the natural fertility of the then
   innocent and blessed ground. By which means it came to pass that every
   man had enough for himself, and all. But that now the earth being
   cursed and barren, there was danger of want, a necessity of toil and
   labour and care, and maintenance of servants. Therefore he concluded,
   that the charity of men ought to supply the earth's sterility, who
   could never want, were they all of a mind, and liberal to each other.
   But since this also faileth, and men's hearts are cursed and barren as
   the ground, what is wanting in them God will supply. And that to live
   upon God's provisions is the most glorious dependence in the whole
   world. And so he made the love of God his true foundation, and builded
   not his hopes on the charity of men, but fled unto God as his best
   refuge, which he thought it very safe and blessed to do, because the
   trial of his faith was more glorious, and the love of God supplied the
   defect of charity in men: and he that had commanded had faithfully
   promised and was able to perform.


   24

        He thought the stars as fair now, as they were in Eden, the sun as
   bright, the sea as pure; and nothing pestered the world with miseries,
   and destroyed its order, peace, and beauty but sins and vices Rapine,
   covetousness, envy, oppression, luxury, ambition, pride &c., filled the
   world with briars and thorns, desolations, wars, complaints, and
   contentions, and that this made enormities to be vices. But universal
   charity; did it breathe among men, would blow all these away, as the
   wind doth chaff and stubble; and that then the heavens would be as
   serene and fair, and the lands as rich as ever they were. And that as
   all things were improved by the work of redemption, trades and
   occupations that were left behind, would be pleasant ornaments and
   innocent recreations; for whence have we all our cities, palaces, and
   temples, whence all our thrones and magnificent splendours, but from
   trades and occupations?


   25

        But order and charity in the midst of these, is like a bright star
   in an obscure night, like a summer's day in the depth of winter, like a
   sun shining among the clouds, like a giant among his enemies, that
   receiveth strength from their numbers, like a king sitting in the midst
   of an army. By how much the more scarce it is, by so much the more
   glorious, by how much the more assaulted, by so much the more
   invincible; by how much the more lonely, by so much the more pitied of
   God and Heaven. And surely He, who being perfect Love, designed the
   felicity of the world with so much care in the beginning, will now be
   more tender of the soul that is like Him in its Deordination.


   26

        He thought that men were more to be beloved now than before. And,
   which is a strange paradox, the worse they are the more they were to be
   beloved. The worse they are the more they were to be pitied, and
   tendered and desired, because they had more need, and were more
   miserable, though the better they are, they are more to be delighted
   in. But his true meaning in that saying was this: Comparing them with
   what the were before they were fallen, they are more to be beloved.
   They are now worse, yet more to be beloved. For Jesus Christ hath been
   crucified for them. God loved them more, and He gave His Son to die for
   them and for me also, which are strong obligations leading us to
   greater charity. So that men's unworthiness and our virtue are alike
   increased.


   27

        He conceived it his duty and much delighted in the obligation,
   that he was to treat every man in the whole world as representative of
   mankind and that he was to meet in him, and to pay unto him all the
   love of God, Angels and Men.


   28

        He thought that he was to treat every man in the person of Christ.
   That is both as if himself were Christ in the greatness of his love,
   and also as if the man were Christ, he was to use him having respect to
   all others. For the love of Christ is to dwell within, him, and every
   man is the object of it. God and he are to become one Spirit, that is
   one in will, and one in desire. Christ must live within him. He must be
   filled with the Holy Ghost, which is the God of Love, he must be of the
   same mind with Christ. Jesus, and led by His Spirit. For on the other
   side he was well acquainted with this mystery--That every man being the
   object of our Saviour's Love, was to be treated as our Saviour, Who
   hath said, Inasmuch as ye have done it to the least of these my
   brethren; ye have done it unto me. And thus he is to live upon Earth
   among sinners.


   29

        He had another saying?He lives most like an Angel that lives least
   upon himself, and doth most good to others. For the Angels neither eat
   nor drink, and yet do good to the whole world. Now a man is an
   incarnate Angel. And he that lives in the midst of riches as a poor man
   himself, enjoying God and Paradise, or Christendom which is better,
   conversing with the poor, and seeing the value of their souls through
   their bodies, and prizing all things clearly with a due esteem, is
   arrived here to the estate of immortality. He cares little for the
   delicacies either of food or raiment himself, and delighteth in others.
   God, Angels, and Men are his treasures. He seeth through all the mists
   and veils of invention, and possesseth here beneath the true riches.
   And he that doth this always is a rare Phoenix. But he confessed that
   he had often cause to bewail his infirmities.


   30

        I speak not his practises but his principles. I should too much
   praise your friend did I speak his practises, but it is no shame for
   any man to declare his principles, though they are the most glorious in
   the world. Rather they are to be shamed that have no glorious
   principles, or that are ashamed of them. This he desired me to tell you
   because of modesty. But with all that indeed his practises are so short
   of these glorious principles, that to relate them would be to his
   shame; and that therefore you would never look upon him but as clothed
   in the righteousness of Jesus Christ. Nevertheless I have heard him
   often say, That he never allowed himself in swerving from any of these,
   and that he repented deeply every miscarriage and moreover firmly
   resolved as much as was possible never to err or wander from them
   again.


   31

        I heard him often say that holiness and happiness were the same,
   and he quoted a mighty place of scripture?All her ways are pleasantness
   and her paths are peace. But he delighted in giving the reason of
   scripture, and therefore said, That holiness and wisdom in effect were
   one: for no man could be wise that knew excellent things without doing
   them. Now to do their is holiness and to do them wisdom. No man
   therefore can be further miserable than he severeth from the ways of
   holiness and wisdom.


   32

        If he might have had but one request of God Almighty, it should
   have been above all other, that he might be a blessing to mankind. That
   was his daily prayer above all his petitions. He wisely knew that it
   included all petitions; for he that is a blessing to mankind must be
   blessed, that he may be so, and must inherit all their affections, and
   in that their treasures. He could not help it. But he so desired to
   love them, and to be a joy unto them, that he protested often, that he
   could never enjoy himself, but as he was enjoyed of others, and that
   above all delight in all worlds, he desired to be a joy and blessing to
   others. Though for this he was not to be commended, for he did but
   right to God and Nature, who had implanted in all that inclination.


   33

       The desire of riches was removed from himself pretty early. He
   often protested, if he had a palace of gold and a paradise of delights,
   besides that he enjoyed; he could not understand a farthing worth of
   benefit that he should receive thereby unless in giving it away. But
   for others he sometimes could desire riches; till at last perceiving
   the root of covetousness in him, and that it would grow as long as it
   was shrouded under that mould, he rooted it quite up with this
   principle--Sometimes it may so happen, that to contemn the world in the
   whole lump was as acceptable to God as first to get it with solicitude
   and care, and then to retail it out in particular charities.


   34

        After this he could say with Luther, that covetousness could never
   fasten the least hold upon him. And concerning his friends even to the
   very desire of seeing them rich, he could say, as Phocion the poor
   Athenian did of his children: Either they will be like me or not; if
   they are like me they will not need riches; if they are not they will
   be but needless and hurtful superfluities.


   35

        He desired no other riches for his friends but those which cannot
   be abused; to wit the true treasures, God and Heaven and Earth and
   Angels and Men, &c. with the riches of wisdom and grace to enjoy them.
   And it was his principle?That all the treasures in the whole world
   would not make a miser happy, a miser happy. A miser is not only a
   covetous man but a fool. Any needy man, that wanteth the world, is
   miserable. He wanteth God and all things.


   36

        He thought also that no poverty could befall him that enjoyed
   Paradise. For when all the things are gone which man can give, a man is
   still as rich as Adam was in Eden, who was naked there. A naked man is
   the richest creature in all worlds, and can never be happy till he sees
   the riches of his very nakedness. He is very poor in knowledge that
   thinks Adam poor in Eden. See here how one principle helps another. All
   our disadvantages contracted by the fall are made up and recompensed by
   the Love of God.


   37

        Tis not change of place, but glorious principles well practised
   that establish Heaven in the life and soul. An angel will be happy
   anywhere, and a devil miserable, because the principles of the one are
   always good, of the other, bad. From the centre to the utmost bounds of
   the everlasting hills all is Heaven before God, and full of treasure;
   and he that walks like God in the midst of them, blessed.


   38

        Love God, Angels and Men, triumph in God's works, delight in God's
   laws, take pleasure in God's ways in all ages, correct sins, bring good
   out of evil, subdue your lusts, order your senses, conquer the customs
   and opinions of men and render good for evil, you are in Heaven
   everywhere. Above the stars earthly things will be celestial joys, and
   here beneath will things delight you that are above the heavens, All
   things being infinitely beautiful in their places, and wholly yours in
   all their places. Your riches will be as infinite in value and
   excellency, as they are in beauty and glory, and that is, as they are
   in extent.


   39

        Thus he was possessor of the whole world, and held it his
   treasure, not only as the gift of God, but as the theatre of virtues.
   Esteeming it principally his because it upheld and ministered to many
   objects of his love and goodness. Towards whom, before whom, among whom
   he might do the work of fidelity and wisdom, exercise his courage and
   prudence, show his temperance and bring forth the fruits of faith and
   repentance. For all those are the objects of our joy that are the
   objects of our care. They are our true treasures about whom we are
   wisely employed.


   40

        He had one maxim of notable concernment, and that was, That God,
   having reserved all other things in his own disposal, had left his
   heart to him. Those things that were in God's care he would commit to
   God, those things that were committed to his, he would take care about.
   He said therefore, that he had but one thing to do, and that was to
   order and keep his heart which alone being well guided, would order all
   other things blessedly and successfully. The things about him were
   innumerable and out of his power, but they were in God's power. And if
   he pleased God in that which was committed to him, God would be sure to
   please him in things without committed unto God. For He was faithful
   that had promised; in all that belonged unto Him God was perfect; all
   the danger being lest we should be imperfect in ours, and unfaithful in
   those things that pertain unto us.


   41

      Having these principles nothing was more easy than to enjoy the
   world. Which being enjoyed, he had nothing more to do, than to spend
   his life in praises and thanksgivings. All his care being to be
   sensible of God's mercies, and to behave himself as the friend of God
   in the Universe. If anything were amiss, he still would have recourse
   to his own heart, and found nothing but that out of frame: by restoring
   which all things were rectified, and made delightful: As much as that
   had swerved from the rule of justice, equity and right, so far was he
   miserable, and no more so that by experience he found the words of the
   wise man true, and worthy of all acceptation: In all thy keeping, keep
   thy heart, for out of it core the issues of life and death.


   42

        One thing he saw, which is not commonly discerned, and that is,
   that God made man a free agent for his own advantage, and left him in
   the hand of his own counsel, that he might be the more glorious. It is
   hard, to conceive how much this tended to his satisfaction. For all the
   things in Heaven and Earth being so beautiful, and made, as it were, on
   purpose for his own enjoyment; he infinitely admired God's wisdom, in
   that it salved his and all men's exigencies, in which it fully answered
   his desires. For his desire was that all men should be happy as well as
   he. And he admired his goodness, which had enjoined no other duty, than
   what pertained to the more convenient fruition of the world which he
   had given: and at the marvellous excellency of His love, in committing
   that duty to the sons of men to be performed freely. For thereby He
   adventured such a power into the hands of His creatures, which Angels
   and Cherubims wonder at, and which when it is understood all Eternity
   will admire the bounty of giving. For He thereby committed to their
   hands a power to do that which He infinitely hated, which nothing
   certainly could move Him to entrust them with, but some infinite
   benefit which might be attained thereby, What that was, if you desire
   to know, it was the excellency, dignity and exaltation of His creature.


   43

        O Adorable and Eternal God! Hast Thou made me a free agent! And
   enabled me if I please to offend Thee infinitely! What other end
   couldst Thou intend by this, but that I might please Thee infinitely!
   That having the power of pleasing or displeasing, I might be the friend
   of God! Of all exaltations in all worlds this is the greatest. To make
   a world for me was much, to prepare eternal joys for me was more. But
   to give me a power to displease thee, or to set a sin before Thy face,
   which Thou infinitely hatest, to profane Eternity, or to defile Thy
   works, is more stupendous than all these. What other couldst Thou
   intend by it but that I might infinitely please Thee? And having the
   power of pleasing or displeasing, might please Thee and myself
   infinitely, in being pleasing! Hereby Thou hast prepared a new fountain
   and torrent of joy greater than all that went before, seated us in the
   Throne of God, made us Thy companions, endued us with a power most
   dreadful to ourselves, that we might live in sublime and
   incomprehensible blessedness for evermore. For the satisfaction of our
   goodness is the most sovereign delight of which we are capable. And
   that by our own actions we should be well pleasing to Thee, is the
   greatest Felicity Nature can contain. O Thou who art infinitely
   delightful to the sons of men, make me, and the sons of men, infinitely
   delightful unto Thee. Replenish our actions with amiableness and
   beauty, that they may be answerable to thine, and like unto Thine in
   sweetness and value. That as Thou in all Thy works art pleasing to us,
   we in all our works may be so to Thee; our own actions as they are
   pleasing to Thee being an offspring of pleasures sweeter than all.


   44

        This he thought a principle at the bottom of Nature, That
   whatsoever satisfied the goodness of Nature, was the greatest treasure.
   Certainly men therefore err because they know not this principle. For
   all inclinations and desires in the soul flow from and tend to the
   satisfaction of goodness. Tis strange that an excess of goodness should
   be the fountain of all evil. An ambition to please, a desire to
   gratify, a great desire to delight others being the greatest snare in
   the world. Hence is it that all hypocrisies and honours arise, I mean
   esteem of honours. Hence all imitations of human customs, hence all
   compliances and submissions to the vanities and errors of this world.
   For men being mistaken in the nature of Felicity, and we by a strong
   inclination prone to please them, follow a multitude to do evil. We
   naturally desire to approve ourselves to them, and above all things
   covet to be excellent, to be greatly beloved, to be esteemed, and
   magnified, and therefore endeavour what they endeavour, prize what they
   prize, magnify what they desire, desire what they magnify: ever doing
   that which will render us accepted to them; and coveting that which
   they admire and praise, that so we might be delightful. And the more
   there are that delight in us the more great and happy we account
   ourselves.


   45

        This principle of nature, when you remove the rust it hath
   contracted by corruption, is pure gold; and the most orient jewel that
   shines in man. Few consider it either in itself, or in the design of
   the implanter. No man doubts but it is blessed to receive: to be made
   as glorious creature, and to have worlds given to one is excellent. But
   to be a glorious creature and to give, is a blessedness unknown. It is
   a kind of paradox in our Saviour, and not (as we read of) revealed upon
   earth, but to St. Paul from Heaven, It is more blessed to active than
   to receive. It is a blessedness too high to be understood. To give is
   the happiness of God; to receive, of man. But O the mystery of His
   loving kindness, even that also hath He imparted to us. Will you that I
   ascend higher? In giving us Himself, in giving us the world, in giving
   us our souls and bodies, he hath done much, but all this had been
   nothing, unless He had given us a power to have given Him, ourselves,
   in which is contained the greatest pleasure and honour. We love
   ourselves earnestly, and therefore rejoice to have palaces and
   kingdoms. But when we have these, yea Haven and Earth, unless we can be
   delightful and joyous to others they will be of no value. One soul to
   whom we may be pleasing is of greater worth than all dead things. Some
   unsearchable good lieth in this without which the other is but a vile
   and desolate estate; So that to have all worlds, with a certain sense
   that they are infinitely beautiful and rich and glorious is miserable
   vanity, and leaves us forlorn, if all things are dead, or if ourselves
   are not Divine and illustrious creatures.


   46

        O the superlative Bounty of God! Where all power seemeth to cease,
   He proceedeth in goodness, and is wholly infinite, unsearchable, and
   endless. He seemeth to have made as many things depend upon man's
   liberty, as His own. When all that could be wrought by the use of His
   own liberty were attained, by man's liberty He attained more. This is
   incredible, but experience will make it plain. By His own liberty He
   could but create worlds and give Himself to creatures, make Images and
   endow them with faculties, or seat them in glory. But to see them
   obedient, or to enjoy the pleasure of their amity and praises, to make
   them fountains of actions like His own (without which indeed they could
   not be glorious) or to enjoy the beauty of their free imitation, this
   could by no means be without the liberty of His creatures intervening.
   Nor indeed could the world be glorious, or they blessed without this
   attainment. For can the world be glorious unless it be useful? And to
   what use could the world serve Him, if it served not those, that in
   this were supremely glorious that they could obey and admire and love
   and praise and imitate their Creator? Would it not be wholly useless
   without such creatures? In creating liberty therefore and giving it to
   His creatures He glorified all things: Himself, His work, and the
   subjects of His Kingdom.


   47

        You may feel in yourself how conducive this is to your highest
   happiness. For that you should be exalted to the fruition of worlds,
   and in the midst of innumerable most glorious creatures, be vile and
   ingrateful, injurious and dishonourable, hateful and evil, is the
   greatest misery and dissatisfaction imaginable. But to be the joy and
   delight of innumerable thousands, to be admired as the similitude of
   God, to be amiable and honourable, to be an illustrious and beautiful
   creature, to be a blessing, O the good we perceive in this! O the
   suavity! O the contentation! O the infinite and unspeakable pleasure!
   Then indeed we reign and triumph when we are delighted in. Then are we
   blessed when we are a blessing. When all the world is at peace with us
   and takes pleasure in us, when our actions are delightful, and our
   persons lovely, when our spirits amiable, and our affections
   inestimable, then are we exalted to the Throne of Glory. For things
   when they are useful are most glorious, and it is impossible for you or
   me to be useful but as we are delightful to God and His attendants. And
   that the Head of the World, or the End for which all worlds were made
   should be useless, as it is improportioned to the glory of the means,
   and methods of His exaltation, so is it the reproach of His nature and
   the utter undoing of all His glory. It is improportionable to the
   beauty of His ways, Who made the world, and to the expectation of His
   creatures.


   48

       By this you may see, that the works or actions flowing from your
   own liberty are of greater concernment to you than all that could
   possibly happen besides. And that it is more to your happiness what you
   are, than what you enjoy. Should God give Himself and all worlds to
   you, and you refuse them, it would be to no purpose. Should He love you
   and magnify you, should He give His Son to die for you, and command all
   Angels and Men to love you, should He exalt you in His Throne, and give
   you dominion over all His works, and you neglect them it would be to no
   purpose. Should He make you in His Image, and employ all His wisdom and
   power to fill Eternity with treasures, and you despise them, it would
   be in vain. In all these things you have to do; and therefore your
   actions are great and magnificent, being of infinite importance in all
   eyes; while all creatures stand in expectation what will be the result
   of your liberty. Your exterior works, are little in comparison of
   these. And God infinitely desires you should demean yourself wisely in
   these affairs, that is, rightly. Esteeming and receiving what He gives,
   with veneration and joy and infinite thanksgiving. Many other works
   there are, but this is the great work of all works to be performed.
   Consider whether more depends upon God's love to you, or your love to
   Him. From His love all the things in Heaven and Earth flow unto you;
   but if you love neither Him nor them, you bereave yourself of all, and
   make them infinitely evil and hurtful to you. So that upon your love
   naturally depends your own excellency and the enjoyment of His. It is
   by your love that you enjoy all His delights, and are delightful to
   Him.


   49

        It is very observable by what small principles infusing them in
   the beginning God attaineth infinite ends. By infusing the principle of
   self-love He bath made a creature capable of enjoying all worlds: to
   whom, did he not love himself, nothing could be given. By infusing
   grateful principles, and inclinations to thanksgiving He hath made the
   creature capable of more than all worlds, yea, of more than enjoying
   the Deity in a simple way: though we should suppose it to be infinite.
   For to enjoy God as the fountain of infinite treasures, and as the
   giver of all, is infinite pleasure: but He by His wisdom infusing
   grateful principles, hath made us upon the very account of self-love to
   love Him more than ourselves. And us, who without self-love could not
   be pleased at all, even as we love ourselves He halt so infinitely
   pleased, that we are able to rejoice in Him, and to love Him more than
   ourselves. And by loving Him more than ourselves, in very gratitude and
   honour, to take more pleasure in His felicity, than in our own, by
   which way we best enjoy Him. To see His wisdom, goodness, and power
   employed in creating all worlds for our enjoyment, and infinitely
   magnified in beautifying them for us, and governing them for us
   satisfies our self-love; but with all it so obligeth us that in love to
   Him, which it createth in us, it maketh us more to delight in those
   attributes as they are His, than as they are our own. And the truth is,
   without this we could not fully delight in them, for the most excellent
   and glorious effect of all had been unachieved. But now there is an
   infinite union between Him and us, He being infinitely delightful to
   us, and we to Him. For He infinitely delighteth to see creatures act
   upon such illustrious and eternal principles, in a manner so divine,
   heroic, and most truly blessed; and we delight in seeing Him giving us
   the power.


   50

        That I am to receive all the things in Heaven and Earth is a
   principle not to be slighted. That in receiving I am to behave myself
   in a Divine and illustrious manner, is equally glorious. That God and
   all Eternity are mine is surely considerable: that I am His, is more.
   How ought I to adorn myself, who am made for his enjoyment? If man's
   heart be a rock of stone, these things ought to be engraven in it with
   a pen of a diamond, and every letter to be filled up with gold that it
   may eternally shine in Him and before Him! Wherever we are living,
   whatever we are doing, these things ought always to be felt within him.
   Above all trades, above all occupations this is most sublime. This is
   the greatest of all affairs. Whatever else we do, it is only in order
   to this end that we may live conveniently to enjoy the world, and God
   within it; which is the sovereign employment including and crowning
   all: the celestial life of a glorious creature, without which all other
   estates are servile and impertinent.


   51

        Man being to live in the Image of God, and thus of necessity to
   become productive of glorious actions, was made good, that he might
   rejoice in the fruits, which himself did yield. That goodness which by
   error and corruption becomes a snare, being in the clear and pure
   estate of innocency, the fountain and the channel of all his joys.


   52

        Thus you see how God has perfectly pleased me: it ought also to be
   my care perfectly to please Him. He has given me freedom, and
   adventured the power of sinning into my hands: it ought to be a
   principle engraven in me, to use it nobly, to be illustrious and
   faithful, to please Him in the use of it, to consult His honour, and
   having all the creatures in all worlds by His gift ministering unto me,
   to behave myself as a faithful friend to so great a Majesty, so
   bountiful a Lord, so Divine a Benefactor. Nothing is so easy as to
   yield one's assent to glorious principles, nothing so clear in upright
   nature, nothing so obscure to find in perverted, nothing so difficult
   to practise at all. In the rubbish of depraved Nature they are lost,
   though when they are found by any one, and shewn, like jewels they
   shine by their native splendour.


   53

        If you ask, what is become of us since the fall? because all these
   things now lately named semi to pertain to the estate of innocence;
   truly now we have super-added treasures, Jesus Christ, and are restored
   to the exercise of the same principles, upon higher obligations: I will
   not say with more advantage, though perhaps obligations themselves are
   to us advantage. For what enabled Adam to love God? Was it not that God
   loved him? What constrained him to be averse from God? Was it not that
   God was averse from him? When he was fallen he thought God would hate
   him, and be his enemy eternally. And this was the miserable bondage
   that enslaved him. But when he was restored, O the infinite and eternal
   change! His very love to himself made him to praise His eternal Love: I
   mean his Redeemer's. Do we not all love ourselves? Self-love maketh us
   to love those that love us, and to hate all those that hate us. So that
   obligations themselves are to us advantage. How we come to lose those
   advantages I will not stand here to relate. In a clear light it is
   certain no man can perish. For God is more delightful than He was in
   Eden. Then He was as delightful as was possible, but he had not that
   occasion, as by Sin was afforded, to superadd many more delights than
   before. Being more delightful and more amiable, He is more desirable,
   and may now be more easily, yea strongly beloved: for the amiableness
   of the object enables us to love it.


   54

      It was your friend's delight to meditate the principles of upright
   nature, and to see how things stood in Paradise before they were
   muddied, and blended, and confounded. For now they are lost and buried
   in ruins, nothing appearing but fragments, that are worthless shreds
   and parcels of them. To see the entire piece ravisheth the Angels. It
   was his desire to recover them and to exhibit them again to the eyes of
   men. Above all things he desired to see those principles which a
   stranger in this world would covet to behold upon his first appearance.
   And that is, what principles those were by which the inhabitants of
   this world are to live blessedly and to enjoy the same. He found them
   very easy, and infinitely noble: very noble, and productive of
   unspeakable good, were they well pursued. We have named them, and they
   are such as these: A man should know the blessings he enjoyeth: A man
   should prize the blessings which he knoweth: A man should be thankful
   for the benefits which he prizeth: A man should rejoice in that for
   which he is thankful. These are easy things, and so are those also
   which are drowned in a deluge of errors and customs; That blessings the
   more they are, are the sweeter; the more they serve, if lovers and
   friends, the more delightful, yet these are the hard lessons, in a
   perverse and retrograde world, to be practised: and almost the only
   lessons necessary to its enjoyment.


   55

        He was a strict and severe applier of all things to himself, and
   would first have his self-love satisfied, and then his love of all
   others. It is true that self-love is dishonourable, but then it is when
   it is alone. And self-endedness is mercenary, but then it is when it
   endeth in oneself. It is more glorious to love others, and more
   desirable, but by natural means to be attained. That pool must first be
   filled that shall be made to overflow. He was ten years studying before
   he could satisfy his self-love. And now finds nothing more easy than to
   love others better than oneself: and that to love mankind so is the
   comprehensive method to all Felicity. For it makes a man delightful to
   God and men, to himself and spectators, and God and men delightful to
   him, and all creatures infinitely in them. But as not to love oneself
   at all is brutish, or rather absurd and stonish, (for the beasts do
   love themselves) so hath God by rational methods enabled us to love
   others better than ourselves, and thereby made us the most glorious
   creatures. Had we not loved ourselves at all, we could never have been
   obliged to love anything. So that self-love is the basis of all love.
   But when we do love ourselves, and self-love is satisfied infinitely in
   all its desires and possible demands, then it is easily led to regard
   the Benefactor more than itself, and for His sake overflows abundantly
   to all others. So that God by satisfying my self-love, hath enabled and
   engaged me to love others.


   56

      No man loves, but he loves another more than himself. In mean
   instances this is apparent. If you come into an orchard with a person
   you love, and there be but one ripe cherry you prefer it to the other.
   If two lovers delight in the same piece of meat, either takes pleasure
   in the other, and more esteems the beloved's satisfaction. What ails
   men that they do not see it? In greater cases this is evident. A mother
   runs upon a sword to save her beloved. A father leaps into the fire to
   fetch out his beloved. Love brought Christ from Heaven to die for His
   beloved. It is in the nature of love to despise itself, and to think
   only of its beloved's welfare. Look to it, it is not right love that is
   otherwise. Moses and St. Paul were no fools. God make me one of their
   number. I am sure nothing is more acceptable to Him, than to love
   others so as to be willing to imperil even one's own soul for their
   benefit and welfare.


   57

      Nevertheless it is infinitely rewarded, though it seemeth difficult.
   For by this love do we become heirs of all men's joys, and co-heirs
   with Christ. For, what is the reason of your own joys, when you are
   blessed with benefits? Is it not self-love? Did you love others as you
   love yourself, you would be as much affected with their joys. Did you
   love them more, more. For according to the measure of your love to
   others will you be happy in them. For, according thereto you will be
   delightful to them, and delighted in your felicity. The more you love
   men, the more delightful you will be to God, and the more delight you
   will take in God, and the more you will enjoy Him. So that the more
   like you are to Him in goodness, the more abundantly you will enjoy His
   goodness. By loving others you live in others to receive it.


   58

        Shall I not love him infinitely for whom God made the world and
   gave His Son? Shall I not love him infinitely who loveth me infinitely?
   Examine yourself well, and you will find it a difficult matter to love
   God so as to die for Him, and not to love your brother so as to die for
   him in like manner. Shall I not love Him infinitely whom God loveth
   infinitely, and commendeth to my love, as the representative of
   Himself, with such a saying, What ye do to him is done unto Me? And if
   I love him so, can I forbear to help him? Verily had I but one crown in
   the world, being in an open field, where both he and I were ready to
   perish, and twere necessary that one of us must have it all or be
   destroyed, though I knew not where to have relief, he should have it,
   and I would die with comfort. I will not say, How small a comfort so
   small a succour is did I keep it: but how great a joy, to be the
   occasion of another's life! Love knows not how to be timorous, because
   it receives what it gives away, and is unavoidably the end of its own
   afflictions and another's happiness. Let him that pleases keep his
   money, I am more rich in this noble charity to all the world, and more
   enjoy myself in it, than he can be in both the Indies.


   59

        Is it unnatural to do what Jesus Christ hath done? He that would
   not in the same cases do the same things can never be saved. For unless
   we are led by the Spirit of Christ we are none of His. Love in him that
   in the same cases would do the same things, will be an oracle always
   inspiring and teaching him what to do how far to adventure upon all
   occasions. And certainly he whose love is like his Saviour's, will be
   far greater than any that is now alive, in goodness and love to God and
   men. This is a sure rule: Love studies not to be scanty in its
   measures, but how to abound and overflow with benefits. He that
   pincheth and studieth to spare is a pitiful lover, unless it be for
   other's sakes Love studieth to be pleasing, magnificent and noble, and
   would in all things be glorious and divine unto its object. Its whole
   being is to its object, and its whole felicity in its object, and it
   hath no other thing to take care for. It doth good to its own soul
   while it doth good to another.


   60

        Here upon Earth, it is under many disadvantages and impediments
   that maim it in its exercise, but in Heaven it is most glorious. And it
   is my happiness that I can see it on both sides the veil or screen.
   There it appeareth in all its advantages, for every soul being full and
   fully satisfied, at ease, in rest, and wanting nothing, easily
   overflows and shines upon all. It is its perfect interest so to do, and
   nothing hinders it, self-love therefore being swallowed up and made
   perfect in the love of others. But here it is pinched and straitened by
   wants: here it is awakened and put in mind of itself: here it is
   divided and distracted between two. It has a body to provide for,
   necessities to relieve, and a person to supply. Therefore is it in this
   world the more glorious, if in the midst of these disadvantages it
   exert itself in its operations. In the other world it swimmeth down the
   stream, and acteth with its interest. Here therefore is the place of
   its trial where its operations and its interests are divided. And if
   our Lord Jesus Christ, as some think, knew the glory to which He should
   ascend, by dying for others, and that all was safe which He undertook,
   because in humbling Himself to the death of the cross He did not
   forsake but attain His glory: The like fate shall follow us, only let
   us expect it after death as He did: and remember that this and the
   other life are made of a piece, but this is the time of trial, that, of
   rewards. The greatest disadvantages of love are its highest advantages.
   In the great hazards it achieveth to itself the greatest glory. It is
   seldom considered; but a love to others stronger than what we bear to
   ourselves, is the mother of all the heroic actions that have made
   histories pleasant, and beautified the world.


   61

      Since Love will thrust in itself as the greatest of all principles,
   let us at last willingly allow it room. I was once a stranger to it,
   now I am familiar with it as a daily acquaintance. Tis the only heir
   and benefactor of the world. It seems it will break in everywhere, as
   that without which the world could not be enjoyed. Nay as that without
   which it would not be worthy to be enjoyed. For it was beautified by
   love, and commandeth the love of a Donor to us. Love is a Phoenix that
   will revive in its own ashes, inherit death, and smell sweetly in the
   grave.


   62

        These two properties are in it--that it can attempt all and suffer
   all. And the more it suffers the more it is delighted, and the more it
   attempteth the more it is enriched. For it seems that all love is so
   mysterious that there is something in it which needs expression and can
   never be understood by any manifestation, (of itself, in itself) but
   only by mighty doings and sufferings. This moved God the Father to
   create the world, and Gad the Son to die for it. Nor is this all. There
   are many other ways whereby it manifests itself as well as these, there
   being still something infinite in it behind: In its laws, in its
   tenderness, in its provisions, in its caresses, in its joys as well as
   in its hazards, is its honours as well as in its cares: nor does it
   ever cease till it has poured out itself in all its communications. In
   all which it ever rights and satisfies itself; for above all things in
   all worlds it desires to be magnified, and taketh pleasure in being
   glorified before its object. For which cause also it does all those
   things, which magnify its object and increase its happiness.


   63

        Whether Love principally intends its own glory or its objects,
   happiness is a great question, and of the more importance, because the
   right ordering of our own affections depends much upon the solution of
   it. For on the one side, to be self-ended is mercenary and base and
   slavish; and to do all things for one's own glory is servile, and
   vainglory. On the other God doth all things for Himself, and seeketh
   His glory as His last end, and is Himself the end whom He seeks and
   attains in all His ways. How shall we reconcile this riddle? or untie
   this knot? For some men have taken occasion hereby seeing this in Love,
   to affirm that there is no true love in the world, but it is all
   self-love whatsoever a man doth. Implying also that it was self-love in
   our Saviour that made Him to undertake for us. Whereupon we might
   justly question, whether it were more for his own ends, or more for
   ours? As also whether it were for His own end that God created the
   world or more for ours? For extraordinary much of our duty and felicity
   hangeth upon this point: and whatsoever sword untieth this Gordian
   knot, will open a world of benefit and instruction to us.


   64

        God doth desire glory as His sovereign end, but true glory. From
   whence it followeth that He doth sovereignly and supremely desire both
   His own glory and man's happiness. Though that be miraculous, yet it is
   very plain. For true glory is to love another for his own sake, and to
   prefer his welfare and to seek his happiness. Which God doth because it
   is true glory. So that He seeks the happiness of Angels and Men as His
   last end, and in that His glory: to wit, His true glory. False and vain
   glory is inconsistent with His nature, but true glory is the very
   essence of His being. Which is Love unto His beloved, Love unto
   Himself, Love unto His creatures.


   65

        How can God be Love unto Himself, without the imputation of
   self-love? Did He love Himself under any other notion than as He is the
   lover of His beloved there might be some danger. But the reason why He
   loves Himself being because He is Love, nothing is more glorious than
   His self-love. For He loves Himself because He is infinite and eternal
   Love to others. Because He loves Himself He cannot endure that His love
   should be displeased. And loving others vehemently and infinitely all
   the love He bears to Himself is tenderness towards them. All that
   wherein He pleaseth Himself is delightful to them: He magnifieth
   Himself in magnifying them. And in fine, His love unto Himself is His
   love unto them, and His love unto them is love unto Himself. They are
   individually one, which it is very amiable and beautiful to behold,
   because therein the simplicity of God doth evidently appear. The more
   He loveth them, the greater He is and the more glorious. The more He
   loveth them, the more precious and dear they are to him. The more He
   loveth them, the more joys and treasures He possesseth. The more He
   loveth them the more He delighteth in their felicity. The more He
   loveth them, the more He rejoiceth in all His works for serving them:
   and in all His kingdoms for delighting them. And being Love to them the
   more He loveth Himself, and the more jealous He is lest Himself should
   be displeased, the more He loveth and tendereth them and secureth their
   welfare. And the more He desires His own cry, the more good He doth for
   them, in the more divine and genuine manner. You must love after His
   similitude.


   66

        He from whom I derived these things delighted always that I should
   be acquainted with principles that would make me fit for all ages. And
   truly in love there are enough of them. For since Nature never created
   anything in vain, and love of all other is the most glorious there is
   not any relic or parcel of that that shall be unused. It is not like
   gold made to be buried and concealed in darkness, but like the sun to
   communicate itself wholly in its beams unto all. It is more excellent
   and more communicative. It is hid in a centre and nowhere at all, if we
   respect its body. But if you regard its soul, it is an interminable
   sphere, which as some say of the sun, is infinities infinita, in the
   extension of its beams, being equally vigorous in all places, equally
   near to all objects, equally acceptable to all persons, and equally
   abundant in all its overflowing: Infinitely everywhere. This of naked
   and divested Love in its true perfection. Its own age is too little to
   contain it, its greatness is spiritual, like the Deity's. It filleth
   the world, and exceeds what it filleth. It is present with all objects,
   and tastes all excellencies, and meeteth the infiniteness of God in
   everything. So that in length it is infinite as well as in breadth,
   being equally vigorous at the utmost bound to which it can extend as
   here, and as wholly there as here, and wholly everywhere. Thence also
   it can see into further spaces; things present and things to come;
   height and depth being open before it, and all things in Heaven,
   Eternity, and Time, equally near.


   67

        Were not Love the darling of God; this would be a rash and a bold
   sally. But since it is His Image, and the Love of God, I may almost say
   the God of God, because His beloved, all this happeneth unto Love. And
   this Love is your true self when you are in act what you are in power:
   the great Daemon of the world, the End of all things, the desire of
   Angels and of all nations. A creature so glorious, that having seen it,
   it puts an end to all curiosity and swallows up all admiration. Holy,
   wise, and just towards all things, blessed in all things, the Bride of
   God, glorious before all, His offspring and first born, and so like
   Him, that being described, one would think it He. I should be afraid to
   say all this of it, but that I know Him, how He delighteth to have it
   magnified: And how He hath magnified it infinitely before because it is
   His bride and first-born. I will speak only a little of its violence
   and vigour afar off. It can love an act of virtue in the utmost Indies,
   and hate a vice in the highest heavens. It can see into hell and adore
   the justice of God among the damned; it can behold and admire His Love
   from everlasting. It can be present with His infinite and eternal Love,
   it can rejoice in the joys which it foreseeth: Can Love Adam in Eden,
   Moses in the wilderness, Aaron in the tabernacle, David before the Ark,
   S. Paul among the nations, and Jesus either in the manger or on the
   Cross: All these it can love with violence. And when it is restored
   from all that is terrene and sensual to its true spiritual being, it
   can love these, or any of these, as violently as any person in the
   living age.


   68

        Shall it not love violently what God loveth, what Jesus Christ
   loveth, what all Saints and Angels love? Moses glorified God in a
   wonderful manner; he prophesied of Christ, he plagued the Egyptians, he
   brought the Israelites out of the land of Egypt, he guided them in the
   wilderness, he gave us the law, he loved the people more than his own
   life: yea, than his own self and all the possible glory that might have
   accrued to him. And what shall we think of Christ Himself? Shall not
   all our love be where He is? Shall it not wholly follow and attend Him?
   Yet shall it not forsake other objects, but love them all in Him, and
   Him in them, and them the more because of Him, and Him the more because
   of them; for by Him it is redeemed to them. So that as God is
   omnipresent our love shall be at once with all: that is we: having
   these strengths to animate and quicken our affection.


   69

        To love one person with a private love is poor and miserable: to
   love all is glorious. To love all persons in all ages, all angels, all
   worlds, is Divine and Heavenly. To love all cities and all kingdoms,
   all kings and all peasants, and every person in all worlds with a
   natural intimate familiar love, as if him alone, is Blessed. This makes
   a man effectually blessed in all worlds, a delightful Lord of all
   things, a glorious friend to all persons, a concerned person in all
   transactions, and ever present with all affairs. So that he must ever
   be filled with company, ever in the midst of all nations, ever joyful,
   and ever blessed. The greatness of this man's love no man can measure;
   it is stable like the Sun, it endureth for ever as the Moon, it is a
   faithful witness in Heaven. It is stronger and more great than all
   private affections. It representeth every person in the light of
   Eternity, and loveth him with the love of all worlds, with a love
   conformable to God's, guided to the same ends, and founded upon the
   same causes. Which however lofty and divine it is, is ready to humble
   itself into the dust to serve the person beloved. And by how much the
   more sublime and glorious it is, is so much the more sweet and truly
   delightful: Majesty and Pleasure concurring together.


   70

        Now you may see what it is to be a Son of God more clearly. Love
   in its glory is the friend of the most High. It was begotten of Him,
   and is to sit in His Throne, and to reign in communion with Him. It is
   to please Him and to be pleased by Him, in all His works, ways, and
   operations. It is ordained to hold an eternal correspondence with Him
   in the highest Heavens. It is here in its infancy, there in its manhood
   and perfect stature. He wills and commands that it should be reverenced
   of all, and takes pleasure to see it admired in its excellencies, If
   Love thus displayed be so glorious a being, how much more glorious and
   great is He that is sovereign Lord of all Lords, and the Heavenly King
   of all these? So many monarchs under one Supreme mightily set forth the
   glory of His Kingdom. If you ask by what certainty, or by what rules we
   discover this? As by the seed we conjecture what plant will arise, and
   know by the acorn what tree will grow forth, or by the eagle's egg what
   kind of bird; so do we by the powers of the soul upon Earth, know what
   kind of Being, Person, and Glory it will be in the Heavens, Its blind
   and latent power shall be turned into Act, its inclinations shall be
   completed, and its capacities filled, for by this means is it made
   perfect. A Spiritual King is an eternal Spirit. Love in the abstract is
   a soul exerted. Neither do you esteem yourself to be any other than
   Love alone. God is Love, and you are never like Him till you are so:
   Love unto all objects in like manner.


   71

      To sit in the Throne of God is the most supreme estate that can
   befall a creature. It is promised in the Revelations. But few
   understand what is promised there, and but few believe it.


   72

        To sit in the Throne of God is to inhabit Eternity. To reign there
   is to be pleased with all things in Heaven and Earth from everlasting
   to everlasting, as if we had the sovereign disposal of them. For He is
   to dwell in us, and we in Him, because He liveth in our knowledge and
   we in His. His will is to be in our will; and our will is to be in His
   will, so that both being joined and becoming one, we are pleased in all
   His works as He is; and herein the Image of God perfectly consisteth.
   No artist maketh a Throne too wide for the person. God is the greatest
   and divinest artist. Thrones proper and fit for the persons, are always
   prepared by the wisest Kings. For little bodies, bodily thrones: for
   Spirits, invisible. God's Throne is His omnipresence, and that is
   infinite, who dwelleth in Himself, or in that Light which is
   inaccessible. The Omnipresence therefore, and the Eternity of God are
   our Throne, wherein we are to reign for evermore. His infinite and
   eternal Love are the borders of it, which everywhere we are to meet,
   and everywhere to see for evermore. In this Throne our Saviour sitteth,
   who is the Alpha and Omega; the first end the last, the Amen; and the
   faithful witness who said, The Glory which Thou hast given me, I have
   given them, that they may be one, as we are one. In Him the fulness of
   the Godhead dwelleth bodily,. If that be too great to be applied to
   men, remember what follows, His Church is the fulness of Him that
   filleth all in all. The fulness of the Godhead dwelleth in Him for our
   sakes. And if yet it seemeth too great to be enjoyed: by the surpassing
   excellency of His Eternal Power, it is made more than ours. For in Him
   we shall more enjoy it than if it were infinitely and wholly all in
   ourselves.


   73

        If anything yet remaineth that is dreadful, or terrible or
   doubtful, that seemeth to startle us, there is more behind that will
   more amaze us. For God is infinite in the expression of His Love; as we
   shall all find to our eternal comfort. Objects are so far from
   diminishing, that they magnify the faculties of the soul beholding
   them. A sand in your conception conformeth your soul, and reduceth it
   to the size and similitude of a sand, A tree apprehended is a tree in
   your mind; the whole hemisphere and the heavens magnify your soul to
   the wideness of the heavens; all the spaces above the heavens enlarge
   it wider to their own dimensions. And what is without limit maketh your
   conception illimited and endless. The infinity of God is infinitely
   profitable as well as great: as glorious as incomprehensible: so far
   from straitening that it magnifieth all things. And must be seen in
   you, or God will be absent: Nothing less than infinite is God, and as
   finite He cannot be enjoyed.


   74

        But what is there more that will more amaze us? Can anything be
   behind such glorious mysteries? Is God more Sovereign in other
   excellencies? Hath He showed Himself glorious in anything besides?
   Verily there is no end of all His greatness, His understanding is
   infinite, and His ways innumerable. How precious, saith the psalmist,
   are Thy thoughts to me, O God; when I would count them they are more
   than can be numbered. There is no man that reckoneth them up in order
   unto Thee. O my Lord I will endeavour it: and I will glorify Thee for
   evermore. The most perfect laws are agreeable only to the most perfect
   creatures. Since therefore Thy laws are the most perfect of all that
   are possible; so are Thy creatures. And if infinite power be wholly
   expressed O Lord, what creatures! what creatures shall we become! What
   Divine, what illustrious Beings! Souls worthy of so great a love,
   blessed forever. Made worthy, though not found; for Love either findeth
   or maketh an object worthy of itself. For which cause Picus Mirandula
   admirably saith, in his tract De Dignitate Hominis, I have read in the
   monuments of Arabia, that Abdala, the Saracen, being asked, Quid in hâc
   quasi mundanâ Scenâ admirandum maxime spectaretur? What in this world
   was most admirable? answered, MAN: Than whom he saw nothing more to be
   admired. Which sentence of his is seconded, by that of Mercurius
   Trismegistus, Magnum, O Asclepiades, Miraculum, Homo; Man is a great
   and wonderful miracle: Ruminating upon the reason of these sayings,
   those things did not satisfy me, which many have spoken concerning the
   excellency of Human Nature. As that man was Creaturarum Internuncius;
   Superis familiaris, Inferiorum Rex; sensuum perspicaciâ, Rationis
   Indagine, Intelligentiae Lumine, Naturae Interpres, Stabilis Aevi et
   fluxi Temporis Interstitium, et (qd. Persae dicunt) Mundi Copula immo
   Hymenaeus: A messenger between the creatures, Lord of inferior things,
   and familiar to those above; by the keenness of his sense, the piercing
   of his reasons, and the light of knowledge, the interpreter of nature,
   a seeming interval between time and eternity, and the inhabitant of
   both, the golden link or tie of the world, yea, the Hymenaeus marrying
   the Creator and His creatures together; made as David witnesseth a
   little lower than the angels. All these things are great, but they are
   not the principal: that is, they are not those which rightly challenge
   the name and title of most admirable: And so he goeth on; admiring and
   exceeding all that had been spoken before concerning the excellency of
   man. Why do we not rather admire the Angels and the Quires above the
   Heaven? At length I seemed to understand, why man was the most happy,
   and therefore the most worthy to be admired of all the creatures: and
   to know that estate; which in the order of things he doth enjoy, not
   only above the beasts but above the stars and that might be envied even
   of the supra-celestial spirits, which he styleth, ultra-mundanis
   mentibus invidiosam.


   75

        The Supreme Architect and our Everlasting Father, having made the
   world, this most glorious house and magnificent Temple of His divinity,
   by the secret laws of His hidden Wisdom; He adorned the regions above
   the heavens with most glorious spirits, the spheres he enlivened with
   Eternal Souls, the dreggy parts of the inferior world he filled with
   all kinds of herds of living creatures. Sed Opere Consummato; but His
   work being completed, He desired some one that might weigh and reason,
   and love the beauty, and admire the vastness of so great a work. All
   things therefore being (as Moses and Timaeus witness) already finished,
   at last He thought of creating man. But there was not in all the
   platforms before conceived any being after whom He might form this new
   offspring. Nor in all His treasures what He might give this new son by
   way of inheritance, nor yet a place in all the regions of the world,
   wherein this contemplator of the universe might be seated. All things
   were already full; all things were already distributed into their
   various orders of supreme, middle and inferior. But it was not the part
   of infinite power to fail as defective in the last production; it was
   not the part of infinite wisdom, for want of council to fluctuate in so
   necessary an affair; it was not the part of infinite goodness or
   sovereign love, that he, who should be raised up to praise the Divine
   Bounty in other things, should condemn it in himself. Statuit tandem
   opt. Opifex, ut cui dari nihil proprium poterat commune esset, quod
   privatum singulis fuit: The wisest, and best of workmen appointed
   therefore, that he to whom nothing proper to himself could be added,
   should have something of all that was peculiar to everything, and
   therefore he took man, the Image of all His work, and placing him in
   the middle of the world, spake thus unto him,?


   76

        "O Adam, we have given thee neither a certain seat, nor a private
   face, nor a peculiar office, that whatsoever seat or face or office
   thou dost desire thou mayest enjoy. All other things have a nature
   bounded within certain laws; thou only art loose from all, and
   according to thy own council in the hand of which I have put thee,
   may'st choose and prescribe what nature thou wilt to thyself. I have
   placed thee in the middle of the world, that from thence thou mayest
   behold on every side more commodiously everything in the whole world.
   We have made thee neither heavenly nor earthly, neither mortal nor
   immortal, that being the honoured former and framer of thyself, thou
   mayest shape thyself into what nature thyself pleasest!"


   77

      "O infinite liberality of God the Father! O admirable and supreme
   Felicity of Man! to whom it is given to have what he desires, and to be
   what he wishes. The brutes when they are brought forth bring into the
   world with them what they are to possess continually. The spirits that
   are above were, either from the beginning or a little after, that which
   they are about to be to all Eternities. Nascenti Homini omnigena vitae
   germina indidit Pater; God infused the seeds of every kind of life into
   man: whatever seeds every one chooseth those spring up with him, and
   the fruits of those shall he bear and enjoy. If sensual things are
   chosen by him, he shall become a beast; if reasonable a celestial
   creature; if intellectual an Angel and a Son of God; and if being
   content with the lot of no creatures, he withdraws himself into the
   centre of his own unity, he shall be one Spirit with God, and dwell
   above all in the solitary darkness of His Eternal Father."


   78

      This Picus Mirandula spake in an oration made before a most learned
   assembly in a famous university. Any man may perceive that he
   permitteth his fancy to wander a little wantonly after the manner of a
   poet but most deep and serious things are secretly hidden under his
   free and luxuriant language. The changeable power he ascribeth to man
   is not to be referred to his body, for as he wisely saith, neither doth
   the bark make a plant, but its stupid and nothing-perceiving nature
   neither doth the skin make a beast, but his brutish and sensual nature,
   neither doth separation from a body, make an Angel but his Spiritual
   intelligence. So neither doth his rind or coat or skin or body make a
   man to be this or that, but the interior stupidness, or sensuality, or
   angelical intelligence of his soul, make him accordingly a plant, a
   beast, or an Angel. The deformity or excellency is within.


   79

        Neither is it to be believed, that God filled all the world with
   creatures before he thought of man: but by that little fable he
   teacheth us the excellency of man. Man is the end, and therefore the
   perfection of all the creatures; but as Eusebius Pamphilus saith (in
   the Nicene Council), he was first in the intention, though last in the
   execution. All Angels were spectators as well as he, all Angels were
   free agents as well as he: as we see by their trial, and the fall of
   some; all angels were seated in as convenient a place as he. But this
   is true, that he was the end of all and the last of all: and the
   comprehensive head and the bond of all, and in that more excellent than
   all the Angels. As for whom the visible and invisible worlds were made,
   and to whom all creatures ministered: as one also, that contained more
   species in his nature than the Angels, which is not as some have
   thought derogatory, but perfective to his being: It is true also that
   God hath prevented him; and satisfied all wishes, in giving him such a
   being as he now enjoyeth. And that for infinite reasons it was best
   that he should be in a changeable estate, and have power to choose what
   himself listed: For he may so choose as to become one Spirit with God
   Almighty.


   80

        By choosing a man may be turned and converted into Love, which, as
   it is an universal sun filling and shining in the Eternity of God, so
   is it infinitely more glorious than the Sun is, not only shedding
   abroad more amiable arid delightful beams, illuminating and comforting
   all objects: yea glorifying them in the supreme and sovereign manner,
   but is of all sensibles the most quick and tender, being able to feel
   like the long-legged spider; at the utmost end of its divaricated feet;
   and to be wholly present in every place where any beam of itself
   extends. The sweetness of its healing influences is inexpressible. And
   of all beings such a being would I choose to be for ever: One that
   might inherit all in the most exquisite manner; and be the joy of all
   in the most perfect measure.


   81

        Nazianzen professed himself to be a lover of right reason, and by
   it did undertake even to speak oracles. Even so may we by the Reason
   discover all the mysteries of heaven. And what our author here
   observeth, is very considerable,. That man by retiring from all
   externals and withdrawing into himself in the centre of his own unity
   becometh most Like unto God. What Mercurius said in the dialogue is
   most true, Man is of all other the greatest miracle, yea verily, should
   all the miracles that ever were done be drawn together, Man is a
   miracle greater than they. And as much may be written of him alone as
   of the whole world. The dividing of the sea, the commanding of the sun,
   the making of the world is nothing to the single creation of one soul:
   There is so much wisdom and power expressed in its faculties and
   inclinations. Yet is this greatest of all miracles unknown because men
   are addicted only to sensible and visible things. So great a world in
   explication of its parts is easy: but here the dimensions of
   innumerable worlds are shut, up in a centre. Where it should lodge such
   innumerable objects, as it doth by knowing, whence it should derive
   such infinite streams as flow from it by Loving, how it should be a
   mirror of all Eternity, being made of nothing, how it should be a
   fountain or a sun of Eternity out of which such abundant rivers of
   affection flow, it is impossible to declare. But above all how, having
   no material or bodily existence, its substance, though invisible,
   should be so rich and precious. The consideration of one Soul is
   sufficient to convince all the Atheists in the whole world.


   82

        The abundance of its beams, the reality of its beams, the freedom
   of its beams, the excellency and value of its beams are all
   transcendent. They shine upon all the things in Heaven and Earth and
   cover them all with celestial waters: waters of refreshment, beams of
   comfort. They flow freely from a mind desiring to be obedient, pleasing
   and good. The soul communicates itself wholly by them: and is richer in
   its communications than all odors and spices whatsoever. It containeth
   in its nature the influences of the stars by way of eminence, the
   splendour of the sun, the verdure of trees, the value of gold, the
   lustre of precious stones, the sense of beasts and the life of Angels:
   the fatness of feasts, the magnificence of palaces, the melody of
   music, the sweetness of wine, the beauty of the excellent, the
   excellency of virtue, and the glory of cherubims. The harmony and the
   joys of Heaven appear in Love, for all these were made for her, and all
   these are to be enjoyed in her.


   83

        Whether it be the Soul itself, or God in the Soul, that shines by
   Love, or both, it is difficult to tell: but certainly the love of the
   Soul is the sweetest thing in the world. I have often admired what
   should make it so excellent. If it be God that loves, it is the shining
   of His essence; if it be the Soul, it is His Image: if it be both, it
   is a double benefit.


   84

        That God should love in the Soul is most easy to believe, because
   it is most easy to conceive, But it is a greater mystery that the Soul
   should love in itself. If God loveth in the Soul it is the more
   precious, if the Soul loveth it is the more marvellous. If you ask how
   a Soul that was made of nothing can return so many flames of Love?
   Where it should have them, or out of what ocean it should communicate
   them? it is impossible to declare--(For it can return those flames upon
   all Eternity, and upon all the creatures and objects in it)--unless we
   say, as a mirror returneth the very self-same beams it receiveth from
   the Sun, so the Soul returneth those beams of love that shine upon it
   from God. For as a looking-glass is nothing in comparison of the world,
   yet containeth all the world in it, and seems a real fountain of those
   beams which flow from it, so the Soul is nothing in respect of God, yet
   all Eternity is contained in it, and it is the real fountain of that
   Love that proceedeth from it. They are the sun-beams which the glass
   returneth: yet they flow from the glass and from the Sun within it. The
   mirror is the well-spring of them, because they shine from the Sun
   within the mirror, which is as deep within the glass as it is high
   within the Heavens. And this showeth the exceeding richness and
   preciousness of love, it is the love of God shining upon, and dwelling
   in the Soul. For the beams that shine, upon it reflect upon others and
   shine from it.


   85

        That the Soul shineth of itself is equally manifest, for it can
   love with a love distinct from God's. It can love irregularly; and no
   irregular love is the love of God. It can forbear to love while God
   loveth. It can love while God forbeareth. It can love a wicked man,
   wickedly and in his wickedness. This shows plainly that it can love
   regularly, with a love that is not merely the reflection of God's. For
   which cause it is not called a mirror, but esteemed more, a real
   fountain. Cant.: My love is a spring shut up, a fountain sealed. That
   is, shut up like a letter, and concealed yet: but in the Kingdom of
   Heaven, her contents and secrets shall be known, and her beauty read of
   all men. Her own waters whence she should receive them: it is most
   admirable, considering the reality and beauty of them: But in this God
   hath magnified His infinite power, that He hath made them. Made them
   freely, made them her own, out of herself to flow from her: creatures
   as it were to which herself gives their existence. For indeed she could
   not love, were not her beams of love her own. Before she loves they are
   not, when she loves they are. And so she gives them their being. Being
   Good herself because she can love: Who else would be a dry and withered
   stick, having neither life nor value. But now she can exalt a creature
   above all the things in Heaven and Earth, in herself: esteem it most
   dear, admire it, honour it, tender it, desire it, delight in it, be
   united to it, prefer it, forsake all things for it, give all things to
   it, die for it. It can languish after it when absent; take pleasure in
   it when present; rejoice in its happiness, live only to it, study to
   please it, delight in suffering for it, feed it with pleasures,
   honours, and caresses, do all things for its sake, esteem gold and
   pearl but dross in comparison, lay crowns and sceptres at its feet,
   make it a lord of palaces, delight in its own beauties, riches, and
   pleasures, as they feed only and satisfy its beloved; be ravished with
   it. It can desire infinitely that good things should be added to it.
   And all this shall we enjoy in every soul in the Kingdom of Heaven. All
   there being like so many Suns shining upon one. All this goodness is so
   like God's, that nothing can be more. And yet that it is distinct from
   His, is manifest because it is the return or recompense of it: the only
   thing which for and above all worlds He infinitely desires.


   86

        Here upon Earth souls love what God hates, and hate what God
   loves. Did they keep their eye open always upon what He loves, and see
   His love to them, and to all, they could not choose but love as He
   does. And were they mirrors only that return His love, one would think
   it impossible, while He shines upon them, to forbear to shine, but they
   are like the eye, mirrors with lids, and the lid of ignorance or
   inconsideration interposing, they are oftentimes eclipsed or shine only
   through some crannies; so that here upon earth having free power to
   hold open or shut their lids, to send or turn away their beams, they
   may love me or forbear. The loss of their love is an evil past
   imagination, for it is the removal of the end of Heaven and Earth, the
   extinction of a Sun infinitely more glorious than that in the Heavens.
   The Sun was made to serve this more divine and glorious creature. The
   love of this creature is the end of Heaven and Earth, because the end
   for which Heaven and Earth were made was for it. And in recompense for
   all that God hath done for it it is to love me. So that God hath
   Glorified me, by giving me a communion with Himself in the end for
   which the world was made. And hath made that creature to love me, and
   given me so great a certainty of its love and title to it, that first
   it must cease to love itself, or to love God before it bereave me. It
   must cease to be wise, and forfeit all its interest in Heaven and
   Earth, before it can cease to love me. In doing it, it ruins itself and
   apostatizeth from all its happiness.


   87

   In the estate of innocency the love of man seemed nothing but the beams
   of love reverted upon another. For they loved no person but of whom he
   was beloved. All that he loved was good, and nothing evil. His love
   seemed the goodness of a being expressed in the Soul, or apprehended in
   the lover, and returned upon itself. But in the estate of misery (or
   rather Grace), a soul loves freely and purely of its own self, with
   God's love, things that seem incapable of love, naught and evil. For as
   God showed His eternity and omnipotency in that He could shine upon
   nothing and love an object when it was nought or evil; as He did Adam
   when He raised him out of nothing, and mankind when He redeemed them
   from evil: so now we can love sinners, and them that deserve nothing at
   our hands. Which as it is a Diviner Love and more glorious than the
   other, so were we redeemed to this power, and it, was purchased for us
   with a greater price.


   88

        It is a generous and heavenly principle, that where a benefit is
   fairly intended we are equally obliged for the intention or success. He
   is an ungrateful debtor, that measureth a benefactor by the success of
   his kindness. A clear soul and a generous mind is as much obliged for
   the intent of his friend, as the prosperity of it: and far more, if we
   separate the prosperity from the intent. For the goodness lies
   principally in the intention. Since therefore God intended me all the
   joys in Heaven and Earth, I am as much obliged for them as if I
   received them. Whatever intervening accident bereaved me of them, He
   really intended them. And in that I contemplate the riches of His
   goodness. Whether men's wickedness in the present age, or my own
   perverseness, or the fall of Adam; He intended me all the joys of
   Paradise, and all the honours in the world, whatever hinders me. In the
   glass of His intention therefore I enjoy them all: and I do confess my
   obligation. It is as great as if nothing had intervened, and I had
   wholly received them. Seeing and knowing Him to be infinitely wise and
   great and glorious, I rejoice that He loved me, and confide in His
   love. His goodness is my sovereign and supreme delight. That God is of
   such a nature in Himself is my infinite treasure. Being He is my
   friend, and delighteth in my honour, though I rob myself of all my
   happiness, He is justified. That He intended it, is His grace and
   glory. But it animates me, as well as comforts me, to see the
   perfection of His Love towards me. As things stood, He used power
   enough before the fall to make me happy. If He refuseth to use any more
   since the fall, I am obliged. But He hath used more. New occasions
   begot new abilities. He redeemed me by His Son. If He refuseth to use
   any more, I cannot complain. If He refuseth to curb my perverseness
   unless I consent, His love was infinitely showed. He desireth that I
   should by prayers and endeavours clothe myself with grace. If in
   default of mine, He doth it Himself, freely giving His Holy Spirit to
   me, it is an infinite mercy, but infinitely new and superadded. If He
   refuseth to overrule the rebellion of other men, and to bring me to
   Honour, notwithstanding their malice; or refuseth to make them love me,
   whether they will or no, I cannot repine. By other signs, He hath
   plainly showed, that He loveth me infinitely, which is enough for me,
   and that He desireth my obedience.


   89

        This estate wherein I am placed is the best for me tho'
   encompassed with difficulties. It is my duty to think so, and I cannot
   do otherwise. I cannot do otherwise without reproaching my Maker: that
   is, without suspecting, and in that offending His goodness and Wisdom.
   Riches are but tarnish and gilded vanities, honours are but airy and
   empty bubbles, affections are but winds, perhaps too great for such a
   ship as mine, of too light a ballast: pleasures, yea, all these, are
   but witches that draw and steal us away from God; dangerous
   allurements, interposing screens, unseasonable companions, counterfeit
   realities, honied poison, cumbersome distractions. I have found them
   so. At least they lull us into lethargies: and we need to be quickened.
   Sometimes they puff us up with vain-glory and we need to be humbled.
   Always they delude us if we place any confidence in them, and therefore
   it is as good always to be without them. But it is as good also, were
   it not for our weakness, sometimes to have them, because a good use may
   be made of them. And therefore they are not to be contemned when God
   doth offer them. But He is to be admired that maketh it good on both
   sides, to have them, and to be without them. Riches are not to be
   hated, nor coveted: but I am to bless God in all estates, Who hath
   given me the world, my Soul, and Himself: and ever to be great in the
   true treasures. Riches are good, and therefore is it good sometimes to
   want them that we might shew our obedience and resignation to God, even
   in being without those things that are good, at His appointment: and
   that also we might clothe ourselves with patience and faith and
   courage, which are greater ornaments than gold and silver, and of
   greater price: and that shall stand us instead of all the splendour of
   alms deeds. Assure yourself, till you prize one virtue above a trunk of
   money you can never be happy. One virtue before the face of God, is
   better than all the gold in the whole world.


   90

        Knowing the greatness and sweetness of Love, I can never be poor
   in any estate. How sweet a thing is it as we go or ride, or eat or
   drink, or converse abroad to remember that one is the heir of the whole
   world, and the friend of God! That one has so great a friend as God is:
   and that one is exalted infinitely by all His Laws! That all the riches
   and honours in the world are ours in the Divine Image to be enjoyed!
   That a man is tenderly beloved of God and always walking in His
   Father's Kingdom, under His wing, and as the apple of His eye! Verily
   that God hath done so much for one in His works and laws, and expressed
   so much love in His word and ways, being as He is Divine and infinite,
   it should make a man to walk above the stars, and seat him in the bosom
   of Men and Angels. It should always fill him with joy, and triumph, and
   lift him up above crowns and empires.


   91

        That a man is beloved of God, should melt him all into esteem and
   holy veneration. It should make him so courageous as an angel of God.
   It should make him delight in calamities and distresses for God's sake.
   By giving me all things else, He hath made even afflictions themselves
   my treasures. The sharpest trials, are the finest furbishing. The most
   tempestuous weather is the best seed-time. A Christian is an oak
   flourishing in winter. God hath so magnified and glorified His servant,
   and exalted him so highly in His eternal bosom, that no other joy
   should be able to move us but that alone. All sorrows should appear but
   shadows, beside that of His absence, and all the greatness of riches
   and estates swallowed up in the light of His favour. Incredible
   Goodness lies in His Love. And it should be joy enough to us to
   contemplate and possess it. He is poor whom God hates: tis a true
   proverb. And besides that, we should so love Him, that the joy alone of
   approving ourselves to Him, and making ourselves amiable and beautiful
   before Him should be a continual feast, were we starving. A beloved
   cannot feel hunger in the presence of his beloved. Where martyrdom is
   pleasant, what can be distasteful. To fight, to famish, to die for
   one's beloved, especially with one's beloved, and in his excellent
   company, unless it be for his trouble, is truly delightful. God is
   always present, and always seeth us.


   92

        Knowing myself beloved and so glorified of God Almighty in another
   world, I ought to honour Him in this always, and to aspire to it. At
   midnight will I rise to give thanks unto Thee because of Thy righteous
   judgments. Seven times a day will I praise Thee, for Thy glorious
   mercy. Early in the morning will I bless Thee, I will triumph in Thy
   works, I will delight in Thy law day and night; at evening will I
   praise Thee. I will ever be speaking of Thy marvellous acts, I will
   tell of Thy greatness, and talk of the glorious majesty of Thy
   excellent Kingdom; these things ought ever to breathe in our souls. We
   ought to covet to live in private, and in private ever to overflow in
   praises. I will boast in Thee all the day long, and be glad in the
   Lord. My exceeding joy, my life, my glory, what shall I render to Thee,
   for all Thy benefits? I will sing and be glad. Let all nations sing
   unto Him, for He covereth the earth as it were with a shield. My lips
   shall be fain when I sing unto Thee, and my soul, O Lord, which Thou
   hast redeemed. God is unseen till He be so known: and David's Spirit an
   inscrutable mystery, till this is experienced.


   93

        Our friendship with God ought to be so pure and so clear, that
   nakedly and simply for His Divine Love, for His glorious works, and
   blessed laws, the wisdom of His counsels, His ancient ways and
   attributes towards us, we should ever in public endeavour to honour
   Him, Always taking care to glorify Him before men: to speak of His
   goodness, to sanctify His name, to do those things that will stir up
   others, and occasion others to glorify Him. Doing this so zealously
   that we would, not forbear the least act wherein we might serve Him for
   all worlds. It ought to be a firm principle rooted in us, that this
   life is the most precious season in all Eternity, because all Eternity
   dependeth on it. Now we may do those actions which hereafter we shall
   never have occasion to do. And now we are to do them in another manner,
   which in its place is the most acceptable in all worlds: namely, by
   faith and hope, in which God infinitely delighteth, with difficulty and
   danger, which God infinitely commiserates, and greatly esteems. So
   piecing this life with the life of Heaven, and seeing it as one with
   all Eternity, a part of it, a life within it: Strangely and
   stupendously blessed in its place and season.


   94

        Having once studied these principles you are eternally to practise
   them. You are to warm yourselves at these fires, and to have recourse
   to them every day. When you think not of these things you are in the
   dark. And if you would walk in the light of them, you must frequently
   meditate. These principles are like seed in the ground, they must
   continually be visited with heavenly influences, or else your life will
   be a barren field. Perhaps they might be cast into better frame, and
   more curiously expressed; but if well cultivated they will be as
   fruitful, as if every husk were a golden rind. It is the substance that
   is in them that is productive of joy and good to all.


   95

        It is an indelible principle of Eternal truth, that practice and
   exercise is the Life of all. Should God give you worlds, and laws, and
   treasures, and worlds upon worlds, and Himself also in the Divinest
   manner, if you will be lazy and not meditate, you lose all. The soul is
   made for action, and cannot rest till it be employed. Idleness is its
   rust. Unless it will up and think and taste and see, all is in vain.
   Worlds of beauty and treasure and felicity may be round about it, and
   itself desolate. If therefore you would be happy, your life must be as
   full of operation as God of treasure: Your operation shall be treasure
   to Him, as His operation is delightful to you.


   96

        To be acquainted with celestial things is not only to know them,
   but by frequent meditation to be familiar with them. The effects of
   which are admirable. For by this those things that at first seemed
   uncertain become evident, those things which seemed remote become near,
   those things which appeared like shady clouds become solid realities:
   finally, those things which seemed impertinent to us and of little
   concernment, appear to be our own, according to the strictest rules of
   propriety and of infinite moment.


   97

        General and public concernments seem at first unmanageable, by
   reason of their greatness; but in the soul there is such a secret
   sufficiency, that it is able upon trial, to manage all objects with
   equal ease; things infinite in greatness as well as the smallest sand.
   But this secret strength is not found in it, but merely upon
   experience, nor discerned but by exercise. The eternity of God Himself
   is manageable to the understanding, and may be used in innumerable ways
   for its benefit; so may His almighty power, and infinite goodness, His
   omnipresence and immensity, the wideness of the world, and the
   multitude of Kingdoms. Which argueth a peculiar excellency in the soul,
   because it is a creature that can never be exceeded. For bodily
   strength by this is perceived to be finite, that bulk is unwieldy, and
   by the greatness of its object may easily be overcome. But the soul
   through God that strengthened her is able to do all things. Nothing is
   too great, nothing too heavy, nothing unwieldy; it can rule and manage
   anything with infinite advantage.


   98

        Because the strength of the soul is spiritual it is generally
   despised: but if ever you would be Divine, you must admit this
   principle: That spiritual things are the greatest, and that spiritual
   strength is the most excellent, useful, and delightful. For which cause
   it is made as easy as it is endless and invincible. Infinity is but one
   object, almighty power is another, eternal wisdom is another which it
   can contemplate; from infinity it can go to power, from power to
   wisdom, from wisdom to goodness, from goodness to glory, and so to
   blessedness, and from these to any object or all whatsoever,
   contemplating them as freely as if it had never seen an object before.
   If any one say, that though it can proceed thus from one object to
   another, yet it cannot comprehend any one of them, all I shall answer
   is this. It can comprehend any one of them as much as a creature can
   possibly do: and the possibility of a creature dependeth purely upon
   the power of God: for a creature may be made able to do all that which
   its Creator is able to make it to do. So if there be any defect in His
   power there must of necessity a limit follow in the power of His
   creature, which even God Himself cannot make a creature to exceed. But
   this, you will say, is an argument only of what may be, not of what is.
   Though considering God's infinite love, it is sufficient to show what
   is possible; because His love will do all it can for the glory of
   itself and its object: yet further to discover what is, we may add
   this, that when a soul hath contemplated the Infinity of God, and
   passeth from that to another object, all that it is able to contemplate
   on any other it might have added to its first contemplation. So that
   its liberty to contemplate all shows its illimitedness to any one. And
   truly I think it pious to believe that God hath without a metaphor
   infinitely obliged us.


   99

        The reason why learned men have not exactly measured the faculties
   of the soul, is because they know not to what their endless extent
   should serve. For till we know the universal beauty of God's Kingdom,
   and that all objects in the omnipresence are the treasures of the soul,
   to enquire into the sufficiency and extent of its powers is
   impertinent. But when we know this, nothing is more expedient than to
   consider whether a soul be able to enjoy them. Which if it be, its
   powers must extend as far as its objects. For no object without the
   sphere of its power, can be enjoyed by it. It cannot be so much as
   perceived, much less enjoyed. From whence it will proceed, that the
   soul will to all Eternity be silent about it. A limitation of praises,
   and a parsimony in love following hereupon, to the endangering of the
   perfection of God's Kingdom.


   100

        Upon the infinite extent of the understanding and affection of the
   soul, strange and wonderful things will follow: 1. A manifestation of
   God's infinite love. 2. The possession of infinite treasures. 3. A
   return of infinite thanksgivings. 4. A fulness of joy which no thing
   can exceed. 5. An infinite beauty and greatness in the soul. 6. An
   infinite beauty in God's Kingdom. 7. An infinite union between God and
   the soul (as well in extent, as fervour). 8. An exact fitness between
   the powers of the soul, and its objects: neither being desolate,
   because neither exceedeth the other. 9. An infinite glory in the
   communion of Saints, every one being a treasure to all the residue and
   enjoying the residue, and in the residue all the glory of all worlds.
   10. A perfect indwelling of the soul in God, and God in the soul. So
   that as the fulness of the Godhead dwelleth in our Saviour, it shall
   dwell in us; and the Church shall be the fulness of Him that filleth
   all in all: God being manifested thereby to be a king infinitely
   greater, because reigning over infinite subjects. To Whom be all glory
   and dominion for ever and ever. Amen.
     __________________________________________________________________


   THE FIFTH CENTURY


   1

        THE objects of Felicity, and the way of enjoying them, are two
   material themes; wherein to be instructed is infinitely desirable,
   because as necessary as profitable. Whether of the two, the object or
   the way be more glorious, it is difficult to determine. God is the
   object, and God is the way of enjoying. God in all His excellencies,
   laws, and works, in all His ways and counsels is the sovereign object
   of all Felicity. Eternity and Time, Heaven and Earth, Kingdoms and
   Ages, Angels and Men are in Him to be enjoyed. In Him the Fountain, in
   Him the End, in Him the Light, the Life, the Way, in Him the glory and
   crown of all. Yet for distinction sake we will speak of several eminent
   particulars, beginning with His attributes.


   2

        The Infinity of God is our enjoyment, because it is the region and
   extent of His dominion. Barely as it comprehends infinite space, it is
   infinitely delightful; because it is the room and the place of our
   treasures, the repository of joys, and the dwelling place, yea the seat
   and throne, and Kingdom of our souls. But as it is the Light wherein we
   see, the Life that inspires us, the violence of His love, and the
   strength of our enjoyments, the greatness and perfection of every
   creature, the amplitude that enlargeth us, and the field wherein our
   thoughts expatiate without limit or restraint, the ground and
   foundation of all our satisfactions, the operative energy and power of
   the Deity; the measure of our delights, and the grandeur of our soul,
   it is more our treasure, and ought more abundantly to be delighted in.
   It surroundeth us continually on every side, it fills us, and inspires
   us. It is so mysterious, that it is wholly within us, and even then it
   wholly seems and is without us. It is more inevitably and constantly,
   more nearly and immediately our dwelling place, than our cities and
   kingdoms and houses. Our bodies themselves are not so much ours, or
   within us as that is. The immensity of God is an eternal tabernacle.
   Why then we should not be sensible of that as much as of our dwellings,
   I cannot tell, unless our corruption and sensuality destroy us. We
   ought always to feel, admire, and walk in it. It is more clearly
   objected to the eye of the soul, than our castles and palaces to the
   eye of the body. Those accidental buildings may be thrown down, or we
   may be taken from them, but this can never be removed, it abideth for
   ever. It is impossible not to be within it, nay, to be so surrounded as
   evermore to be in the centre and midst of it, wherever we can possibly
   remove, is inevitably fatal to every being.*


   3

        Creatures that are able to dart their thoughts into all spaces can
   brook no limit or restraint; they are infinitely indebted to this
   illimited extent, because were there no such infinity, there would be
   no room for their imaginations; their desires and affections would be
   cooped up, and their souls imprisoned. We see the heavens with our
   eyes, and know the world with our senses. But had we no eyes, nor
   senses, we should see infinity like the Holy Angels. The place wherein
   the world standeth, were it all annihilated would still remain, the
   endless extent of which we feel so really and palpably, that we do not
   more certainly know the distinctions and figures and bounds and
   distances of what we see, than the everlasting expansion of what we
   feel and behold within us. It is an object infinitely great and
   ravishing: as full of treasures as full of room, and as fraught with
   joy as capacity. To blind men it seemeth dark, but is all glorious
   within, as infinite is light and beauty as extent and treasure. Nothing
   is in vain, much less infinity. Every man is alone the centre and
   circumference of it. It is all his own, and so glorious, that it is the
   eternal and incomprehensible essence of the Deity, A cabinet of
   infinite value, equal in beauty, lustre, and

   *This is the reading of the original MS.; but doubtless the author has
   here omitted some words which would have made his meaning plain.
   perfection to all its treasures. It is the Bosom of God, the Soul and
   Security of every Creature.


   4

        Were it not for this infinity, God's bounty would of necessity be
   limited. His goodness would want a receptacle for its effusions. His
   gifts would be confined into narrow room, and His Almighty Power for
   lack of a theatre magnificent enough, a storehouse large enough, be
   straitened. But Almighty Power includes Infinity in its own existence.
   For because God is infinitely able to do all things, there must of
   necessity be an infinite capacity to answer that power, because nothing
   itself is an obedient subject to work upon: and the eternal privation
   of infinite perfections is to Almighty Power a Being capable of all. As
   sure as there is a Space infinite, there is a Power, a Bounty, a
   Goodness, a Wisdom infinite, a Treasure, a Blessedness, a Glory.


   5

        Infinity of space is like a painter's table, prepared for the
   ground and field of those colours that are to be laid thereon. Look how
   great he intends the picture, so great doth he make the table. It would
   be an absurdity to leave it unfinished, or not to fill it. To leave any
   part of it naked and bare, and void of beauty, would render the whole
   ungrateful to the eye, and argue a defect of time or materials, or wit
   in the limner. As the table is infinite so are the pictures. God's
   Wisdom is the art, His Goodness the will, His Word the pencil, His
   Beauty and Power the colours, His Pictures are all His Works and
   Creatures. Infinitely more real and more glorious, as well as more
   great and manifold than the shadows of a landscape. But the Life of all
   is, they are the spectator's own. He is in them as in his territories,
   and in all these views his own possessions.


   6

        One would think that besides infinite space there could be no more
   room for any treasure. Yet to show that God is infinitely infinite,
   there is infinite room besides, and perhaps a more wonderful region
   making this to be infinitely infinite. No man will believe besides the
   space from the centre of the earth to the utmost bounds of the
   everlasting hills, there should be any more. Beyond those bounds
   perhaps there may, but besides all that space that is illimited and
   present before us, and absolutely endless every way, where can there be
   any room for more? This is the space that is at this moment only
   present before our eye, the only space that was, or that will be, from
   everlasting to everlasting. This moment exhibits infinite space, but
   there is a space also wherein all moments are infinitely exhibited, and
   the everlasting duration of infinite space is another region and room
   of joys. Wherein all ages appear together, all occurrences stand up at
   once, and the innumerable and endless myriads of years that were before
   the creation, and will be after the world is ended, are objected as a
   clear and stable object, whose several parts extended out at length,
   give an inward infinity to this moment, and compose an eternity that is
   seen by all comprehensors and enjoyers.


   7

        Eternity is a mysterious absence of times and ages: an endless
   length of ages always present, and for ever perfect. For as there is an
   immovable space wherein all finite spaces are enclosed, and all motions
   carried on and performed; so is there an immovable duration, that
   contains and measures all moving durations. Without which first the
   last could not be; no more than finite places, and bodies moving
   without infinite space. All ages being but successions correspondent to
   those parts of the Eternity wherein they abide, and filling no more of
   it, than ages can do. Whether they are commensurate with it or no, is
   difficult to determine. But the infinite immovable duration is
   Eternity, the place and duration of all things, even of infinite space
   itself: the cause and end, the author and beautifier, the life and
   perfection of all.


   8

        Eternity magnifies our joys exceedingly, for whereas things in
   themselves began, and quickly end; before they came, were never in
   being; do service but for few moments; and after they are gone pass
   away and leave us for ever, Eternity retains the moments of their
   beginning and ending within itself: and from everlasting to everlasting
   those things were in their times and places before God, and in all
   their circumstances eternally will be, serving Him in those moments
   wherein they existed, to those intents and purposes for which they were
   created. The swiftest thought is present with Him eternally: the
   creation and the day of judgment, His first consultation, choice and
   determination, the result and end of all just now in full perfection,
   ever beginning, ever passing, ever ending with all the intervals of
   space between things and things: As if those objects that arise many
   thousand years one after the other were all together. We also were
   ourselves before God eternally; and have the joy of seeing ourselves
   eternally beloved and eternally blessed, and infinitely enjoying all
   the parts of our blessedness; in all the durations of eternity
   appearing at once before ourselves, when perfectly consummate in the
   Kingdom of Light and Glory. The smallest thing by the influence of
   eternity, is made infinite and eternal. We pass through a standing
   continent or region of ages, that are already before us, glorious and
   perfect while we come to them. Like men in a ship we pass forward, the
   shores and marks seeming to go backward, though we move and they stand
   still. We are not with them in our progressive motion, but prevent the
   swiftness of our course, and are present with them in our
   understandings. Like the sun we dart our rays before us, and occupy
   those spaces with light and contemplation which we move towards, but
   possess not with our bodies. And seeing all things in the light of
   Divine knowledge, eternally serving God, rejoice unspeakably in that
   service, and enjoy it all.


   9

        His omnipresence is our ample territory or field of joys, a
   transparent temple of infinite lustre, a strong tower of defence, a
   castle of repose, a bulwark of security, a palace of delights, an
   immediate help, and a present refuge in the needful time of trouble, a
   broad and a vast extent of fame and glory, a theatre of infinite
   excellency, an infinite ocean by means whereof every action, word, and
   thought is immediately diffused like a drop of wine in a pail of water,
   and everywhere present, everywhere seen and known, infinitely delighted
   in, as well as filling infinite spaces. It is the Spirit that pervades
   all His works, the life and soul of the universe, that in every point
   of space from the centre to the heavens, in every kingdom in the world,
   in every city, in every wilderness, in every house, every soul, every
   creature, in all the parts of His infinity and eternity sees our
   persons; loves our virtues, inspires us with itself, and crowns our
   actions with praise and glory. It makes our honour infinite in extent,
   our glory immense, and our happiness eternal. The rays of our light are
   by this means darted from everlasting to everlasting. This spiritual
   region makes us infinitely present with God, Angels, and Men in all
   places from the utmost bounds of the everlasting hills, throughout all
   the unwearied durations of His endless infinity, and gives us the sense
   and feeling of all the delights and praises we occasion, as well as of
   all the beauties and powers, and pleasures and glories which God
   enjoyeth or createth.


   10

      Our Bridegroom and our King being everywhere, our Lover and Defender
   watchfully governing all worlds, no danger or enemy can arise to hurt
   us, but is immediately prevented and suppressed, in all the spaces
   beyond the utmost borders of those unknown habitations which He
   possesseth. Delights of inestimable value are there preparing, for
   everything is present by its own existence. The essence of God
   therefore being all light and knowledge, love and goodness, care and
   providence, felicity and glory, a pure and simple act, it is present in
   its operations, and by those acts which it eternally exerteth is wholly
   busied in all parts and places of His dominion, perfecting and
   completing our bliss and happiness.

     __________________________________________________________________


   NOTES AND REFERENCES


        IT should perhaps be stated that though the original manuscript of
   this work is written in a clear and beautiful handwriting, it is in
   very small characters, and is in some places difficult to decipher,
   owing to interlineations, and to the fact that many words and passages
   have been crossed through for omission. Had the author lived to revise
   his work for publication, there can be little doubt that he would have
   altered or modified some parts of it. Little indulgence indeed is
   required for it on account of the want of revision; but naturally there
   are here and there oversights, redundancies, and repetitions which
   would not have been found if the author had lived to give the final
   touches to his work. These defects, however, are of little consequence,
   and such as affect only the expression, and not the substance of the
   author's thought. Very few works which have not received the benefit of
   their author's after-thoughts would bear the test of critical
   examination so well as the present.


        In printing this book the general principle which I have kept in
   view has been to endeavour to make its perusal as easy as possible for
   modern readers, while not departing in any essential point from the
   original text. I have indeed modernised the spelling throughout in all
   but a few cases, since I could not see that any advantage would be
   gained by retaining the old orthography. I have also modified very
   considerably Traherne's punctuation, which is very peculiar, and would,
   if it had been retained, have placed many obstacles in the way of
   apprehending his meaning. I have only done this, however, where it
   seemed clearly necessary, and I have perhaps allowed the original
   punctuation to remain in some cases where it might have been altered
   with advantage. Mention should also be made of the fact that Traherne,
   like most writers of his time, made abundant use of capital letters in
   his works. These I have thought it best to suppress in most cases, in
   accordance with the modern practice. However, I have allowed a number
   of them to stand partly in order to preserve some traces of this
   characteristic, and partly because in a few cases it seemed expedient
   to retain them. These things, seeing that they affect only the
   unessential elements of style, I have thought it within my province to
   regulate; but otherwise I have kept strictly to the author's text,
   without presuming in any way to alter or amend it.

        For many of the notes which follow I have to express my
   indebtedness to my friend, Mr. W. T. Brooke. To Mr. Thorn Drury also,
   who has read the proofs, I am under many obligations.



   Notes on The First Century:


   Page 1. Line 1. An empty book is like an infant's soul.' Here Traherne
   may possibly have had in his mind a passage in Bishop Earle's
   "Microcosmography." In delineating the character of a child, Earle
   says: "His soul is yet a white paper unscribbled with observations of
   the world, wherewith at length it becomes a blurred note-book,"

   Page 14. Line 25. The entrance of his words. This sentence is from
   Psalm cxix. 130.

   Page 15. Last line of Med. 21. "Insatiableness." This word in
   Traherne's time was often used in a good sense, and not as now
   exclusively is a bad one.

   Page 21. The quotation at the bottom of the page is from Genesis
   xxviii. 16. Traherne's reading, however, differs somewhat from that of
   the Authorised Version. In this and in many other cases it looks as if
   he trusted to his memory only, and so was often untrue to the letter of
   his text, though never to its spirit.

   Page 22. Line13. They walk on in darkness. This is from Psalm lxxxii.
   5; as is also the quotation at the end of the Meditation.

   Page 27. Line 1 of Med. 40. "Socrates was wont." Traherne wrote first
   as follows: "Socrates the glorious philosopher, was wont to say They
   were most happy,'" & c. In substituting are for were he overlooked the
   fact that he was rendering the sentence ungrammatical.

   Page 40. Line 3.Where the carcase is. Matthew xxiv. 28.

   Page 41. Line 3 of Med. 59. It is an ensign. This sentence is from
   Isaiah xi. 10 and 12.

   Page 57. Line 6. Sweeter to me. A quotation from Psalm xix. 70 and from
   cxix. 72.

   Page 57. Line 17. As I have loved you-- 1 John xiii. 34.

   Pages 60-1. Med. 81. My goodness extendeth not, &c. Psalm xvi. 2-3.

   Page 71. Line 14. Having eyes I see not, &c. The reference here is to
   Psalm cxxxv. 1,6?17.

   Page 71. Line 20. Visit me. . . Holy Hill. Psalm xliii. 3.

   Page 72. Line 5 from bottom. Of whom' to end of sentence. Cf. Ephesians
   iii. 15?19.

   Page 73. Line 3. O Thou who ascendedst, &c. cf. Psalm lxviii. 18.

   Page 75. Line 19. That I may dwell, &c. John xvii. 28.

   Page 77. Line 6. We are the Sons of God, &c. Cf. 1 John iii. 2.

   Page 77. Line 21. A chosen generation, &c. 1 Peter ii. 9.

   Page 79. Line 7. Sing the song of Moses, &c. Revelation xv. 3.


   Notes on the Second Century

   Page 94. Line 9. The Book of ---- The reference here is to the
   apocryphal Wisdom of Solomon xiii. 1-5.

   Page 104. Med. 33. As originally written this Meditation commenced
   thus: Whether the sufferings of an. Angel would have been meritorious
   or no I will not dispute: but'---- And the following sentence, which
   comes after the first, has also been crossedout: So that it was an
   honour and no injury to be called to it: And so great an honour that it
   was an ornament to God himself, and an honour even to the second Person
   in the Trinity.' There are a good many passages in Traherne's
   manuscript which are thus marked for omission; but in most cases they
   are of little importance, being only such redundancies of expression or
   needless repetitions as any author would expunge on reviewing his work.
   Therefore in these notes I mention only those omissions which seem to
   me to be of some importance.

   Page 105. Line 8. For which cause, &c. This sentence is an adaptation
   from some verses in Philippians ii. 5-9.

   Page 106. Line 15. Counted all things but dross, & c. Philippians iii.
   8.

   Page 106. Line 3. For the redemption, &c. Traherne is here quoting from
   Psalm xlix. 7-8; but he has rather obscured the meaning by giving the
   verses in inverted order. What is to cease for ever is man's attempt to
   redeem man, a task which only a God could accomplish. The meaning
   indeed is not very clear in the Authorised Version; the Prayer Book
   version is more perspicuous?°But no man may deliver his brother, nor
   make agreement to God for him: for it cost more to redeem their souls,
   so that he must let that alone for ever.'

   Page 107. Med. 36. After the first sentence of this Meditation, the
   following passage (which is marked for omission in the original MS.)
   occurs: It was not convenient that the Righteousness of the Judge
   Himself should be accepted for ours, but the Righteousness of another,
   who on our behalf should appear before our Judge. For which cause it
   was necessary that another and not the Judge should be Righteous in our
   stead: and that in suffering as well as doing. Now no Angel could be
   Righteous in suffering, because, though by Almighty power sustaining,
   he might be upheld to suffer infinite punishments, yet by his own
   strength he could not suffer infinite punishments, at least not so as
   to be virtuous and meritorious in suffering them for us. For to suffer
   virtuously and meritoriously is so to suffer as to love the Inflicter
   in the midst of sufferings. Which no Angel under infinite torments, by
   his own strength was able to do, being hated of God.'

   Page 108. Line 12. He through the Eternal Spirit, &c. Hebrews v. 7.

   Page 122. Med. 60. Between the first and second sentences of this
   Meditation the following crossed out passage occurs: Who more prizeth
   our naked love than temples full of gold: Whose naked Love is more
   delightful to us than all worlds; and Whose greatest gifts and
   treasures are living souls and friends and lovers. Who, as He hath
   manifested His love by giving us His Son, hath manifested it also by
   giving us all his sons and servants: commanding them to love us with
   the precious love wherewith they do themselves.'

   Page 126. Med. 67. This Meditation is singularly Blake-like in thought;
   and the Poet-Artist would have been delighted with it had he known it:
   Let the reader compare it with Blake's "Auguries of Innocence:"

   To see a world in a grain of sand,

   And a heav'n in a wild flower,


   Hold infinity in the palm of your hand,

   And eternity in an hour.

   God appears and God is light

   To those poor souls who dwell in night;

   But does a human form display

   To those who dwell in realms of day.

   Pages 130-1. After this . . . to the Lamb. Revelation vii. 9-10.

   Page 131. Lines 5-12. Revelation v. 8. 10.

   Page 131. Line 12-20. Revelation, v. 11?13.

   Page 142 Lines 4,5. Appear before God in Sion, &c. Pg. lxxxiv. 7.

   Page 153. Romans viii. 38?9.


   Notes on the Third Century


   Page 161. Line 1. He must be born again, &c. This is a compound
   citation from John iii. 3, and Mark x. 15, in the order named.

   Page 182. Line 17. For all things should work together, &c. See Romans
   viii. 28.

   Page 184. Lines 10-11. Being Satan is able, &c. 2 Corinthians xi. 14.

   Page 184. Last line. Like a sparrow, &c. Psalm cii.

   Page 187. Line 1. Mechanisms. This word is, in the original MS.,
   mechanicismes.'

   Page 187. Line 7. Like the King's daughter, &c. Psalm xlv. 14.

   Page 188. Med. 39. The best of all possible ends, &c. Traherne is here
   thinking of the Shorter Catechism, 1645: What is the chief end of Man?
   To glorify God: and enjoy Him for ever.'

   Page 191. Med. 43. first sentence. This is slightly obscure, and it
   looks as if the word are' had been accidentally omitted after
   'outgoings.' If we read the sentence, after the first clause, as
   follows, the meaning becomes quite clear: "because we are with Him
   whose outgoings are everlasting: our duty being to contemplate God, and
   to walk with Him in all His ways: and therefore to be entertained with
   everything He has created, since He is the fountain, governor, and end
   of them.'

   Page 203. Last line. Acts xvii. 23.

   Page 204. Line 24. Alienated from the life of God, &c. Ephesians iv.
   18.

   Page 210. Med. 67. Blessing the Lord . . . and fullness thereof.
   Deuteronomy xxxiii. 13?16.

   Page 211. Line 6. All these will I give thee, &c. Genesis xiii. 15.

   Page 212. Med. 69. This poem in many ways anticipates Christopher
   Smarts "Song to David," and should be compared with it. Of course Smart
   could have known nothing of it.

   Page 218. Med. 73. Quoted from Psalm xxii. 23?31.

   Page 219. The Earth is the lord's, &c. Psalm xxiv. 1.

   Page 219. Because they regard not, & c. Psalm xxxviii. 5.

   Page 219. Med. 75. The passage here quoted is from Psalm xxxiii. 6?9.

   Page 220. All my bones shall say, &c. Psalm xxxv. 10.

   Page 220. Thy mercy, O Lord, etc. Psalm xxxvi. 5?9.

   Page 220. Med. 77. The quotation here is from Psalm xlv. 10, 13?16.

   Page 220. Med. 78. The quotations here are from Psalm xlvi. 4 and 8.

   Page 222. Med. 79. The quotations here are from Psalm xlviii. 2, 3, and
   12-14.

   Page 222. Med. 80. By "this following" in the second line Traherne
   means Psalm xlix., he having quoted from Psalm xlviii. in the previous
   Meditation.

   Page 222. They that trust in their wealth, &c. This quotation is from
   Psalm xlix. 6, 7, 8, 10, I1, 13, 14, and 20.

   Page 223. Med. 81. The quotation here is from Psalm 1. 7?I5.

   Page 225. Med. 83. The quotation here is from Hebrews x. 5, itself a
   quotation from Psalm xl. 6, altered.

   Page 226. Thou desirest not sacrifice, &c. Psalm li. 16 and 17.

   Page 226. Med. 84. Converting to Him, &c. "Converting" is here used, as
   was then not uncommon, in the sense of °' being converted."

   Page 227. Med. 85. The quotations here are from Psalms lviii. 10 and
   lix. 16.

   Page 227. Med. 86. The quotations here are from Psalms lxiii. 1?5 and
   lxv. 2?4.

   Page 228. Med. 87. The quotation here is from Psalm lxvi. 1-5.

   Page 229. Med. 88. The quotation here is from Psalm lxxxiv. 12-14.

   Page 230. Med. 91. The quotation here is from Psalm lxxxvi. 8-10.

   Page 231. Line 2 from bottom. Whoso considereth these things, &c. Psalm
   cvii. 43.


   Notes on the Fourth Century


   Page 238. Med. 1. In the wording of this meditation, and of several
   other passages in the Fourth Century, it seems as though Traherne is
   speaking not of himself, but of, a friend and teacher of his. He did
   this, no doubt, in order that he might not lay himself open to the
   charge of over-egotism. Yet that he is throughout relating his own
   experiences is proved by the fact that this Meditation, as first
   written, contains passages which the author afterwards marked for
   omission. In its original form it began thus: "Since the author in the
   last century hath spoken so much concerning his entrance and progress
   into the study of Felicity, and all he hath there said pertaineth only
   to the contemplative part of it, I will in this Century speak of the
   principles with which he endued himself to enjoy it." This seems
   conclusive, though there are later on in this "Century" passages in
   which the author appears to be speaking not of his own experiences, but
   of that of a friend who had communicated them to him.

   Page 240. Line 22. In him are hid, &c. Colossians ii. 3.

   Page 243. Line 13. We must dig for her, &c. Proverbs ii. 4.

   Page 243. Line 17. Wisdom is the principal thing, &c. Proverbs iv. 7-9.

   Page 246. Line 2. Ye are not straitened, &c. 2 Corinthians xxiv. 20.

   Page 248. Med. 13. Line 4. Alone like a sparrow, &c. Psalm cii. 6 and
   7.

   Page 252. Med. 18. Line 6. For it is more blessed, &c. Acts xx. 35.

   Page 253. Med. 20. Compare this Meditation with the poem "Of Meekness,"
   which is to be found on page 145 of Traherne's "Poetical Works."

   Page 259. Line 10. Inasmuch as ye have done it, &c. Matthew xxv. 40.

   Page 265. Line 25. In all thy keeping, &c. Proverbs iv. 23.

   Page 269. Line 13. It is more blessed, &c. Acts xx. 35.

   Page 281. Line 5. What ye do to him, &c. Matthew xxv. 40.

   Page 292-3. The Alpha and Omega, the first and the last &c. Revelation
   i. 11 and 18.

   Page 293. Line 2. The Glory which Thou last given me &c. John xvii. 22.

   Page 293. Line 4. In Him the fulness of the Godhead, &c. Colossians ii.
   19.

   Page 293. Line 6. His Church is the fulness, &c. Ephesians i. 22.

   Page 294. Line 10. How precious are thy Thoughts, &c. Psalm cxxxix. 17,
   18.

   Page 304. Line 10. My love is a spring, &c. Song of Solomon iv. 12.


   Notes on The Fifth Century


   Page 327. Med. 10. Here the manuscript ends. That the author intended
   to continue his work there can be no doubt, and we may therefore
   conclude that he was prevented from finishing it by his too early
   death. It is a loss to us that it is thus incomplete: yet in the work
   as it stands we have perhaps a sufficiently full statement of the main
   points of the author's religion and philosophy. Like all other creeds
   it will perhaps only appeal to those minds which are prepared to
   receive it; but it is one, nevertheless; which must command the respect
   even of those who are least inclined to accept its teachings. It
   presents Christianity (or at least Protestant Christianity) in its most
   favourable aspect; nor is it likely that as an eloquent and persuasive
   exposition of its leading doctrines it will ever be surpassed or
   superseded: There are no doubt some few things in it which even devout
   believers will no longer hold themselves bound to accept as necessary
   to salvation; but on the whole, if the Christian faith is not to
   undergo an entire transformation at the hands of its modern apologists,
   it must be expounded as Traherne expounds it, not as a collection of
   soulless dogmas embodied in formal confessions of faith, but as a great
   reality, which is of the deepest concernment to all men, and without
   which the life of man is an inexplicable enigma.


   Printed by BALLANTYNE & CO. LIMITED Tavistock Street, Covent Garden,
   London




     __________________________________________________________________

                                    Indexes
     __________________________________________________________________

Index of Scripture References

   Genesis

   [1]13:15   [2]28:16

   Deuteronomy

   [3]33:13

   Psalms

   [4]1   [5]2   [6]2:6   [7]7:43   [8]16:2-3   [9]19:70   [10]19:130
   [11]22:23   [12]24:1   [13]33:6   [14]35:1   [15]35:6   [16]35:10
   [17]36:5   [18]38:5   [19]39:17-18   [20]40:6   [21]43:3   [22]45:10
   [23]45:13   [24]45:14   [25]46:4   [26]48   [27]48:2-3   [28]49
   [29]49:6-8   [30]49:7-8   [31]49:10   [32]51:16   [33]58:10
   [34]63:1   [35]66:1-5   [36]68:18   [37]82:5   [38]84:12-14
   [39]86:8-10

   Proverbs

   [40]2:4   [41]4:7-9   [42]4:23

   Isaiah

   [43]11:10

   Matthew

   [44]24:28   [45]25:40   [46]25:40

   Mark

   [47]10:15

   John

   [48]3:3   [49]17:22   [50]17:28

   Acts

   [51]17:23   [52]20   [53]20:35   [54]20:35

   Romans

   [55]8:28   [56]8:38

   2 Corinthians

   [57]11:14   [58]24:20

   Ephesians

   [59]1:22   [60]3:15   [61]4:18

   Philippians

   [62]2:5-9   [63]3:8

   Colossians

   [64]2:3   [65]2:19

   Hebrews

   [66]5:7   [67]10:5

   1 Peter

   [68]2:9

   1 John

   [69]3:2   [70]13:34

   Revelation

   [71]1:11   [72]5:8   [73]7:9-10   [74]15:3
     __________________________________________________________________

Index of Pages of the Print Edition

   [75]4  [76]5  [77]6  [78]7  [79]8  [80]9  [81]10  [82]11  [83]12
   [84]13  [85]14  [86]15  [87]16  [88]17  [89]18  [90]19  [91]20  [92]21
   [93]22  [94]23  [95]24  [96]25  [97]26  [98]27  [99]28  [100]29
   [101]30  [102]31  [103]32  [104]33  [105]34  [106]35  [107]36  [108]37
   [109]38  [110]39  [111]40  [112]41  [113]42  [114]43  [115]44  [116]45
   [117]46  [118]47  [119]48  [120]49  [121]50  [122]51  [123]52  [124]53
   [125]54  [126]55  [127]56  [128]57  [129]58  [130]59  [131]60  [132]61
   [133]62  [134]63  [135]64  [136]65  [137]66  [138]67  [139]68  [140]69
   [141]70  [142]71  [143]72  [144]73  [145]74  [146]75  [147]76  [148]77
   [149]78  [150]79  [151]80  [152]81  [153]82  [154]83  [155]84  [156]85
   [157]86  [158]87  [159]88  [160]89  [161]90  [162]91  [163]92  [164]93
   [165]94  [166]95  [167]96  [168]97  [169]98  [170]99  [171]100
   [172]101  [173]102  [174]103  [175]104  [176]105  [177]106  [178]107
   [179]108  [180]109  [181]110  [182]111  [183]112  [184]113  [185]114
   [186]115  [187]116  [188]117  [189]118  [190]119  [191]120  [192]121
   [193]122  [194]123  [195]124  [196]125  [197]126  [198]127  [199]128
   [200]129  [201]130  [202]131  [203]132  [204]133  [205]134  [206]135
   [207]136  [208]137  [209]138  [210]139  [211]140  [212]141  [213]142
   [214]143  [215]144  [216]145  [217]146  [218]147  [219]148  [220]149
   [221]150  [222]151  [223]152  [224]153  [225]154  [226]155  [227]156
   [228]157  [229]158  [230]159  [231]160  [232]161  [233]162  [234]163
   [235]164  [236]165  [237]166  [238]167  [239]168  [240]169  [241]170
   [242]171  [243]172  [244]173  [245]174  [246]175  [247]176  [248]177
   [249]178  [250]179  [251]180  [252]181  [253]182  [254]183  [255]184
   [256]185  [257]186  [258]187  [259]188  [260]189  [261]190  [262]191
   [263]192  [264]193  [265]194  [266]195  [267]196  [268]197  [269]198
   [270]199  [271]200  [272]201  [273]202  [274]203  [275]204  [276]205
   [277]206  [278]207  [279]208  [280]209  [281]210  [282]211  [283]212
   [284]213  [285]214  [286]215  [287]216  [288]217  [289]218  [290]219
   [291]220  [292]221  [293]222  [294]223  [295]224  [296]225  [297]226
   [298]227  [299]228  [300]229  [301]230  [302]231  [303]232  [304]233
   [305]234  [306]235  [307]236  [308]237  [309]238  [310]239  [311]240
   [312]241  [313]242  [314]243  [315]244  [316]245  [317]246  [318]247
   [319]248  [320]249  [321]250  [322]251  [323]252  [324]253  [325]254
   [326]255  [327]256  [328]257  [329]258  [330]259  [331]260  [332]261
   [333]262  [334]263  [335]264  [336]265  [337]266  [338]267  [339]268
   [340]269  [341]270  [342]271  [343]272  [344]273  [345]274  [346]275
   [347]276  [348]277  [349]278  [350]279  [351]280  [352]281  [353]282
   [354]283  [355]284  [356]285  [357]286  [358]287  [359]288  [360]289
   [361]290  [362]291  [363]292  [364]293  [365]294  [366]295  [367]296
   [368]297  [369]298  [370]299  [371]300  [372]301  [373]302  [374]303
   [375]304  [376]305  [377]306  [378]307  [379]308  [380]309  [381]310
   [382]311  [383]312  [384]313  [385]314  [386]315  [387]316  [388]317
   [389]318  [390]319  [391]320  [392]321  [393]322  [394]323  [395]324
   [396]325  [397]326  [398]327  [399]328  [400]329  [401]330  [402]331
   [403]332  [404]333  [405]334  [406]335  [407]336  [408]337  [409]338
   [410]339  [411]340  [412]341  [413]342
     __________________________________________________________________

            This document is from the Christian Classics Ethereal
               Library at Calvin College, http://www.ccel.org,
                   generated on demand from ThML source.

References

   1. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=13&scrV=15#vi-p70.1
   2. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=28&scrV=16#vi-p15.1
   3. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=33&scrV=13#vi-p69.1
   4. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=1&scrV=0#vi-p83.1
   5. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=2&scrV=0#vi-p62.1
   6. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=2&scrV=6#vi-p101.1
   7. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=7&scrV=43#vi-p92.1
   8. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=16&scrV=2#vi-p22.1
   9. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=19&scrV=70#vi-p20.1
  10. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=19&scrV=130#vi-p13.1
  11. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=22&scrV=23#vi-p72.1
  12. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=24&scrV=1#vi-p73.1
  13. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=33&scrV=6#vi-p75.1
  14. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=35&scrV=1#vi-p23.1
  15. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=35&scrV=6#vi-p23.1
  16. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=35&scrV=10#vi-p76.1
  17. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=36&scrV=5#vi-p77.1
  18. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=38&scrV=5#vi-p74.1
  19. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=39&scrV=17#vi-p112.1
  20. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=40&scrV=6#vi-p84.2
  21. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=43&scrV=3#vi-p24.1
  22. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=45&scrV=10#vi-p78.1
  23. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=45&scrV=13#vi-p78.1
  24. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=45&scrV=14#vi-p64.1
  25. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=46&scrV=4#vi-p79.1
  26. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=48&scrV=0#vi-p81.2
  27. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=48&scrV=2#vi-p80.1
  28. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=49&scrV=0#vi-p81.1
  29. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=49&scrV=6#vi-p82.1
  30. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=49&scrV=7#vi-p37.1
  31. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=49&scrV=10#vi-p82.1
  32. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=51&scrV=16#vi-p85.1
  33. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=58&scrV=10#vi-p87.1
  34. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=63&scrV=1#vi-p88.1
  35. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=66&scrV=1#vi-p89.1
  36. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=68&scrV=18#vi-p26.1
  37. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=82&scrV=5#vi-p16.1
  38. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=84&scrV=12#vi-p90.1
  39. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=86&scrV=8#vi-p91.1
  40. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=2&scrV=4#vi-p98.1
  41. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=4&scrV=7#vi-p99.1
  42. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=4&scrV=23#vi-p105.1
  43. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=11&scrV=10#vi-p19.1
  44. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=24&scrV=28#vi-p18.1
  45. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=25&scrV=40#vi-p104.1
  46. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=25&scrV=40#vi-p107.1
  47. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=10&scrV=15#vi-p59.2
  48. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=3#vi-p59.1
  49. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=17&scrV=22#vi-p109.1
  50. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=17&scrV=28#vi-p27.1
  51. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=17&scrV=23#vi-p67.1
  52. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=20&scrV=0#ii-p141.1
  53. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=20&scrV=35#vi-p102.1
  54. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=20&scrV=35#vi-p106.1
  55. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=28#vi-p60.1
  56. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=38#vi-p55.1
  57. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=11&scrV=14#vi-p61.1
  58. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=24&scrV=20#vi-p100.1
  59. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=22#vi-p111.1
  60. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=3&scrV=15#vi-p25.1
  61. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=18#vi-p68.1
  62. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=5#vi-p35.1
  63. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=3&scrV=8#vi-p36.1
  64. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=2&scrV=3#vi-p97.1
  65. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=2&scrV=19#vi-p110.1
  66. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=5&scrV=7#vi-p39.1
  67. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=10&scrV=5#vi-p84.1
  68. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=9#vi-p29.1
  69. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=3&scrV=2#vi-p28.1
  70. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=13&scrV=34#vi-p21.1
  71. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=1&scrV=11#vi-p108.1
  72. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=5&scrV=8#vi-p52.1
  73. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=7&scrV=9#vi-p51.1
  74. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=15&scrV=3#vi-p30.1
  75. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#i_1-Page_4
  76. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#i_1-Page_5
  77. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#i_1-Page_6
  78. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#i_1-Page_7
  79. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#i_1-Page_8
  80. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#i_1-Page_9
  81. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#i_1-Page_10
  82. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#i_1-Page_11
  83. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#i_1-Page_12
  84. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#i_1-Page_13
  85. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#i_1-Page_14
  86. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#i_1-Page_15
  87. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#i_1-Page_16
  88. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#i_1-Page_17
  89. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#i_1-Page_18
  90. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#i_1-Page_19
  91. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#i_1-Page_20
  92. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#i_1-Page_21
  93. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#i_1-Page_22
  94. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#i_1-Page_23
  95. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#i_1-Page_24
  96. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#i_1-Page_25
  97. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#i_1-Page_26
  98. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#i_1-Page_27
  99. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#i_1-Page_28
 100. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#i_1-Page_29
 101. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#i_1-Page_30
 102. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#i_1-Page_31
 103. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#i_1-Page_32
 104. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#i_1-Page_33
 105. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#i_1-Page_34
 106. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#i_1-Page_35
 107. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#i_1-Page_36
 108. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#i_1-Page_37
 109. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#i_1-Page_38
 110. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#i_1-Page_39
 111. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#i_1-Page_40
 112. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#i_1-Page_41
 113. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#i_1-Page_42
 114. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#i_1-Page_43
 115. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#i_1-Page_44
 116. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#i_1-Page_45
 117. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#i_1-Page_46
 118. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#i_1-Page_47
 119. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#i_1-Page_48
 120. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#i_1-Page_49
 121. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#i_1-Page_50
 122. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#i_1-Page_51
 123. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#i_1-Page_52
 124. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#i_1-Page_53
 125. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#i_1-Page_54
 126. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#i_1-Page_55
 127. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#i_1-Page_56
 128. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#i_1-Page_57
 129. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#i_1-Page_58
 130. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#i_1-Page_59
 131. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#i_1-Page_60
 132. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#i_1-Page_61
 133. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#i_1-Page_62
 134. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#i_1-Page_63
 135. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#i_1-Page_64
 136. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#i_1-Page_65
 137. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#i_1-Page_66
 138. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#i_1-Page_67
 139. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#i_1-Page_68
 140. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#i_1-Page_69
 141. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#i_1-Page_70
 142. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#i_1-Page_71
 143. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#i_1-Page_72
 144. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#i_1-Page_73
 145. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#i_1-Page_74
 146. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#i_1-Page_75
 147. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#i_1-Page_76
 148. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#i_1-Page_77
 149. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#i_1-Page_78
 150. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#i_1-Page_79
 151. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#ii-Page_80
 152. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#ii-Page_81
 153. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#ii-Page_82
 154. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#ii-Page_83
 155. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#ii-Page_84
 156. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#ii-Page_85
 157. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#ii-Page_86
 158. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#ii-Page_87
 159. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#ii-Page_88
 160. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#ii-Page_89
 161. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#ii-Page_90
 162. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#ii-Page_91
 163. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#ii-Page_92
 164. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#ii-Page_93
 165. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#ii-Page_94
 166. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#ii-Page_95
 167. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#ii-Page_96
 168. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#ii-Page_97
 169. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#ii-Page_98
 170. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#ii-Page_99
 171. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#ii-Page_100
 172. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#ii-Page_101
 173. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#ii-Page_102
 174. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#ii-Page_103
 175. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#ii-Page_104
 176. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#ii-Page_105
 177. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#ii-Page_106
 178. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#ii-Page_107
 179. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#ii-Page_108
 180. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#ii-Page_109
 181. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#ii-Page_110
 182. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#ii-Page_111
 183. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#ii-Page_112
 184. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#ii-Page_113
 185. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#ii-Page_114
 186. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#ii-Page_115
 187. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#ii-Page_116
 188. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#ii-Page_117
 189. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#ii-Page_118
 190. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#ii-Page_119
 191. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#ii-Page_120
 192. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#ii-Page_121
 193. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#ii-Page_122
 194. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#ii-Page_123
 195. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#ii-Page_124
 196. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#ii-Page_125
 197. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#ii-Page_126
 198. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#ii-Page_127
 199. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#ii-Page_128
 200. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#ii-Page_129
 201. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#ii-Page_130
 202. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#ii-Page_131
 203. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#ii-Page_132
 204. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#ii-Page_133
 205. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#ii-Page_134
 206. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#ii-Page_135
 207. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#ii-Page_136
 208. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#ii-Page_137
 209. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#ii-Page_138
 210. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#ii-Page_139
 211. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#ii-Page_140
 212. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#ii-Page_141
 213. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#ii-Page_142
 214. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#ii-Page_143
 215. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#ii-Page_144
 216. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#ii-Page_145
 217. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#ii-Page_146
 218. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#ii-Page_147
 219. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#ii-Page_148
 220. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#ii-Page_149
 221. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#ii-Page_150
 222. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#ii-Page_151
 223. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#ii-Page_152
 224. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#ii-Page_153
 225. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#ii-Page_154
 226. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#ii-Page_155
 227. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#iii-Page_156
 228. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#iii-Page_157
 229. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#iii-Page_158
 230. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#iii-Page_159
 231. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#iii-Page_160
 232. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#iii-Page_161
 233. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#iii-Page_162
 234. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#iii-Page_163
 235. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#iii-Page_164
 236. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#iii-Page_165
 237. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#iii-Page_166
 238. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#iii-Page_167
 239. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#iii-Page_168
 240. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#iii-Page_169
 241. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#iii-Page_170
 242. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#iii-Page_171
 243. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#iii-Page_172
 244. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#iii-Page_173
 245. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#iii-Page_174
 246. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#iii-Page_175
 247. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#iii-Page_176
 248. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#iii-Page_177
 249. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#iii-Page_178
 250. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#iii-Page_179
 251. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#iii-Page_180
 252. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#iii-Page_181
 253. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#iii-Page_182
 254. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#iii-Page_183
 255. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#iii-Page_184
 256. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#iii-Page_185
 257. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#iii-Page_186
 258. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#iii-Page_187
 259. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#iii-Page_188
 260. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#iii-Page_189
 261. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#iii-Page_190
 262. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#iii-Page_191
 263. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#iii-Page_192
 264. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#iii-Page_193
 265. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#iii-Page_194
 266. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#iii-Page_195
 267. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#iii-Page_196
 268. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#iii-Page_197
 269. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#iii-Page_198
 270. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#iii-Page_199
 271. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#iii-Page_200
 272. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#iii-Page_201
 273. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#iii-Page_202
 274. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#iii-Page_203
 275. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#iii-Page_204
 276. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#iii-Page_205
 277. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#iii-Page_206
 278. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#iii-Page_207
 279. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#iii-Page_208
 280. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#iii-Page_209
 281. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#iii-Page_210
 282. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#iii-Page_211
 283. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#iii-Page_212
 284. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#iii-Page_213
 285. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#iii-Page_214
 286. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#iii-Page_215
 287. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#iii-Page_216
 288. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#iii-Page_217
 289. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#iii-Page_218
 290. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#iii-Page_219
 291. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#iii-Page_220
 292. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#iii-Page_221
 293. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#iii-Page_222
 294. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#iii-Page_223
 295. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#iii-Page_224
 296. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#iii-Page_225
 297. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#iii-Page_226
 298. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#iii-Page_227
 299. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#iii-Page_228
 300. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#iii-Page_229
 301. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#iii-Page_230
 302. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#iii-Page_231
 303. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#iii-Page_232
 304. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#iii-Page_233
 305. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#iii-Page_234
 306. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#iii-Page_235
 307. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#iii-Page_236
 308. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#iii-Page_237
 309. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#iii-Page_238
 310. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#iv-Page_239
 311. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#iv-Page_240
 312. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#iv-Page_241
 313. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#iv-Page_242
 314. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#iv-Page_243
 315. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#iv-Page_244
 316. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#iv-Page_245
 317. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#iv-Page_246
 318. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#iv-Page_247
 319. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#iv-Page_248
 320. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#iv-Page_249
 321. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#iv-Page_250
 322. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#iv-Page_251
 323. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#iv-Page_252
 324. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#iv-Page_253
 325. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#iv-Page_254
 326. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#iv-Page_255
 327. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#iv-Page_256
 328. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#iv-Page_257
 329. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#iv-Page_258
 330. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#iv-Page_259
 331. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#iv-Page_260
 332. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#iv-Page_261
 333. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#iv-Page_262
 334. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#iv-Page_263
 335. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#iv-Page_264
 336. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#iv-Page_265
 337. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#iv-Page_266
 338. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#iv-Page_267
 339. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#iv-Page_268
 340. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#iv-Page_269
 341. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#iv-Page_270
 342. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#iv-Page_271
 343. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#iv-Page_272
 344. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#iv-Page_273
 345. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#iv-Page_274
 346. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#iv-Page_275
 347. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#iv-Page_276
 348. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#iv-Page_277
 349. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#iv-Page_278
 350. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#iv-Page_279
 351. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#iv-Page_280
 352. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#iv-Page_281
 353. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#iv-Page_282
 354. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#iv-Page_283
 355. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#iv-Page_284
 356. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#iv-Page_285
 357. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#iv-Page_286
 358. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#iv-Page_287
 359. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#iv-Page_288
 360. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#iv-Page_289
 361. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#iv-Page_290
 362. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#iv-Page_291
 363. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#iv-Page_292
 364. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#iv-Page_293
 365. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#iv-Page_294
 366. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#iv-Page_295
 367. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#iv-Page_296
 368. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#iv-Page_297
 369. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#iv-Page_298
 370. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#iv-Page_299
 371. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#iv-Page_300
 372. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#iv-Page_301
 373. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#iv-Page_302
 374. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#iv-Page_303
 375. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#iv-Page_304
 376. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#iv-Page_305
 377. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#iv-Page_306
 378. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#iv-Page_307
 379. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#iv-Page_308
 380. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#iv-Page_309
 381. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#iv-Page_310
 382. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#iv-Page_311
 383. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#iv-Page_312
 384. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#iv-Page_313
 385. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#iv-Page_314
 386. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#iv-Page_315
 387. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#iv-Page_316
 388. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#iv-Page_317
 389. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#iv-Page_318
 390. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#v-Page_319
 391. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#v-Page_320
 392. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#v-Page_321
 393. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#v-Page_322
 394. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#v-Page_323
 395. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#v-Page_324
 396. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#v-Page_325
 397. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#v-Page_326
 398. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#v-Page_327
 399. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#v-Page_328
 400. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#vi-Page_329
 401. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#vi-Page_330
 402. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#vi-Page_331
 403. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#vi-Page_332
 404. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#vi-Page_333
 405. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#vi-Page_334
 406. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#vi-Page_335
 407. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#vi-Page_336
 408. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#vi-Page_337
 409. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#vi-Page_338
 410. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#vi-Page_339
 411. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#vi-Page_340
 412. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#vi-Page_341
 413. file:///ccel/t/traherne/centuries/cache/centuries.html3#vi-Page_342
