     __________________________________________________________________

           Title: Commenting and Commentaries
      Creator(s): Spurgeon, Charles Haddon (1834-1892)
   CCEL Subjects: All; Classic; Theology;
      LC Call no: Z7770; BS482
     __________________________________________________________________

Commenting and Commentaries:

   Two Lectures

   Addressed to the students of

   The Pastors' College, Metropolitan Tabernacle,

   by

   C. H. Spurgeon,

   President

   London: Passmore & Alabaster, Paternoster Buildings

   1890

   (All rights reserved)
     __________________________________________________________________

   The present volume is the second of a series of works useful to
   Students and Ministers prepared by Mr. Spurgeon; and published at 2s.
   6d. The first volume is "Lectures to my Students: a Selection from
   Addresses delivered to the Students of the Pastors' College,
   Metropolitan Tabernacle". Passmore and Alabaster, Paternoster
   Buildings.

   Mr. Spurgeon has other works of a similar character in contemplation,
   which will be issued, if the Lord will. It is hoped that The College
   Series may render efficient service to preachers of the gospel. Friends
   who appreciate the books will greatly oblige by making them known to
   others. The same motive which prompted the author to write, leads him
   to desire a large circle of readers.
     __________________________________________________________________

Preface

   When I issued the first volume of "Lectures to my Students" it was my
   intention to prepare another series as soon as time permitted, and I
   meant to include two addresses upon Commenting in the proposed
   selection. It struck me, however, that a better thing was possible. The
   two lectures might introduce the topic of exposition, and then a
   catalogue of Commentaries might help the student to carry the advice
   into practice. The making of that catalogue would, of course, be no
   small labour; but, once accomplished, it might be of service to many,
   and effect more in the direction aimed at than the most earnest
   exhortations. I therefore resolved to attempt the work, and here is the
   result.

   It would be easy to point out the deficiencies of the modern pulpit,
   and hold up one's own ideal of what preaching ought to be, but this has
   been so often attempted by others with such slender results that we
   decline the task. A judicious critic would probably complain that many
   sermons are deficient ill solid instruction, Biblical exposition, and
   Scriptural argument: they are flashy, rather than fleshy; clever,
   rather than solid; entertaining, rather than impressive. He would point
   to rhetorical discourses in which doctrine is barely discernible, and
   brilliant harangues from which no food for the soul could ever be
   extracted. Having done this, he would probably propose that homilies
   should flow out of texts, and should consist of a clear explanation,
   and an earnest enforcement of the truths which the texts distinctly
   teach. Expository preaching he would advocate as the great need of the
   day, its best protection against rising errors, and its surest means of
   spiritual edification. To such observations most of us would offer no
   opposition; we should confess them to be full of wisdom, and worthy of
   being pondered. We should not unite in any indiscriminate censuring of
   hortatory addresses, or topical sermons, nor should we agree with the
   demand that every discourse should be limited to the range of its text,
   nor even that it should have a text at all; but we should heartily
   subscribe to the declaration, that more expository preaching is greatly
   needed, and that all preachers would be the better if they were more
   able expounders of the inspired Word.

   To render such a result more probable, every inducement to search the
   Holy Scriptures should be placed in the way of our ministers, and to
   the younger brethren some guidance should be proffered as to the works
   most likely to aid them in their studies. Many are persuaded that they
   should expound the Word, but being unversed in the original tongues
   they can only fall back upon the help of their English Concordances,
   and are left floundering about, when a sound comment would direct their
   thoughts. True, the Holy Spirit will instruct the seeker, but he works
   by means. The Ethiopian eunuch might have received divine illumination,
   and doubtless did receive it, but still, when asked whether he
   understood the Scripture which he read, he replied, "How can I unless
   some man shall guide me?" The guiding man is needed still. Divines who
   have studied the Scriptures have left us great stores of holy thought
   which we do well to use. Their expositions can never be a substitute
   for our own meditations, but as water poured down a dry pump often sets
   it to work to bring up water of its own, so suggestive reading sets the
   mind in motion on its own account. Here, however, is the difficulty.
   Students do not find it easy to choose which works to buy, and their
   slender stores are often wasted on books of a comparatively worthless
   kind. If I can save a poor man from spending his money for that which
   is not bread, or, by directing a brother to a good book, may enable him
   to dig deeper into the mines of truth, I shall be well repaid. For this
   purpose I have toiled, and read much, and passed under review some
   three or four thousand volumes. From these I have compiled my
   catalogue, rejecting man, yet making a very varied selection. Though I
   have carefully used such judgment as I possess, I have doubtless made
   many errors; I shall certainly find very few who will agree with all my
   criticisms, and some persons may be angry at my remarks. I have,
   however, done my best, and, with as much impartiality as I can command,
   I have nothing extenuated nor set down aught in malice. He who finds
   fault will do well to execute the work in better style; only let him
   remember that he will have my heifer to plough with and therefore ought
   in all reason to excel me.

   I have used a degree of pleasantry in my remarks on the Commentaries,
   for a catalogue is a dry affair, and, as much for my own sake as for
   that of my readers, I have indulged the mirthful vein here and there.
   For this I hope I shall escape censure, even if I do not win
   commendation.

   The preface to the Catalogue will be found on pages 33 and 34???, which
   the reader is requested to peruse before attempting to use the list.

   To God I commend this labour, which has been undertaken and carried out
   with no motive but that of honoring his name, and edifying his Church
   by stimulating the study of his Word. May he, for his Son's sake, grant
   my heart's desire.

     __________________________________________________________________

The Pastors' College

   The preparation of the present work was suggested by the author's
   connection with the Pastors' College, and the Library of that
   Institution has in a high degree assisted in its execution, therefore
   the reader must permit the College to be noticed in these pages in the
   same manner as in the former volume of this series. To make it known,
   and to win for it willing friends is confessedly one object, of these
   publications, which may indeed be viewed as merely the giving forth to
   a wider area the instruction carried on within the College walls.

   The Institution is intended to aid useful preachers in obtaining a
   better education. It takes no man to make him a minister, but requires
   that its pupils should, as a rule, have exercised their gifts for at
   least two years and have won souls to Jesus. These we receive, however
   poor or backward they may be, and our endeavours are all turned towards
   the one aim that they should be instructed in the things of God,
   furnished for their work, and practised in the gift of utterance. Much
   prayer is made by the Church that this end may be accomplished, nor has
   the prayer been in vain, for some 330 men are now declaring the gospel
   of Jesus who were trained in this manner. Besides the students for the
   regular ministry, several hundreds of street preachers, city
   missionaries, teachers, and workers of all kinds have passed through
   our evening classes, and a band of 250 such men are now with us,
   pursuing their callings by day and studying in the evening. We ask for
   much prayer from all our brethren, that the supply of the Spirit may
   sanctify the teaching, and anoint every worker for the service of the
   Lord.

   As it would be quite unwarrantable for us to interfere with the
   arrangements of other bodies of Christians, who have their own methods
   of training their ministers, and as it is obvious that we could not
   find spheres for men in denominations with which we have no
   ecclesiastical connection, we confine our college to Baptists; and in
   order not to be harassed with endless controversies, we invite those
   only who hold those views of divine truth which are popularly known as
   Calvinistic,--not that we care for names and phrases, but as we wish to
   be understood, we use a term which conveys our meaning as nearly as any
   descriptive word can do. Believing the grand doctrines of grace to be
   the natural accompaniments of the fundamental evangelical truth of
   redemption by the blood of Jesus, we hold and teach them not only in
   our ministry to the masses, but in the more select instruction of the
   class room. Latitudinarianism with its infidelity, and unsectarianism
   with its intolerance, are neither of them friends of ours: we delight
   in the man who believes, and therefore speaks. Our Lord has given us no
   permission to be liberal with what is none of ours. We are to give an
   account of every truth with which we are put in trust.

   Our means for conducting this work are with the most High God,
   possessor of heaven and earth. We have no list of subscribers or roll
   of endowments. Our trust is in Him whom we desire to serve. He has
   supported the work for many years, by moving his stewards to send us
   help, and we are sure that he will continue to do so as long as he
   desires us to pursue this labour of love. We need, at least, 100 pounds
   every week of the year. Since our service is gratuitous in every sense,
   we the more freely appeal to those who agree with us in believing that
   to aid an earnest young minister to equip himself for his life work is
   a worthy effort. No money yields so large a return, no work is so
   important, just now none is so absolutely needful.

   Nightingale Lane,

   Clapham, Surrey.

   C. H. Spurgeon
     __________________________________________________________________

Lecture 1

A Chat about Commentaries

   In order to be able to expound the Scriptures, and as an aid to your
   pulpit studies, you will need to be familiar with the commentators: a
   glorious army, let me tell you, whose acquaintance will be your delight
   and profit. Of course, you are not such wiseacres as to think or say
   that you can expound Scripture without assistance from the works of
   divines and learned men who have laboured before you in the field of
   exposition. If you are of that opinion, pray remain so, for you are not
   worth the trouble of conversion, and like a little coterie who think
   with you, would resent the attempt as an insult to your infallibility.
   It seems odd, that certain men who talk so much of what the Holy Spirit
   reveals to themselves, should think so little of what he has revealed
   to others. My chat this afternoon is not for these great originals, but
   for you who are content to learn of holy men, taught of God, and mighty
   in the Scriptures. It has been the fashion of late years to speak
   against the use of commentaries. If there were any fear that the
   expositions of Matthew Henry, Gill, Scott, and others, would be exalted
   into Christian Targums, we would join the chorus of objectors, but the
   existence or approach of such a danger we do not suspect. The
   temptations of our times lie rather in empty pretensions to novelty of
   sentiment, than in a slavish following of accepted guides. A
   respectable acquaintance with the opinions of the giants of the past,
   might have saved many an erratic thinker from wild interpretations and
   outrageous inferences. Usually, we have found the despisers of
   commentaries to be men who have no sort of acquaintance with them; in
   their case, it is the opposite of familiarity which has bred contempt.
   It is true there are a number of expositions of the whole Bible which
   are hardly worth shelf room; they aim at too much and fail altogether;
   the authors have spread a little learning over a vast surface, and have
   badly attempted for the entire Scriptures what they might have
   accomplished for one book with tolerable success; but who will deny the
   preeminent value of such expositions as those of Calvin, Ness, Henry,
   Trapp, Poole, and Bengel, which are as deep as they are broad? and yet
   further, who can pretend to biblical learning who has not made himself
   familiar with the great writers who spent a life in explaining some one
   sacred book? Caryl on Job will not exhaust the patience of a student
   who loves every letter of the Word; even Collinges, with his nine
   hundred and nine pages upon one chapter of the Song, will not be too
   full for the preacher's use; nor will Manton's long metre edition of
   the hundred and nineteenth Psalm (Ps 119:1-176) be too profuse. No
   stranger could imagine the vast amount of real learning to be found in
   old commentaries like the following:--Durham on Solomon's Song,
   Wilcocks on Psalms and Proverbs, Jermin on Ecclesiastes and Proverbs,
   Greenhill on Ezekiel, Burroughs on Hosea, Ainsworth on the Pentateuch,
   King on Jonah, Hutcheson on John, Peter Martyr on Romans, &c., and in
   Willett, Sibbes, Bayne, Elton, Byfield, Daille, Adams, Taylor, Barlow,
   Goodwin, and others on the various epistles. Without attempting to give
   in detail the names of all, I intend in a familiar talk to mention the
   more notable, who wrote upon the whole Bible, or on either Testament,
   and I especially direct your attention to the titles, which in Puritan
   writers generally give in brief the run of the work.

   First among the mighty for general usefulness we are bound to mention
   the man whose name is a household word, Matthew Henry. [1] He is most
   pious and pithy, sound and sensible, suggestive and sober, terse and
   trustworthy. You will find him to be glittering with metaphors, rich in
   analogies, overflowing with illustrations, superabundant in
   reflections. He delights in apposition and alliteration; he is usually
   plain, quaint, and full of pith; he sees right through a text directly;
   apparently he is not critical, but he quietly gives the result of an
   accurate critical knowledge of the original fully up to the best
   critics of his time. He is not versed in the manners and customs of the
   East, for the Holy Land was not so accessible as in our day; but he is
   deeply spiritual, heavenly, and profitable; finding good matter in
   every text, and from all deducing most practical and judicious lessons.
   His is a kind of commentary to be placed where I saw it, in the old
   meeting house at Chester--chained in the vestry for anybody and
   everybody to read. It is the poor man's commentary, the old Christian's
   companion, suitable to everybody, instructive to all. His own account
   of how he was led to write his exposition, affords us an example of
   delighting in the law of the Lord. "If any desire to know how so mean
   and obscure a person as I am, who in learning, judgment, felicity of
   expression, and all advantages for such a service, am less than the
   least of all my Master's servants, came to venture upon so great a
   work, I can give no other account of it but this. It has long been my
   practice, what little time I had to spare in my study from my constant
   preparations for the pulpit, to spend it in drawing up expositions upon
   some parts of the New Testament, not so much for my own use, as purely
   for my own entertainment, because I know not how to employ my thoughts
   and time more to my satisfaction. Trahit sua quemque voluptas; every
   man that studies hath some beloved study, which is his delight above
   any other; and this is mine. It is that learning which it was my
   happiness from a child to be trained up in by my ever honoured father,
   whose memory must always be very dear and precious to me. He often
   minded me, that a good textuary is a good divine; and that I should
   read other books with this in my eye, that I might be the better able
   to understand and apply the Scripture." You are aware, perhaps, that
   the latter part of the New Testament was completed by other hands, the
   good man having gone the way of all flesh. The writers were Messrs,
   Evans, Brown, Mayo, Bays, Rosewell, Harriss, Atkinson, Smith, Tong,
   Wright, Merrell, Hill, Reynolds, and Billingsley--all Dissenting
   ministers. They have executed their work exceedingly well, have worked
   in much of the matter which Henry had collected, and have done their
   best to follow his methods, but their combined production is far
   inferior to Matthew Henry himself, and any reader will soon detect the
   difference. Every minister ought to read Matthew Henry entirely and
   carefully through once at least. I should recommend you to get through
   it in the next twelve months after you leave college. Begin at the
   beginning, and resolve that you will traverse the goodly land from Dan
   to Beersheba. You will acquire a vast store of sermons if you read with
   your notebook close at hand; and as for thoughts, they will swarm
   around you like twittering swallows around an old gable towards the
   close of autumn. If you publicly expound the chapter you have just been
   reading, your people will wonder at the novelty of your remarks and the
   depth of your thoughts, and then you may tell them what a treasure
   Henry is. Mr. Jay's sermons bear indubitable evidence of his having
   studied Matthew Henry almost daily. Many of the quaint things in Jay's
   sermons are either directly traceable to Matthew Henry or to his
   familiarity with that writer. I have thought that the style of Jay was
   founded upon Matthew Henry: Matthew Henry is Jay writing, Jay is
   Matthew Henry preaching. What more could I say in commendation either
   of the preacher or the author?

   It would not be possible for me too earnestly to press upon you the
   importance of reading the expositions of that prince among men, John
   Calvin! [2] I am afraid that scant purses may debar you from their
   purchase, but if it be possible procure them, and meanwhile, since they
   are in the College library, use them diligently. I have often felt
   inclined to cry out with Father Simon, a Roman Catholic, "Calvin
   possessed a sublime genius", and with Scaliger, "Oh! how well has
   Calvin reached the meaning of the prophets--no one better." You will
   find forty two or more goodly volumes worth their weight in gold. Of
   all commentators I believe John Calvin to be the most candid. In his
   expositions he is not always what moderns would call Calvinistic; that
   is to say, where Scripture maintains the doctrine of predestination and
   grace he flinches in no degree, but inasmuch as some Scriptures bear
   the impress of human free action and responsibility, he does not shun
   to expound their meaning in all fairness and integrity. He was no
   trimmer and pruner of texts. He gave their meaning as far as he knew
   it. His honest intention was to translate the Hebrew and the Greek
   originals as accurately as he possibly could, and then to give the
   meaning which would naturally be conveyed by such Greek and Hebrew
   words: he laboured, in fact, to declare, not his own mind upon the
   Spirit's words, but the mind of the Spirit as couched in those words.
   Dr. King very truly says of him, "No writer ever dealt more fairly and
   honestly by the Word of God. He is scrupulously careful to let it speak
   for itself, and to guard against every tendency of his own mind to put
   upon it a questionable meaning for the sake of establishing some
   doctrine which he feels to be important, or some theory which he is
   anxious to uphold. This is one of his prime excellences. He will not
   maintain any doctrine, however orthodox and essential, by a text of
   Scripture which to him appears of doubtful application, or of
   inadequate force. For instance, firmly as he believed the doctrine of
   the Trinity, he refuses to derive an argument in its favour from the
   plural form of the name of God in the first chapter of Genesis. It were
   easy to multiply examples of this kind, which, whether we agree in his
   conclusion or not, cannot fail to produce the conviction that he is at
   least an honest commentator, and will not make any passage of Scripture
   speak more or less than, according to his view, its divine Author
   intended it to speak."

   The edition of John Calvin's works which was issued by the Calvin
   Translation Society, is greatly enriched by the remarks of the editors,
   consisting not merely of notes on the Latin of Calvin, and the French
   translation, or on the text of the original Scriptures, but also of
   weighty opinions of eminent critics, illustrative manners and customs,
   and observations of travellers. By the way, gentlemen, what a pity it
   is that people do not, as a rule, read the notes in the old Puritan
   books! If you purchase old copies of such writers as Brooks, you will
   find that the notes in the margin are almost as rich as the books
   themselves. They are dust of gold, of the same metal as the ingots in
   the centre of the page. But to return to Calvin. If you needed any
   confirmatory evidence as to the value of his writings, I might summon a
   cloud of witnesses, but it will suffice to quote one or two. Here is
   the opinion of one who is looked upon as his great enemy, namely,
   Arminius: "Next to the perusal of the Scriptures, which I earnestly
   inculcate, I exhort my pupils to peruse Calvin's commentaries, which I
   extol in loftier terms than Helmich [3] himself; for I affirm that he
   excels beyond comparison in the interpretation of Scripture, and that
   his commentaries ought to be more highly valued than all that is handed
   down to us by the Library of the Fathers; so that I acknowledge him to
   have possessed above most others, or rather above all other men, what
   may be called an eminent gift of prophecy."

   Quaint Robert Robinson said of him, "There is no abridging this
   sententious commentator, and the more I read him, the more does he
   become a favourite expositor with me." Holy Baxter wrote, "I know no
   man since the apostles' days, whom I value and honour more than Calvin,
   and whose judgment in all things, one with another, I more esteem and
   come nearer to."

   If you are well enough versed in Latin, you will find in Poole's
   Synopsis, [4] a marvellous collection of all the wisdom and folly of
   the critics. It is a large cyclopaedia worthy of the days when
   theologians could be cyclopean, and had not shrunk from folios to
   octavos. Query--a query for which I will not demand an answer--has one
   of you ever beaten the dust from the venerable copy of Poole which
   loads our library shelves? Yet as Poole spent no less than ten years in
   compiling it, it should be worthy of your frequent notice--ten years,
   let me add, spent in Amsterdam in exile for the truth's sake from his
   native land.

   His work was based upon an earlier compilation entitled Critici Sacri,
   containing the concentrated light of a constellation of learned men who
   have never been excelled in any age or country.

   Matthew Poole also wrote Annotations [5] upon the Word of God, in
   English, which are mentioned by Matthew Henry as having passed through
   many impressions in his day, and he not only highly praises them, but
   declares that he has in his own work all along been brief upon that
   which Mr. Poole has more largely discussed, and has industriously
   declined what is to be found there. The three volumes, tolerably cheap,
   and easily to be got at, are necessaries for your libraries. On the
   whole, if I must have only one commentary, and had read Matthew Henry
   as I have, I do not know but what I should choose Poole. He is a very
   prudent and judicious commentator; and one of the few who could
   honestly say, "We have not willingly balked any obvious difficulty, and
   have designed a just satisfaction to all our readers; and if any knot
   remains yet untied, we have told our readers what hath been most
   probably said for their satisfaction in the untying of it." Poole is
   not so pithy and witty by far as Matthew Henry, but he is perhaps more
   accurate, less a commentator, and more an expositor. You meet with no
   ostentation of learning in Matthew Poole, and that for the simple
   reason that he was so profoundly learned as to be able to give results
   without a display of his intellectual crockery. A pedant who is for
   ever quoting Ambrose and Jerome, Piscator and OEcolampadius, in order
   to show what a copious reader he has been, is usually a dealer in small
   wares, and quotes only what others have quoted before him, but he who
   can give you the result and outcome of very extensive reading without
   sounding a trumpet before him is the really learned man. Mind you do
   not confound the Annotations with the Synopsis; the English work is not
   a translation of the Latin one, but an entirely distinct performance.
   Strange to say, like the other great Matthew he did not live to
   complete his work beyond Isaiah 58; other hands united to finish the
   design.

   Would it be possible to eulogise too much the incomparably sententious
   and suggestive folios of John Trapp? [6] Since Mr. Dickinson has
   rendered them accessible, [7] I trust most of you have bought them.
   Trapp will be most valuable to men of discernment, to thoughtful men,
   to men who only want a start in a line of thought, and are then able to
   run alone. Trapp excels in witty stories on the one hand, and learned
   allusions on the other. You will not thoroughly enjoy him unless you
   can turn to the original, and yet a mere dunce at classics will prize
   him. His writings remind me of himself: he was a pastor, hence his holy
   practical remarks; he was the head of a public school, and everywhere
   we see his profound scholarship; he was for some time amid the guns and
   drums of a parliamentary garrison, and he gossips and tells queer
   anecdotes like a man used to a soldier's life; yet withal, he comments
   as if he had been nothing else but a commentator all his days. Some of
   his remarks are far fetched, and like the far fetched rarities of
   Solomon's Tarshish, there is much gold and silver, but there are also
   apes and peacocks. His criticisms would some of them be the cause of
   amusement in these days of greater scholarship; but for all that, he
   who shall excel Trapp had need rise very early in the morning. Trapp is
   my especial companion and treasure; I can read him when I am too weary
   for anything else. Trapp is salt, pepper, mustard, vinegar, and all the
   other condiments. Put him on the table when you study, and when you
   have your dish ready, use him by way of spicing the whole thing. Yes,
   gentlemen, read Trapp certainly, and if you catch the infection of his
   consecrated humour, so much the better for your hearers.

   A very distinguished place is due to Dr. Gill. [8] Beyond all
   controversy, Gill was one of the most able Hebraists of his day, and in
   other matters no mean proficient. When an opponent in controversy had
   ventured to call him "a botcher in divinity", the good doctor, being
   compelled to become a fool in glorying, gave such a list of his
   attainments as must have covered his accuser with confusion. His great
   work on the Holy Scriptures is greatly prized at the present day by the
   best authorities, which is conclusive evidence of its value, since the
   set of the current of theological thought is quite contrary to that of
   Dr. Gill. No one in these days is likely to be censured for his
   Arminianism, but most modern divines affect to sneer at anything a
   little too highly Calvinistic: however, amid the decadence of his own
   rigid system, and the disrepute of even more moderate Calvinism, Gill's
   laurels as an expositor are still green. His ultraism is discarded, but
   his learning is respected: the world and the church take leave to
   question his dogmatism, but they both bow before his erudition.
   Probably no man since Gill's days has at all equalled him in the matter
   of Rabbinical learning. Say what you will about that lore, it has its
   value: of course, a man has to rake among perfect dunghills and dust
   heaps, but there are a few jewels which the world could not afford to
   miss. Gill was a master cinder sifter among the Targums, the Talmuds,
   the Mishna, and the Gemara. Richly did he deserve the degree of which
   he said, "I never bought it, nor thought it, nor sought it."

   He was always at work; it is difficult to say when he slept, for he
   wrote 10,000 folio pages of theology. The portrait of him which belongs
   to this church, and hangs in my private vestry, and from which all the
   published portraits have been engraved, represents him after an
   interview with an Arminian gentleman, turning up his nose in a most
   expressive manner, as if he could not endure even the smell of
   freewill. In some such a vein he wrote his commentary. He hunts
   Arminianism throughout the whole of it. He is far from being so
   interesting and readable as Matthew Henry. He delivered his comments to
   his people from Sabbath to Sabbath, hence their peculiar mannerism. His
   frequent method of animad-version is, "This text does not mean this",
   nobody ever thought it did; "It does not mean that", only two or three
   heretics ever imagined it did; and again it does not mean a third
   thing, or a fourth, or a fifth, or a sixth absurdity; but at last he
   thinks it does mean so-and-so, and tells you so in a methodical, sermon
   like manner. This is an easy method, gentlemen, of filling up the time,
   if you are ever short of heads for a sermon. Show your people firstly,
   secondly, and thirdly, what the text does not mean, and then afterwards
   you can go back and show them what it does mean. It may be thought,
   however, that one such a teacher is enough, and that what was tolerated
   from a learned doctor would be scouted in a student fresh from college.
   For good, sound, massive, sober sense in commenting, who can excel
   Gill? Very seldom does he allow himself to be run away with by
   imagination, except now and then when he tries to open up a parable,
   and finds a meaning in every circumstance and minute detail; or when he
   falls upon a text which is not congenial with his creed, and hacks and
   hews terribly to bring the word of God into a more systematic shape.
   Gill is the Coryphaeus of hyper-Calvinism, but if his followers never
   went beyond their master, they would not go very far astray.

   I have placed next to Gill in my library Adam Clarke, [9] but as I have
   no desire to have my rest broken by wars among the authors, I have
   placed Doddridge between them. If the spirits of the two worthies could
   descend to the earth in the same mood in which they departed, no one
   house would be able to hold them. Adam Clarke is the great annotator of
   our Wesleyan friends; and they have no reason to be ashamed of him, for
   he takes rank among the chief of expositors. His mind was evidently
   fascinated by the singularities of learning, and hence his commentary
   is rather too much of an old curiosity shop, but it is filled with
   valuable rarities, such as none but a great man could have collected.
   Like Gill, he is one sided, only in the opposite direction to our
   friend the Baptist. The use of the two authors may help to preserve the
   balance of your judgments. If you consider Clarke wanting in unction,
   do not read him for savour but for criticism, and then you will not be
   disappointed.

   The author thought that lengthy reflections were rather for the
   preacher than the commentator, and hence it was not a part of his plan
   to write such observations as those which endear Matthew Henry to the
   million. If you have a copy of Adam Clarke, and exercise discretion in
   reading it, you will derive immense advantage from it, for frequently
   by a sort of side light he brings out the meaning of the text in an
   astonishingly novel manner. I do not wonder that Adam Clarke still
   stands, notwithstanding his peculiarities, a prince among commentators.
   I do not find him so helpful as Gill, but still from his side of the
   question, with which I have personally no sympathy, he is an important
   writer, and deserves to be studied by every reader of the Scriptures.
   He very judiciously says of Dr. Gill, "He was a very learned and good
   man, but has often lost sight of his better judgment in spiritualising
   the text"; this is the very verdict which we pass upon himself, only
   altering the last sentence a word or two; "He has often lost sight of
   his better judgment in following learned singularities"; the monkey,
   instead of the serpent, tempting Eve, is a notable instance.

   As I am paying no sort of attention to chronological order, I shall now
   wander back to old Master Mayer, [10] a rare and valuable author. I
   have been in London a long time now, but I have only of late been able
   to complete my set. The first volume especially is rare in the extreme.
   The six volumes, folio, are a most judicious and able digest of feather
   commentators, enriched with the author's own notes, forming altogether
   one of the fullest and best of learned English commentaries; not meant
   for popular use, but invaluable to the student. He is a link between
   the modern school, at the head of which I put Poole and Henry, and the
   older school who mostly wrote in Latin, and were tinctured with the
   conceits of those schoolmen who gathered like flies around the corpse
   of Aristotle. He appears to have written before Diodati and Trapp, but
   lacked opportunity to publish. I fear he will be forgotten, as there is
   but little prospect of the republication of so diffuse, and perhaps
   heavy, an author. He is a very Alp of learning, but cold and lacking in
   spirituality, hence his lack of popularity.

   In 1653, Arthur Jackson, [11] Preacher of God's Word in Wood Street,
   London, issued four volumes upon the Old Testament, which appear to
   have been the result of his pulpit expositions to his people. Valuable
   his works would be if there were no better, but they are not comparable
   to others already and afterwards mentioned. You can do without him, but
   he is a reputable author. Far more useful is Ness's History And Mystery
   of the Old and New Testament, [12] a grand repository of quaint remarks
   upon the historical books of Scripture. You will find it contained in
   four thin folio volumes, and you will have a treasure if you procure
   it.

   Need I commend Bishop Hall's Contemplations [13] to your Haak's
   Annotations [14] come to us as the offspring of the famous Synod of
   Dort, and the Westminster Annotations [15] as the production of a still
   more venerable assembly; but if, with my hat off, bowing profoundly to
   those august conclaves of master minds, I may venture to say so, I
   would observe that they furnish another instance that committees seldom
   equal the labours of individuals. The notes are too short and
   fragmentary to be of any great value. The volumes are a heavy
   investment.

   Among entire commentators of modern date, a high place is usually
   awarded to Thomas Scott, [16] and I shall not dispute his right to it.
   He is the expositor of evangelical Episcopalians, even as Adam Clarke
   is the prophet of the Wesleyans, but to me he has seldom given a
   thought, and I have almost discontinued consulting him. The very first
   money I ever received for pulpit services in London was invested in
   Thomas Scott, and I neither regretted the investment nor became
   exhilarated thereby. His work has always been popular, is very
   judicious, thoroughly sound and gracious: but for suggestiveness and
   pith is not comparable to Matthew Henry. I know I am talking heresy,
   but I cannot help saying that for a minister's use, Scott is mere milk
   and water--good and trustworthy, but not solid enough in matter for
   full grown men. In the family, Scott will hold his place, but in the
   study you want condensed thought, and this you must look for elsewhere.

   To all young men of light purses let me recommend The Tract Society's
   Commentary, [17] in six volumes, which contains the marrow of Henry and
   Scott, with notes from a hundred other authors. It is well executed,
   and for poor men a great Godsend. I believe the Society has some
   special arrangement for poor students, that they may have these volumes
   at the cheapest rate.

   Gentlemen, if you want something full of marrow and fatness, cheering
   to your own hearts by way of comment, and likely to help you in giving
   to your hearers rich expositions, buy Dr. Hawker's Poor Man's
   Commentary. [18] Dr. Hawker was the very least of commentators in the
   matter of criticism; he had no critical capacity, and no ability
   whatever as an interpreter of the letter; but he sees Jesus, and that
   is a sacred gift which is most precious whether the owner be a critic
   or no. It is to be confessed that he occasionally sees Jesus where
   Jesus is not legitimately to be seen. He allows his reason to be
   mastered by his affections, which, vice as it is, is not the worst
   fault in the world. There is always such a savour of the Lord Jesus
   Christ in Dr. Hawker that you cannot read him without profit. He has
   the peculiar idea that Christ is in every Psalm, and this often leads
   him totally astray, because he attributes expressions to the Saviour
   which really shock the holy mind to imagine our Lord's using. However,
   not as a substantial dish, but as a condiment, place the Plymouth
   vicar's work on the table. His writing is all sugar, and you will know
   how to use it, not devouring it in lumps, but using it to flavour other
   things.

   "Albert Barnes", say you, "what, do you think of Albert Barnes?" Albert
   Barnes is a learned and able divine, but his productions are unequal in
   value, the gospels are of comparatively little worth, but his other
   comments are extremely useful for Sunday School teachers and persons
   with a narrow range of reading, endowed with enough good sense to
   discriminate between good and evil. If a controversial eye had been
   turned upon Barnes's Notes years ago, and his inaccuracies shown up by
   some unsparing hand, he would never have had the popularity which at
   one time set rival publishers advertising him in every direction. His
   Old Testament volumes are to be greatly commended as learned and
   laborious, and the epistles are useful as a valuable collection of the
   various opinions of learned men. Placed by the side of the great
   masters, Barnes is a lesser light, but taking his work for what it is
   and professes to be, no minister can afford to be without it, and this
   is no small praise for works which were only intended for Sunday School
   teachers. [19]

   Upon the New Testament Doddridge's Expositor [20] is worthy of a far
   more extensive reading than is nowadays accorded to it. It is all in
   the form of a paraphrase, with the text in italics; a mode of treatment
   far from satisfactory as a rule, but exceedingly well carried out in
   this instance. The notes are very good, and reveal the thorough
   scholar. Our authorised version is placed in the margin, and a new
   translation in the paraphrase. The four evangelists are thrown into a
   harmony, a plan which has its advantages but is not without its evils.
   The practical improvements at the end of each chapter generally consist
   of pressing exhortations and devout meditations, suggested by the
   matter under discussion. It is sadly indicative of the Socinianism of
   the age in which this good man lived, that he feels called upon to
   apologise for the evangelical strain in which he has written. He
   appears to have barely finished this work in shorthand at the time of
   his death, and the later books were transcribed under the care of Job
   Orton. No Life Insurance Society should accept the proposals of a
   commentator on the whole of either Testament, for it seems to be the
   rule that such students of the Word should be taken up to their reward
   before their task is quite completed.

   Then, of course, gentlemen, you will economise rigidly until you have
   accumulated funds to purchase Kitto's Pictorial Bible. You mean to take
   that goodly freight on board before you launch upon the sea of married
   life. As you cannot visit the Holy Land, it is well for you that there
   is a work like the Pictorial Bible, in which the notes of the most
   observant travellers are arranged under the texts which they
   illustrate. For the geography, zoology, botany, and manners and customs
   of Palestine, this will be your counsellor and guide. Add to this noble
   comment, which is sold at a surprisingly low price, the eight volumes
   of Kitto's Daily Readings. [21] They are not exactly a commentary, but
   what marvellous expositions you have there! You have reading more
   interesting than any novel that was ever written, and as instructive as
   the heaviest theology. The matter is quite attractive and fascinating,
   and yet so weighty, that the man who shall study those eight volumes
   thoroughly, will not fail to read his Bible intelligently and with
   growing interest.

   The Gnomon of the New Testament, By John Albert Bengel, [22] is the
   scholar's delight. He selected the title as modest and appropriate,
   intending it in the sense of a pointer or indicator, like the sundial;
   his aim being to point out or indicate the full force and meaning of
   the words and sentences of the New Testament. He endeavours to let the
   text itself cast its shadow on his page, believing with Luther that
   "the science of theology is nothing else but grammar exercised on the
   words of the Holy Spirit". The editor of the translation published by
   Messrs. Clarke, says in his preface, "It is quite superfluous to write
   in praise of the Gnomon of Bengel. Ever since the year in which it was
   first published, A.D. 1742, up to the present time, it has been growing
   in estimation, and has been more and more widely circulated among the
   scholars of all countries. Though modern criticism has furnished many
   valuable additions to our materials for New Testament exegesis, yet, in
   some respects, Bengel stands out still `facile princeps' among all who
   have laboured, or who as yet labour in that important field. He is
   unrivalled in felicitous brevity, combined with what seldom accompanies
   that excellence, namely, perspicuity. Terse, weighty, and suggestive,
   he often, as a modern writer observes, `condenses more matter into a
   line, than can be extracted from pages of other writers.'" ..... "In
   the passages which form the subject of controversy between Calvinists
   and Arminians, Bengel takes the view adopted by the latter, and in this
   respect I do not concur with him. But whilst he thus gives an undue
   prominence, as it would seem to me, to the responsibility and freedom
   of man in these passages, yet, in the general tenor of his work, there
   breathe such a holy reverence for God's sovereignty, and such spiritual
   unction, that the most extreme Calvinist would, for the most part, be
   unable to discover to what section of opinions he attached himself, and
   as to the controverted passages would feel inclined to say, `Quum talis
   sis, utinam noster esses.'"

   Men with a dislike for thinking had better not purchase the five
   precious volumes, for they will be of little use to them; but men who
   love brain work will find fine exercise in spelling out the deep
   meaning of Bengel's excessively terse sentences. His principles of
   interpretation stated in his "Essay on the Right Way of Handling Divine
   Subjects", are such as will make the lover of God's word feel safe in
   his hands: `Put nothing into the Scriptures, but draw everything from
   them, and suffer nothing to remain hidden, that is really in them."
   "Though each inspired writer has his own manner and style, one and the
   same Spirit breathes through all, one grand idea pervades all." "Every
   divine communication carries (like the diamond) its own light with it,
   thus showing whence it comes; no touchstone is required to discriminate
   it." "The true commentator will fasten his primary attention on the
   letter (literal meaning), but never forget that the Spirit must equally
   accompany him; at the same time we must never devise a more spiritual
   meaning for Scripture passages than the Holy Spirit intended." "The
   historical matters of Scripture, both narrative and prophecy,
   constitute as it were the bones of its system, whereas the spiritual
   matters are as its muscles, blood vessels, and nerves. As the bones are
   necessary to the human system, so Scripture must have its historical
   matters. The expositor who nullifies the historical ground work of
   Scripture for the sake of finding only spiritual truths everywhere,
   brings death on all correct interpretations. Those expositions are the
   safest which keep closest to the text."

   His idea of the true mode of dying touched me much when I first saw it.
   He declared that he would make no spiritual parade of his last hours,
   but if possible continue at his usual works, and depart this life as a
   person in the midst of business leaves the room to attend to a knock at
   the door. Accordingly he was occupied with the correction of his proof
   sheets as at other times, and the last messenger summoned him to his
   rest while his hands were full. This reveals a calm, well balanced
   mind, and unveils many of those singular characteristics which enabled
   him to become the laborious recensor of the various M.S.S., and the
   pioneer of true Biblical criticism.

   The Critical English Testament. [23] A Critical New Testament, so
   compiled as to enable a reader, unacquainted with Greek, to ascertain
   the exact English force and meaning of the language of the New
   Testament, and to appreciate the latest results of modern criticism."
   Such is the professed aim of this commentary, and the compilers have
   very fairly carried out their intentions. The whole of Bengel's Gnomon
   is bodily transferred into the work, and as one hundred and twenty
   years have elapsed since the first issue of that book, it may be
   supposed that much has since been added to the wealth of Scripture
   exposition; the substance of this has been incorporated in brackets, so
   as to bring it down to the present advanced state of knowledge. We
   strongly advise the purchase of this book, as it is multum in parvo,
   and will well repay an attentive perusal. Tischendorf and Alford have
   contributed largely, with other German and English critics, to make
   this one of the most lucid and concise commentaries on the text and
   teachings of the New Testament.

   Alford's Greek Testament, [24] "for the use of Theological Students and
   Ministers", is an invaluable aid to the critical study of the text of
   the New Testament. You will find in it the ripened results of a matured
   scholarship, the harvesting of a judgment, generally highly impartial,
   always worthy of respect, which has gleaned from the most important
   fields of Biblical research, both modern and ancient, at home and
   abroad. You will not look here for any spirituality of thought or
   tenderness of feeling; you will find the learned Dean does not forget
   to do full justice to his own views, and is quite able to express
   himself vigorously against his opponents; but for what it professes to
   be, it is an exceedingly able and successful work. The later issues are
   by far the most desirable, as the author has considerably revised the
   work in the fourth edition.

   What I have said of his Greek Testament applies equally to Alford's New
   Testament for English Readers, [25] which is also a standard work.

   I must confess also a very tender side towards Bloomfield's Greek
   Testament, [26] and I am singular enough to prefer it in some respects
   to Alford; at least, I have got more out of it on some passages, and I
   think it does not deserve to be regarded as superseded.

   The Commentary by Patrick, Lowth, Arnald, Whitby,, and Lowman, [27] is
   said by Darling to be of standard authority, but you may do without it
   with less loss than in the case of several others I have mentioned. The
   authors were men of great learning, their association in one commentary
   is remarkable, and their joint production has a place in all complete
   libraries.

   Dr. Wordsworth's Holy Bible, With Notes and Introductions, [28] is a
   valuable addition to our stores, but it is rendered much more bulky and
   expensive than it needed to be by the printing of the text at large. It
   gives many precious hints, and much of the choicest thought of
   mediaeval writers, besides suggesting catch words and showing
   connections between various passages. although it is occasionally
   marred by the characteristic weaknesses of the Bishop, and has here and
   there foolishnesses at which one cannot but smile, it is a great work,
   such as only an eminent scholar could have produced.

   I am not so enamoured of the German writers as certain of my brethren
   appear to be, for they are generally cold and hard, and unspiritual. As
   Dr. Graham says, "there are about twenty or thirty names in the
   literary world who have gained a conspicuous place in theological
   circles; and in German commentaries these are perpetually introduced.
   In some of them the bulk of the work is made up of these authoritative
   names, and quotations from their works. This gives their writings the
   appearance of prodigious learning and research. Every page is bristling
   with hard words and strange languages, and the eye of the common reader
   is terrified at the very appearance, as the peaceful citizen is at the
   pointed cannon of a fortress." I do, however, greatly prize the series
   lately produced under the presidency of Dr. Lange. [29] These volumes
   are not all of equal value, but, as a whole, they are a grand addition
   to our stores. The American translators have added considerably to the
   German work, and in some cases these additions are more valuable than
   the original matter. For homiletical purposes these volumes are so many
   hills of gold, but, alas, there is dross also, for Baptismal
   Regeneration and other grave errors occur.

   The Speaker's Commentary [30] is issued (August, 1875) as far as the
   Lamentations. It is costly, too costly for your pockets, and I am
   therefore somewhat the less sorry to add that it is not what I hoped it
   would be. Of course it is a great work, and contains much which tends
   to illustrate the text; but if you had it you would not turn to it for
   spiritual food, or for fruitful suggestion, or if you did so, you would
   be disappointed. The object of the work is to help the general reader
   to know what the Scriptures really say and mean, and to remove some of
   the difficulties. It keeps to its design and in a measure accomplishes
   it.

   I must also add to the list A Commentary, Critical, Experimental, and
   Practical, on the Old and New Testaments. [31] Of this I have a very
   high opinion. It is the joint work of Dr. Jamieson, A. R. Fausset, and
   Dr. David Brown. It is to some extent a compilation and condensation of
   other men's thoughts, but it is sufficiently original to claim a place
   in every minister's library: indeed it contains so great a variety of
   information that if a man had no other exposition he would find himself
   at no great loss if he possessed this and used it diligently.

   Several other works I omit, not because they are worthless, or unknown
   to me, but because for scant purses the best will be best. I must not
   omit upon the New Testament the goodly volume of Burkitt. [32] If you
   can get him cheap, buy him. He is the celebrated "Rector" whom Keach
   "rectified" in the matter of infant baptism. Burkitt is somewhat pithy,
   and for a modern rather rich and racy, but he is far from deep, and is
   frequently common place. I liked him well enough till I had read abler
   works and grown older. Some books grow upon us as we read and reread
   them, but Burkitt does not. Yet so far from depreciating the good man,
   I should be sorry to have missed his acquaintance, and would bespeak
   for him your attentive perusal.

   The best commentators, after all, are those who have written upon only
   one book. Few men can comment eminently well upon the whole Bible,
   there are sure to be some weak points in colossal works; prolixity in
   so vast an undertaking is natural, and dulness follows at its
   heels--but a life devoted to one of the inspired volumes of our
   priceless Bible must surely yield a noble result. If I find myself able
   to do so, at some future time I will introduce you to a selection of
   the great one book writers. For the present this much must suffice.

     __________________________________________________________________

   [1] An Exposition of all the Books of the Old and New Testaments. By
   Matthew Henry, late minister of the gospel in Chester. (Many editions;
   to be met with at very low prices.)

   [2] The Works of John Calvin, in 51 volumes. Messrs. Clark, of
   Edinburgh, announce that they possess the copyright of the works of
   Calvin originally published by the Calvin Translation Society, and
   issue them on the following terms:--Complete sets in 51 volumes, 9
   pounds, 9 shillings. The "Letters", edited by Dr. Bonnet, 2 vols., 10
   shillings. 6d., additional, Complete sets of Commentaries, 45 vols., 7
   pounds 17s. 6d. The "Institutes", 3 vols., 24 shillings.

   [3] Werner Helmich, a Dutch Protestant divine, A.D. 1551-1608.

   [4] Synopsis Criticorum aliorumque S. Scripturae Interpretum. Opera
   Matthaei Poli. Londinensis, MDCLXIX.

   [5] Annotations upon the Holy Bible. Wherein the sacred text is
   inserted, and various readings annexed, together with the parallel
   Scriptures. The more difficult terms in each verse explained; seeming
   contradictions reconciled; questions and doubts resolved; and the whole
   text opened. By the late Rev. and learned divine, Mr. Matthew Poole.
   1700.

   [6] Annotations upon the Old and New Testament, in five distinct
   volumes. Whereof the first is upon the five Books of Moses, and upon
   the following books, of Joshua, Judges, Ruth, Samuel, Kings, and
   Chronicles. The second is upon Ezra, Nehemiah, Esther, Job, and Psalms.
   The third is upon Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, Solomon's Song, and the four
   major prophets, with a treatise called, "The righteous Man's
   Recompense". The fourth is upon the twelve minor prophets, the fifth
   and last is upon the whole New Testament, with a Decade of Divine
   Discourses, or Common-places, thereunto annexed. By John Trapp, M.A.,
   pastor and preacher of the word of God at Weston-upon-Avon, in
   Gloucestershire. 1662.

   [7] The reprint by Mr. R. D. Dickinson is edited by Rev. W. Webster,
   and Rev. Hugh Martin, with a Memoir of the Author, by Rev. A. B.
   Grosart, 5 vols., super royal 8vo., cloth; 3 pounds 2s. 6d. to
   Subscribers.

   [8] An Exposition of the Old Testament, in which are recorded the
   origin of mankind, of the several nations of the world, and of the
   Jewish nation in particular; the, lives of the patriarchs of Israel;
   the journey of that people from Egypt to the land of Canaan, and their
   settlement in that land: their laws, moral, ceremonial, and judicial;
   their government and state under judges and kings; their several
   captivities, and, their sacred books of devotion: in the exposition of
   which, it is attempted to give an account of their several books and
   the writers of them; a summary of each chapter, and the genuine sense
   of each verse, and, throughout the whole, the original text and the
   versions of it, are inspected and compared; interpretation of the best
   note, both Jewish and Christian, consulted; difficult places at large
   explained, seeming contradictions reconciled, and various passages
   illustrated and confirmed by testimonies of writers as well Gentile as
   Jewish. By John Gill, D.D. An Exposition of the New Testament, in which
   the sense of the sacred text is taken; doctrinal and practical truths
   are set in a plain and easy light, difficult passages explained;
   seeming contradictions reconciled; and whatever is material in the
   various readings and several Oriental versions is observed. The whole
   illustrated with notes taken from the most ancient Jewish writings. By
   John Gill, D.D.

   [9] The Holy Bible, containing the Old and New Testaments. The text
   carefully printed from the most correct copies of the present
   Authorised Translation, including the Marginal Readings and Parallel
   Texts. With a Commentary and Critical Notes; designed as a help to a
   better understanding of the Sacred Writings. By Adam Clarke, LL.D.,
   F.S.A., &c. A new edition with the Author's final corrections. London:
   Printed for Thomas Tegg, &c. (7 volumes.)

   [10] A Commentary upon the whole "Old Testament", added to that of the
   same author upon the whole "New Testament", published many years
   before, to make a complete work upon the whole Bible. Wherein the
   divers Translations and Expositions, Literall and Mysticall, of all the
   most famous Commentators, both Ancient and Modern, are propounded,
   examined, and judged of, for the more full satisfaction of the studious
   reader in all things, and many most genuine notions inserted for
   edification in the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ. A work, the like
   unto which hath never yet been published by any man, yet very
   necessary, not only for students in divinity, but also for every
   Christian that loveth the knowledge of divine things, or humane,
   whereof this comment is also full, &c. By John Mayer, Doctor of
   Divinity. London. MDCLIII.

   [11] A help for the understanding of the Holy Scripture. Intended
   chiefly for the assistance and information of those that use constantly
   every day to read some part of the Bible, and would gladly always
   understand what they read if they had some man to help them. The first
   part. Containing certain short notes of exposition upon the five books
   of Moses, &c. By Arthur Jackson, preacher of God's Word in Wood Street,
   London. Anno Dom. MDCDLIII.

   [12] A Complete History and Mystery of the Old and New Testament,
   logically discussed, and theologically improved. In three distinct
   volumes. The first beginning at the Creation of the World, and ending
   at Moses. The second continuing the History from Joshua till the Birth
   of Christ. The third from the Birth of Christ, to the Death of the last
   and longest living Apostle, John the Divine. The like undertaking (in
   such a manner and method) being never attempted before. By Mr.
   Christopher Ness, minister of the gospel in London. 1690. 3 vols., thin
   folio.

   [13] Contemplations on the historical passages of the Old and New
   Testament. By the right Rev. Joseph Hall, D.D., Bishop of Norwich.
   Numerous editions; the one before us has "a memoir of the author, by
   James Hamilton, M.B.S.", and wad published by Mr. Nelson of Edinburgh.
   affectionate attention? What wit! What sound sense! What concealed
   learning! His style is as pithy and witty as that of Thomas Fuller, and
   it has a sacred unction about it to which Fuller has no pretension.

   [14] The Dutch Annotations upon the whole Bible; or, all the Holy
   Canonical Scriptures of the Old and New Testament, together with, and
   according to, their own, translation of all the text: as both the one
   and the other were ordered and appointed by the Synod of Dort, 1618,
   and published by authority, 1637. Now faithfully communicated to the
   use of Great Britain, in English, &c. By Theodore Haak, Esq. London,
   1657. 2 volumes folio.

   [15] Annotations upon all the Books of the Old and New Testaments. This
   third, above the first and second, edition so enlarged, as they make an
   entire commentary on the sacred Scriptures, the like never before
   published in English. Wherein the text is explained, doubts resolved,
   Scriptures paralleled, and various readings observed. By the labour of
   certain learned divines, thereunto appointed, and therein employed, as
   is expressed in the preface. London, 1657.

   [16] The Holy Bible, containing the Old and New Testaments, according
   to the, authorised version, with explanatory notes, practical
   observations, and copious marginal references. By Thomas Scott, rector
   of Ashton Sandford, Bucks. A new edition, with the author's last
   corrections and improvements, with ten maps. London: L. B. Seeley and
   Son. 1827.

   [17] The Holy Bible; the text according to the authorised version; and
   a Commentary from Henry and Scott, with numerous Observations and Notes
   from other Authors; also, the Marginal References, Maps of the
   Countries mentioned in Scripture, and various useful Tables. London:
   The Religious Tract Society. (6 volumes.)

   [18] The Poor Man's Commentary on the Bible. By Robert Hawker, D.D.,
   Vicar of Charles, Plymouth, 1822. (3 vols. folio, or 10 vols. 8vo.)

   [19] There are several English editions of Barnes's Notes; the one
   before us is thus advertised: "The Rev. Albert Barnes's Notes
   (Explanatory and Practical), designed for the Heads of Families,
   Students, Bible Classes, and Sunday Schools. Edited, and carefully
   revised, by the Rev. John Cumming, D.D., Minister of the Scotch Church,
   Crown Court." The Notes on the Entire New Testament, in 11 vols., on
   the Book of Isaiah, in 3 vols., on the Book of Job, in 2 vols., on the
   Book of Daniel, in 2 vols., or in 11 double vols. The "Notes on the
   Book of Psalms" are now being issued in 3 vols. by Messrs. Gall and
   Inglis.

   [20] The Family Expositor; or a Paraphrase and Version of the New
   Testament; with Critical Notes, and a Practical Improvement of each
   Section. By P. Doddridge, D.D. To which is prefixed a Life of the
   Author, By Andrew Kippis, D.D., F.R.S., and S.A. London: Longman, Orme,
   and Co., 1840. (4 vols. 8vo.)

   [21] Daily Bible Illustrations, being Original Readings for a Year, on
   subjects from Sacred History, Biography, Antiquities, and Theology.
   Especially designed for the family circle. By John Kitto, D.D., F.S.A.
   8 volumes, small 8vo. (A New Annotated edition has just been brought
   out by Messrs. Oliphant of Edinburgh.)

   [22] Gnomon of the New Testament, by John Albert Bengal. But first
   translated, into English, with original notes explanatory and
   illustrative. Revised and edited by Rev. Andrew R. Fausset, M.A., of
   Trinity College, Dublin. Edinburgh: T. & T. Clarke, 38, George-street,
   1863. (Five vols. demy 8vo.; Subscription, 31s. 6d.)

   [23] The Critical English Testament.--Being an adaption of Bengel's
   Gnomon, with numerous Notes, showing Precise Results of Modern
   Criticism and Exegesis. Edited by Rev. W. L. Blackley, M.A., and Rev.
   James Hawes, M.A. Published by Messrs. Isbister and Co, Ludgate Hill,
   London. (Three vols. 18s.)

   [24] The Greek Testament: with a Critically Revised Text; a Digest of
   various Readings; Marginal References to Verbal and Idiomatic Usage;
   Prolegomena; and a Critical and Exegetical Commentary. For the use of
   Theological Students and Ministers. By Henry Alford, D.D., Dean of
   Canterbury. In four volumes. London: Rivingtons, Waterloo Place; and
   Deighton, Bell, and Co., Cambridge. 1861.

   [25] The New Testament for English Readers; containing the Authorized
   Version, with a revised English Text; Marginal References; and a
   Critical and Explanatory Commentary; By Henry Alford), D.D., late Dean
   of Canterbury. New edition. 4 vols. 8vo. 54/6. London, Oxford, and
   Cambridge. Rivingtons, and G. Bell and Sons, 1872.

   [26] The Greek Testament, with English Notes, Critical, Philological,
   and Explanatory; partly selected and arranged from the best
   Commentators, ancient and modern, but chiefly original. Fourth edition,
   revised. 2 vols. 8vo. London. 1841.

   [27] A Critical Commentary and Paraphrase on the Old and New Testament,
   and the Apocrypha. By Patrick, Lowth, Arnald, Whitby, and Lowman. A new
   edition, &c., in 4 vols. William Tegg and Co.

   [28] The Holy Bible; with Notes and Introductions [Old Testament only].
   6 vols. imp. 8vo. 6 pounds.--The New Testament in the original Greek;
   with Notes, Introductions, and Indexes. By Chr. Wordsworth, D.D.,
   Bishop of Lincoln. 2 vols. imp. 8vo. 3 pounds. London, Oxford, and
   Cambridge. Rivingtons. 1872, etc.

   [29] A Commentary on the Holy Scriptures, Critical, Doctrinal, and
   Homiletical, with special reference to Ministers and Students, by John
   Peter Lange, D.D., in connection with a number of eminent European
   divines. Translated from the German, and edited, with additions, by
   Phillip Schaff, D.D., in connection with American scholars of various
   Evangelical denominations. Imperial 8vo. Edinburgh, T. & T. Clark.
   1868, etc. [18 volumes, price 21s. each, or to subscribers 15s.]

   [30] The Holy Bible, according to the Authorized Version (A.D. 1611),
   with an Explanatory and Critical Commentary, and a Revision of the
   Translation by Bishops and other Clergy of the Anglican Church. Edited
   by F. C. Cook, M.A., Canon of Exeter, Preacher at Lincoln's Inn, and
   Chaplain in Ordinary to the Queen. Medium 8vo. London, John Murray.
   1871, etc. [5 volumes published, Genesis to Lamentations. Vol. I in 2
   parts, 30s. Vols. II and III, 36s. Vol. IV, 24s. Vol. V, 20s.]

   [31] A Commentary, Critical, Experimental, and Practical, on the Old
   and New Testaments. By the Rev. Robert Jamieson, D.D., St. Paul's,
   Glasgow; Rev. A. R. Fausset, A.M., St. Cuthbert's, York; and the Rev.
   David Brown, D.D., Professor of Theology, Aberdeen. 6 vols. medium 8vo.
   3 pounds 12s.; or separately at 14s. each, vol. London, Glasgow, and
   Edinburgh. W. Collins, Sons, & Co. 1871.

   [32] Expository Notes, with Practical Observations, on the New
   Testament of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, wherein, &c.
   Endeavoured by William Burkitt, M.A. Late Vicar and Lecturer of Dedham,
   in Essex. (Numerous editions, folio and quarto.)
     __________________________________________________________________

Lecture 2

On Commenting

   Having introduced you to the commentators, I must now press upon you
   one of the most practical uses of them, namely, your own public
   commenting upon the Scriptures read during divine, service. Preaching
   in the olden time consisted very much more of exposition than it does
   now. I suppose that the sermons of the primitive Christians were for
   the most part expositions of lengthy passages of the Old Testament; and
   when copies of the gospels, and the epistles of Paul had become
   accessible to the churches, the chief work of the preacher would be to
   press home the apostolical teachings by delivering an address, the back
   bone of which would be a complete passage of Scripture: there would
   probably be but faint traces of divisions, heads and points, such as we
   employ in modern discoursing, but the teacher would follow the run of
   the passage which was open before him, commenting as he read. I suppose
   this to have been the case, because some of the early Christian modes
   of worship were founded very much upon that of the synagogue. I say
   some of the modes, since I suppose that as the Lord Jesus left his
   disciples free from rubrics and liturgies, each church worshipped
   according to the working of the free Spirit among them; one with the
   open meeting of the Corinthians, and another with a presiding minister,
   and a third with a mixture of the two methods. In the synagogue, it was
   the rule of the Rabbis that never less than twenty two verses of the
   law should be read at one time, and the preaching consisted of notes
   upon a passage of that length. Such a rule would be a mere superstition
   if we were slavishly bound by it, but I could almost wish that the
   custom were reestablished, for the present plan of preaching from short
   texts, together with the great neglect of commenting publicly upon the
   word is very unsatisfactory. We cannot expect to deliver much of the
   teaching of Holy Scripture by picking out verse by verse, and holding
   these up at random. The process resembles that of showing a house by
   exhibiting separate bricks. It would be an astounding absurdity if our
   friends used our private letters in this fashion, and interpreted them
   by short sentences disconnected and taken away from the context. Such
   expositors would make us out to say in every letter all we ever thought
   of, and a great many things besides far enough from our minds; while
   the real intent of our epistles would probably escape attention.
   Nowadays since expository preaching is not so common as it ought to be,
   there is the more necessity for our commenting during the time of our
   reading the Scriptures. Since topical preaching, hortatory preaching,
   experimental preaching, and so on--all exceedingly useful in their
   way--have almost pushed proper expository preaching out of place, there
   is the more need that we should, when we read passages of Holy Writ,
   habitually give running comments upon them.

   I support my opinion with this reason, that the public reading of the
   abstruser parts of Scripture is of exceedingly little use to the
   majority of the people listening. I can recollect hearing in my younger
   days long passages out of Daniel, which might have been exceedingly
   instructive to me if I had obtained the remotest conception of what
   they meant. Take again, parts of the prophecy of Ezekiel, and ask
   yourselves what profit can arise from their perusal by the illiterate,
   "unless some man shall guide them"? What more edification can come from
   a chapter in English which is not understood than from the same passage
   in Hebrew or Greek? The same argument which enforces translation
   demands exposition. If but a few explanatory words are thrown in by a
   judicious reader, it is wonderful how luminous obscure portions may be
   made. Two or three sentences will often reveal the drift of a whole
   chapter; the key of a great difficulty may be presented to the hearer
   in half a score words, and thus the public reading may be made
   abundantly profitable. I once saw a school of blind children among the
   charming ruins of York Abbey, and could not help pitying their
   incapacity to enjoy so much beauty: how willingly would I have opened
   their eyes! Are ignorant people wandering among the glories of
   Scripture much less to be pitied? Who will refuse them the light?

   Abundant evidence has come before me that brief comments upon Scripture
   in our ordinary services are most acceptable and instructive to our
   people. I have often heard from working men, and their wives, and from
   merchants and their families, that my own expositions have been most
   helpful to them. They testify that when they read the Bible at home in
   the family, the exposition makes it doubly precious to them; and the
   chapter which they had unprofitably read in course at family prayers,
   when they pursue it the next time, recollecting what their minister has
   said upon it, becomes a real delight to them. The mass of our hearers,
   in London at least, do not, to any appreciable extent, read
   commentaries or any other books which throw a light upon the
   Scriptures. They have neither the money nor the time to do so, and if
   they are to be instructed in the Word of God in things which they
   cannot find out by mere experience, and are not likely to have
   explained to them by their associates, they must get that instruction
   from us, or nowhere else; nor do I see how we are to give them such
   spiritual assistance except through the regular practice of exposition.

   Besides, if you are in the habit of commenting, it will give you an
   opportunity of saying many things which are not of sufficient
   importance to become the theme of a whole sermon, and therefore would
   probably remain unnoticed, to the great loss of the Lord's people and
   others. It is astounding what a range of truth, doctrinal, practical,
   and experimental, Holy Scripture brings before us; and equally worthy
   of admiration is the forcible manner in which that truth is advanced.
   Hints given in the way in which the word of God offers them are always
   wise and opportune; as, for instance, the rebukes which the word
   administers might have seemed too severe had they been made by the
   pastor, unsustained by the word and unsuggested by it, but arising out
   of the chapter they cannot be resented. You can both censure sins and
   encourage virtues by dilating upon the histories which you read in the
   inspired records, whereas you might never have touched upon them had
   not the chapter read brought the matter before you. If you want to make
   full proof of your ministry, and to leave no single point of revelation
   untouched, your easiest mode will be to comment upon Scripture
   habitually. Without this much of the word will be utterly unknown to
   many of your people. It is a very sad fact that they do not read so
   much as they should at home; the ungodly, in England, scarcely read the
   Bible at all; and if only that part which we preach upon be expounded
   to them, how little of the Bible can they ever know! If you will mark
   your Bibles with lines under the texts from which you have spoken, as I
   have always done with an old copy which I keep in my study, you will
   discover that in twelve or fourteen years very little of the book has
   been gone through; a very large proportion of it remains unmarked, like
   a field unploughed. Try, then, by exposition to give your people a fair
   view of the entire compass of revelation; take them as it were to the
   top of Nebo, and show them the whole land from Dan to Beersheba, and
   prove to them that everywhere it floweth with milk and honey.

   Earnestly do I advocate commenting. It is unfashionable in England,
   though somewhat more usual beyond the Tweed. The practice was hardly
   followed up anywhere in England a few years ago, and it is very
   uncommon still. It may be pressed upon you for one other reason,
   namely, that in order to execute it well, the commenting minister will
   at first have to study twice as much as the mere preacher, because he
   will be called upon to prepare both his sermons and his expositions. As
   a rule, I spend much more time over the exposition than over the
   discourse. Once start a sermon with a great idea, and from that moment
   the discourse forms itself without much labour to the preacher, for
   truth naturally consolidates and crystallises itself around the main
   subject like sweet crystals around a string hung up in syrup; but as
   for the exposition, you must keep to the text, you must face the
   difficult points, and must search into the mind of the Spirit rather
   than your own. You will soon reveal your ignorance as an expositor if
   you do not study; therefore diligent reading will be forced upon you.
   Anything which compels the preacher to search the grand old Book is of
   immense service to him. If any are jealous lest the labour should
   injure their constitutions, let them remember that mental work up to a
   certain point is most refreshing, and where the Bible is the theme toil
   is delight. It is only when mental labour passes beyond the bounds of
   common sense that the mind becomes enfeebled by it, and this is not
   usually reached except by injudicious persons, or men engaged on topics
   which are unrefreshing and disagreeable; but our subject is a
   recreative one, and to young men like ourselves the vigorous use of our
   faculties is a most healthy exercise. Classics and mathematics may
   exhaust us, but not the volume of our Father's grace, the charter of
   our joys, the treasure of our wealth.

   A man to comment well should be able to read the Bible in the original.
   Every minister should aim at a tolerable proficiency both in the Hebrew
   and the Greek. These two languages will give hint a library at a small
   expense, an inexhaustible thesaurus, a mine of spiritual wealth.
   Really, the effort of acquiring a language is not so prodigious that
   brethren of moderate abilities should so frequently shrink from the
   attempt. A minister ought to attain enough of these tongues to be at
   least able to make out a passage by the aid of a lexicon, so as to be
   sure that he is not misrepresenting the Spirit of God in his
   discoursings, but is, as nearly as he can judge, giving forth what the
   Lord intended to reveal by the language employed. Such knowledge would
   prevent his founding doctrines upon expressions in our version when
   nothing at all analogous is to be found in the inspired original. This
   has been done by preachers time out of mind, and they have shouted over
   an inference drawn from a shall, or an if gathered out of tim
   translation, with as much assurance of infallibility and sense of
   importance as if the same language had occurred in the words which the
   Holy Ghost used. At such times, we have been reminded of the story told
   by the late beloved Henry Craik, in his book on the Hebrew language. At
   one time, the Latin Vulgate was so constantly spoken of as the very
   word of God, that a Roman Catholic theologian thus commented upon Ge
   1:10:--"The gathering together of the waters called he seas." The Latin
   term for seas is Maria. On this ground, the writer asks, "What is the
   gathering together of waters but the accumulation of all the graces
   into one place, that is, into the Virgin Mary (Maria)? But there is
   this distinction, that Maria (the seas) has the (i) short, because that
   which the seas contain is only of a transitory nature, while the gifts
   and graces of the blessed Virgin (Maria) shall endure for ever." Such
   superlative nonsense may be indulged in if we forget that translations
   cannot be verbally inspired, and that to the original is the last
   appeal.

   Fail not to be expert in the use of your Concordance. Every day I live
   I thank God more and more for that poor half crazy Alexander Cruden. Of
   course you have read his life, which is prefixed to the concordance; it
   exhibits him as a man of diseased mind, once or twice the inmate of a
   lunatic asylum, but yet for all that successfully devoting his energies
   to producing a work of absolutely priceless value, which never has been
   improved upon, and probably never will be; a volume which must ever
   yield the greatest possible assistance to a Christian minister, being
   as necessary to him as a plane to the carpenter, or a plough to the
   husbandman. Be sure you buy a genuine unabridged Cruden, and none of
   the modern substitutes; good as they may be at the price, they are a
   delusion and a snare to ministers, and should never be tolerated in the
   manse library. To consider cheapness in purchasing a concordance is
   folly. You need only one: have none but the best. At the head of each
   notable word, Cruden gives you its meaning, and very often all its
   particular shades of meaning, so that he even helps you in sermonising.
   When you have read his headings, by following out the concordance, you
   will observe connections in which the word occurs, which most
   advantageously and correctly fix its meaning. Thus will the word of God
   be its own key. A good textuary is a good theologian; be then well
   skilled in using Cruden.

   I make but small account of most reference Bibles; they would be very
   useful if they were good for anything; but it is extremely easy to
   bring out a reference Bible which has verbal and apparent references,
   and nothing more. You will often turn to a reference, and will have to
   say, "Well, it is a reference, certainly, in a way, for it contains the
   same word, but there is no reference in the sense that the one text
   will explain the other." The useful reference cuts the diamond with a
   diamond, comparing spiritual things with spiritual; it is a thought
   reference, and not a word reference. If you meet with a really valuable
   reference Bible, it will be to you what I once heard a countryman call
   "a reverence Bible", for it will lead you to prize more and more the
   sacred volume. The best reference Bible is a thoroughly good
   concordance. Get the best, keep it always on the table, use it hourly,
   and you will have found your best companion.

   Need I after my previous lectures commend to you the judicious reading
   of commentaries! These are called "dead men's brains" by certain
   knowing people, who claim to give us nothing in their sermons but what
   they pretend the Lord reveals direct to themselves. Yet these men are
   by no means original, and often their supposed inspiration is but
   borrowed wit. They get a peep at Gill on the sly. The remarks which
   they give forth as the Spirit's mind are very inferior in all respects
   to what they affect to despise, namely, the mind of good and learned
   men. A batch of poems was sent me some time ago for The Sword and the
   Trowel, which were written by a person claiming to be under the
   immediate influence of the Holy Spirit. He informed me that he was
   passive, and that what was enclosed was written under the direct
   physical and mental influence of the Spirit upon his mind and hand. My
   bookshelves can show many poems as much superior to these pretended
   inspirations as angels are to blue bottles; the miserable doggerel bore
   on its face the evidence of imposture. So when I listen to the
   senseless twaddle of certain wise gentlemen who are always boasting
   that they alone are ministers of the Spirit, I am ashamed of their
   pretensions and of them. No, my dear friends, you may take it, as a
   rule that the Spirit of God does not usually do for us what we can do
   for ourselves, and that if religious knowledge is printed in a book,
   and we can read it, there is no necessity for the Holy Ghost to make a
   fresh revelation of it to us in order to screen our laziness. Read,
   then, the admirable commentaries which I have already introduced to
   you. Yet be sure you use your own minds too, or the expounding will
   lack interest. Here I call to mind two wells in the courtyard of the
   Doge's palace at Venice, upon which I looked with much interest. One is
   filled artificially by water brought in barges from a distance, and few
   care for its insipid contents; the other is a refreshing natural well,
   cool and delicious, and the people contend for every drop of it.
   Freshness, naturalness, life, will always attract, whereas mere
   borrowed learning is flat and insipid. Mr. Cecil says his plan was,
   when he laid a hold of a Scripture, to pray over it, and get his own
   thoughts on it, and then, after he had so done, to take up the ablest
   divines who wrote upon the subject, and see what their thoughts were.
   If you do not think and think much, you will become slaves and mere
   copyists. The exercise of your own mind is most healthful to you, and
   by perseverance, with divine help, you may expect to get at the meaning
   of every understandable passage. So to rely upon your own abilities as
   to be unwilling to learn from others is clearly folly; so to study
   others as not to judge for yourself is imbecility.

   What should be the manner of your public commenting? One rule should be
   always to point out very carefully wherever a word bears a special
   sense; for rest assured in Holy Scripture the same word does not always
   mean the same thing. The Bible is a Book meant for human beings, and
   therefore it is written in human language; and in human language the
   same word may signify two or three things. For instance, "a pear fell
   from the tree"; "a man fell into drunken habits". There the meaning of
   the second word, "fell", is evidently different from the first, since
   it is not literal, but metaphorical. Again, "the cabman mounted the
   box"; "the child was pleased with his Christmas box"; "his lordship is
   staying at his shooting box". In each case there is the same word, but
   who does not see that there is a great difference of meaning? So it is
   in the word of God. You must explain the difference between a word used
   in a peculiar sense, and the ordinary meaning of the word, and thus you
   will prevent your people falling into mistakes. If people will say that
   the same word in Scripture always means the same thing, as I have heard
   some assert publicly, they will make nonsense of the word of God, and
   fall into error through their own irrational maxims. To set up canons
   of interpretation for the Book of God which would be absurd if applied
   to other writings is egregious folly: it has a show of accuracy, but
   inevitably leads to confusion.

   The obvious literal meaning of a Scripture is not always the true one,
   and ignorant persons are apt enough to fall into the most singular
   misconceptions--a judicious remark from the pulpit will be of signal
   service. Many persons have accustomed themselves to misunderstand
   certain texts; they have heard wrong interpretations in their youth,
   and will never know better unless the correct meaning be indicated to
   them.

   We must make sure in our public expositions that obscure and involved
   sentences are explained. To overleap difficulties, and only expound
   what is already clear, is to make commenting ridiculous. When we speak
   of obscure sentences, we mean such as are mostly to be found in the
   prophets, and are rendered dark through the translation, or the
   Orientalism of their structure, or through their intrinsic weight of
   meaning. Involved sentences most abound in the writings of Paul, whose
   luxuriant mind was not to be restrained to any one line of argument. He
   begins a sentence, and does not finish it perhaps until eight verses
   further on, and all the interstices between the commencement and the
   end of the sentence are packed full of compressed truth, which it is
   not always easy to separate from the general argument. Hints consisting
   of but two or three words will let your hearers know where the
   reasoning breaks off, and where it is taken up again. In many poetical
   parts of the Old Testament the speakers change; as in Solomen's Song,
   which is mostly a dialogue. Here perfect nonsense is often made by
   reading the passage as if it were all spoke, by the same person. In
   Isaiah the strain often varies most suddenly, and while one verse is
   addressed to the Jews, the next may be spoken to the Messiah or to the
   Gentiles. Is it not always well to notify this to the congregation? If
   the chapters and verses had been divided with a little common sense,
   this might be of less importance, but as our version is so clumsily
   chopped into fragments, the preacher must insert the proper paragraphs
   and divisions as he reads aloud. In fine, your business is to make the
   word plain. In Lombardy I observed great heaps of huge stones in the
   fields, which had been gathered out from the soil by diligent hands to
   make room for the crops; your duty is to "gather out the stones", and
   leave the fruitful field of Scripture for your people to till. There
   are Orientalisms, metaphors, peculiar expressions, idioms, and other
   verbal memorabilia which arise from the Bible having been written in
   the East; all these you will do well to explain. To this end be
   diligent students of Oriental life. Let the geography of Palestine, its
   natural history, its fauna and its flora, be as familiar to you as
   those of your own native village. Then as you read you will interpret
   the word, and your flock will be fed thereby. [33]

   The chief part of your commenting, however, should consist in applying
   the truth to the hearts of your hearers, for he who merely comprehends
   the meaning of the letter without understanding how it bears upon the
   hearts and consciences of men, is like a man who causes the bellows of
   an organ to be blown, and then fails to place his fingers on the keys;
   it is of little service to supply men with information unless we urge
   upon them the practical inferences therefrom. Look, my brethren,
   straight down into the secret chambers of the human soul, and let fall
   the divine teaching through the window, and thus light will be carried
   to the heart and conscience. Make remarks suitable to the occasion, and
   applicable to the cases of those present. Show how a truth which was
   first heard in the days of David is still forcible and pertinent in
   these modern times, and you will thus endear the Scriptures to the
   minds of your people, who prize your remarks much more than you
   imagine. Clean the grand old pictures of the divine masters; hang them
   up in new frames; fix them on the walls of your people's memories, and
   their well instructed hearts shall bless you.

   Is a caution needed amongst intelligent men? Yes, it must be given. Be
   sure to avoid prosiness. Avoid it everywhere, but especially in this.
   Do not be long in your notes. If you are supremely gifted do not be
   long; people do not appreciate too much of a good thing; and if your
   comments are only second rate, why, then be shorter still, for men soon
   weary of inferior talking. Very little time in the service can be
   afforded for reading the lessons; do not rob the prayer and the sermon
   for the sake of commenting. This robbing Peter to pay Paul is
   senseless. Do not repeat commonplace things which must have occurred
   even to a Sunday School child. Do not remind your hearers of what they
   could not possibly have forgotten. Give them something weighty if not
   new, so that an intelligent listener may feel when the service is over
   that he has learned at least a little.

   Again, avoid all pedantry. As a general rule, it may be observed that
   those gentlemen who know the least Greek are the most sure to air their
   rags of learning in the pulpit; they miss no chance of saying, "The
   Greek is so and so." It makes a man an inch and a half taller by a
   foolometer, if he everlastingly lets fall bits of Greek and Hebrew, and
   even tells the people the tense of the verb and the case of the noun,
   as I have known some do. Those who have no learning usually make a
   point of displaying the pegs on which learning ought to hang. Brethren,
   the whole process of interpretation is to be carried on in your study;
   you are not to show your congregation the process, but to give them the
   result; like a good cook who would never think of bringing up dishes,
   and pans, and rolling pin, and spice box into the dining hall, but
   without ostentation sends up the feast.

   Never strain passages when you are expounding. Be thoroughly honest
   with the word: even if the Scriptures were the writing of mere men,
   conscience would demand fairness of you; but when it is the Lord's own
   word, be careful not to pervert it even in the smallest degree. Let it
   be said of you, as I have heard a venerable hearer of Mr. Simeon say of
   him, "Sir, he was very Calvinistic when the text was so, and people
   thought him an Arminian when the text was that way, for he always stuck
   to its plain sense." A very sound neighbour of ours once said, by way
   of depreciating the grand old reformer, "John Calvin was not half a
   Calvinist", and the remark was correct as to his expositions, for in
   them, as we have seen, he always gave his Lord's mind and not his own.
   In the church of St. Zeno, in Verona, I saw ancient frescoes which had
   been plastered over, and then covered with other designs; I fear many
   do this with Scripture, daubing the text with their own glosses, and
   laying on their own conceits. There are enough of these plasterers
   abroad, let us leave the evil trade to them and follow all honest
   calling. Remember Cowper's lines--

   "A critic on the sacred text should be

   Candid and learn'd, dispassionate and free;

   Free from the wayward bias bigots feel,

   From fancy's influence and intemperate zeal;

   For of all arts sagacious dupes invent,

   To cheat themselves and gain the world's assent,

   The worst is--Scripture warped from its intent."

   Use your judgment more than your fancy. Flowers are well enough, but
   hungry souls prefer bread. To allegorize with Origen may make men stare
   at you, but your work is to fill men's mouths with truth, not to open
   them with wonder.

   Do not be carried away with new meanings. Plymouth Brethren delight to
   fish up some hitherto undiscovered tadpole of interpretation, and cry
   it round the town as a rare dainty; let us be content with more
   ordinary and more wholesome fishery. No one text is to be exalted above
   the plain analogy of faith; and no solitary expression is to shape our
   theology for us. Other men and wiser men have expounded before us, and
   anything undiscovered by them it were well to put to test and trial
   before we boast too loudly of the treasure trove.

   Do not needlessly amend our authorized version. It is faulty in many
   places, but still it is a grand work taking it for all in all, and it
   is unwise to be making every old lady distrust the only Bible she can
   get at, or what is more likely, mistrust you for falling out with her
   cherished treasure. Correct where correction must be for truth's sake,
   but never for the vainglorious display of your critical ability. When
   reading short psalms, or connected passages of the other books, do not
   split up the authors utterances by interjecting your notes. Read the
   paragraph through, and then go over it again with your explanations;
   breaking it up as you may think fit at the second reading. No one would
   dream of dividing a stanza of a poet with an explanatory remark; it
   would be treason to common sense to do so: sound judgment will forbid
   your thus marring the word of God. Better far never to comment than to
   cut and carve the utterances of inspiration, and obscure their meaning
   by impertinently thrusting in untimely remarks of your own. Upon many
   passages comments would be gross folly: never think of painting the
   lily or gilding refined gold; leave the sublime sentences alone in
   their glory. I speak as unto wise men; prove your wisdom in this thing
   also.

   If I were bound to deliver a sermon upon the subject in hand, I could
   not desire a better text than Ne 8:8: "So they read in the book in the
   law of God distinctly, and gave the sense, and caused them to
   understand the reading." Here is a hint for the reader as to his
   reading. Let it always be distinct. Aim to be good readers, and be the
   more anxious about it because few men are so, and all preachers ought
   to be so. It is as good as a sermon to hear our best men read the
   Scriptures; they bring out the meaning by their correct emphasis and
   tone. Never fall into the idea that the mere utterance of the words
   before you is all that is required of you in reading; good reading is:
   a high, but rare attainment. Even if you do not comment, yet read the
   chapter previously, and become familiar with it; it is inexcusable for
   a man to betray the fact that he is out of his latitude in the reading,
   traversing untrodden ground, floundering and picking his way across
   country, like a huntsman who has lost his bearings. Never open the
   Bible in the pulpit to read the chapter for the first time, but go to
   the familiar page after many rehearsals. You will be doubly useful if
   in addition to this you "gave the sense." You will then, by God's
   blessing, be the pastor of an intelligent, Bible loving people. You
   will hear in your meeting house that delightful rustle of Bible leaves
   which is so dear to the lover of the Word; your people will open their
   Bibles, looking for a feast. The Word will become increasingly precious
   to yourself, your knowledge will enlarge, and your aptness to teach
   will become every day more apparent. Try it, my brethren, for even if
   you should see cause to discontinue it, at least no harm will come of
   the attempt.

   In all that I have said I have given you another reason for seeking the
   aid of the Holy Spirit. If you do not understand a book by a departed
   writer you are unable to ask him his meaning, but the Spirit, who
   inspired Holy Scripture, lives forever, and he delights to open up the
   Word to those who seek his instruction. He is always accessible: "He
   dwelleth with you and shall be in you." Go to him for yourselves and
   cry, "Open thou mine eyes that I may behold wondrous things out of thy
   law"; and, this being granted you, entreat him to send forth his light
   and power with the Word when you expound it, that your hearers also may
   be led into all truth. Commentaries, expositions, interpretations, are
   all mere scaffolding; the Holy Ghost himself must edify you and help
   you to build up the church of the living God.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [33] For suggestions as to interpretation the student is referred to
   the Bible Handbook by Dr. Joseph Angus. From page 150 of that work and
   onwards the most valuable hints will be met with. Much that we would
   otherwise have inserted in this volume is admirably stated by our
   learned friend.
     __________________________________________________________________

                                    Indexes
     __________________________________________________________________

Index of Scripture References

   Genesis

   [1]1:10

   Nehemiah

   [2]8:8

   Psalms

   [3]119:1-176

   Isaiah

   [4]58

   Colossians

   [5]1871
     __________________________________________________________________

            This document is from the Christian Classics Ethereal
               Library at Calvin College, http://www.ccel.org,
                   generated on demand from ThML source.

References

   1. file:///ccel/s/spurgeon/comment/cache/comment.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=1&scrV=10#v-p6.1
   2. file:///ccel/s/spurgeon/comment/cache/comment.html3?scrBook=Neh&scrCh=8&scrV=8#v-p27.1
   3. file:///ccel/s/spurgeon/comment/cache/comment.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=119&scrV=1#iv-p1.1
   4. file:///ccel/s/spurgeon/comment/cache/comment.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=58&scrV=0#iv-p8.2
   5. file:///ccel/s/spurgeon/comment/cache/comment.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=1871&scrV=0#iv-p34.2
