     __________________________________________________________________

           Title: The Ten Commandments
      Creator(s): Watson, Thomas
     Print Basis: 1692
          Rights: Public Domain
   CCEL Subjects: All; Theology;
      LC Call no: BX9184.A5
     LC Subjects:

                  Christian Denominations

                  Protestantism

                  Post-Reformation

                  Other Protestant denominations

                  Presbyterianism. Calvinistic Methodism
     __________________________________________________________________

                      Thomas Watson, The Ten Commandments

  First published as part at A Body of Practical Divinity, 1692
     __________________________________________________________________

1. INTRODUCTION
     __________________________________________________________________

  1.1 Obedience

   Take heed, and hearken, O Israel; this day thou art become the people
   of the Lord thy God. Thou shalt therefore obey the voice of the Lord
   thy God, and do his commandments.' Deut 27: 9, 10.

   What is the duty which God requireth of man?

   Obedience to his revealed will.

   It is not enough to hear God's voice, but we must obey. Obedience is a
   part of the honour we owe to God. If then I be a Father, where is my
   honour?' Mal 1: 6. Obedience carries in it the life-blood of religion.
   Obey the voice of the Lord God,' and do his commandments. Obedience
   without knowledge is blind, and knowledge without obedience is lame.
   Rachel was fair to look upon, but, being barren, said, Give me
   children, or I die;' so, if knowledge does not bring forth the child of
   obedience, it will die. To obey is better than sacrifice.' 1 Sam 15:
   22. Saul thought it was enough for him to offer sacrifices, though he
   disobeyed God's command; but to obey is better than sacrifice.' God
   disclaims sacrifice, if obedience be wanting. I spake not unto your
   fathers concerning burnt offerings, but this thing commanded I them,
   saying, Obey my voice.' Jer 7: 22. Not but that God did enjoin those
   religious rites of worship; but the meaning is that he looked chiefly
   for obedience -- without which, sacrifice was but devout folly. The end
   why God has given us his laws, is obedience. Ye shall do my judgements,
   and keep mine ordinances.' Lev 18: 4. Why does a king publish an edict,
   but that it may be observed?

   What is the rule of obedience?

   The written word. That is proper obedience which the word requires; our
   obedience must correspond with the word, as the copy with the original.
   To seem to be zealous, if it be not according to the word, is not
   obedience, but will-worship. Popish traditions which have no footing in
   the word, are abominable; and God will say, Quis quaesivit haec? Who
   has required this at your hand?' Isa 1: 12. The apostle condemns the
   worshipping of angels, which had a show of humility. Col 2: 18. The
   Jews might say they were loath to be so bold as to go to God in their
   own persons; they would be more humble, and prostrate themselves before
   the angels, and desire them to present their petitions to God; but this
   show of humility was hateful to God, because there was no word to
   warrant it.

   What are the ingredients in our obedience that make it acceptable?

   (1) It must be cum animi prolubio, free and cheerful, or it is penance,
   not sacrifice. If ye be willing and obedient.' Isa 1: 19. Though we
   serve God with weakness, it may be with willingness. You love to see
   your servants go cheerfully about their work. Under the law, God will
   have a free-will offering. Deut 16: 10. Hypocrites obey God grudgingly,
   and against their will; facere bonum, but not velle [they do good but
   not willingly]. Cain brought his sacrifice, but not his heart. It is a
   true rule, Quicquid cor non facit, non fit; what the heart does not do,
   is not done. Willingness is the soul of obedience. God sometimes
   accepts of willingness without the work, but never of the work without
   willingness. Cheerfulness shows that there is love in the duty; and
   love is to our services what the sun is to fruit; it mellows and ripens
   them, and makes them come off with a better relish.

   (2) Obedience must be devout and fervent. Fervent in spirit,' &c. Rom
   12: 11. Quae ebullit prae ardore. As water that boils over; so the
   heart must boil over with hot affections in the service of God. The
   glorious angels, who, for burning in fervour and devotion, are called
   seraphims, are chosen by God to serve him in heaven. The snail under
   the law was unclean, because a dull, slothful creature. Obedience
   without fervency, is like a sacrifice without fire. Why should not our
   obedience be lively and fervent? God deserves the flower and strength
   of our affections. Domitian would not have his statue carved in wood or
   iron, but made of gold. Lively affections make golden services. It is
   fervency that makes obedience acceptable. Elijah was fervent in spirit,
   and his prayer opened and shut heaven; and again he prayed, and fire
   fell on his enemies. 2 Kings 1: 10. Elijah's prayer fetched fire from
   heaven, because, being fervent, it carried fire up to heaven; quicquid
   decorum ex fide proficiscitur. Augustine.

   (3) Obedience must be extensive, it must reach to all God's commands.
   Then shall I not be ashamed (or, as it is in the Hebrew, lo Ehosh,
   blush), when I have respect unto all thy commandments.' Psa 119: 6.
   Quicquid propter Deum fit aequaliter fit [All God's requirements demand
   equal effort]. There is a stamp of divine authority upon all God's
   commands, and if I obey one precept because God commands, I must obey
   all. True obedience runs through all duties of religion, as the blood
   through all the veins, or the sun through all the signs of the zodiac.
   A good Christian makes gospel piety and moral equity kiss each other.
   Herein some discover their hypocrisy: they will obey God in some things
   which are more facile, and may raise their repute; but other things
   they leave undone. One thing thou lackest,' unum deest. Mark 10: 21.
   Herod would hear John Baptist, but not leave his incest. Some will
   pray, but not give alms, others will give alms, but not pray. Ye pay
   tithe of mint and anise, and have omitted the weightier matters of the
   law, judgement, mercy and faith.' Matt 23: 23. The badger has one foot
   shorter than the other; so these are shorter in some duties than in
   others. God likes not such partial servants, who will do some part of
   the work he sets them about, and leave the other undone.

   (4) Obedience must be sincere. We must aim at the glory of God in it.
   Finis specificat actionem; in religion the end is all. The end of our
   obedience must not be to stop the mouth of conscience, or to gain
   applause or preferment; but that we may grow more like God, and bring
   more glory to him. Do all to the glory of God.' 1 Cor 10: 31. That
   which has spoiled many glorious actions, and made them lose their
   reward, is, that men's aims have been wrong. The Pharisees gave alms,
   but blew a trumpet that they might have the glory of men. Matt 6: 2.
   Alms should shine, but not blaze. Jehu did well in destroying the
   Baal-worshippers, and God commended him for it; but, because his aims
   were not good (for he aimed at settling himself in the kingdom), God
   looked upon it as no better than murder. I will avenge the blood of
   Jezreel upon the house of Jehu.' Hos 1: 4. O let us look to our ends in
   obedience; it is possible the action may be right, and not the heart. 2
   Chron 25: 2. Amaziah did that which was right in the sight of the Lord,
   but not with a perfect heart. Two things are chiefly to be eyed in
   obedience, the principle and the end. Though a child of God shoots
   short in his obedience, he takes a right aim.

   (5) Obedience must be in and through Christ. He has made us accepted in
   the beloved.' Eph 1: 6. Not our obedience, but Christ's merits procure
   acceptance. In every part of worship we must present Christ to God in
   the arms of our faith. Unless we serve God thus, in hope and confidence
   of Christ's merits, we rather provoke him than please him. As, when
   king Uzziah would offer incense without a priest, God was angry with
   him, and struck him with leprosy (2 Chron 26: 20); So, when we do not
   come to God in and through Christ, we offer up incense to him without a
   priest, and what can we expect but severe rebukes?

   (6) Obedience must be constant. Blessed [is] he that does righteousness
   at all times.' Psa 106: 3. True obedience is not like a high colour in
   a fit, but it is a right complexion. It is like the fire on the altar,
   which was always kept burning. Lev 6: 13. Hypocrites' obedience is but
   for a season; it is like plastering work, which is soon washed off; but
   true obedience is constant. Though we meet with affliction, we must go
   on in our obedience. The righteous shall hold on his way.' Job 17: 9.
   We have vowed constancy; we have vowed to renounce the pomps and
   vanities of the world, and to fight under Christ's banner to death.
   When a servant has entered into covenant with his master, and the
   indentures are sealed, he cannot go back, he must serve out his time;
   so there are indentures drawn in baptism, and in the Lord's Supper the
   indentures are renewed and scaled on our part, that we will be faithful
   and constant in our obedience; therefore we must imitate Christ, who
   became obedient unto death. Phil 2: 8. The crown is set upon the head
   of perseverance. He that keepeth my works unto the end, I will give him
   the morning star.' Rev 2: 26, 28.

   Use one. This condemns those who live in contradiction to the text, and
   have cast off the yoke of obedience. As for the word that thou hast
   spoken unto us in the name of the Lord, we will not hearken unto thee.'
   Jer 44: 16. God bids men pray in their family, but they live in the
   total neglect of it; he bids them sanctify the Sabbath, but they follow
   their pleasures on that day; he bids them abstain from the appearance
   of sin, but they do not abstain from the act; they live in the act of
   revenge, and in the act of uncleanness. This is a high contempt of God;
   it is rebellion, and rebellion is as the sin of witchcraft.

   Whence is it that men do not obey God? They know their duty, but do it
   not.

   (1) The not obeying God is for want of faith. Quis credidit? Who has
   believed our report?' Isa 53: 1: Did men believe sin were so bitter,
   that hell followed at the heels of it, would they go on in sin? Did
   they believe there was such a reward for the righteous, that godliness
   was gain, would they not pursue it; but they are atheists, not fully
   brought into the belief of these things; hence it is that they obey
   not. Satan's master-piece, his draw-net by which he drags millions to
   hell, is to keep them in infidelity; he knows, if he can but keep them
   from believing the truth, he is sure to keep them from obeying it.

   (2) The not obeying God is for want of self-denial. God commands one
   thing, and men's lusts command another; and they will rather die than
   deny their lusts. If lust cannot be denied, God cannot be obeyed.

   Use two. Obey God's voice. This is the beauty of a Christian.

   What are the great arguments or incentives to obedience?

   (1) Obedience makes us precious to God, his favourites. If ye will obey
   my voice, ye shall be a peculiar treasure unto me above all people;'
   you shall be my portion, my jewels, the apple of mine eye. Exod 19: 5.
   I will give kingdoms for your ransom.' Isa 43: 3.

   (2) There is nothing lost by obedience. To obey God's will is the wav
   to have our will. [1] Would we have a blessing in our estates? Let us
   obey. God. If thou shalt hearken to the voice of the Lord, to do all
   his commandments, blessed shalt thou be in the field: blessed shall be
   thy basket and thy store.' Deut 28: 1, 3, 5. To obey is the best way to
   thrive in your estates. [21 Would we have a blessing in our souls? Let
   us obey God. Obey, and I will be your God.' Jer 7: 23. My Spirit shall
   be your guide, sanctifier, and comforter. Christ became the author of
   eternal salvation unto all them that obey him.' Heb 5: 9. While we
   please God, we please ourselves; while we give him the duty, he gives
   us the dowry. We are apt to say, as Amaziah, What shall we do for the
   hundred talents?' 2 Chron 25: 9. You lose nothing by obeying. The
   obedient son has the inheritance settled on him. Obey, and you shall
   have a kingdom. It is your Father's good pleasure to give you the
   kingdom.' Luke 12: 32.

   (3) What a sin is disobedience! [1] It is an irrational sin. We are not
   able to stand it out in defiance against God. Are we stronger than he?'
   Will the sinner go to measure arms with God? 1 Cor 10: 22. He is the
   Father Almighty, who can command legions. If we have no strength to
   resist him, it is irrational to disobey him. It is irrational, as it is
   against all law and equity. We have our daily subsistence from him; in
   him we live and move. Is it not just that as we live by him, we should
   live to him? that as he gives us our allowance, so we should give him
   our allegiance?

   [2] It is a destructive sin. The Lord Jesus shall be revealed from
   heaven with his mighty angels, in flaming fire, taking vengeance on
   them that obey not the gospel.' 2 Thess 1: 7, 8. He who refuses to obey
   God's will in commanding, shall be sure to obey his will in punishing.
   While the sinner thinks to slip the knot of obedience, he twists the
   cord of his own damnation, and he perishes without excuse. The servant
   which knew his lord's will, neither did according to his will, shall be
   beaten with many stripes.' Luke 12: 47. God will say, Why did you not
   obey? you knew how to do good, but did not; therefore your blood is
   upon your own head.'

   What means shall we use that we may obey?

   (1) Serious consideration. Consider, God's commands are not grievous:
   he commands nothing unreasonable. 1 John 5: 3. It is easier to obey the
   commands of God than sin. The commands of sin are burdensome -- let a
   man be under the power of any lust, how he tires himself! what hazards
   he runs, even to endangering his health and soul, that he may satisfy
   his lusts! What tedious journeys did Antiochus Epiphanies take in
   persecuting the Jews! They weary themselves to commit iniquity;' and
   are not God's commands more easy to obey? Chrysostom says, virtue is
   easier than vice; temperance is less burdensome than drunkenness. Some
   have gone with less pains to heaven, than others to hell.

   God commands nothing but what is beneficial. And now, Israel, what does
   the Lord require of thee, but to fear the Lord thy God, and to keep his
   statutes, which I command thee this day, for thy good?' Deut 10: 12,
   13. To obey God, is not so much our duty as our privilege; his commands
   carry meat in the mouth of them. He bids us repent; and why? That our
   sins may be blotted out. Acts 3: 19. He commands us to believe: and
   why? That we may be saved. Acts 16: 31. There is love in every command:
   as if a king should bid one of his subjects dig in a gold mine, and
   then take the gold to himself.

   (2) Earnest supplication. Implore the help of the Spirit to carry you
   on in obedience. God's Spirit makes obedience easy and delightful. If
   the loadstone draw the iron, it is not hard for it to move; so if God's
   Spirit quicken and draw the heart, it is not hard to obey. When a gale
   of the Spirit blows, we go full sail in obedience. Turn his promise
   into a prayer. I will put my Spirit within you, and cause you to walk
   in my statutes.' Ezek 36: 27. The promise encourages us, the Spirit
   enables us to obey.
     __________________________________________________________________

  1.2 Love

   The rule of obedience being the moral law, comprehended in the Ten
   Commandments, the next question is:

   What is the sum of the Ten Commandments?

   The sum of the Ten Commandments is, to love the Lord our God with all
   our heart, with all our soul, with all our strength, and with all our
   mind, and our neighbour as ourselves.

   Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thine heart, and with all thy
   soul, and with all thy might.' Deut 6: 5. The duty called for is love,
   yea, the strength of love, with all thy heart.' God will lose none of
   our love. Love is the soul of religion, and that which constitutes a
   real Christian. Love is the queen of graces; it shines and sparkles in
   God's eye, as the precious stones on the breastplate of Aaron.

   What is love?

   It is a holy fire kindled in the affections, whereby a Christian is
   carried out strongly after God as the supreme good.

   What is the antecedent of love to God?

   The antecedent of love is knowledge. The Spirit shines upon the
   understanding, and discovers the beauties of wisdom, holiness, and
   mercy in God; and these are the loadstone to entice and draw out love
   to God; Ignoti nulla cupido: such as know not God cannot love him; if
   the sun be set in the understanding, there must needs be night in the
   affections.

   Wherein does the formal nature of love consist?

   The nature of love consists in delighting in an object. Complacentia
   amantis in amato. [The lover's delight in his beloved] Aquinas. This is
   loving God, to take delight in him. Delight thyself also in the Lord'
   (Psa 37: 4), as a bride delights herself in her jewels. Grace changes a
   Christian's aims and delights.

   How must our love to God be qualified?

   (1) If it be a sincere love, we love God with all our heart. Thou shalt
   love the Lord thy God with all thy heart.' God will have the whole
   heart. We must not divide our love between him and sin. The true mother
   would not have the child divided, nor will God have the heart divided;
   it must be the whole heart.

   (2) We must love God propter se, for himself, for his own intrinsic
   excellencies. We must love him for his loveliness. Meretricius est amor
   plus annulum quam sponsum amare: It is a harlot's love to love the
   portion more than the person.' Hypocrites love God because he gives
   them corn and wine: we must love God for himself; for those shining
   perfections which are in him. Gold is loved for itself.

   (3) We must love God with all our might, in the Hebrew text, our
   vehemency; we must love God, quod posse, as much as we are able.
   Christians should be like seraphim, burning in holy love. We can never
   love God so much as he deserves. The angels in heaven cannot love God
   so much as he deserves.

   (4) Love to God must be active in its sphere. Love is an industrious
   affection; it sets the head studying for God, hands working, feet
   running in the ways of his commandments. It is called the labour of
   love. 1 Thess 1: 3. Mary Magdalene loved Christ, and poured her
   ointments on him. We think we never do enough for the person whom we
   love.

   (5) Love to God must be superlative. God is the essence of beauty, a
   whole paradise of delight; and he must have a priority in our love. Our
   love to God must be above all things besides, as the oil swims above
   the water. We must love God above estate and relations. Great is the
   love to relations. There is a story in the French Academy, of a
   daughter, who, when her father was condemned to die by hunger, gave him
   suck with her own breasts. But our love to God must be above father and
   mother. Matt 10: 37. We may give the creature the milk of our love, but
   God must have the cream. The spouse keeps the juice of her pomegranates
   for Christ. Cant 8: 2.

   (6) Our love to God must be constant, like the fire which the Vestal
   virgins kept in Rome, which did not go out. Love must be like the
   motion of the pulse, which beats as long as there is life. Many waters
   cannot quench love,' not the waters of persecution. Cant 8: 7. Rooted
   in love.' Eph 3: 17. A branch withers that does not grow on a root; so
   love, that it may not die, must be well rooted.

   What are the visible signs of our love to God?

   If we love God, our desire will be after him. The desire of our soul is
   to thy name.' Isa 26: 8. He who loves God, breathes after communion
   with him. My soul thirsteth for the living God.' Psa 42: 2. Persons in
   love desire to be often conferring together. He who loves God, desires
   to be much in his presence; he loves the ordinances: they are the glass
   where the glory of God is resplendent; in the ordinances we meet with
   him whom our souls love; we have God's smiles and whispers, and some
   foretastes of heaven. Such as have no desire after ordinances, have no
   love to God.

   The second visible sign is, that he who loves God cannot find
   contentment in any thing without him. Give a hypocrite who pretends to
   love God corn and wine, and he can be content without God; but a soul
   fired with love to God, cannot be without him. Lovers faint away if
   they have not a sight of the object loved. A gracious soul can do
   without health, but cannot do without God, who is the health of his
   countenance. Psa 43: 5. If God should say to a soul that entirely loves
   him, Take thy ease, swim in pleasure, solace thyself in the delights of
   the world; but thou shalt not enjoy my presence:' this would not
   content it. Nay, if God should say, I will let thee be taken up to
   heaven, but I will retire into another room, and thou shalt not see my
   face;' it would not content the soul. It is hell to be without God. The
   philosopher says there can be no gold without the influence of the sun;
   certainly there can be no golden joy in the soul without God's sweet
   presence and influence.

   The third visible sign is that he who loves God, hates that which would
   separate between him and God, and that is sin. Sin makes God hide his
   face; it is like an incendiary, which parts chief friends; therefore,
   the keenness of a Christian's hatred is set against it. I hate every
   false way.' Psa 119: 128. Antipathies can never be reconciled; one
   cannot love health but he must hate poison; so we cannot love God but
   we must hate sin, which would destroy our communion with him.

   The fourth visible sign is sympathy. Friends that love, grieve for the
   evils which befall each other. Homer, describing Agamemnon's grief,
   when he was forced to sacrifice his daughter, brings in all his friends
   weeping with him, and accompanying him to the sacrifice, in mourning.
   Lovers grieve together. If we have true love in our heart to God, we
   cannot but grieve for those things which grieve him; we shall lay to
   heart his dishonours; the luxury, drunkenness, contempt of God and
   religion. Rivers of waters run down mine eyes,' &c. Psa 119: 136. Some
   speak of the sins of others, and laugh at them; but they surely have no
   love to God who can laugh at that which grieves his Spirit! Does he
   love his father who can laugh to hear him reproached?

   The fifth visible sign is, that he who loves God, labours to render him
   lovely to others. He not only admires God, but speaks in his praises,
   that he may allure and draw others to be in love with him. She that is
   in love will commend her lover. The lovesick spouse extols Christ, she
   makes a panegyrical oration of his worth, that she might persuade
   others to be in love with him. His head is as the most fine gold.' Cant
   5: 11. True love to God cannot be silent, it will be eloquent in
   setting forth his renown. There is no better sign of loving God than to
   make him appear lovely, and to draw proselytes to him.

   The sixth visible sign is, that he who loves God, weeps bitterly for
   his absence. Mary comes weeping, They have taken away my Lord.' John
   20: 13. One cries, My health is gone!' another, My estate is gone!' but
   he who is a lover of God, cries out, My God is gone! I cannot enjoy him
   whom I love.' What can all worldly comforts do, when once God is
   absent? It is like a funeral banquet, where there is much meat, but no
   cheer. I went mourning without the sun.' Job 30: 28. If Rachel mourned
   greatly for the loss of her children, what vail or pencil can shadow
   out the sorrow of that Christian who has lost God's sweet presence?
   Such a soul pours forth floods of tears; and while it is lamenting,
   seems to say thus to God, Lord, thou art in heaven, hearing the
   melodious songs and triumph of angels; but I sit here in the valley of
   tears, weeping because thou art gone. Oh, when wilt thou come to me,
   and revive me with the light of thy countenance! Or, Lord, if thou wilt
   not come to me, let me come to thee, where I shall have a perpetual
   smile of thy face in heaven and shall never more complain, My beloved
   has withdrawn himself.'"

   The seventh visible sign is, that he who loves God is willing to do and
   suffer for him. He subscribes to God's commands, he submits to his
   will. He subscribes to his commands. If God bids him mortify sin, love
   his enemies, be crucified to the world, he obeys. It is a vain thing
   for a man to say he loves God, and slight his commands. He submits to
   his will. If God would have him suffer for him, he does not dispute,
   but obeys. Love endureth all things.' 1 Cor 13: 7. Love made Christ
   suffer for us, and love will make us suffer for him. It is true that
   every Christian is not a martyr but he has a spirit of martyrdom in
   him; he has a disposition of mind to suffer, if God call him to it. I
   am ready to be offered.' 2 Tim 4: 6. Not only the sufferings were ready
   for Paul, but he was ready for the sufferings. Origin chose rather to
   live despised in Alexandria, than with Plotinus to deny the faith, and
   be great in the prince's favour. Rev 12: 11. Many say they love God,
   but will not suffer the loss of anything for him. If Christ should have
   said to us, I love you well, you are dear to me, but I cannot suffer
   for you, I cannot lay down my life for you,' we should have questioned
   his love very much; and may not the Lord question ours, when we pretend
   love to him, but will endure nothing for his sake?

   Use one. What shall we say to those who have not a drachm of love in
   their hearts to God? They have their life from him, yet do not love
   him. He spreads their table every day, yet they do not love him.
   Sinners dread God as a judge, but do not love him as a father. All the
   strength in the angels cannot make the heart love God; judgements will
   not do it; omnipotent grace only can make a stony heart melt in love.
   How sad is it to be void of love to God. When the body is cold, and has
   no heat, it is a sign of death; so he is spiritually dead who has no
   heat of love in his heart to God. Shall such live with God that do not
   love him? Will God lay an enemy in his bosom? They shall be bound in
   chains of darkness who will not be drawn with cords of love.

   Use two. Let us be persuaded to love God with all our heart and might.
   O let us take our love off from other things, and place it upon God.
   Love is the heart of religion, the fat of the offering; it is the grace
   which Christ inquires most after. Simon lovest thou me?' John 21: 15.
   Love makes all our services acceptable, it is the musk that perfumes
   them. It is not so much duty, as love to duty, God delights in;
   therefore serving and loving God are put together. Isa 56: 6. It is
   better to love him than to serve him; obedience without love, is like
   wine without the spirit. O then, be persuaded to love God with all your
   heart and might.

   (1) It is nothing but your love that God desires. The Lord might have
   demanded your children to be offered in sacrifice; he might have bid
   you cut and lance yourselves, or lie in hell awhile; but he only
   desires your love, he would only have this flower. Is it a hard
   request, to love God? Was ever any debt easier paid than this? Is it
   any labour for the wife to love her husband? Love is delightful. Non
   potest amor esse, et dulcis non esse [Love must by definition be
   sweet]. Bernard. What is there in our love that God should desire it?
   Why should a king desire the love of a woman that is in debt and
   diseased? God does not need our love. There are angels enough in heaven
   to adore and love him. What is God the better for our love? It adds not
   the least cubit to his essential blessedness. He does not need our
   love, and yet he seeks it. Why does he desire us to give him our heart?
   Prov 23: 26. Not that he needs our heart, but that he may make it
   better.

   (2) Great will be our advantage if we love God. He does not court our
   love that we should lose by it. Eye has not seen, nor ear heard, the
   things which God has prepared for them that love him.' 1 Cor 2: 9. If
   you will love him, you shall have such a reward as exceeds your faith.
   He will betroth you to himself in the dearest love. I will betroth thee
   unto me for ever, in loving kindness and in mercies.' Hos 2: 19. The
   Lord thy God will rest in his love, he will joy over thee with
   singing.' Zeph 3: 17. If you love God, he will interest you in all his
   riches and dignities, he will give you heaven and earth for your dowry,
   he will set a crown on your head. Vespasian the emperor gave a great
   reward to a woman who came to him, and professed she loved him; but God
   gives a crown of life to them that love him. James 1: 12.

   (3) Love is the only grace that shall live with us in heaven. In heaven
   we shall need no repentance, because we shall have no sin; no faith,
   because we shall see God face to face; but love to God shall abide for
   ever. Love never faileth.' 1 Cor 13: 8. How should we nourish this
   grace which shall outlive all the graces, and run parallel with
   eternity!

   (4) Our love to God is a sign of his love to us. We love him because he
   first loved us.' 1 John 4: 19. By nature we have no love to God; we
   have hearts of stone. Ezek 36: 26. And how can any love be in hearts of
   stone? Our loving him is from his loving us. If the glass burn, it is
   because the sun has shone on it; so if our hearts burn in love, it is a
   sign the Sun of Righteousness has shone upon us.

   What shall we do in order to love God aright?

   (1) Wait on the preaching of the word. As faith comes by hearing, so
   does love. The word sets forth God in his incomparable excellencies; it
   deciphers and pencils him out in all his glory, and a sight of his
   beauty inflames love.

   (2) Beg of God that he will give you a heart to love him. When king
   Solomon asked wisdom of God, it pleased the Lord. 1 Kings 3: 10. So,
   when thou criest to God, Lord give me a heart to love thee, it is my
   grief I can love thee no more; surely this prayer will please the Lord,
   and he will pour out his Spirit upon thee. His golden oil will make the
   lamp of thy love burn bright.

   (3) You who have love to God, keep it flaming upon the altar of your
   heart. Love, like fire, is ever ready to go out. Thou hast left thy
   first love.' Rev 2: 4. Through neglect of duty, or too much love of the
   world, our love to God will cool. O preserve your love to him. As you
   would be careful to preserve the natural heat in your body, so be
   careful to preserve the heat of love to God in your soul. Love is like
   oil to the wheels, it quickens us in God's service. When you find love
   abate and cool, use all means to quicken it. When the fire is going
   out, you throw on fuel; so when the flame of love is going out, make
   use of the ordinances as sacred fuel to keep the fire of your love
   burning.
     __________________________________________________________________

  1.3 The Preface to the Commandments

   And God spake all these words, saying, I am the LORD thy God,' &c. Exod
   20: 1, 2.

   What is the preface to the Ten Commandments?

   The preface to the Ten Commandments is, I am the Lord thy God.'

   The preface to the preface is, God spake all these words, saying,' &c.
   This is like the sounding of a trumpet before a solemn proclamation.
   Other parts of the Bible are said to be uttered by the mouth of the
   holy prophets (Luke 1: 70), but here God spake in his own person.

   How are we to understand that, God spake, since he has no bodily parts
   or organs of speech?

   God made some intelligible sound, or fanned a voice in the air, which,
   to the Jews was as though God himself was speaking to them. Observe:

   (1) The lawgiver. God spake.' There are two things requisite in a
   lawgiver. [1] Wisdom. Laws are founded upon reason; and he must be wise
   that makes laws. God, in this respect, is most fit to be a lawgiver: he
   is wise in heart.' Job 9: 4. He has a monopoly of wisdom. The only wise
   God.' 1 Tim 1: 17. Therefore he is the fittest to enact and constitute
   laws. [2] Authority. If a subject makes laws, however wise they may be,
   they want the stamp of authority. God has the supreme power in his
   hand: he gives being to all; and he who gives men their lives, has most
   right to give them their laws.

   (2) The law itself. All these words.' That is, all the words of the
   moral law, which is usually styled the decalogue, or ten commandments.
   It is called the moral law because it is the rule of life and manners.
   The Scripture, as Chrysostom says, is a garden, and the moral law is
   the chief flower in it: it is a banquet, and the moral law is the chief
   dish in it.

   The moral law is perfect. The law of the Lord is perfect.' Psa 19: 7.
   It is an exact model and platform of religion; it is the standard of
   truth, the judge of controversies, the pole-star to direct us to
   heaven. The commandment is a lamp.' Prov 6: 23. Though the moral law be
   not a Christ to justify us, it is a rule to instruct us.

   The moral law is unalterable; it remains still in force. Though the
   ceremonial and judicial laws are abrogated, the moral law delivered by
   God's own mouth is of perpetual use in the church. It was written in
   tables of stone, to show its perpetuity.

   The moral law is very illustrious and full of glory. God put glory upon
   it in the manner of its promulgation. [1] The people, before the moral
   law was delivered, were to wash their clothes, whereby, as by a type,
   God required the sanctifying of their ears and hearts to receive the
   law. Exod 19: 10. [2] There were bounds set that none might touch the
   mount, which was to produce in the people reverence to the law. Exod
   19: 12. [3] God wrote the law with his own finger, which was such an
   honour put upon the moral law, as we read of no other such writing.
   Exod 31: 18. God by some mighty operation, made the law legible in
   letters, as if it had been written with his own finger. [4] God's
   putting the law in the ark to be kept was another signal mark of honour
   put upon it. The ark was the cabinet in which He put the ten
   commandments, as ten jewels. [5] At the delivery of the moral law, many
   angels were in attendance. Deut 33: 2. A parliament of angels was
   called, and God himself was the speaker.

   Use one. Here we may notice God's goodness, who has not left us without
   a law. He often sets down the giving his commandments as a
   demonstration of his love. He has not dealt so with any nation: and as
   for his judgements they have not known them.' Psa 147: 20. Thou gavest
   them true laws, good statutes and commandments.' Neh 9: 13. What a
   strange creature would man be if he had no law to direct him! There
   would be no living in the world; we should have none born but Ishmaels
   -- every man's hand would be against his neighbour. Man would grow wild
   if he had not affliction to tame him, and the moral law to guide him.
   The law of God is a hedge to keep us within the bounds of sobriety and
   piety.

   Use two. If God spake all these words of the moral law, then it
   condemns: (1) The Marcionites and Manichees, who speak lightly, yea,
   blasphemously, of the moral law; who say it is below a Christian, it is
   carnal; which the apostle confutes, when he says, The law is spiritual,
   but I am carnal.' Rom 7: 14. (2) The Antinomians, who will not admit
   the moral law to be a rule to a believer. We say not that he is under
   the curse of the law, but the commands. We say not the moral law is a
   Christ, but it is a star to lead to Christ. We say not that it saves,
   but sanctifies. They who cast God's law behind their backs, God will
   cast their prayers behind his back. They who will not have the law to
   rule them, shall have the law to judge them. (3) The Papists, who, as
   if God's law were imperfect, and when he spake all these words he did
   not speak enough, add to it their canons and traditions. This is to tax
   God's wisdom, as if he knew not how to make his own law. This surely is
   a high provocation. If any man shall add to these things, God shall add
   unto him the plagues that are written in this book.' Rev 22: 18. As it
   is a great evil to add anything to a man's sealed will, so much more to
   add anything to the law which God himself spake, and wrote with his own
   fingers.

   Use three. If God spake all the words of the moral law, several duties
   are enjoined upon us: (1) If God spake all these words, then we must
   hear all these words. The words which God speaks are too precious to be
   lost. As we would have God hear all our words when we pray, so we must
   hear all his words when he speaks. We must not be as the deaf adder,
   which stoppeth her ears: he that stops his ears when God cries, shall
   cry himself, and not be heard.

   (2) If God spake all these words, then we must attend to them with
   reverence. Every word of the moral law is an oracle from heaven. God
   himself is the preacher, which calls for reverence. If a judge gives a
   charge upon the bench, all attend with reverence. In the moral law God
   himself gives a charge, God spake all these words;' with what
   veneration, therefore, should we attend! Moses put off his shoes from
   his feet, in token of reverence, when God was about to speak to him.
   Exod 3: 5, 6.

   (3)If God spake all these words of the moral law, then we must remember
   them. Surely all God speaks is worth remembering; those words are
   weighty which concern salvation. It is not a vain thing for you,
   because it is your life.' Deut 32: 47. Our memory should be like the
   chest in the ark where the law was kept. God's oracles are ornaments,
   and shall we forget them? Can a maid forget her ornaments?' Jer 2: 32.

   (4) If God spake all these words, then believe them. See the name of
   God written upon every commandment. The heathens, in order to gain
   credit to their laws, reported that they were inspired by the gods at
   Rome. The moral law fetches its pedigree from heaven. Ipse dixit. God
   spake all these words. Shall we not give credit to the God of heaven?
   How would the angel confirm the women in the resurrection of Christ? Lo
   (said he), I have told you.' Matt 28: 7. I speak in the word of an
   angel. Much more should the moral law be believed, when it comes to us
   in the word of God. God spake all these words.' Unbelief enervates the
   virtue of God's word, and makes it prove abortive. The word did not
   profit, not being mixed with faith.' Heb 4: 2. Eve gave more credit to
   the devil when he spake than she did to God.

   (5) If God spake all these words, then love the commandments. Oh, how
   love I thy law! it is my meditation all the day.' Psa 119: 97. Consider
   how I love thy precepts.' Psa 119: 159. The moral law is the copy of
   God's will, our spiritual directory; it shows us what sins to avoid,
   what duties to pursue. The ten commandments are a chain of pearls to
   adorn us, they are our treasury to enrich us; they are more precious
   than lands of spices, or rocks of diamonds. The law of thy mouth is
   better unto me than thousands of gold and silver.' Psa 119: 72. The law
   of God has truth and goodness in it. Neh 9: 13. Truth, for God spake
   it; and goodness, for there is nothing the commandment enjoins, but it
   is for our good. O then, let this command our love.

   (6) If God spake all these words, then teach your children the law of
   God. These words, which I command thee this day, shall be in thy heart,
   and thou shalt teach them diligently unto thy children.' Deut 6: 6, 7.
   He who is godly, is both a diamond and a loadstone: a diamond for the
   sparkling of his grace, and a loadstone for his attractive virtue in
   drawing others to the love of God's precepts. Vir bonus magis aliis
   prodest quam sibi [A good man benefits others more than himself]. You
   that are parents, discharge your duty. Though you cannot impart grace
   to your children, yet you may impart knowledge. Let your children know
   the commandments of God. Ye shall teach them your children.' Deut 11:
   19. You are careful to leave your children a portion: leave the oracles
   of heaven with them; instruct them in the law of God. If God spake all
   these words, you may well speak them over again to your children.

   (7) If God spake all these words, the moral law must be obeyed. If a
   king speaks, his word commands allegiance; much more, when God speaks,
   must his words be obeyed. Some will obey partially, obey some
   commandments, not others; like a slough, which, when it comes to a
   stiff piece of earth, makes a baulk; but God, who spake all the words
   of the moral law, will have all obeyed. He will not dispense with the
   breach of one law. Princes, indeed, for special reasons, sometimes
   dispense with penal statutes, and will not enforce the severity of the
   law; but God, who spake all these words, binds men with a subpoena to
   yield obedience to every law.

   This condemns the church of Rome, which, instead of obeying the whole
   moral law, blots out one commandment, and dispenses with others. They
   leave the second commandment out of their catechism, because it makes
   against images; and to fill up the number of ten, they divide the tenth
   commandment into two. Thus, they incur that dreadful condemnation: If
   any man shall take away from the words of this book, God shall take
   away his part out of the book of life.' Rev 22: 19. As they blot out
   one commandment, and cut the knot which they cannot untie, so they
   dispense with other commandments. They dispense with the sixth
   commandment, making murder meritorious in case of propagating the
   Catholic cause. They dispense with the seventh commandment, wherein God
   forbids adultery; for the Pope dispenses with the sin of uncleanness,
   yea, incest, by paying fines and sums of money into his coffer. No
   wonder the Pope takes men off their loyalty to kings and princes, when
   he teaches them disloyalty to God. Some of the Papists say expressly in
   their writings, that the Pope has power to dispense with the laws of
   God, and can give men license to break the commandments of the Old and
   New Testament. That such a religion should ever again get foot in
   England, the Lord in mercy prevent! If God spake all the commandments,
   then we must obey all; he who breaks the hedge of the commandments, a
   serpent shall bite him.

   But what man can obey all God's commandments?

   To obey the law in a legal sense -- to do all the law requires -- no
   man can. Sin has cut the lock of original righteousness, where our
   strength lay; but, in a true gospel-sense, we may so obey the moral law
   as to find acceptance. This gospel obedience consists in a real
   endeavour to observe the whole moral law. I have done thy commandments'
   (Psa 119: 166); not, I have done all I should do, but I have done all I
   am able to do; and wherein my obedience comes short, I look up to the
   perfect righteousness and obedience of Christ, and hope for pardon
   through his blood. This is to obey the moral law evangelically; which,
   though it be not to satisfaction, yet it is to acceptation.

   We come now to the preface itself, which consists of three parts: I. I
   am the Lord thy God'; II. which have brought thee out of the land of
   Egypt'; III. out of the house of bondage'.

   I. I am the Lord thy God. Here we have a description of God; (1) By his
   essential greatness, I am the Lord;' (2) By his relative goodness, Thy
   God.'

   [1] By his essential greatness, I am the Lord:' or, as it is in the
   Hebrew, JEHOVAH. By this great name God sets forth his majesty.
   Sanctius habitum fuit, says Buxtorf. The name of Jehovah was had in
   more reverence among the Jews than any other name of God. It signifies
   God's self-sufficiency, eternity, independence, and immutability. Mal.
   3: 6.

   Use one. If God be Jehovah, the fountain of being, who can do what he
   will, let us fear him. That thou mayest fear this glorious and fearful
   name, Jehovah.' Deut 28: 58.

   Use two. If God be Jehovah, the supreme Lord, the blasphemous Papists
   are condemned who speak after this manner: Our Lord God the Pope.' Is
   it a wonder the Pope lifts his triple crown above the heads of kings
   and emperors, when he usurps God's title, showing himself that he is
   God'? 2 Thess 2: 4. He seeks to make himself Lord of heaven, for he
   will canonise saints there; Lord of earth, for with his keys he binds
   and looses whom he pleases; Lord of hell, for he frees men out of
   purgatory. God will pull down these plumes of pride; he will consume
   this man of sin with the breath of his mouth, and the brightness of his
   coming.' 2 Thess 2: 8.

   [2] God is described by his relative goodness; thy God.' Had he called
   himself Jehovah only, it might have terrified us, and made us flee from
   him; but when he says, thy God,' it allures and draws us to him. This,
   though a preface to the law, is pure gospel. The word Eloeha, thy God,'
   is so sweet, that we can never suck all the honey out of it. I am thy
   God,' not only by creation, but by election. This word, thy God,'
   though it was spoken to Israel, is a charter which belongs to all the
   saints. For the further explanation, here are three questions.

   How comes God to be our God?

   Through Jesus Christ. Christ is a middle person in the Trinity. He is
   Emmanuel, God with us.' He brings two different parties together: makes
   our nature lovely to God, and God's nature lovely to us; by his death,
   causes friendship, yea, union; and brings us within the verge of the
   covenant, and thus God becomes our God.

   What is implied by God being our God?

   It is comprehensive of all good things. God is our strong tower; our
   fountain of living water; our salvation. More particularly, being our
   God implies the sweetest relations.

   (1) The relation of a father. I will be a Father unto you;' 2 Cor 6:
   18. A father is full of tender care for his child. Upon whom does he
   settle the inheritance but his child? God being our God, will be a
   father to us; a Father of mercies,' 2 Cor 1: 3; The everlasting
   Father.' Isa 9: 6. If God be our God, we have a Father in heaven that
   never dies.

   (2) It imports the relation of a husband. Thy Maker is thine husband.'
   Isa 54: 5. If God be our husband, he esteems us precious to him, as the
   apple of his eye. Zech 2: 8. He imparts his secrets to us. Psa 25: 14.
   He bestows a kingdom upon us for our dowry. Luke 12: 32.

   How may we know that by covenant union, God is our God?

   (1) By having his grace planted in us. Kings' children are known by
   their costly jewels. It is not having common gifts which shows we
   belong to God; many have the gifts of God without God; but it is grace
   that gives us a true genuine title to God. In particular, faith is
   vinculum unionis, the grace of union, by which we may spell out our
   interest in God. Faith does not, as the mariner, cast its anchor
   downwards, but upwards; it trusts in the mercy and blood of God, and
   trusting in God, engages him to be our God. Other graces make us like
   God, faith makes us one with him.

   (2) We may know God is our God by having the earnest of his Spirit in
   our hearts. 2 Cor 1: 22. God often gives the purse to the wicked, but
   the Spirit only to such as he intends to make his heirs. Have we had
   the consecration of the Spirit? If we have not had the sealing work of
   the Spirit, have we had the healing work? Ye have an unction from the
   Holy One.' 1 John 2: 20. The Spirit, where it is, stamps the impress of
   its own holiness upon the heart; it embroiders and bespangles the soul,
   and makes it all glorious within. Have we had the attraction of the
   Spirit? Draw me, we will run after thee.' Cant 1: 4. Has the Spirit, by
   its magnetic virtue, drawn our hearts to God? Can we say, O thou whom
   my soul loveth?' Cant 1: 7. Is God our paradise of delight? our
   Segullah, or chief treasure! Are our hearts so chained to God that no
   other object can enchant us, or draw us away from him? Have we had the
   elevation of the Spirit? Has it raised our hearts above the world? The
   Spirit lifted me up.' Ezek 3: 14. Has the Spirit made us, superna
   anhelare, seek the things above where Christ is? Though our flesh is on
   earth, is our heart in heaven? Though we live here, trade we above? Has
   the Spirit thus lifted us up? By this we may know that God is our God.
   Where God gives his Spirit for an earnest, there he gives himself for a
   portion.

   (3) We may know God is our God, if he has given us the hearts of
   children. Have we obediential hearts? Psa 27: 8. Do we subscribe to
   God's commands when his commands cross our will? A true saint is like
   the flower of the sun, which opens and shuts with the sun: he opens to
   God, and shuts to sin. If we have the hearts of children, God is our
   Father.

   (4) We may know God is ours, and we have an interest in him, by
   standing up for his interest. We shall appear in his cause and
   vindicate his truth, wherein his glory is so much concerned. Athanasius
   was the bulwark of truth; he stood up for it, when most of the world
   were Asians. In former times the nobles of Polonia, when the gospel was
   read, laid their hands upon their swords, signifying that they were
   ready to defend the faith, and hazard their lives for the gospel. There
   is no better sign of having an interest in God than standing up for his
   interest.

   (5) We may know God is ours, and we have an interest in him, by his
   having an interest in us. My beloved is mine, and I am his.' Cant 2:
   16. When God says to the soul, Thou art mine;' the soul answers, Lord,
   I am thine; all I have is at thy service; my head shall be thine to
   study for thee; my tongue shall be thine to praise thee.' If God be our
   God by way of donation, we are his by way of dedication; we live to
   him, and are more his than we are our own. Thus we may come to know
   that God is our God.

   Use one. Above all things, let us get this great charter confirmed,
   that God is our God. Deity is not comfortable without propriety. Let us
   labour to get sound evidences that God is our God. We cannot call
   health, liberty, estate, ours; but let us be able to call God ours, and
   say as the church, God, even our own God, shall bless us.' Psa 67: 6.
   Let every soul labour to pronounce this Shibboleth, My God.' That we
   may endeavour to have God for our God, consider the misery of such as
   have not God for their God, in how sad a condition are they, when the
   hour of distress comes! This was Saul's case when he said I am sore
   distressed; for the Philistines make war against me, and God is
   departed from me.' 1 Sam 28: 15. A wicked man in time of trouble, is
   like a vessel tossed on the sea without an anchor, which strikes on
   rocks or sands. A sinner who has not God to be his God, may make a
   shift while health and estate last, but when these crutches on which he
   leaned are broken, his heart must sink. It is with him as it was with
   the old world when the flood came. The waters at first came to the
   valleys, but then the people would get to the hills and mountains; but
   when the waters came to the mountains, then there might be some trees
   on the high hills, and they would climb up to them; ay, but the waters
   rose above the tops of the trees; and then their hearts failed them,
   and all hopes of being saved were gone. So it is with a man that has
   not God to be his God. If one comfort be taken away, he has another; if
   he lose a child, he has an estate; but when the waters rise higher,
   death comes and takes away all, and he has nothing to help himself
   with, no God to go to, he must needs die in despair. How great a
   privilege it is to have God for our God! Happy is that people whose God
   is the Lord.' Psa 144: 15. Beatitudo hominis est Deus [Man's happiness
   is God himself]. Augustine. That you may see the privilege of this
   charter: --

   (1) If God be our God, then though we may feel the stroke of evil, yet
   not the sting. He must needs be happy who is in such a condition, that
   nothing can hurt him. If he lose his name, it is written in the book of
   life; if he lose his liberty, his conscience is free; if he lose his
   estate, he is possessed of the pearl of price; if he meets with storms,
   he knows where to put in for harbour; God is his God, and heaven is his
   heaven.

   (2) If God be our God, our soul is safe. The soul is the jewel, it is a
   blossom of eternity. I was grieved in my spirit in the midst of my
   body;' in the Chaldee, it is in the midst of my sheath.' Dan 7: 15. The
   body is but the sheath; the soul is the princely part of man, which
   sways the sceptre of reason; it is a celestial spark, as Damascene
   calls it. If God be our God, the soul is safe, as in a garrison. Death
   can do no more hurt to a virtuous heaven-born soul, than David did to
   Saul, when he cut off the skirt of his garment. The soul is safe, being
   hid in the promises; hid in the wounds of Christ; hid in God's decree.
   The soul is the pearl, and heaven is the cabinet where God will lock it
   up safe.

   (3) If God be our God, then all that is in God is ours. The Lord says
   to a saint in covenant, as the king of Israel to the king of Syria, I
   am thine, and all that I have.' 1 Kings 20: 4. So saith God, I am
   thine:' how happy is he who not only inherits the gift of God, but
   inherits God himself! All that I have shall be thine; my wisdom shall
   be thine to teach thee; my power shall be thine to support thee; my
   mercy shall be thine to save thee. God is an infinite ocean of
   blessedness, and there is enough in him to fill us: as if a thousand
   vessels were thrown into the sea, there is enough in the sea to fill
   them.

   (4) If God be our God, he will entirely love us. Property is the ground
   of love. God may give men kingdoms, and not love them; but he cannot be
   our God, and not love us. He calls his covenanted saints, Jediduth
   Naphshi, The dearly beloved of my soul.' Jer 12: 7. He rejoiceth over
   them with joy, and rests in his love. Zeph 3: 17. They are his refined
   silver (Zech 13: 9); his jewels (Mal 3: 17); his royal diadem (Isa 62:
   3). He gives them the cream and flower of his love. He not only opens
   his hand and fills them, but opens his heart and fills them. Psa 145:
   16.

   (5) If God be our God, he will do more for us than all the world
   besides can. What is that? [1] He will give us peace in trouble. When
   there is a storm without, he will make music within. The world can
   create trouble in peace, but God can create peace in trouble. He will
   send the Comforter, who, as a dove, brings an olive-branch of peace in
   his mouth. John 14: 16. [2] God will give us a crown of immortality.
   The world can give a crown of gold, but that crown has thorns in it and
   death in it; but God will give you a crown of glory that fadeth not
   away. 1 Pet. 5: 4. The garland made of the flowers of paradise never
   withers.

   (6) If God be our God, he will bear with many infirmities. He may
   respite sinners awhile, but long forbearance is no acquittance; he will
   throw them to hell for their sins; but if he be our God, he will not
   for every failing destroy us; he bears with his spouse as with the
   weaker vessel. He may chastise. Psa 89: 32. He may use the rod and the
   pruning-knife, but not the bloody axe. He has not beheld iniquity in
   Jacob.' Numb 23: 21. He will not see sin in his people so as to destroy
   them, but their sins so as to pity them. He sees them as a physician a
   disease in his patient, to heal him. I have seen his ways, and will
   heal him.' Isa 57: 18. Every failing does not break the marriage-bond
   asunder. The disciples had great failings, they all forsook Christ and
   fled; but this did not break off their interest in God; therefore, says
   Christ, at his ascension, Tell my disciples, I go to my God and to
   their God.'

   (7) If God be once our God, he is so for ever. This God is our God for
   ever and ever.' Psa 48: 14. Whatever worldly comforts we have, they are
   but for a season, and we must part with all. Heb 11: 25. As Paul's
   friends accompanied him to the ship, and there left him (Acts 20: 38),
   so all our earthly comforts will but go with us to the grave, and there
   leave us. You cannot say you have health, and shall have it for ever;
   you have a child, and shall have it for ever; but if God be your God,
   you shall have him for ever. This God is our God for ever and ever.' If
   God be our God, he will be a God to us as long as he is a God. Ye have
   taken away my gods,' said Micah. Judges 18: 14. But it cannot be said
   to a believer, that his God is taken away; He may lose all things else,
   but cannot lose his God. God is ours from everlasting in election, and
   to everlasting in glory.

   (8) If God be our God, we shall enjoy all our godly relations with him
   in heaven. The great felicity on earth is to enjoy relations. A father
   sees his own picture in a child; and a wife sees herself in her
   husband. We plant the flower of love among our relations, and the loss
   of them is like the pulling off a limb from the body. But if God be
   ours, with the enjoyment of God we shall enjoy all our pious relations
   in glory. The gracious child shall see his godly father, the virtuous
   wife shall see her religious husband in Christ's arms; and then there
   will be a dearer love to relations than there ever was before, though
   in a far different manner; then relations shall meet and never part.
   And so shall we be ever with the Lord.'

   Use two. To such as can realise this covenant union we have several
   exhortations.

   (1) If God be our God, let us improve our interest in him, let us cast
   all our burdens upon him: the burden of our fears, our wants and our
   sins. Cast thy burden upon the Lord.' Psa 55: 22. Wicked men who are a
   burden to God have no right to cast their burden upon him; but such as
   have God for their God are called upon to cast their burden on him.
   Where should the child ease all its cares but in the bosom of its
   parent? Let all thy wants lie upon me.' Judges 19: 20. So God seems to
   say to his children, Let all your wants lie upon me.' Christian, what
   troubles thee? Thou hast a God to pardon thy sins and to supply thy
   wants; therefore roll your burden on him. Casting all your care upon
   him.' 1 Pet 5: 7. Why are Christians so disquieted in their minds? They
   are taking care when they should be casting care.

   (2) If God be our God, let us learn to be contented, though we have the
   less of other things. Contentment is a rare jewel, it is the cure of
   care. If we have God to be our God, well may we be contented. I know
   whom I have believed.' 2 Tim 1: 12. There was Paul's interest in God.
   As having nothing, and yet possessing all things.' 2 Cor 6: 10. Here
   was his content. That such who have covenant-union with God may be
   filled with contentment of spirit, consider what a rich blessing God is
   to the soul.

   He is bonum sufficiens, a sufficient good. He who has God has enough.
   If a man be thirsty, bring him to a spring, and he is satisfied; in God
   there is enough to fill the heaven-born soul. He gives grace and
   glory.' Psa 84: 11. There is in God not only a sufficiency, but a
   redundancy; he is not only full as a vessel, but as a spring. Other
   things can no more fill the soul than a mariner's breath can fill the
   sails of a ship; but in God there is a cornucopia, an infinite fulness;
   he has enough to fill the angels, therefore enough to fill us. The
   heart is a triangle, which only the Trinity can fill.

   God is bonum sanctificans, a sanctifying good. He sanctifies all our
   comforts and turn them into blessings. Health is blessed, estate is
   blessed. He gives with the venison a blessing. I will abundantly bless
   her provision.' Psa 132: 15. He gives us the life we have, tanquam
   arrhabo, as an earnest of more. He gives the little meal in the barrel
   as an earnest of the royal feast in paradise. He sanctifies all our
   crosses. They shall not be destructive punishments, but medicines; they
   shall corrode and eat out the venom of sin; they shall polish and
   refine our grace. The more the diamond is cut, the more it sparkles.
   When God stretches the strings of his viol, it is to make the music
   better.

   God is bonum selectum, a choice good. All things, sub sole, are but
   bona scabelli, as Augustine says, the blessings of the footstool, but
   to have God himself to be ours, is the blessing of the throne. Abraham
   gave gifts to the sons of the concubines, but he settled the
   inheritance upon Isaac. Abraham gave all that he had to Isaac.' Gen 25:
   5. God may send away the men of the world with gifts, a little gold and
   silver; but in giving us himself, he gives us the very essence, his
   grace, his love, his kingdom: here is the crowning blessing.

   God is bonum summum, the chief good. In the chief good there must be
   delectability; it must have something that is delicious and sweet: and
   where can we suck those pure essential comforts, which ravish us with
   delight, but in God? In Deo quadam dulcedine delectatur anima, immo
   rapitur [In God's character there is a certain sweetness which
   fascinates or rather enraptures the soul]. At thy right hand there are
   pleasures.' Psa 16: 11: In the chief good there must be transcendence,
   it must have a surpassing excellence. Thus God is infinitely better
   than all other things. It is below the Deity to compare other things
   with it. Who would weigh a feather against a mountain of gold? God is
   fons et origo, the spring of all entities, and the cause is more noble
   than the effect. It is God that bespangles the creation, that puts
   light into the sun, that fills the veins of the earth with silver.
   Creatures do but maintain life, God gives life. He infinitely outshines
   all sublunary glory. He is better than the soul, than angels, and than
   heaven. In the chief good, there must be not only fulness, but variety.
   Where variety is wanting we are apt to nauseate. To feed only on honey
   would breed loathing; but in God is all variety of fulness. Col 1: 19.
   He is a universal good, commensurate to all our wants. He is bonum in
   quo omnia bona [the good in which is every good], a son, a portion, a
   horn of salvation. He is called the God of all comfort.' 2 Cor 1: 3.
   There is a complication of all beauties and delights in him. Health has
   not the comfort of beauty, nor beauty of riches, nor riches of wisdom;
   but God is the God of all comfort. In the chief good there must be
   eternity. God is a treasure that can neither be drawn low, nor drawn
   dry. Though the angels are continually spending what is his, he can
   never be spent; he abides for ever. Eternity is a flower of his crown.
   Now, if God be our God, there is enough to let full contentment into
   our souls. What need we of torchlight, if we have the sun? What if God
   deny the flower, if he has given us the jewel? How should a Christian's
   heart rest on this rock! If we say God is our God, and we are not
   content, we have cause to question our interest in him.

   (3) If we can clear up this covenant-union, that God is our God, let it
   cheer and revive us in all conditions. To be content with God is not
   enough, but to be cheerful. What greater cordial can you have than
   union with Deity? When Jesus Christ was ready to ascend, he could not
   leave a richer consolation with his disciples than this, I ascend to my
   God and to your God.' John 20: 17. Who should rejoice, if not they who
   have an infinite, all-sufficient, eternal God to be their portion, who
   are as rich as heaven can make them? What though I want health? I have
   God who is the health of my countenance, and my God. Psa 42: 11. What
   though I am low in the world? If I have not the earth, I have him that
   made it. The philosopher comforted himself by saying, Though I have no
   music or vine-trees, yet here are the household gods with me;' so,
   though we have not the vine or fig-tree, yet we have God with us. I
   cannot be poor, says Bernard, as long as God is rich; for his riches
   are mine. O let the saints rejoice in this covenant-union! To say God
   is ours, is more than to say heaven is ours, for heaven would not be
   heaven without him. All the stars cannot make day without the sun; all
   the angels, those morning stars, cannot make heaven without Christ the
   Sun of Righteousness. And as to have God for our God, is matter of
   rejoicing in life, so especially it will be at death. Let a Christian
   think thus, I am going to my God. A child is glad when he is going home
   to his father. It was Christ's comfort when he was leaving the world, I
   ascend to my God.' John 20: 17. And this is a believer's deathbed
   cordial, I am going to my God; I shall change my place, but not my
   kindred; I go to my God and my Father.'

   (4) If God be our God, let us break forth into praise. Thou art my God,
   and I will praise thee.' Psa 118: 28. Oh, infinite, astonishing mercy,
   that God should take dust and ashes into so near a bond of love as to
   be our God! As Micah said, What have I more?' Judges 18: 24. So, what
   has God more? What richer jewel has he to bestow upon us than himself?
   What has he more? That God should put off most of the world with riches
   and honour, that he should pass over himself to us by a deed of gift,
   to be our God, and by virtue of this settle a kingdom upon us! O let us
   praise him with the best instrument, the heart; and let this instrument
   be screwed up to the highest pitch. Let us praise him with our whole
   heart. See how David rises by degrees. Be glad in the Lord, and
   rejoice, and shout for joy.' Psa 32: 11. Be glad, there is
   thankfulness; rejoice, there is cheerfulness; shout, there is triumph.
   Praise is called incense, because it is a sweet sacrifice. Let the
   saints be choristers in God's praises. The deepest springs yield the
   sweetest water; the more deeply sensible we are of God's covenant-love
   to us, the sweeter praises we should yield. We should begin here to
   eternise God's name, and do that work on earth which we shall be always
   doing in heaven. While I live will I praise the Lord.' Psa 146: 2.

   (5) Let us carry ourselves as those who have God to be our God; that
   is, walk so that others may see there is something of God in us. Live
   homily. What have we to do with sin, which if it does not break, will
   weaken our interest? What have I to do any more with idols?' Hos 14: 8.
   So would a Christian say, God is my God; what have I to do any more
   with sin, with lust, pride, malice! Bid me commit sin! As well bid me
   drink poison. Shall I forfeit my interest in God? Let me rather die
   than willingly offend him who is the crown of my joy, the God of my
   salvation.'

   II. Which have brought thee out of the land of Egypt. Egypt and the
   house of bondage are the same; only they are represented to us under
   different expressions. The first expression is, Which have brought thee
   out of the land of Egypt.'

   Why does the Lord mention the deliverance of Israel out of Egypt?

   (1) Because of the strangeness of the deliverance. God delivered his
   people Israel by strange signs and wonders, by sending plague after
   plague upon Pharaoh, blasting the fruits of the earth, and killing all
   the first-born in Egypt. Exod 12: 29. When Israel marched out of Egypt,
   God made the waters of the sea to part, and become a wall to his
   people, while they went on dry ground; and he made the same sea a
   causeway to Israel, and a grave to Pharaoh and his chariots. Well might
   the Lord make mention of this strange deliverance. He wrought miracle
   upon miracle for the deliverance of that people.

   (2) God mentions Israel's deliverance out of Egypt because of the
   greatness of the deliverance. He delivered Israel from the pollutions
   of Egypt. Egypt was a bad air to live in, it was infected with
   idolatry; the Egyptians were gross idolaters; they were guilty of that
   which the apostle speaks of in Rom 1: 23. They changed the glory of the
   uncorruptible God into an image made like to corruptible man, and to
   birds, and four-footed beasts, and creeping things.' The Egyptians,
   instead of the true God, worshipped corruptible man; they deified their
   king Apis, forbidding all, under pain of death, to say that he was a
   man. They worshipped birds, as the hawk. They worshipped beasts, as the
   ox. They made the image of a beast to be their god. They worshipped
   creeping things, as the crocodile, and the Indian mouse. God mentions
   it therefore as a signal favour to Israel, that he brought them out of
   such an idolatrous country. I brought thee out of the land of Egypt.'

   The thing I would note is, that it is no small blessing to be delivered
   from places of idolatry. God speaks of it no less than ten times in the
   Old Testament, I brought you out of the land of Egypt;' an idolatrous
   place. Had there been no iron furnace in Egypt, yet so many altars
   being there, and false gods, it was a great privilege to Israel to be
   delivered out of Egypt. Joshua reckons it among the chief and most
   memorable mercies of God to Abraham, that he brought him out of Ur of
   the Chaldees, where Abraham's ancestors served strange gods. Josh 24:
   2, 3. It is well for the plant that is set in a bad soil, to be
   transplanted to a better, where it may grow and flourish; so it is a
   mercy when any who are planted among idolaters, are removed and
   transplanted into Zion, where the silver drops of God's word make them
   grow in holiness.

   Wherein does it appear to be so great a blessing to be delivered from
   places of idolatry?

   (1) It is a great mercy, because our nature is prone to idolatry.
   Israel began to be defiled with the idols of Egypt. Ezek 22: 3. Dry
   wood is not more prone to take fire than our nature is to idolatry. The
   Jews made cakes to the queen of heaven, that is, to the moon. Jer 7:
   15.

   Why is it that we are prone to idolatry?

   Because we are led much by visible objects, and love to have our senses
   pleased. Men naturally fancy a god that they may see; though it be such
   a god that cannot see them, yet they would see it. The true God is
   invisible; which makes the idolater worship something that he can see.

   (2) It is a mercy to be delivered from idolatrous places, because of
   the greatness of the sin of idolatry, which is giving that glory to an
   image which is due to God. All divine worship God appropriates to
   himself; it is a flower of his crown. The fat of the sacrifice is
   claimed by him. Lev 3: 3. Divine worship is the fat of the sacrifice,
   which he reserves for himself. The idolater devotes this worship to an
   idol, which the Lord will by no means endure. My glory will I not give
   to another, neither my praise to graven images.' Isa 42: 8. Idolatry is
   spiritual adultery. With their idols have they committed adultery.'
   Ezek 23: 37. To worship any other than God, is to break wedlock, and
   makes the Lord disclaim his interest in a people. Plead with your
   mother, plead: for she is not my wife.' Hos 2: 2. Thy people have
   corrupted themselves;' no more my people, but thy people. Exod 32: 7.
   God calls idolatry, blasphemy. In this your fathers have blasphemed
   me.' Idolatry is devil worship. Ezek 20: 27, 31. They sacrificed unto
   devils, not to God; to new gods.' Deut 32: 17. These new gods were old
   devils. And they shall no more offer their sacrifices unto devils.' Lev
   17: 7. The Hebrew word La-sairim, is the hairy ones, because the devils
   were hairy, and appeared in the forms of satyrs and goats. How dreadful
   a sin is idolatry; and what a signal mercy is it to be snatched out of
   an idolatrous place, as Lot was snatched by the angels out of Sodom!

   (3) It is a mercy to be delivered out of idolatrous places, because
   idolatry is such a silly and irrational religion. I may say, as Jer 8:
   9: What wisdom is in them?' Is it not folly to refuse the best, and
   choose the worst? The trees in the field of Jotham's parable, despised
   the vine-tree, which cheers both God and man, and the olive which is
   full of fatness, and the fig-tree which is full of sweetness, and chose
   the bramble to reign over them -- which was a foolish choice. Judg 9.
   So it is for us to refuse the living God, who has power to save us, and
   to make choice of an idol, that has eyes and sees not, feet but walks
   not. Psa 115: 6, 7. What a prodigy of madness is this? Therefore to be
   delivered from committing such folly is a mercy.

   (4) It is a mercy to be delivered from idolatrous places, because of
   the sad judgements inflicted upon idolaters. This is a sin which
   enrages God, and makes the fury come up in his face. Ezek 38: 18.
   Search through the whole book of God, and you shall find no sin he has
   followed with more plagues than idolatry. Their sorrows shall be
   multiplied that hasten after another god.' Psa 16: 4. They moved him to
   jealousy with their graven images.' Psa 78: 58. When God heard this he
   was wrath, and greatly abhorred Israel; so that he forsook the
   tabernacle of Shiloh.' Verses 59, 60. Shiloh was a city belonging to
   the tribe of Ephraim, where God set his name. Jer 7: 12. But, for their
   idolatry, God forsook the place, gave his people up to the sword,
   caused his priests to be slain, and his ark to be carried away captive,
   never more to be returned. How severe was God against Israel for
   worshipping the golden calf! Exod 32: 27. The Jews say, that in every
   misery that befalls them, there is uncia aurei vituli, an ounce of the
   golden calf in it.' Come out of her, my people, that ye be not
   partakers of her sins, and that ye receive not of her plagues.' Rev.
   18: 4. Idolatry, lived in, cuts men off from heaven. 1 Cor 6: 9. So
   then it is no small mercy to be delivered out of idolatrous places.

   Use one. See the goodness of God to our nation, in bringing us out of
   mystic Egypt, delivering us from popery, which is Romish idolatry, and
   causing the light of his truth to break forth gloriously among us. In
   former times, and more lately in the Marian days, England was
   overspread with idolatry. It worshipped God after a false manner; and
   it is idolatry, not only to worship a false god, but the true God in a
   false manner. Such was our case formerly; we had purgatory,
   indulgences, the idolatrous mass, the Scriptures locked up in an
   unknown tongue, invocation of saints and angels, and image-worship.
   Images are teachers of lies. Hab 2: 18. Wherein do they teach lies?
   They represent God, who cannot be seen, in a bodily shape. Ye saw no
   similitude, only ye heard a voice.' Deut 4: 12. Quod invisibile est,
   pingi non potest. Ambrose. God cannot be pictured by any finger; not
   the soul even, being a spirit, much less God. To whom then will ye
   liken God?' Isa 40: 18. The Papists say they worship God by the image;
   which is a great absurdity, for if it be absurd to fall down to the
   picture of a king when the king himself is present, much more to bow
   down to the image of God when God himself is present. Jer 23: 24. What
   is the popish religion but a bundle of ridiculous ceremonies? Their
   wax, flowers, pyres, agnus Dei, cream and oil, beads, crucifixes; what
   are these but Satan's policy, to dress up a carnal worship, fitted to
   carnal minds? Oh! what cause have we to bless God for delivering us
   from popery! It was a mercy to be delivered from the Spanish invasion,
   and the powder treason; but it is a far greater to be delivered from
   the popish religion, which would have made God give us a bill of
   divorce.

   Use two. If it be a great blessing to be delivered from the Egypt of
   popish idolatry, it shows the sin and folly of those who, being brought
   out of Egypt, are willing to return to it again. The apostle says, Flee
   from idolatry.' 1 Cor 10: 14. But these rather flee to idolatry; and
   are herein like the people of Israel, who, notwithstanding all the
   idolatry and tyranny of Egypt, longed to go back to Egypt. Let us make
   a captain and let us return into Egypt.' Numb 14: 4. But how shall they
   go back into Egypt? How shall they have food in the wilderness? Will
   God rain down man any more upon such rebels? How will they get over the
   Red Sea? Will God divide the water again by miracle, for such as leave
   his service, and go into idolatrous Egypt? Yet they say, Let us make a
   captain.' And are there not such spirits among us, who say, Let us make
   a captain and go back to the Romish Egypt again'? If we do, what shall
   we get by it? I am afraid the leeks and onions of Egypt will make us
   sick. Do we ever suppose that, if we drink in the cup of fornication,
   we shall drink in the cup of salvation? Oh! that any should so forfeit
   their reason, as to enslave themselves to the see of Rome; that they
   should be willing to hold a candle to a mass-priest, and bow down to a
   strange God! Let us not say we will make a captain, but rather say as
   Ephraim, What have I to do any more with idols?' Hos 14: 8.

   Use three. If it be a mercy to be brought out of Egypt, it is not
   desirable or safe to plant one's self in an idolatrous place, where it
   may be a capital crime to be seen with a Bible in our hands. Some, for
   secular gain, thrust themselves among idolaters, and think there is no
   danger to live where Satan's seat is. They pray God would not lead them
   into temptation, but led themselves. They are in great danger of being
   polluted. It is hard to be as the fish, which keeps fresh in salt
   waters. A man cannot dwell among blackamoors, but he will be
   discoloured. You will sooner be corrupted by idolaters, than they will
   be converted by you. Joseph got no good by living in an idolatrous
   court; he did not teach Pharaoh to pray, but Pharaoh taught him to
   swear. They were mingled among the heathen, and served their idols.'
   Psalm 106: 35, 36. I fear it has been the undoing of many; that they
   have seated themselves amongst idolaters, for advancing their trade,
   and at last have not only traded with them in their commodities, but in
   their religion.

   Use four. It is a mercy to be brought out of the land of Egypt, a
   defiled place, and where sin reigns. It reproaches such parents as show
   little love for the souls of their children, whether it be in putting
   them out to service, or matching them. In putting them out to service,
   their care is chiefly for their bodies, that they may be provided for,
   and they care not what becomes of their souls. Their souls are in
   Egypt, in houses where there is drinking, swearing, Sabbath-breaking,
   and where God's name is every day dishonoured. In matching their
   children, they look only at money. Be ye not unequally yoked.' 2 Cor 6:
   14. If their children be equally yoked for estate, they care not
   whether they be unequally yoked for religion. Let such parents think
   how precious the soul of their child is; that it is immortal, and
   capable of communion with God and angels. Will you let a soul be lost
   by placing it in a bad family? If you had a horse you loved, you would
   not put him in a stable with other horses that were sick and diseased;
   and do you not love your child better than your horse? God has
   intrusted you with the souls of your children; you have a charge of
   souls. God says, as 1 Kings 20: 39: Keep this man: if he be missing,
   then shall thy life be for his life.' So says God, if the soul of thy
   child miscarry by thy negligence, his blood will I require at thy hand.
   Think of this, all ye parents; take heed of placing your children in
   Egypt, in a wicked family; do not put them in the devil's mouth. Seek
   for them a sober, religious family, such as Joshua's. As for me and my
   house, we will serve the Lord.' Josh 14: 15. Such a family as
   Cranmer's, which was palaestra pietatis, a nursery of piety, a Bethel,
   of which it may be said, The church which is in his house.' Col. 4: 15.

   Use five. Let us pray that God would keep our English nation from the
   defilements of Egypt, that it may not be again overspread with
   superstition and idolatry. Oh, sad religion! not only to have our
   estates, our bodies enslaved, but our consciences. Pray that the true
   Protestant religion may still nourish among us, that the sun of the
   gospel may still shine in our horizon. The gospel lifts a people up to
   heaven, it is columna et corona regni, the crown and glory of the
   kingdom'; if this be removed, Ichabod, the glory is departed. The top
   of the beech tree being cut off, the whole body of the tree withers
   apace; so the gospel is the top of all our blessings; if this top be
   cut, the whole body politic will soon wither. O pray that the Lord will
   continue the visible tokens of his presence among us, his ordinances,
   that England may be called, Jehovah-shammah, The Lord is there.' Ezek
   48: 35. Pray that righteousness and peace may kiss each other, that so
   glory may dwell in our land.

   III. Out of the house of bondage. Egypt and the house of bondage are
   the same, only they are expressed under a different notion. By Egypt is
   meant a place of idolatry and superstition; by the house of bondage is
   meant a place of affliction. Israel, while in Egypt, were under great
   tyranny; they had cruel task-masters set over them, who put them to
   hard labour, and set them to make bricks, yet allowed them no straw;
   therefore, Egypt is called, in Deut 4: 20, the iron furnace, and here
   the house of bondage. From this expression, I brought thee out of the
   house of bondage,' two things are to be noted; God's children may
   sometimes be under sore afflictions. In the house of bondage.' But God
   will, in due time, bring them out of their afflicted state. I brought
   thee out of the house of bondage.'

   God's children may sometimes be under sore afflictions, in domo
   servitutis, in the house of bondage. God's people have no writ of ease
   granted them, no charter of exemption from trouble in this life. While
   the wicked are kept in sugar, the godly are often kept in brine. And,
   indeed, how could God's power be seen in bringing them out of trouble,
   if he did not sometimes bring them into it? or how should God wipe away
   the tears from their eyes in heaven, if on earth they shed none?
   Doubtless, God sees there is need that his children should be sometimes
   in the house of bondage. If need be, ye are in heaviness.' 1 Peter 1:
   6. The body sometimes needs a bitter portion more than a sweet one.

   Why does God let his people be in the house of bondage or in an
   afflicted state?

   He does it, (1) For probation or trial. Who led thee through that
   terrible wilderness, that he might humble thee and prove thee.' Deut 8:
   15, 16. Affliction is the touch-stone of sincerity. Thou O God, hast
   proved us; thou hast tried us as silver; thou laidst affliction upon
   our loins.' Psa 66: 10, 11. Hypocrites may embrace the true religion in
   prosperity, and court this queen while she has a jewel hung at her ear;
   but he is a good Christian who will keep close to God in a time of
   suffering. All this is come upon us, yet have we not forgotten thee.'
   Psa 44: 17. To love God in heaven, is no wonder; but to love him when
   he chastises us, discovers sincerity. (2) For purgation; to purge our
   corruption. Ardet palea, purgatur aurum. And this is all the fruit, to
   take away his sin.' Isa 28: 9. The eye, though a tender part, yet when
   sore, we put sharp powders and waters into it to eat out the pearl; so
   though the people of God are dear to him, yet, when corruption begins
   to grow in them, he will apply the sharp powder of affliction, to eat
   out the pearl in the eye. Affliction is God's flail to thresh off our
   husks; it is a means God uses to purge out sloth, luxury, pride, and
   love of the world. God's furnace is in Zion. Isa 31: 5. This is not to
   consume, but to refine. What if we have more affliction, if by this
   means we have less sin!

   (3) For augmentation; to increase the graces of the Spirit. Grace
   thrives most in the iron furnace. Sharp frosts nourish the corn; so
   sharp afflictions nourish grace. Grace in the saints is often as fire
   hid in the embers, affliction is the bellows to blow it up into a
   flame. The Lord makes the house of bondage a friend to grace. Then
   faith and patience act their part. The darkness of the night cannot
   hinder the brightness of a star; so, the more the diamond is cut the
   more it sparkles; and the more God afflicts us, the more our graces
   cast a sparkling lustre.

   (4) For preparation; to fit and prepare the saints for glory. 2 Cor 4:
   17. The stones which are cut out for a building, are first hewn and
   squared. The godly are called living stones.' 1 Pet 2: 5. God first
   hews and polishes them by affliction, that they may be fit for the
   heavenly building. The house of bondage prepares for the house not made
   with hands. 2 Cor 5: 1: The vessels of mercy are seasoned with
   affliction, and then the wine of glory is poured in.

   How do the afflictions of the godly differ from the afflictions of the
   wicked?

   (1) They are but castigations, but those on the wicked are punishments.
   The one come from a father, the other from a judge.

   (2) Afflictions on the godly are fruits of covenant-mercy. 2 Sam 7: 17.
   Afflictions on the wicked are effects of God's wrath. He has much wrath
   with his sickness.' Eccl 5: 17. Afflictions on the wicked are the
   pledge and earnest of hell; they are like the pinioning of a
   malefactor, which presages his execution.

   (3) Afflictions on the godly make them better, but afflictions on the
   wicked make them worse. The godly pray more; Psa 130: 1: The wicked
   blaspheme more. Men were scorched with great heat, and blasphemed the
   name of God.' Rev 16: 9. Afflictions on the wicked make them more
   impenitent; every plague upon Egypt increased the plague of hardness in
   Pharaoh's heart. To what a prodigy of wickedness do some persons come
   after great sickness. Affliction on the godly is like bruising spices,
   which are most sweet and fragrant: affliction on the wicked is like
   pounding weeds with a pestle, which makes them more unsavoury.

   Use one. (1) We are not to wonder to see Israel in the house of
   bondage. 1 Pet 4: 12. The holiness of the saints will not excuse them
   from sufferings. Christ was the holy one of God, yet he was in the iron
   furnace. His spouse is a lily among thorns. Cant 2: 2. Though his sheep
   have the ear-mark of election upon them, yet they may have their wool
   fleeced off. The godly have some good in them, therefore the devil
   afflicts them; and some evil in them, therefore God afflicts them.
   While there are two seeds in the world, expect to be under the black
   rod. The gospel tells us of reigning, but first of suffering. 2 Tim 2:
   12.

   (2) Affliction is not always the sign of God's anger. Israel, the apple
   of God's eye, a peculiar treasure to him above all people, were in the
   house of bondage. Exod 19: 5. We are apt to judge and censure those who
   are in an afflicted state. When the barbarians saw the viper on Paul's
   hand, they said, No doubt this man is a murderer.' Acts 28: 4. So, when
   we see the viper of affliction fasten upon the godly, we are apt to
   censure them, and say, these are greater sinners than others, and God
   hates them; but this rash censuring is for want of wisdom. Were not
   Israel in the house of bondage? Was not Jeremiah in the dungeon, and
   Paul a night and day in the deep? God's afflicting is so far from
   evidencing hatred, that his not afflicting does. I will not punish your
   daughters when they commit whoredom.' Hos 4: 14. Deus maxime irascitur
   cum non irascitur. Bernard. God punishes most when he does not punish;
   his hand is heaviest when it seems to be lightest. The judge will not
   burn him in the hand whom he intends to execute.

   (3) If God's own Israel may be in the house of bondage, then
   afflictions do not of themselves demonstrate a man miserable. Indeed,
   sin unrepented of, makes one miserable; but the cross does not. If God
   has a design in afflicting his children to make them happy, they are
   not miserable; but God's afflicting them is to make them happy,
   therefore they are not miserable. Happy is the man whom God
   correcteth.' Job 5: 17. The world counts them happy who can keep out of
   affliction; but the Scripture calls them happy who are afflicted.

   How are they happy?

   Because they are more holy. Heb 12: 10. Because they are more in God's
   favour. Prov 3: 12. The goldsmith loves his gold when in the furnace.
   Because they have more of God's sweet presence. Psa 91: 15. They cannot
   be unhappy who have God's powerful presence in supporting, and his
   gracious presence in sanctifying, their affliction. Because the more
   affliction they have, the more degrees of glory they shall have; the
   lower they have been in the iron furnace, the higher they shall sit
   upon to throne of glory; the heavier their crosses, the heavier shall
   be their crown. So then, if afflictions make a Christian happy, they
   cannot call him miserable.

   (4) See the merciful providence of God to his children. Though they may
   be in the house of bondage, and smart by affliction, yet they shall not
   be hurt by affliction. What hurt does the fan to the corn? it only
   separates the chaff from it; or the lance to the body? it only lets out
   the abscess. The house of bondage does that which sometimes ordinances
   will not; it humbles and reforms. If they be holden in cords of
   affliction, he openeth their ear to discipline, and commandeth that
   they return from iniquity.' Job 36: 8, 10. Oh! what a merciful
   providence is it that, though God bruise his people, yet, while he is
   bruising them, he is doing them good! It is as if one should throw a
   bag of money at another, which bruises him a little, but yet it
   enriches him. Affliction enriches the soul and yields the sweet fruits
   of righteousness. Heb. 12: 11.

   (5) If Israel be in the house of bondage, if the Lord deals so with his
   own children, then how severely will he deal with the wicked! If he be
   so severe with those he loves, how severe will he be with those he
   hates! If they do these things in a green tree, what shall be done in
   the dry?' Luke 13: 31. If they that pray and mourn for sin be so
   severely dealt with, what will become of those that swear and break the
   Sabbath, and are unclean! If Israel be in the iron furnace, the wicked
   shall lie in the fiery furnace of hell. It should be the saddest news
   to wicked men, to hear that the people of God are afflicted. Let them
   think how dreadful the case of sinners will be. Judgement must begin at
   the house of God; and if it first begin at us, what shall the end be of
   them that obey not the gospel?' 1 Pet 4: 17. If God thresh his wheat,
   he will burn the chaff. If the godly suffer castigation, the wicked
   shall suffer condemnation. If he mingle his people's cup with wormwood
   he will mingle the wicked's cup with fire and brimstone.

   Use two. If Israel be in the house of bondage,

   (1) Do not entertain too hard thoughts of affliction. Christians are
   apt to look upon the cross and the iron furnace as frightful things,
   and do what they can to shun them. Nay, sometimes, to avoid affliction,
   they run themselves into sin. But do not think too hardly of
   affliction; do not look upon it as through the multiplying-glass of
   fear. The house of bondage is not hell. Consider that affliction comes
   from a wise God, who prescribes whatever befalls us. Persecutions are
   like apothecaries: they give us the physic which God the physician
   prescribes. Affliction has its light side, as well as its dark one. God
   can sweeten our afflictions, and candy our wormwood. As our sufferings
   abound, so does also our consolation. 2 Cor 1: 5. Argerius dated his
   letters from the pleasant garden of the Leonine prison. God sometimes
   so revives his children in trouble, that they had rather bear their
   afflictions than want their comforts. Why then should Christians
   entertain such hard thoughts of afflictions? Do not look at its grim
   face, but at the message it brings, which is to enrich us with both
   grace and comfort.

   (2) If Israel be sometimes in the house of bondage, in an afflicted
   state, think beforehand of affliction. Say not as Job (29: 18), I shall
   die in my nest.' In the house of mirth think of the house of bondage.
   You that are now Naomi, may be Mara. Ruth 1:20. How quickly may the
   scene turn, and the hyperbole of joy end in a catastrophe! All outward
   things are given to change. The forethoughts of affliction would make
   us sober and moderate in the use of lawful delight; it would cure a
   surfeit. Christ at a feast mentions his burial; a good antidote against
   a surfeit. The forethought of affliction would make us prepare for it;
   it would take us off the world; it would put us upon search of our
   evidences.

   We should see what oil we have in our lamps, what grace we can find,
   that we may be able to stand in the evil day. That soldier is imprudent
   who has his sword to whet when he is just going to fight. He who
   forecasts sufferings, will have the shield of faith, and the sword of
   the Spirit ready, that he may not be surprised.

   (3) If afflictions come, let us labour to conduct ourselves wisely as
   Christians, that we may adorn our sufferings: that is, let us endure
   with patience. Take, my brethren, the prophets for an example of
   suffering affliction and patience.' James 5: 10. Satan labours to take
   advantage of us in affliction, by making us either faint or murmur; he
   blows the coals of passion and discontent, and then warms himself at
   the fire. Patience adorns sufferings. A Christian should say as Jesus
   Christ did, Lord, not my will but thy will be done.' It is a sign the
   affliction is sanctified when the heart is brought to a sweet
   submissive frame. God will then remove the affliction: he will take us
   out of the iron furnace.

   We may consider these words, Which brought thee out of the house of
   bondage,' either, [1] Literally; or [2] Spiritually and Mystically. In
   the letter, I brought thee out of the house of bondage;' that is, I
   delivered you out of the misery and servitude you sustained in Egypt,
   where you were in the iron furnace. Spiritually and mystically, by
   which I brought thee out of the house of bondage,' is a type of our
   deliverance by Christ from sin and hell.

   [1] Literally, I brought thee out of the house of bondage,' out of
   great misery and slavery in the iron furnace. The thing I note here is
   that, though God brings his people sometimes into trouble, yet he will
   bring them out again. Israel was in the house of bondage, but at last
   was brought out.

   We shall endeavour to show: 1. That God does deliver out of trouble. 2.
   In what manner. 3. At what seasons. 4. Why he delivers. 5. How the
   deliverances of the godly and wicked out of trouble differ.

   God does deliver his children out of troubles. Our fathers trusted in
   thee; they trusted, and thou didst deliver them.' Psa 22: 4. And I was
   delivered out of the mouth of the lion,' namely, from Nero. 2 Tim 4:
   17. Thou laidst affliction upon our loins, but thou broughtest us out
   into a wealthy place.' Psa 66: 11, 12. Weeping may endure for a night,
   but joy comes in the morning.' Psa 30: 5. God brought Daniel out of the
   lions' den, Zion out of Babylon. In his due time he gives an issue out
   of trouble. Psa 68: 20. The tree which in the winter seems dead,
   revives in the spring. Post nubila Phoebus [The sun emerges after the
   storms]. Affliction may leap on us as the viper did on Paul, but at
   last it shall be shaken off. It is called a cup of affliction. Isa 51:
   17. The wicked drink a sea of wrath, the godly drink only a cup of
   affliction, and God will say shortly, Let this cup pass away.' God will
   give his people a gaol-delivery.

   In what manner does God deliver his people out of trouble?

   He does it like a God, in wisdom. (1) He does it sometimes suddenly. As
   the angel was caused to fly swiftly (Dan 9: 21), so God sometimes makes
   a deliverance fly swiftly, and on a sudden turns the shadow of death
   into the light of the morning. As he gives us mercies above what we can
   think (Eph 3: 20), so sometimes before we can think of them. When the
   Lord turned again the captivity of Zion, we were like them that dream;'
   it came suddenly upon us as a dream. Psa 126: 1. Joseph could not have
   thought of such a sudden alteration, to be the same day freed out of
   prison, and made the chief ruler in the kingdom. Mercy sometimes does
   not stick long in the birth, but comes forth on a sudden. (2) God
   sometimes delivers his people strangely. Thus the whale which swallowed
   up Jonah was the means of bringing him safe to land. He sometimes
   delivers his people in the very way which they think will destroy. In
   bringing Israel out of Egypt, he stirred up the heart of the Egyptians
   to hate them (Psa 105: 25), and that was the means of their
   deliverance. He brought Paul to shore by a contrary wind, and upon the
   broken pieces of the ship. Acts 27: 44.

   When are the times and seasons that God usually delivers his people out
   of the bondage of affliction?

   (1) When they are in the greatest extremity. Though Jonah was in the
   belly of hell, he says, Thou hast brought up my life from corruption.'
   Jonah 2: 6. When there is but a hair's breadth between the godly and
   death, God ushers in deliverance. When the ship was almost covered with
   waves Christ awoke and rebuked the wind. When Isaac was upon the altar,
   and the knife about to be put to his throat, the angel comes and says,
   Lay not thy hand upon the child.' When Peter began to sink, Christ took
   him by the hand. Cum duplicantur lateres, venit Moses: when the tale of
   brick was doubled, then Moses the temporal saviour comes. When the
   people of God are in the greatest danger the morning star of
   deliverance appears. When the patient is ready to faint the cordial is
   given.

   (2) The second season is, when affliction has done its work upon them;
   when it has effected that which God sent it for. As, [1] When it has
   humbled them. Remembering my affliction, the wormwood and gall, my soul
   is humbled in me.' Lam 3: 19, 20. Then God's corrosive has eaten out
   the proud flesh. [2] When it has tamed their impatience. Before, they
   were proud and impatient, like froward children that struggle with
   their parents; but when their cursed hearts are tamed, they say, I will
   bear the indignation of the Lord, because I have sinned against him'
   (Micah 7: 9); and as Eli, It is the Lord; let him do what seemeth him
   good:' Let him hedge me with thorns, if he will plant me with grace.' 1
   Sam 3: 18.

   (3) When they are partakers of more holiness, and are more full of
   heavenly-mindedness. Heb 12: 10. When the sharp frost of affliction has
   brought forth the spring-flowers of grace, the cross is sanctified, and
   God will bring them out of the house of bondage. Luctus in laetitiam
   vertetur, cineres in corollas [Sorrow will turn to joy, ashes to
   garlands]. When the metal is refined it is taken out of the furnace.
   When affliction has healed us, God takes off the smarting plaister.

   Why does God bring his people out of the house of bondage?

   Hereby he makes way for his own glory. His glory is dearer to him than
   anything besides; it is a crown jewel. By raising his people he raises
   the trophies of his own honour; he glorifies his own attributes; his
   power, truth, and goodness are triumphant.

   (1) His power. If God did not sometimes bring his people into trouble,
   how could his power be seen in bringing them out? He brought Israel out
   of the house of bondage, with miracle upon miracle; he saved them with
   an outstretched arm. What ailed thee, O thou sea, that thou fleddest?'
   &c. Psa 114: 5. Of Israel's march out of Egypt it is said, when the sea
   fled, and the waters were parted each from other. Here was the power of
   God set forth. Is there any thing too hard for me?' Jer 32: 27. God
   loves to help when things seem past hope. He creates deliverance. Psa
   124: 8. He brought Isaac out of a dead womb, and the Messiah out of a
   virgin's womb. oh! how does his power shine forth when he overcomes
   seeming impossibilities, and works a cure when things look desperate!

   (2) His truth. God has made promises to his people, when they are under
   great pressures, to deliver them; and his truth is engaged in his
   promise. Call upon me in the day of trouble, I will deliver thee.' Psa
   50: 15. He shall deliver thee in six troubles, yea in seven.' Job 5:
   19. How is the Scripture bespangled with these promises as the
   firmament is with stars! Either God will deliver them from death, or by
   death; he will make a way of escape. 1 Cor 10: 13. When promises are
   verified, God's truth is magnified.

   (3) His goodness. God is full of compassion to such as are in misery.
   The Hebrew word, Racham, for mercy, signifies bowels. God has sounding
   of bowels.' Isa 63: 15. And this sympathy stirs up God to deliver. In
   his love and pity he redeemed them.' Isa 63: 9. This makes way for the
   triumph of his goodness. He is tender-hearted, he will not over
   afflict; he cuts asunder the bars of iron, he breaks the yoke of the
   oppressor. Thus all his attributes ride in triumph in saving his people
   out of trouble.

   How do the deliverance of the godly and tricked out of trouble differ?

   (1) The deliverances of the godly are preservations; of the wicked
   reservations. The Lord knows how to deliver the godly, and to reserve
   the unjust to be punished.' 2 Pet 2: 9. A sinner may be delivered from
   dangerous sickness, and out of prison; but all this is but a
   reservation for some greater evil.

   (2) God delivers the wicked, or rather spares them in anger.
   Deliverances to the wicked are not given as pledges of his love, but
   symptoms of displeasure; as quails were given to Israel in anger. But
   deliverances of the godly are in love. He delivered me because he
   delighted in me'. 2 Sam 22: 20. Thou hast in love to my soul delivered
   it from the pit of corruption;' or, as in the Hebrew, Chashiaqta
   Naphshi. Isa 38: 17. Thou hast loved me from the pit of corruption. A
   wicked man may say, Lord, thou hast delivered me out of the pit of
   corruption;' but a godly man may say, Lord, thou hast loved me out of
   the pit of corruption.' It is one thing to have God's power deliver us,
   and another thing to have his love deliver us. O,' said Hezekiah, Thou
   hast in love to my soul, delivered me from the pit of corruption.'

   How may it be known that a deliverance comes in love?

   (1) When it makes our heart boil over in love to God. I love the Lord
   because he has heard my voice.' Psa 116: 1. It is one thing to love our
   mercies, another thing to love the Lord. Deliverance is in love when it
   causes love.

   (2) Deliverance is in love when we have hearts to improve it for God's
   glory. The wicked, instead of improving their deliverance for God's
   glory, increase their corruption; they grow worse, as the metal when
   taken out of the fire grows harder; but our deliverance is in love when
   we improve it for God's glory. God raises us out of a low condition,
   and we lift him up in our praises, and honour him with our substance.
   Prov 3: 9. He recovers us from sickness, and we spend ourselves in his
   service. Mercy is not as the sun to the fire, to dull it and put it
   out, but as oil to the wheel, to make it move faster.

   (3) Deliverance comes in love when it makes us more exemplary in
   holiness; and our lives are walking Bibles. A thousand praises and
   doxologies do not honour God so much as the mortifying of one lust.
   Upon mount Zion there shall be deliverance and holiness,' Obadiah 17.
   When these two go together, deliverance and holiness; when, being made
   monuments of mercy, we are patterns of piety; then a deliverance comes
   in love, and we may say as Hezekiah, Thou hast in love to my soul
   delivered it from the pit of corruption.'

   Use one. If God brings his people out of bondage, let none despond in
   trouble. Say not I shall sink under this burden;' or as David, I shall
   one day perish by the hand of Saul.' God can make the text good,
   personally and nationally, to bring his people out of the house of
   bondage. When he sees a fit season, he will put forth his arm and save
   them; and he can do it with ease. Lord, it is nothing with thee to
   help.' 2 Chron 14: 11. He that can turn tides, can turn the times; he
   that raised Lazarus when he was dead, can raise thee when thou art
   sick. I looked, and there was none to help, therefore mine own arm
   brought salvation.' Isa 63: 5. Do not despond; believe in God's power:
   faith sets God to work to deliver us.

   Use two. Labour, if you are in trouble, to be fitted for deliverance.
   Many would have deliverance, but are not fitted for it.

   When are we fitted for deliverance?

   When, by our afflictions, we are conformed to Christ; when we have
   learned obedience. He learned obedience by the things which he
   suffered;' that is, he learned sweet submission to his Father's will.
   Heb 5: 8. Not my will, but thine, be done.' Luke 22: 42. When we have
   thus learned obedience by our sufferings, we are willing to do what God
   would have us do, and be what God would have us be. We are conformed to
   Christ, and are fitted for deliverance.

   Use three. If God has brought you at any time out of the house of
   bondage, out of great and eminent troubles, be much in praise.
   Deliverance calls for praise. Thou hast put off my sackcloth, and
   girded me with gladness; to the end that my glory may sing praise to
   thee.' Psa 30: 11, 12. My glory, that is, my tongue, which is the
   instrument of glorifying thee. The saints are temples of the Holy
   Ghost. 1 Cor 3: 16. Where should God's praises be sounded but in his
   temple? Beneficium postulat officium [Gratitude should follow a
   favour]. The deepest springs yield the sweetest water; and hearts
   deeply sensible of God's deliverances yield the sweetest praises. Moses
   tells Pharaoh, when he was going out of Egypt, We will go with our
   flocks and our herds.' Exod 10: 9. Why so? Because he might have
   sacrifices of thanksgiving ready to offer to God for their deliverance.
   To have a thankful heart for deliverance is a greater blessing than the
   deliverance itself. One of the lepers, when he saw that he was healed,
   turned back, and with a loud voice glorified God.' Luke 17: 15. The
   leper's thankful heart was a greater blessing than to be healed of his
   leprosy. Have any of you been brought out of the house of bondage --
   out of prison, sickness, or any death-threatening danger? Do not forget
   to be thankful. Be not graves, but temples. That you may be the more
   thankful, observe every emphasis and circumstance in your deliverance;
   such as to be brought out of trouble when you were in articulo mortis
   [at the brink of death], when there was but a hair's breadth between
   you and death; or, to be brought out of affliction, without sin, you
   did not purchase your deliverance by the ensnaring of your consciences;
   or, to be brought out of trouble upon the wings of prayer; or, that
   those who were the occasions of bringing you into trouble, should be
   the instruments of bringing you out. These circumstances, being well
   weighed, heighten a deliverance, and should heighten our thankfulness.
   The cutting of a stone may be of more value than the stone itself; and
   the circumstancing of a deliverance may be greater than the deliverance
   itself.

   But how shall we praise God in a right manner for deliverance?

   (1) Be holy persons. In the sacrifice of thanksgiving, whosoever did
   eat thereof with his uncleanness upon him, was to be cut off (Lev 7:
   20), to typify how unpleasing their praises and thank-offerings are who
   live in sin.

   (2) Praise God with humble hearts, acknowledge how unworthy you were of
   deliverance. God's mercies are not debts, but legacies; and that you
   should have them by legacy should make you humble. The elders fell upon
   their faces (an expression of humility) and worshipped God. Rev 11: 16.

   (3) Praise God for deliverances cordially. I will praise the Lord with
   my whole heart.' Psa 111: 1. In religion there is no music but in
   concert, when heart and tongue join.

   (4) Praise God for deliverances constantly. While I live will I praise
   the Lord.' Psa 146: 2. Some will be thankful while the memory of a
   deliverance is fresh, and then leave off. The Carthaginians used, at
   first, to send the tenth of their yearly revenue to Hercules; but by
   degrees they grew weary, and left off sending; but we must be constant
   in our Eucharistic sacrifice, or thank-offering. The motion of our
   praise must be like the motion of our pulse, which beats as long as
   life lasts. I will sing praises unto my God while I have any being.'
   Psa 146: 2.

   [2] THESE words are to be understood mystically and spiritually. By
   Israel's deliverance from the house of bondage, is typified their
   spiritual deliverance from sin, Satan, and hell.

   (1) From sin. The house of bondage was a type of Israel's deliverance
   from sin. Sin is the true bondage, it enslaves the soul. Nihil durius
   servitute. Cicero. Of all conditions, servitude is the worst.' I was
   held before conversion,' says Augustine, not with an iron chain, but
   with the obstinacy of mine own will.' Sin is the enslaver; it is called
   a law, because it has a binding power over a man (Rom 7: 23); it is
   said to reign, because it exercises a tyrannical power (Rom 6: 12); and
   men are said to be the servants of sin, because they are so enslaved by
   it. Rom 6: 17. Thus sin is the house of bondage. Israel was not so
   enslaved in the iron furnace as the sinner is by sin. They are worse
   slaves and vassals who are under the power of sin, than they are who
   are under the power of earthly tyrants.

   Other slaves have tyrants ruling over their bodies only; but the sinner
   has his soul tyrannised over. That princely thing, the soul, which
   sways the sceptre of reason, and was once crowned with perfect
   knowledge and holiness, now goes on foot; it is enslaved, and made a
   lackey to every base lust.

   Other slaves have some pity shown them: the tyrant gives them meat, and
   lets them have hours for their rest; but sin is a merciless tyrant, it
   will let men have no rest. Judas had no rest until he had betrayed
   Christ, and after that he had less rest than before. How does a man
   wear himself out in the service of sin, waste his body, break his
   sleep, distract his mind! A wicked man is every day doing sin's
   drudgery-work.

   Other slaves have servile work; but it is lawful. It is lawful to work
   in the galley, and tug at the oar; but all the laws and commands of sin
   are unlawful. Sin says to one man, defraud; to another, be unchaste; to
   another take revenge; to another, take a false oath. Thus all sin's
   commands are unlawful; we cannot obey sin's law, but by breaking God's
   law.

   Other slaves are forced against their will. Israel groaned under
   slavery (Exod 2: 23); but sinners are content to be under the command
   of sin; they are willing to be slaves; they love their chains; they
   will not take their freedom; they glory in their shame.' Phil 3: 19.
   They wear their sins, not as their fetters, but their ornaments; they
   rejoice in iniquity. Jer 11: 15.

   Other slaves are brought to correction, but sin's slaves are without
   repentance, and are brought to condemnation. Other slaves lie in the
   iron furnace: sin's slaves lie in the fiery furnace. What freedom of
   will has a sinner to his own confusion, when he can do nothing but what
   sin will have him? He is enslaved. Thus sinners are in the house of
   bondage; but God takes his elect out of the house of bondage, he beats
   off the chains and fetters of sin; he rescues them from their slavery;
   he makes them free, by bringing them into the glorious liberty of the
   children of God.' Rom 8: 21. The law of love now rules, not the law of
   sin. Though the life of sin be prolonged, yet not the dominion; as
   those beasts in Daniel had their lives prolonged for a season, but
   their dominion was taken away. Dan 7: 12. The saints are made spiritual
   kings, to rule and conquer their corruptions, to bind these kings in
   chains.' It is matter of the highest praise and thanksgiving, to be
   taken out of the house of bondage, to be freed from enslaving hosts,
   and made kings to reign in glory for ever.

   (2) The bringing Israel out of the house of bondage, was a type of the
   deliverance from Satan. Men naturally are in the house of bondage, they
   are enslaved to Satan. Satan is called the prince of this world (John
   14: 30); and the god of this world (2 Cor 4: 4); because he has power
   to command and enslave them. Though he shall one day be a close
   prisoner in chains, yet now he insults and tyrannises over the souls of
   men. Sinners are under his rule, he exercises over them a jurisdiction
   such as Caesar did over the senate. He fills men's heads with error,
   and their hearts with malice. Why has Satan filled thine heart?' Act 5:
   3. A sinner's heart is the devil's mansion house. I will return into
   mine house.' Matt. 12: 44. And sure that must needs be a house of
   bondage, which is the devil's mansion-house. Satan is a complete
   tyrant. He rules men's minds, he blinds them with ignorance. The god of
   this world has blinded the minds of them that believe not.' 2 Cor 4: 4.
   He rules their memories. They remember that which is evil, and forget
   that which is good. Their memories are like a strainer, that lets go
   all the pure liquor, and retains only the dregs. He rules their wills.
   Though he cannot force the will, he draws it. The lusts of your father
   you will do.' John 8: 44. He has got your hearts, and him you will
   obey. His strong temptations draw men to evil more than all the
   promises of God can draw them to good. This is the state of every man
   by nature; he is in the house of bondage; the devil has him in his
   power. A sinner grinds in the devil's mill; he is at the command of
   Satan, as the ass is at the command of the driver. No wonder to see men
   oppress and persecute; as slaves they must do what the god of this
   world will have them. How could those swine but run, when the devil
   entered into them? Matt 8: 32. When the devil tempted Ananias to tell a
   lie, he could not but speak what Satan had put in his heart. Acts 5: 3.
   When the devil entered into Judas, and bade him betray Christ, he would
   do it, though he hanged himself. It is a sad and dismal case, to be in
   the house of bondage, under the power and tyranny of Satan. When David
   would curse the enemies of God, how did he pray against them? That
   Satan might be at their right hand. Psa 109: 6. He knew he could then
   lead them into any snare. If the sinner has Satan at his right hand,
   let him take heed that he be not at God's left hand. Is it not a case
   to be bewailed, to see men taken captive by Satan at his will? 2 Tim 2:
   26. He leads sinners as slaves before him in triumph; he wholly
   possesses them. If people should see their beasts bewitched and
   possessed of the devil, they would be much troubled; and yet, though
   their souls are possessed by Satan, they are not sensible of it. What
   can be worse than for men to be in the house of bondage, and to have
   the devil hurry them on in their lusts to perdition? Sinners are
   willingly enslaved to Satan; they love their gaoler; are content to sit
   quietly under Satan's jurisdiction; they choose this bramble to rule
   over them, though after a while, fire will come out of the bramble to
   devour them. Judges 9: 15. What an infinite mercy is it when God brings
   poor souls out of this house of bondage, when he gives them a
   gaol-delivery from the prince of darkness! JESUS CHRIST redeems
   captives, he ransoms sinners by price, and rescues them by force. As
   David took a lamb out of the lion's mouth (1 Sam 17: 35), so Christ
   rescues souls out of the mouth of the roaring lion. Oh, what a mercy is
   it to be brought out of the house of bondage, from captives to the
   prince of the power of the air, to be made subjects of the Prince of
   Peace! This is done by the preaching of the Word. To turn them from the
   power of Satan unto God.' Acts 26: 18.

   (3) The bringing of Israel out of the house of bondage was a type of
   their being delivered from hell. Hell is domus servitutis, a house of
   bondage; a house built on purpose for sinners to lie in.

   There is such a house of bondage where the damned lie. The wicked shall
   be turned into hell.' Psa 9: 17. How can ye escape the damnation of
   hell?' Matt 23: 33. If any one should ask where this house of bondage
   is, where is the place of hell? I wish he may never know
   experimentally. Let us not so much,' says Chrysostom, labour to know
   where hell is, as how to escape it.' Yet to satisfy curiosity, it may
   be observed that hell is locus subterraneus, some place beneath. Hell
   beneath.' Prov 15: 24. Hesiod says, Hell is as far under the earth, as
   heaven is above it.' The devils besought Christ that he would not
   command them to go out into the deep.' Luke 8: 31. Hell is in the deep.

   Why must there be this house of bondage? Why a hell? Because there must
   be a place for the execution of divine justice. Earthly monarchs have
   their prison for malefactors, and shall not God have his? Sinners are
   criminals, they have offended God; and it would not consist with his
   holiness and justice, to have his laws infringed, and not inflict
   penalties.

   The dreadfulness of the place. Could you but hear the groans and
   shrieks of the damned for one hour, it would confirm you in the truth,
   that hell is a house of bondage. Hell is the emphasis of misery.
   Besides the poena damni, the punishment of loss,' which is the
   exclusion of the soul from the gloried sight of God, which divines
   think the worst part of hell, there will be poena sensus,' the
   punishment of sense.' If, when God's wrath is kindled but a little, and
   a spark of it flies into a man's conscience in this life, it is so
   terrible (as in the case of Spira), what will hell itself be?

   In hell there will be a plurality of torments, Bonds and chains.' 2 Pet
   2: 4. There will be the worm. Mark 9: 48; This is the worm of
   conscience. There will be the lake of fire. Rev 20: 15. Other fire is
   but painted to this.

   This house of hell is haunted with devils. Matt 25: 41. Anselm says, I
   had rather endure all torments, than see the devil with bodily eyes.'
   Such as go to hell must not only be forced to behold the devil, but
   must be shut up with this lion in his den; they must keep the devil
   company. He is full of spite against mankind; a red dragon that will
   spit fire in men's faces.

   The torments of hell abide for ever. The smoke of their torment
   ascendeth up for ever and ever.' Rev 14: 2: Time cannot finish it,
   tears cannot quench it. Mark 9: 44. The wicked are salamanders, who
   live always in the fire of hell, and are not consumed. After they have
   lain millions of years in hell, their punishment is as far from ending,
   as it was at the beginning. If all the earth and sea were sand, and
   every thousandth year a bird should come, and take away one grain, it
   would be a long time before that vast heap would be removed; yet, if
   after all that time the damned might come out of hell, there would be
   some hope; but this word EVER breaks the heart.

   How does it seem to comport with God's justice to punish a sin
   committed in a moment, with eternal torment?

   Because there is an eternity of sin in man's nature. Because sin is
   crimen laesae majestatis, committed against an infinite majesty,' and
   therefore the sin itself is infinite, and proportionally the punishment
   must be infinite. Because a finite creature cannot bear infinite wrath,
   he must be eternally satisfying what he can never satisfy. If hell be
   such a house of bondage, what infinite cause have they to bless God who
   are delivered from it! Jesus delivered us from the wrath to come.' 1
   Thess 1: 10. Jesus Christ suffered the torments of hell in his soul,
   that believers should not suffer them. If we are thankful, when we are
   ransomed out of prison, or delivered from fire, oh, how should we bless
   God to be preserved from the wrath to come! It may cause more
   thankfulness in us, seeing the most part go into the house of bondage,
   even to hell. To be of the number of those few that are delivered from
   it, is matter of infinite thankfulness. Most, I say, go to that house
   of bondage when they die; most go to hell. Broad is the way that
   leadeth to destruction, and many there be which go in thereat.' Matt 7:
   13. The greatest part of the world lies in wickedness. 1 John 5: 19.
   Divide the world, says Brerewood, into thirty-one parts, nineteen parts
   of it are possessed by Jews and Turks, and seven parts by heathens; so
   that there are but five parts of Christians, and among these Christians
   so many seduced Papists on the one hand, and so many formal Protestants
   on the other, that we may conclude the major part of the world goes to
   hell. Scripture compares the wicked to briers. Isa 10: 17. There are
   but few lilies in your fields, but in every hedge thorns and briers. It
   compares them to the mire in the streets.' Isa 10: 6. Few jewels or
   precious stones are in the street, but you cannot go a step without
   meeting with mire. The wicked are as common as the dirt in the street.
   Look at the generality of people. How many drunkards are there for one
   that is sober! How many adulterers for one that is chaste! How many
   hypocrites for one that is sincere! The devil has the harvest, and God
   a few gleanings only. Oh, then, such as are delivered from the house of
   bondage, in hell, have infinite cause to admire and bless God. How
   should the vessels of mercy run over with thankfulness! When most
   others are carried prisoners to hell, they are delivered from the wrath
   to come.

   How shall I know I am delivered from hell?

   (1) Those whom Christ saves from hell he saves from sin. He shall save
   his people from their sins.' Matt 1: 21. Has God delivered you from the
   power of corruption, from pride, malice, and lust? If he has delivered
   you from the hell of sin, he has delivered you from the hell of
   torment.

   (2) If you have got an interest in Christ, and are prizing, trusting,
   and loving him, you are delivered from hell and damnation. No
   condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus.' Rom 8:1. If you are in
   Christ, he has put the garment of his righteousness over you, and
   hell-fire can never singe it. Pliny observes, nothing will so soon
   quench fire as salt and blood: the salt tears of repentance and the
   blood of Christ will quench the fire of hell, so that it shall never
   kindle upon you.
     __________________________________________________________________

  1.4 The Right Understanding of the Law

   Thou shalt have no other Gods before me.' Exod 20: 3.

   Before I come to the commandments, I shall answer questions, and lay
   down rules respecting the moral law.

   What is the difference between the moral laud and the gospel?

   (1) The law requires that we worship God as our Creator; the gospel,
   that we worship him in and through Christ. God in Christ is propitious;
   out of him we may see God's power, justice, and holiness: in him we see
   his mercy displayed.

   (2) The moral law requires obedience, but gives no strength (as Pharaoh
   required brick, but gave no straw), but the gospel gives strength; it
   bestows faith on the elect; it sweetens the law; it makes us serve God
   with delight.

   Of what use is the moral law to us?

   It is a glass to show us our sins, that, seeing our pollution and
   misery, we may be forced to flee to Christ to satisfy for former guilt,
   and to save from future wrath. The law was our schoolmaster to bring us
   unto Christ. Gal 3: 24.

   But is the moral law still in force to believers; is it not abolished
   to them?

   In some sense it is abolished to believers. (1) In respect of
   justification. They are not justified by their obedience to the moral
   law. Believers are to make great use of the moral law, but they must
   trust only to Christ's righteousness for justification; as Noah's dove
   made use of her wings to fly, but trusted to the ark for safety. If the
   moral law could justify, what need was there of Christ's dying? (2) The
   moral law is abolished to believers, in respect of its curse. They are
   freed from its curse and condemnatory power. Christ has redeemed us
   from the curse of the law, being made a curse for us.' Gal 3: 13.

   How was Christ made a curse for us?

   Considered as the Son of God, he was not made a curse, but as our
   pledge and surety, he was made a curse for us. Heb 7: 22. This curse
   was not upon his Godhead, but upon his manhood. It was the wrath of God
   lying upon him; and thus he took away from believers the curse of the
   law, by being made a curse for them. But though the moral law be thus
   far abolished, it remains as a perpetual rule to believers. Though it
   be not their Saviour, it is their guide. Though it be not foedus, a
   covenant of life; yet it is norma, a rule of life. Every Christian is
   bound to conform to it; and to write, as exactly as he can, after this
   copy. Do we then make void the law through faith? God forbid.' Rom 3:
   31. Though a Christian is not under the condemning power of the law,
   yet he is under its commanding power. To love God, to reverence and
   obey him, is a law which always binds and will bind in heaven. This I
   urge against the Antinomians, who say the moral law is abrogated to
   believers; which, as it contradicts Scripture, so it is a key to open
   the door to all licentiousness. They who will not have the law to rule
   them, shall never have the gospel to save them.

   Having answered these questions, I shall in the next place, lay down
   some general rules for the right understanding of the Decalogue, or Ten
   Commandments. These may serve to give us some light into the sense and
   meaning of the commandments.

   Rule I. The commands and prohibitions of the moral law reach the heart.
   (1) The commands of the moral law reach the heart. The commandments
   require not only outward actions, but inward affections; they require
   not only the outward act of obedience, but the inward affection of
   love. Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thine heart.' Deut 6:
   5.

   (2) The threats and prohibitions of the moral law reach the heart. The
   law of God forbids not only the act of sin, but the desire and
   inclination; not only does it forbid adultery, but lusting (Matt 5:
   28): not only stealing, but coveting (Rom 7: 7). Lex humana ligat
   manum, lex divina comprimit animam Man's law binds the hands only,
   God's law binds the heart.'

   Rule 2. In the commandments there is a synecdoche, more is intended
   than is spoken. (1) Where any duty is commanded, the contrary sin is
   forbidden. When we are commanded to keep the Sabbath-day holy, we are
   forbidden to break the Sabbath. When we are commanded to live in a
   calling, Six days shalt thou labour,' we are forbidden to live idly,
   and out of a calling.

   (2) Where any sin is forbidden, the contrary duty is commanded. When we
   are forbidden to take God's name in vain, the contrary duty, that we
   should reverence his name, is commanded. That thou mayest fear this
   glorious and fearful name, the Lord Thy God.' Deut 28: 58. Where we are
   forbidden to wrong our neighbour, there the contrary duty, that we
   should do him all the good we can, by vindicating his name and
   supplying his wants, is included.

   Rule 3. Where any sin is forbidden in the commandment, the occasion of
   it is also forbidden. Where murder is forbidden, envy and rash anger
   are forbidden, which may occasion it. Where adultery is forbidden, all
   that may lead to it is forbidden, as wanton glances of the eye, or
   coming into the company of a harlot. Come not nigh the door of her
   house.' Prov 5: 8. He who would be free from the plague, must not come
   near the infected house. Under the law the Nazarite was forbidden to
   drink wine; nor might he eat grapes of which the wine was made.

   Rule 4. In relato subintelligitur correlatum. Where one relation is
   named in the commandment, there another relation is included. Where the
   child is named, the father is included. Where the duty of children to
   parents is mentioned, the duty of parents to children is also included.
   Where the child is commanded to honour the parent, it is implied that
   the parent is also commanded to instruct, to love, and to provide for
   the child.

   Rule 5. Where greater sins are forbidden, lesser sins are also
   forbidden. Though no sin in its own nature is little, yet one may be
   comparatively less than another. Where idolatry is forbidden,
   superstition is forbidden, or bringing any innovation into God's
   worship, which he has not appointed. As the sons of Aaron were
   forbidden to worship an idol, so to sacrifice to God with strange fire.
   Lev 10: 1. Mixture in sacred things, is like a dash in wine, which
   though it gives a colour, yet does but debase and adulterate it. It is
   highly provoking to God to bring any superstitious ceremony into his
   worship which he has not prescribed; it is to tax God's wisdom, as if
   he were not wise enough to appoint the manner how he will be served.

   Rule 6. The law of God is entire. Lex est copulativa [The law is all
   connected]. The first and second tables are knit together; piety to
   God, and equity to our neighbour. These two tables which God has joined
   together, must not be put asunder. Try a moral man by the duties of the
   first table, piety to God, and there you will find him negligent; try a
   hypocrite by the duties of the second table, equity to his neighbour,
   and there you will find him tardy. If he who is strict in the second
   table neglects the first, or he who is zealous in the first, neglects
   the second, his heart is not right with God. The Pharisees were the
   highest pretenders to keeping the first table with zeal and holiness;
   but Christ detects their hypocrisy: Ye have omitted judgement, mercy
   and faith.' Matt 23: 23. They were bad in the second table; they
   omitted judgement, or being just in their dealings; mercy in relieving
   the poor; and faith, or faithfulness in their promises and contracts
   with men. God wrote both the tables, and our obedience must set a seal
   to both.

   Rule 7. God's law forbids not only the acting of sin in our own
   persons, but being accessory to, or having any hand in, the sins of
   others.

   How and in what sense may we be said to partake of, and have a hand in
   the sins of others?

   (1) By decreeing unrighteous decrees, and imposing on others that which
   is unlawful. Jeroboam made the people of Israel to sin; he was
   accessory to their idolatry by setting up golden calves. Though David
   did not in his own person kill Uriah, yet because he wrote a letter to
   Joab, to set Uriah in the forefront of the battle, and it was done by
   his command, he was accessory to Uriah's death, and the murder of him
   was laid by the prophet to his charge. Thou hast killed Uriah the
   Hittite with the sword.' 2 Sam 12: 9.

   (2) We become accessory to the sins of others by not hindering them
   when it is in our power. Qui non prohibit cum potest, jubet [The
   failure to prevent something, when it lies within your power, amounts
   to ordering it]. If a master of a family see his servant break the
   Sabbath, or hear him swear, and does not use the power he has to
   suppress him, he becomes accessory to his sin. Eli, for not punishing
   his sons when they made the offering of the Lord to be abhorred, made
   himself guilty. 1 Sam 3: 13, 14. He that suffers an offender to pass
   unpunished, makes himself an offender.

   (3) By counselling, abetting, or provoking others to sin. Ahithophel
   made himself guilty of the fact by giving counsel to Absalom to go in
   and defile his father's concubines. 2 Sam 16: 21. He who shall tempt or
   solicit another to be drunk, though he himself be sober, yet being the
   occasion of another's sin, he is accessory to it. Woe unto him that
   giveth his neighbour drink, that puttest thy bottle to him.' Hab 2: 15.

   (4) By consenting to another's sin. Saul did not cast one stone at
   Stephen, yet the Scripture says, Saul was consenting unto his death.'
   Acts 8: 1. Thus he had a hand in it. If several combined to murder a
   man, and should tell another of their intent, and he should give his
   consent to it, he would be guilty; for though his hand was not in the
   murder, his heart was in it; though he did not act it, yet he approved
   it, and so it became his sin.

   (5) By example. Vivitur exemplis [We live by example]. Examples are
   powerful and cogent. Setting a bad example occasions another to sin,
   and so a person becomes accessory. If the father swears, and the child
   by his example, learns to swear, the father is accessory to the child's
   sin; he taught him by his example. As there are hereditary diseases, so
   there are hereditary sins.

   Rule 8. The last rule about the commandments is, that though we cannot,
   by our own strength, fulfil all these commandments, yet doing quod
   posse, what we are able, the Lord has provided encouragement for us.
   There is a threefold encouragement.

   (1) That though we have not ability to obey any one command, yet God
   has in the new covenant, promised to work that in us which he requires.
   I will cause you to walk in my statutes.' Ezek 36: 27. God commands us
   to love him. Ah, how weak is our love! It is like the herb that is yet
   only in the first degree; but God has promised to circumcise our
   hearts, that we may love him. Deut 30: 6. He that commands us, will
   enable us. God commands us to turn from sin, but alas! we have not
   power to turn; therefore he has promised to turn us, to put his Spirit
   within us, and to turn the heart of stone into flesh. Ezek 36: 26.
   There is nothing in the command, but the same is in the promise.
   Therefore, Christian, be not discouraged, though thou hast no strength
   of thy own, God will give thee strength. The iron has no power to move,
   but when drawn by the loadstone it can move. Thou hast wrought all our
   works in us.' Isa 26: 12.

   (2) Though we cannot exactly fulfil the moral law, yet God for Christ's
   sake will mitigate the rigour of the law, and accept of something less
   than he requires. God in the law requires exact obedience, yet will
   accept of sincere obedience; he will abate something of the degree, if
   there be truth in the inward parts. He will see the faith, and pass by
   the failing. The gospel remits the severity of the moral law.

   (3) Wherein our personal obedience comes short, God will be pleased to
   accept us in our Surety. He has made us accepted in the Beloved.' Eph
   1: 6. Though our obedience be imperfect, yet, through Christ our
   Surety, God looks upon it as perfect. That very service which God's law
   might condemn, his mercy is pleased to crown, by virtue of the blood of
   our Mediator. Having given you these rules about the commandments, I
   shall come next to the commandments themselves.
     __________________________________________________________________

2. THE TEN COMMANDMENTS
     __________________________________________________________________

  2.1 The First Commandment

   Thou shalt have no other gods before me.' Exod 20: 3.

   Why is the commandment in the second person singular, Thou? Why does
   not God say, You shall have no other gods?

   Because the commandment concerns every one, and God would have each one
   take it as spoken to him by name. Though we are forward to take
   privileges to ourselves, yet we are apt to shift off duties from
   ourselves to others; therefore the commandment is in the second person,
   Thou and Thou, that every one may know that it is spoken to him, as it
   were, by name. We come now to the commandment, Thou shalt have no other
   gods before me.' This may well lead the van, and be set in the front of
   all the commandments, because it is the foundation of all true
   religion. The sum of this commandment is, that we should sanctify God
   in our hearts, and give him a precedence above all created beings.
   There are two branches of this commandment: 1. That we must have one
   God. 2. That we must have but one. Or thus, 1. That we must have God
   for our God. 2. That we must have no other.

   1. That we must have God for our God. It is manifest that we must have
   a God, and who is God save the Lord?' 2 Sam 22: 32. The Lord Jehovah
   (one God in three persons) is the true, living, eternal God; and him we
   must have for our God.

   [1] To have God to be a God to us, is to acknowledge him for a God. The
   gods of the heathen are idols. Psa 96: 5. And we know that an idol is
   nothing' (1 Cor 8: 4); that is, it has nothing of Deity in it. If we
   cry, Help, O Idol,' an idol cannot help; the idols themselves were
   carried into captivity, so that an idol is nothing. Isa 46: 2. Vanity
   is ascribed to it, we do not therefore acknowledge it to be a god. Jer
   14: 22. But we have this God to be a God to us, when, ex animo [from
   the heart], we acknowledge him to be God. All the people fell on their
   faces and said, The Lord he is the God! the Lord he is the God!' 1
   Kings 18: 39. Yea, we acknowledge him to be the only God. O Lord God of
   Israel, which dwellest between the cherubim, thou art the God, even
   thou alone.' 2 Kings 19: 15. Deity is a jewel that belongs only to his
   crown. Further, we acknowledge there is no God like him. And Solomon
   stood before the altar of the Lord; and he said, Lord God of Israel,
   there is no God like thee.' 1 Kings 8: 22, 23. For who in the heaven
   can be compared unto the Lord? who among the sons of the mighty can be
   likened unto the Lord?' Psa 89: 6. In the Chaldee it is, Who among the
   angels?' None can do as God; he brought the world out of nothing; And
   hangeth the earth upon nothing.' Job 26: 7. It makes God to be a God to
   us, when we are persuaded in our hearts, and confess with our tongues,
   and subscribe with our hands, that he is the only true God, and that
   there is none comparable to him.

   [2] To have God to be a God to us is to choose him. Choose you this day
   whom ye will serve: but as for me and my house we will serve the Lord:'
   that is, we will choose the Lord to be our God. Josh 24: 15. It is one
   thing for the judgement to approve of God, and another for the will to
   choose him. Religion is not a matter of chance, but choice.

   Before choosing God for our God, there must be knowledge. We must know
   him before we can choose him. Before any one choose the person he will
   marry, he must have some knowledge of that person; so we must know God
   before we can choose him for our God. Know thou the God of thy father.'
   1 Chron 28: 9. We must know God in his attributes, as glorious in
   holiness, rich in mercy, and faithful in promises. We must know him in
   his Son. As the face is represented in a glass, so in Christ, as in a
   transparent glass, we see God's beauty and love shine forth. This
   knowledge must go before choosing God. Lactantius said, all the
   learning of the philosophers was without a head, because it wanted the
   knowledge of God. This choosing is an act of mature deliberation. The
   Christian having viewed the superlative excellences in God, and being
   stricken with a holy admiration of his perfections, singles him out
   from all other objects to set his heart upon, and says as Jacob, The
   Lord shall be my God.' Gen 28: 21. He that chooses God, devotes himself
   to God. Thy servant who is devoted to thy fear.' Psa 119: 38. As the
   vessels of the sanctuary were consecrated and set apart from common to
   holy uses, so he who has chosen God to be his God, has dedicated
   himself to God, and will no more be devoted to profane uses.

   [3] To have God to be a God to us, is to enter into solemn covenant
   with him, that he shall be our God. After choice the marriage-covenant
   follows. As God makes a covenant with us, I will make an everlasting
   covenant with you, even the sure mercies of David' (Isa 55: 3); so we
   make a covenant with him, They entered into a covenant to seek the Lord
   God of their fathers.' 2 Chron 15: 12. One shall say, I am the Lord's:
   and another shall subscribe with his hand unto the Lord;' like soldiers
   that subscribe their names in the muster roll. Isa 44: 5. This
   covenant, That God shall be our God,' we have often renewed in the
   Lord's Supper; which, like a seal to a bond, binds us fast to God, and
   so keeps us that we do not depart from him.

   [4] To have God to be a God to us, is to give him adoration: which
   consists in reverencing him: God is to be had in reverence of all them
   that are about him.' Psa 89: 7. The seraphim, who stood about God's
   throne, covered their faces (Isa 6), and Elijah wrapped himself in a
   mantle when the Lord passed by, in token of reverence. This reverence
   shows the high esteem we have of God's sacred majesty. Adoration
   consists in bowing to him, or worshipping him. Worship the Lord in the
   beauty of holiness.' Psa 29: 2. They bowed their heads, and worshipped
   the Lord with their faces to the ground.' Neh 8: 6. Divine worship is
   the peculiar honour belonging to the Godhead; which God is jealous of,
   and will have no creature share in. My glory will I not give to
   another.' Isa 42: 8. Magistrates may have a civil respect or
   veneration, but God only should have a religious adoration.

   [5] To have God to be a God to us, is to fear him. That thou mayest
   fear this glorious and fearful name, The Lord thy God.' Deut 28: 58.
   This fearing God is (1) To have him always in our eye, I have set the
   Lord always before me.' Psa 16: 8. Mine eyes are ever towards the
   Lord.' Psa 25: 15. He who fears God imagines that whatever he is doing,
   God looks on, and as a judge, weighs all his actions. (2) To fear God
   is to have such a holy awe of God upon our hearts, that we dare not
   sin. Stand in awe and sin not.' Psa 4: 4. The wicked sin and fear not;
   the godly fear and sin not. How then can I do this great wickedness and
   sin against God?' Gen 39: 9. Bid me sin, and you bid me drink poison.
   It is a saying of Anselm, If hell were on one side, and sin on the
   other, I would rather leap into hell, than willingly sin against my
   God.' He who fears God will not sin, though it be ever so secret. Thou
   shalt not curse the deaf, nor put a stumbling-block before the blind,
   but shalt fear thy God.' Lev 19: 14. Suppose you should curse a deaf
   man, he could not hear you; or you were to lay a block in a blind man's
   way, and cause him to fall, he could not see you do it; but the fear of
   God will make you forsake sins which can neither be heard nor seen by
   men. The fear of God destroys the fear of man. The three children
   feared God, therefore they feared not the king's wrath. Dan 3: 16. The
   greater noise drowns the less; the noise of thunder drowns the noise of
   a river; so, when the fear of God is supreme in the soul, it drowns all
   other carnal fear. It makes God to be God to us when we have a holy
   filial fear of him.

   [6] To have God to be a God to us, is to trust in him. Mine eyes are
   unto thee, O God the Lord: in thee is my trust.' Psa 141: 8. The God of
   my rock, in him will I trust.' 2 Sam 22: 3. There is none in whom we
   can trust but God. All creatures are a refuge of lies; they are like
   the Egyptian reed, too weak to support us, but strong enough to wound
   us. 2 Kings 18: 21. Omnis motus fit super immobili [The immovable is
   undisturbed by any commotion]. God only is a sufficient foundation to
   build our trust upon. When we trust him, we make him a God to us; when
   we do not trust him, we make him an idol. Trusting in God is to rely on
   his power as a Creator, and on his love as a Father. Trusting in God is
   to commit our chief treasure, our soul, to him. Into thy hands I commit
   my spirit.' Psa 31: 5. As the orphan trusts his estate with his
   guardian, so we trust our souls with God. Then he becomes a God to us.

   But how shall we know that we trust in God aright? If we trust in God
   aright, we shall trust him at one time as well as another. Trust in him
   at all times.' Psa 62: 8. Can we trust him in our straits? When the
   fig-tree does not flourish, when our earthly crutches are broken, can
   we lean upon God's promise? When the pipes are cut off that used to
   bring us comfort, can we live upon God, in whom are all our fresh
   springs? When we have no bread to eat but the bread of carefulness
   (Ezek 12: 19), when we have no water to drink but tears, as in Psa 80:
   5: Thou givest them tears to drink in great measure;' can we then trust
   in God's providence to supply us? A good Christian believes, that if
   God feeds the ravens, he will feed his children, he lives upon God's
   all-sufficiency, not only for grace, but for food. He believes if God
   gives him heaven, he will give daily bread; he trusts his bond: Verily
   thou shalt be fed.' Psa 37: 3. Can we trust God in our fears? When
   adversaries grow high can we display the banner of faith? What time I
   am afraid, I will trust in thee.' Psa 56: 3. Faith cures the trembling
   in heart; it gets above fear, as oil swims above the water. To trust in
   God, makes him to be a God to us.

   [7] To have God to be a God to us, is to love him. In the godly fear
   and love kiss each other.

   [8] To have him to be a God to us, is to obey him. Upon this I shall
   speak more at large in the second commandment.

   Why must use cleave to the Lord as our God?

   (1) Because of its equity. It is but just that we should cleave to him
   from whom we receive our being. Who can have a better right to us than
   he that gives us our breath? For it is he that made us, and not we
   ourselves.' Psa 100: 3. It is unjust, yea, ungrateful, to give away our
   love or worship to any but God.

   (2) Because of its utility. If we cleave to the Lord as our God, then
   he will bless us: God, even our own God, shall bless us.' Psa 67: 6. He
   will bless us in our estate. Blessed shall be the fruit of thy ground:
   blessed shall be thy basket and thy store.' Deut 28: 4, 5. We shall not
   only have our sacks full of corn, but money in the mouth of the sack.
   He will bless us with peace. The Lord will bless his people with
   peace.' Psa 29: 11. With outward peace, which is the nurse of plenty.
   He maketh peace in thy borders.' Psa 147: 14. With inward peace, a
   smiling conscience, which is sweeter than the dropping of honey. God
   will turn all evils to our good. Rom 8: 28. He will make a treacle of
   poison. Joseph's imprisonment was a means for his advancement. Gen 50:
   20. Out of the bitterest drug he will distil his glory and our
   salvation. In short, he will be our guide to death, our comfort in
   death, and our reward after death. The utility of it, therefore, may
   make us cleave to the Lord as our God. Happy is that people whose God
   is the Lord.' Psa 144: 15.

   (3) Because of its necessity. If God be not our God, he will curse our
   blessings; and God's curse blasts wherever it comes. Mal 2: 2. If God
   be not our God, we have none to help us in misery. Will he help his
   enemies? Will he assist those who disclaim him? If we do not make God
   to be our God, he will make himself to be our judge; and if he
   condemns, there is no appealing to a higher court. There is a
   necessity, therefore, for having God for our God, unless we intend to
   be eternally espoused to misery.

   Use one. If we must have the Lord Jehovah for our one God, it condemns
   the Atheists who have no God. The fool has said in his heart, There is
   no God.' Psa 14: 1. There is no God he believes in, or worships. Such
   Atheists were Diagoras and Theodorus. When Seneca reproved Nero for his
   impieties, Nero said, Dost thou think I believe there is any God, when
   I do such things?' The duke of Silesia was so infatuated, that he
   affirmed, Neque inferos, neque superos esse; that there was neither God
   nor devil. We may see God in the works of his fingers. The creation is
   a great volume in which we may read a Godhead, and he must needs put
   out his own eyes that denies a God. Aristotle, though a heathen, not
   only acknowledged God, when he cried out, Thou Being of beings, have
   mercy on me,' but he thought he that did not confess a Deity was not
   worthy to live. They who will not believe a God, shall feel him. It is
   a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God.' Heb 10: 31.

   Use two. Christians are condemned who profess to own God for their God
   and yet do not live as if he were their God. (1) They do not believe in
   him as a God. When they look upon their sins, they are apt to say, Can
   God pardon? When they look upon their wants, they say, Can God provide,
   can he prepare a table in the wilderness? (2) They do not love him as a
   God. They do not give him the cream of their love, but are prone to
   love other things more than God; they say they love God, but will part
   with nothing for him. (3) They do not worship him as God. They do not
   give him that reverence, nor pray with that devotion, as if they were
   praying to a God. How dead are their hearts! If not dead in sin, they
   are dead to duty. They pray as to a god that has eyes and sees not,
   ears and hears not. In hearing the Word, how much distraction, and what
   regardless hearts have many! They are thinking of their shops and
   drugs. Would a king take it well at our hands, if, when speaking to us,
   we should be playing with a feather? When God is speaking to us in his
   Word, and our hearts are taken up with thoughts about the world, is not
   this playing with a feather? Oh, how should this humble most of us,
   that we do not make God to be a God to us! We do not believe in him,
   love him, worship him as God. Many heathens have worshipped their false
   gods with more seriousness and devotion than some Christians do the
   true God. O let us chide ourselves; did I say chide? Let us abhor
   ourselves for our deadness and formality in religion; how we have
   professed God, and yet have not worshipped him as God.

   II. That we must have no other god. Thou shalt have no other gods
   before me.

   What is meant by the words, Before me?

   It means before my face; in conspectu meo, in my sight. Cursed be the
   man that maketh any graven image, and putteth it in a secret place.'
   Deut 27: 15. Some would not bow to the idol in the sight of others, but
   they would secretly bow to it; but though this was out of man's sight,
   it was not out of God's sight. Cursed, therefore,' says God, be he that
   puts the image in a secret place.' Thou shalt have no other gods.' 1.
   There is really no other god. 2. We must have no other.

   [1] There is really no other god. The Valentinians held there were two
   gods; the Polytheists, that there were many; the Persian worshipped the
   sun; the Egyptians, the ox and elephant; the Grecians, Jupiter; but
   there is no other than the true God. Know, therefore, this day, and
   consider it in thy heart, that the Lord he is God in heaven above, and
   upon the earth beneath; there is none else.' Deut 4: 39. For, (1) There
   is but one First Cause, that has its being of itself, and on which all
   other beings depend. As in the heavens the Primum Mobile moves all the
   other orbs, so God is the Great Mover, he gives life and motion to
   everything that exists.

   (2) There is but one Omnipotent Power. If there be two omnipotent, we
   must always suppose a contest between the two: that which one would do,
   the other, being equal, would oppose; and so all things would be
   brought into confusion. If a ship should have two pilots of equal
   power, one would be ever crossing the other; when one would sail the
   other would cast anchor; there would be confusion, and the ship would
   perish. The order and harmony in the world, the constant and uniform
   government of all things, is a clear argument that there is but one
   Omnipotent, one God that rules all. I am the first, and I am the last,
   and beside me there is no God.' Isa 44: 6.

   [2] We must have no other god. Thou shalt have no other gods before
   me.' This commandment forbids: (1) Serving a false god, and not the
   true God. Saying to a stock, Thou art my father; and to a stone, Thou
   hast brought me forth.' Jer 2: 27. (2) Joining a false god with a true.
   They feared the Lord, and served their own gods.' 2 Kings 17: 33. These
   are forbidden in the commandment; we must adhere to the true God, and
   no other. God is a jealous God,' and he will endure no rival. A wife
   cannot lawfully have two husbands at once; nor may we have two gods.
   Thou shalt worship no other god, for the Lord is a jealous God.' Exod.
   34: 14. Their sorrows shall be multiplied that hasten after another
   god.' Psa 16: 4. The Lord interprets it a forsaking of him' to espouse
   any other god. They forsook the Lord, and followed other gods.' Judges
   2: 12. God would not have his people so much as make mention of idol
   gods. Make no mention of the name of other gods, neither let it be
   heard out of thy mouth.' Exod 23: 13. God looks upon it as breaking the
   marriage-covenant, to go after other gods. Therefore, when Israel
   committed idolatry with the golden calf, God disclaimed his interest in
   them. Thy people have corrupted themselves.' Exod 32: 7. Before, God
   called Israel his people; but when they went after other gods, Now,'
   saith the Lord to Moses, they are no more my people but thy people.'
   Plead with your mother, plead; for she is not my wife.' Hos 2: 2. She
   does not keep faith with me, she has stained herself with idols,
   therefore I will divorce her, she is not my wife.' To go after other
   gods, is what God cannot bear; it makes the fury rise up in his face.
   If thy brother, or thy son, or the wife of thy bosom or thy friend,
   which is as thine own soul, entice thee secretly, saying, Let us go and
   serve other gods, thou shalt not consent unto him, neither shall thine
   eye pity him; but thou shalt surely kill him; thine hand shall be first
   upon him to put him to death, and afterwards the hand of all the
   people.' Deut 13: 6, 8, 9.

   What is it to have other gods besides the true God? I fear upon search,
   we have more idolaters among us than we are aware of.

   (1) To trust in any thing more than God, is to make it a god. If we
   trust in our riches, we make riches our god. We may take comfort, but
   not put confidence in them. It is a foolish thing to trust in them.
   They are deceitful riches, and it is foolish to trust to that which
   will deceive us. Matt 13: 22. They have no solid consistency, they are
   like landscapes or golden dreams, which leave the soul empty when it
   awakes or comes to itself. They are not what they promise; they promise
   to satisfy our desires, and they increase them; they promise to stay
   with us, and they take wings. They are hurtful. Riches kept for the
   owners thereof to their hurt.' Eccl 5: 13. It is foolish to trust to
   that which will hurt one. Who would take hold of the edge of a razor to
   help him? They are often fuel for pride and lust. Ezek 28: 5. Jer 5: 7.
   It is folly to trust in our riches; but how many do, and make money
   their god! The rich man's wealth is his strong city.' Prov 10: 15. He
   makes the wedge of gold his hope. Job 31: 24. God made man of the dust
   of the earth, and man makes a god of the dust of the earth. Money is
   his creator, redeemer, comforter: his creator, for if he has money, he
   thinks he is made; his redeemer, for if he be in danger, he trusts to
   his money to redeem him; his comforter, for if he be sad, money is the
   golden harp to drive away the evil spirit. Thus by trusting to money,
   we make it a god.

   If we trust in the arm of flesh, we make it a god. Cursed be the man
   that trusteth in man, and maketh flesh his arm.' Jer 17: 5. The Syrians
   trusted in their army, which was so numerous that it filled the
   country; but this arm of flesh withered. 1 Kings 20: 27, 29. What we
   make our trust, God makes our shame. The sheep run to the hedges for
   shelter, and they lose their wool; so we have run to second causes to
   help us, and have lost much of our golden fleece; they have not only
   been reeds to fail us, but thorns to prick us. We have broken our
   parliament-crutches, by leaning too hard upon them.

   If we trust in our wisdom, we make it a god. Let not the wise man glory
   in his wisdom.' Jer 9: 23. Glorying is the height of confidence. Many a
   man makes an idol of his wit and parts; he deifies himself, but how
   often does God take the wise in their own craftiness! Job 5: 13.
   Ahithophel had a great wit, his counsel was as the oracle of God; but
   his wit brought him to the halter. 2 Sam 17: 23.

   If we trust in our civility, we make it a god. Many trust to this, that
   none can charge them with gross sin. Civility is but nature refined and
   cultivated; a man may be washed, and not changed; his life may be
   civil, and yet there may be some reigning sin in his heart. The
   Pharisee could say, I am no adulterer' (Luke 18: 11); but he could not
   say, I am not proud.' To trust to civility, is to trust to a spider's
   web.

   If we trust to our duties to save us, we make them a god. Our
   righteousnesses are as filthy rags;' they are fly-blown with sin. Isa
   64: 6. Put gold in the fire, and much dross comes out: so our most
   golden duties are mixed with infirmity. We are apt either to neglect
   duty, or idolise it. Use duty, but do not trust to it; for then you
   make it a god. Trust not to your praying and hearing; they are means of
   salvation, but they are not saviours. If you make duties bladders to
   trust to, you may sink with them to hell.

   If we trust in our grace, we make a god of it. Grace is but a creature;
   if we trust to it we make it an idol. Grace is imperfect, and we must
   not trust to that which is imperfect to save us. I have walked in my
   integrity: I have trusted also in the Lord.' Psa 26: 1: David walked in
   his integrity; but did not trust in his integrity. I have trusted in
   the Lord.' If we trust in our graces, we make a Christ of them. They
   are good graces, but bad Christs.

   (2) To love any thing more than God, is to make it a god. If we love
   our estate more than God, we make it a god. The young man in the gospel
   loved his gold better than his Saviour; the world lay nearer his heart
   than Christ. Matt 19: 22. Fulgens hoc aurum praestringit oculos [This
   gold with its glitter blinds the eyes]. Varius. The covetous man is
   called an idolater. Eph 5: 5. Why so? Because he loves his estate more
   than God, and so makes it his god. Though he does not bow down to an
   idol, if he worships the graven image in his coins, he is an idolater.
   That which has most of the heart, we make a god of.

   If we love our pleasure more than God, we make a god of it. Lovers of
   pleasures more than lovers of God.' 2 Tim 3: 4. Many let loose the
   reins, and give themselves up to all manner of sensual delights; they
   idolise pleasure. They take the timbrel, and the harp, and rejoice at
   the sound of the organ. They spend their days in mirth.' Job 21: 12,
   13, (mg). I have read of a place in Africa, where the people spend all
   their time in dancing and making merry; and have not we many who make a
   god of pleasure, who spend their time in going to plays and visiting
   ball-rooms, as if God had made them like the leviathan, to play in the
   water? Psa 104: 26. In the country of Sardinia there is a herb like
   balm, that if any one eats too much of it, he will die laughing: such a
   herb is pleasure, if any one feeds immoderately on it, he will go
   laughing to hell. Let such as make a god of pleasure read but these two
   Scriptures. The heart of fools is in the house of mirth.' Eccl 7: 4.
   How much she has lived deliciously, so much torment give her.' Rev 18:
   7. Sugar laid in a damp place turns to water; so all the sugared joys
   and pleasures of sinners will turn to the water of tears at last.

   If we love our belly more than God, we make a god of it. Whose god is
   their belly.' Phil 3: 19. Clemens Alexandrinus writes of a fish that
   had its heart in its belly; an emblem of epicures, whose heart is in
   their belly; they seek sacrificare lari, their belly is their god, and
   to this god they pour drink offerings. The Lord allows what is fitting
   for the recruiting of nature. I will send grass, that thou mayest eat
   and be full.' Deut 11: 15. But to mind nothing but the indulging of the
   appetite, is idolatry. Whose god is their belly.' What pity is it, that
   the soul, that princely part, which sways the sceptre of reason and is
   akin to angels, should be enslaved to the brutish part!

   If we love a child more than God, we make a god of it. How many are
   guilty in this kind? They think of their children, and delight more in
   them than in God; they grieve more for the loss of their first-born,
   than for the loss of their first love. This is to make an idol of a
   child, and to set it in God's room. Thus God is often provoked to take
   away our children. If we love the jewel more than him that gave it, God
   will take away the jewel, that our love may return to him again.

   Use one. It reproves such as have other gods, and so renounce the true
   God. (1) Such as set up idols. According to the number of thy cities
   are thy gods, O Judah.' Jer 2: 28. Their altars are as heaps in the
   furrows of the field.' Hos 12: 11. (2) Such as seek to familiar
   spirits. This is a sin condemned by the law of God. There shall not be
   found among you a consulted with familiar spirits.' Deut 18: 11.
   Ordinarily, if people have lost any of their goods, they send to
   wizards and soothsayers, to know how they may come by them again. What
   is this but to make a god of the devil, by consulting with him, and
   putting their trust in him? What! because you have lost your goods will
   you lose your souls too? 2 Kings 1: 6. Is it not because you think
   there is not a God in heaven, that you ask counsel of the devil? If any
   be guilty, be humbled.

   Use two. It sounds a retreat in our ears. Let it call us off from
   idolising any creature, and lead us to renounce other gods, and cleave
   to the true God and his service. If we go away from God, we know not
   where to mend ourselves.

   (1) It is honourable to serve the true God. Servire Deo est regnare [To
   serve God is to reign]. It is more honour to serve God, than to have
   kings serve us. (2) Serving the true God is delightful. I will make
   them joyful in my house of prayer.' Isa 56: 7. God often displays the
   banner of his love in an ordinance, and pours the oil of gladness into
   the heart. All God's ways are pleasantness, his paths are strewed with
   roses. Prov 3: 17. (3) Serving the true God is beneficial. Men have
   great gain here, the hidden manna, inward peace, and a great reward to
   come. They that serve God shall have a kingdom when they die, and shall
   wear a crown made of the flowers of paradise. Luke 12: 32; 1 Pet 5: 4.
   To serve the true God is our true interest. God has twisted his glory
   and our salvation together. He bids us believe; and why? That we may be
   saved. Therefore, renouncing all others, let us cleave to the true God.
   (4) You have covenanted to serve the true JEHOVAH, renouncing all
   others. When one has entered into covenant with his master, and the
   indentures are drawn and sealed, he cannot go back, but must serve out
   his time. We have covenanted in baptism, to take the Lord for our God,
   renouncing all others; and renewed this covenant in the Lord's Supper,
   and shall we not keep our solemn vow and covenant? We cannot go away
   from God without the highest perjury. If any man draw back [as a
   soldier that steals away from his colours] my soul shall have no
   pleasure in him.' Heb 10: 38. I will pour vials of wrath on him, and
   make mine arrows drunk with blood.' (5) None ever had cause to repent
   of cleaving to God and his service. Some have repented that they had
   made a god of the world. Cardinal Wolsey said, Oh, if I had served my
   God as I have served my king, he would never have left me thus!' None
   ever complained of serving God: it was their comfort and their crown on
   their death-bed.
     __________________________________________________________________

  2.2 The Second Commandment

   Thou shalt not make unto thee any graven image, or any likeness of any
   thing that is in heaven above, or that is in the earth beneath, or that
   is in the water under the earth: thou shalt not bow down thyself to
   them, nor serve them: for I the Lord thy God am a jealous God, visiting
   the iniquity of the fathers upon the children unto the third and fourth
   generation of them that hate me; and shewing mercy unto thousands of
   them that love me and keep my commandments.' Exod 20: 4-6.

   I. Thou shalt not make unto thee any graven image.

   In the first commandment worshipping a false god is forbidden; in this,
   worshipping the true God in a false manner.

   Thou shalt not make unto thee any graven image.' This forbids not
   making an image for civil use. Whose is this image and superscription?
   They say unto him, It is Caesar's.' Matt 22: 20, 21. But the
   commandment forbids setting up an image for religious use or worship.

   Nor the likeness of any thing,' &c. All ideas, portraitures, shapes,
   images of God, whether by effigies or pictures, are here forbidden.
   Take heed lest ye corrupt yourselves, and make the similitude of any
   figure.' Deut 4: 15, 16. God is to be adored in the heart, not painted
   to the eye.

   Thou shalt not bow down to them.' The intent of making images and
   pictures is to worship them. No sooner was Nebuchadnezzar's golden
   image set up, but all the people fell down and worshipped it. Dan 3: 7.
   God forbids such prostrating ourselves before an idol. The thing
   prohibited in this commandment is image-worship. To set up an image to
   represent God, is debasing him. If any one should make images of snakes
   or spiders, saying he did it to represent his prince, would not the
   prince take it in disdain? What greater disparagement to the infinite
   God than to represent him by that which is unite; the living God, by
   that which is without life; and the Maker of all by a thing which is
   made?

   [1] To make a true image of God is impossible. God is a spiritual
   essence and, being a Spirit, he is invisible. John 4: 24. Ye saw no
   manner of similitude on the day that the Lord spake with you out of the
   midst of the fire.' Deut 4: 15. How can any paint the Deity? Can they
   make an image of that which they never saw? Quod invisibile est, pingi
   non potest [There is no depicting the invisible]. Ambrose. Ye saw no
   similitude.' It is impossible to make a picture of the soul, or to
   paint the angels, because they are of a spiritual nature; much less can
   we paint God by an image, who is an infinite, untreated Spirit.

   [2] To worship God by an image, is both absurd and unlawful.

   (1) It is absurd and irrational; for, the workman is better than the
   work,' He who has builded the house has more honour than the house.'
   Heb 3: 3. If the workman be better than the work, and none bow to the
   workman, how absurd, then, is it to bow to the work of his hands! Is it
   not an absurd thing to bow down to the king's picture, when the king
   himself is present? It is more so to bow down to an image of God, when
   God himself is everywhere present.

   (2) It is unlawful to worship God by an image; for it is against the
   homily of the church, which runs thus: The images of God, our Saviour,
   the Virgin Mary, are of all others the most dangerous; therefore the
   greatest care ought to be had that they stand not in temples and
   churches.' So that image-worship is contrary to our own homilies, and
   affronts the authority of the Church of England. Image-worship is
   expressly against the letter of Scripture. Ye shall make no graven
   image, neither shall ye set up any image of stone to bow down unto it.'
   Lev 26: 1. Neither shalt thou set up any image; which the Lord thy God
   hateth.' Deut 16: 22. Confounded be all they that serve graven images.'
   Psa 97: 7. Do we think to please God by doing that which is contrary to
   his mind, and that which he has expressly forbidden?

   [3] Image worship is against the practice of the saints of old. Josiah,
   that renowned king, destroyed the groves and images. 2 Kings 23: 6, 24.
   Constantine abrogated the images set up in temples. The Christians
   destroyed images at Baste, Zurich, and Bohemia. When the Roman emperors
   would have thrust images upon them, they chose rather to die than
   deflower their virgin profession by idolatry; they refused to admit any
   painter or carver into their society, because they would not have any
   carved state or image of God. When Seraphion bowed to an idol, the
   Christians excommunicated him, and delivered him up to Satan.

   Use one. The Church of Rome is reproved and condemned, which, from the
   Alpha of its religion to the Omega, is wholly idolatrous. Romanists
   make images of God the Father, painting him in their church windows as
   an old man; and an image of Christ on the crucifix; and, because it is
   against the letter of this commandment, they sacrilegiously blot it out
   of their catechism, and divide the tenth commandment into two. Image
   worship must needs be very impious and blasphemous, because it is
   giving the religious worship to the creature which is due to God only.
   It is vain for Papists to say, they give God the worship of the heart,
   and the image only the worship of the body; for the worship of the body
   is due to God, as well as the worship of the heart; and to give an
   outward veneration to an image is to give the adoration to a creature
   which belongs to God only. My glory will I not give to another.' Isa
   42: 8.

   The Papists say they do not worship the image, but only use it as a
   medium through which to worship God. Ne imagini quidem Christi in
   quantum est lignum sculptum, ulla debetur reverentia [Not even to a
   statue of Christ is any reverence owed, since it is only a piece of
   carved wood]. Aquinas.

   (1) Where has God bidden them worship him by an effigy or image? Who
   has required this at your hands?' Isa 1: 12. The Papists cannot say so
   much as the devil, Scriptum est: It is written.

   (2) The heathen may bring the same argument for their gross idolatry,
   as the Papists do for their image-worship. What heathen has been so
   simple as to think gold or silver, or the figure of an ox or elephant,
   was God? These were emblems and hieroglyphics only to represent him.
   They worshipped an invisible God by such visible things. To worship God
   by an image, God takes as done to the image itself.

   But, say the Papists, images are laymen's books, and they are good to
   put them in mind of God. One of the Popish Councils affirmed, that we
   might learn more by an image than by long study of the Scriptures.

   What profiteth the graven image, the molten image, and a teacher of
   lies.' Hab 2: 18. Is an image a layman's book? Then see what lessons
   this book teaches. It teaches lies; it represents God in a visible
   shape, who is invisible. For Papists to say they make use of an image
   to put them in mind of God, is as if a woman should say she keeps
   company with another man to put her in mind of her husband.

   But did not Moses make the image of a brazen serpent? Why, then, may
   not images be set tip?

   That was done by God's special command. Make thee a brazen serpent.'
   Numb 21: 8. There was also a special use in it, both literal and
   spiritual. What! does the setting up of the image of the brazen serpent
   justify the setting up images in churches? What! because Moses made an
   image by God's appointment, may we set up an image of our own devising?
   Because Moses made an image to heal them that were stung, is it lawful
   to set up images in churches to sting them that are whole? Nay, that
   very brazen serpent which God himself commanded to be set up, when
   Israel looked upon it with too much reverence, and began to burn
   incense to it, Hezekiah defaced, and called it Nehushtan, mere brass;
   and God commended him for so doing. 2 Kings 18: 4.

   But is not God represented as having hands, and eyes, and cars? Why nay
   we not, then, make an image to represent him, and help our devotion?

   Though God is pleased to stoop to our weak capacities, and set himself
   out in Scripture by eyes, to signify his omniscience, and hands to
   signify his power, yet it is absurd, from such metaphors and figurative
   expressions, to bring an argument for images and pictures; for, by that
   rule, God may be pictured by the sun and the element of fire, and by a
   rock; for he is set forth by these metaphors in Scripture; and, sure,
   the Papists themselves would not like to have such images made of God.

   If it be not lawful to make the image of God the Father, yet may we not
   make an image of Christ, who took upon him the nature of man?

   No! Epiphanies, seeing an image of Christ hanging in a church, brake it
   in pieces. It is Christ's Godhead, united to his manhood, that makes
   him to be Christ; therefore to picture his manhood, when we cannot
   picture his Godhead, is a sin, because we make him to be but half
   Christ -- we separate what God has joined, we leave out that which is
   the chief thing which makes him to be Christ.

   But how shall we conceive of God aright, if we may not make any image
   or resemblance of him?

   We must conceive of God spiritually. (1) In his attributes -- his
   holiness, justice, goodness -- which are the beams by which his divine
   nature shines forth. (2) We must conceive of him as he is in Christ.
   Christ is the Image of the invisible God' as in the wax we see the
   print of the seal. Col 1: 15. Set the eyes of your faith on
   Christ-God-man. He that has seen me, has seen the Father.' John 14: 9.

   Use two. Take heed of the idolatry of image-worship. Our nature is
   prone to this sin as dry wood to take fire; and, indeed, what need of
   so many words in the commandment: Thou shalt not make any graven image,
   or the likeness of anything in heaven, earth, water,' sun, moon, stars,
   male, female, fish; Thou shalt not bow down to them.' I say, what need
   of so many words, but to show how subject we are to this sin of false
   worship? It concerns us, therefore, to resist this sin. Where the tide
   is apt to run with greater force, there we had need to make the banks
   higher and stronger. The plague of idolatry is very infectious. They
   were mingled among the heathen, and served their idols.' Psa 106: 35,
   36. It is my advice to you, to avoid all occasions of this sin.

   (1) Come not into the company of idolatrous Papists. Dare not to live
   under the same roof with them, or you run into the devil's mouth. John
   the divine would not be in the house where Cerinthus the heretic was.

   (2) Go not into their chapels to see their crucifixes, or hear mass. As
   looking on a harlot draws to adultery, so looking on the popish gilded
   picture may draw to idolatry. Some go to see their idol-worship. A
   vagrant who has nothing to lose, cares not to go among thieves; so such
   as have no goodness in them, care not to what idolatrous places they
   come or to what temptations they expose themselves; but you who have a
   treasure of good principles about you, take heed the popish priests do
   not rob you of them, and defile you with their images.

   (3) Dare not join in marriage with image-worshippers. Though Solomon
   was a man of wisdom, his idolatrous wives drew his heart away from God.
   The people of Israel entered into an oath and curse, that they would
   not give their daughters in marriage to idolaters. Neh 10: 30. For a
   Protestant and Papist to marry, is to be unequally yoked (2 Cor 6: 14);
   and there is more danger that the Papist will corrupt the Protestant,
   shall hope that the Protestant will convert the Papist. Mingle wine and
   vinegar, the vinegar will sooner sour the wine, than the wine will
   sweeten the vinegar.

   (4) Avoid superstition, which is a bridge that leads over to Rome.
   Superstition is bringing any ceremony, fancy, or innovation into God's
   worship, which he never appointed. It is provoking God, because it
   reflects much upon his honour, as if he were not wise enough to appoint
   the manner of his own worship. He hates all strange fire to be offered
   in his temple. Lev 10: 1. A ceremony may in time lead to a crucifix.
   They who contend for the cross in baptism, why not have the oil, salt,
   and cream as well, the one being as ancient as the other? They who are
   for altar-worship, and will bow to the east, may in time bow to the
   Host. Take heed of all occasions of idolatry, for idolatry is
   devil-worship. Psalm 106: 37. If you search through the whole Bible,
   there is not one sin that God has more followed with plagues than
   idolatry. The Jews have a saying, that in every evil that befalls them,
   there is uncia aurei vituli, an ounce of the golden calf in it. Hell is
   a place for idolaters. For without are idolaters.' Rev 22: 15. Senesius
   calls the devil a rejoicer at idols, because the image-worshippers help
   to fill hell.

   Use three. That you may be preserved from idolatry and image-worship.
   (1) Get good principles, that you may be able to oppose the gainsayer.
   Whence does the popish religion get ground? Not from the goodness of
   their cause, but from the ignorance of their people. (2) Get love to
   God. The wife that loves her husband is safe from the adulterer; and
   the soul that loves Christ is safe from the idolater. (3) Pray that God
   will keep you. Though it is true, there is nothing in an image to tempt
   (for if we pray to an image, it cannot hear, and if we pray to God by
   an image, he will not hear), yet we know not our own hearts, or how
   soon we may be drawn to vanity, if God leaves us. Therefore pray that
   you be not enticed by false worship, or receive the mark of the beast
   in your right hand or forehead. Pray, Hold thou me up, and I shall be
   safe.' Psa 119: 117. Lord, let me neither mistake my way for want of
   light, nor leave the true way for want of courage. (4) Let us bless God
   who has given us the knowledge of his truth, that we have tasted the
   honey of his word, and our eyes are enlightened. Let us bless him that
   he has shown us the pattern of his house, the right mode of worship;
   that he has discovered to us the forgery and blasphemy of the Romish
   religion. Let us pray that God will preserve pure ordinances and
   powerful preaching among us. Idolatry came in at first by the want of
   good preaching. The people began to have golden images when they had
   wooden priests.

   II. I the Lord thy God am a jealous God. The first reason why Israel
   must not worship graven images is, because the Lord is a jealous God.
   The Lord, whose name is Jealous, is a jealous God.' Exod 34: 14.
   Jealousy is taken, [1] In a good sense, as God is jealous for his
   people. [2] In a bad sense, as he is jealous of his people.

   [1] In a good sense; as God is jealous for his people. Thus saith the
   Lord, I am jealous for Jerusalem, and for Zion, with a great jealousy.'
   Zech 1: 14. God has a dear affection for his people, they are his
   Hephzibah, or delight. Isa 62: 4. They are the apple of his eye, Zech
   2: 8, to express how dear they are to him, and how tender he is of
   them, Nihil carius pupilla oculi [Nothing is dearer than the apple of
   the eye]. Drusius. They are his spouse, adorned with jewels of grace;
   they lie near his heart. He is jealous for his spouse, therefore he
   will be avenged on those who wrong her. The Lord shall stir up jealousy
   like a man of war; he shall roar, he shall prevail against his
   enemies.' Isa 42: 13. What is done to the saints, God takes as done to
   himself (2 Kings 19: 22); and the Lord will undo all that afflict Zion.
   I will undo all that afflict thee.' Zeph 3: 19.

   [2] Jealousy is taken in a bad sense, in which God is jealous of his
   people. It is so taken in this commandment, I the Lord thy God am a
   jealous God.' I am jealous lest you should go after false gods, or
   worship the true God in a false manner; lest you defile your
   virgin-profession by images. God will have his spouse to keep close to
   him, and not go after other lovers. Thou shalt not be for another man'
   Hos 3: 3. He cannot bear a rival. Our conjugal love, a love joined with
   adoration and worship, must be given to God only.

   Use one. Let us give God no just cause to be jealous. A good wife will
   be so discreet and chaste, as to give her husband no just occasion of
   jealousy. Let us avoid all sin, especially this of idolatry, or
   image-worship. It is heinous, after we have entered into a marriage
   covenant with God, to prostitute ourselves to an image. Idolatry is
   spiritual adultery, and God is a jealous God, he will avenge it.
   Image-worship makes God abhor a people. They moved him to jealousy with
   their graven images. When God heard this, he was wrath, and greatly
   abhorred Israel.' Psa 78: 58, 59. Jealousy is the rage of a man.' Prov
   6: 34. Image-worship enrages God; it makes God divorce a people. Plead
   with your mother, plead; for she is not my wife.' Hos 2: 2. Jealousy is
   cruel as the grave.' Cant 8: 6. As the grave devours men's bodies, so
   God will devour image-worshippers.

   Use two. If God be a jealous God, let it be remembered by those whose
   friends are popish idolaters, and who are hated by their friends,
   because they are of a different religion, and perhaps their maintenance
   cut off from them. Oh, remember, God is a jealous God; better move your
   parents to hatred, than move God to jealousy! Their anger cannot do you
   so much hurt as God's. If they will not provide for you, God will. When
   my father and my mother forsake me, then the Lord will take me up.' Psa
   27: 10.

   III. Visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the children unto the
   third and fourth generation. Here is the second reason against
   image-worship. There is a twofold visiting. There is God's visiting in
   mercy. God will surely visit you:' that is, he will bring you into the
   land of Canaan, the type of heaven. Gen 50: 25. Thus God has visited us
   with the sunbeams of his favour; he has made us swim in a sea of mercy.
   This is a happy visitation. There is God's visiting in anger. Shall I
   not visit for these things?' that is, God's visiting with the rod. Jer
   5: 9. What will ye do in the day of visitation?' that is, in the day
   when God shall visit with his judgements. Isa 10: 3. Thus God's
   visiting is taken in this commandment, visiting iniquity,' that is,
   punishing iniquity. Observe here three things.

   [1] That sin makes God visit. Visiting iniquity.' Sin is the cause why
   God visits with sickness, poverty, &c. If they keep not my
   commandments, then will I visit their transgressions with the rod.' Psa
   89: 31, 32. Sin twists the cords which pinch us; it creates all our
   troubles, is the gall in our cup, and the gravel in our bread. Sin is
   the Trojan horse, the Phaeton that sets all on fire; it is the womb of
   our sorrows, and the grave of our comfort. God visits for sin.

   [2] One special sin for which God's visits, is idolatry and
   image-worship. Visiting the iniquity of the fathers.' Most of his
   envenomed arrows have been shot among idolaters. Go now unto my place
   which was in Shiloh, where I set my name at the first, and see what I
   did to it.' Jer 7: 12. For Israel's idolatry he suffered their army to
   be routed, their priests slain, the ark taken captive, of the returns
   of which to Shiloh we never read any more. Jerusalem was the most
   famous metropolis of the world; there was the temple. Whither the
   tribes go up, the tribes of the Lord.' Psa 122: 4. But for the high
   places and images, that city was besieged and taken by the Chaldean
   forces. 2 Kings 25: 4. When images were set up in Constantinople, the
   chief seat of the Eastern empire, a city which in the eye of the world
   was impregnable, it was taken by the Turks, and many cruelly massacred.
   The Turks in their triumphs at that time reproached the idolatrous
   Christians, caused an image or crucifix to be carried through the
   streets in contempt, and threw dirt upon it, crying, This is the god of
   the Christians.' Here was God's visitation for their idolatry. God has
   set special marks of his wrath upon idolaters. At a place called
   Epoletium, there perished by an earthquake 350 persons, while they were
   offering sacrifice to idols. Idolatry brought misery upon the Eastern
   churches, and removed the golden candlesticks of Asia. For this
   iniquity God visits.

   [3] Idolatrous persons are enemies not to their own souls only, but to
   their children. Visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon their
   children.' As an idolatrous father entails his land of inheritance, so
   he entails God's anger and curse upon his children. A jealous husband,
   finding his wife has stained her fidelity, may justly cast her off and
   her children too, because they are none of his. If the father be a
   traitor to his prince, no wonder if all the children suffer. God may
   visit the iniquity of image-worshippers upon their children.

   But is it not said, Every man shall die for his own sin; the son shall
   not bear the iniquity of the father?' 2 Chron 25: 4, Ezek 18: 20. How
   then does God say, he will visit the iniquity of the fathers upon the
   children?'

   Though the son be not damned, yet he may be severely punished for his
   father's sin. God layeth up his iniquity for his children' (Job 21:
   19); that is, God lays up the punishment of his iniquity for his
   children -- the child smarts for the father's sin. Jeroboam thought to
   have established the kingdom by idolatrous worship, but it brought ruin
   upon him, and all his posterity. 1 Kings 14: 10. Ahab's idolatry
   wronged his posterity, which lost the kingdom, and were all beheaded.
   They took the king's sons, and slew seventy persons.' 2 Kings 10: 7.
   Here God visited the iniquity of the father upon the children. As a son
   catches an hereditary disease from his father, the stone or gout, so he
   catches misery from him: his father's sin ruins him.

   Use one. How sad is it to be the child of an idolater! It had been sad
   to have been one of Gehazi's children, who had leprosy entailed upon
   them. The leprosy of Naaman shall cleave unto thee and unto thy seed
   for ever.' 2 Kings 5: 27. So it is sad to be a child of an idolater, or
   image-worshipper; for his seed are exposed to heavy judgements in this
   life. God visits the iniquity of the fathers upon their children.'
   Methinks I hear God speak, as in Isa 14: 21, Prepare slaughter for his
   children, for the iniquity of their fathers.'

   Use two. What a privilege it is to be the children of good parents. The
   parents are in covenant with God, and God lays up mercy for their
   posterity. The just man walketh in his integrity, his children are
   blessed after him.' Prov 20: 7. A religious parent does not procure
   wrath, but helps to keep off wrath from his child; he seasons his child
   with religious principles, he prays down a blessing on it; he is a
   loadstone to draw his child to Christ by good counsel and example. Oh,
   what a privilege is it to be born of godly, religious parents!
   Augustine says that his mother Monica travailed with greater care and
   pains for his new birth, than for his natural. Wicked idolaters entail
   misery on their posterity; God visits the iniquity of the fathers upon
   their children;' but religious parents procure a blessing upon their
   children; God reserves mercy for their posterity.

   IV. Of them that hate me. Another reason against image-worship is, that
   it is hating God. The Papists, who worship God by an image, hate God.
   Image-worship is a pretended love to God, but God interprets it as
   hating him. Quae diligit alienum odit sponsum, she that loves another
   man, hates her own husband.' An image-lover is a God hater. Idolaters
   are said to go a whoring from God. Exod 34: 15. How can they love God?
   I shall show that image-worshippers hate God, whatever love they
   pretend.

   [1] They who go contrary to his express will hate him. He says, you
   shall not set up any statue, image, nor picture, to represent me; these
   things I hate. Neither shalt thou set up any image; which the Lord thy
   God hateth.' Deut 16: 22. Yet the idolater sets up images, and worships
   them. This God looks upon as hating him. How does the child love his
   father that does all it can to cross him?

   [2] They who turned Jephthah out of doors hated him, therefore they
   laboured to shut him out of his father's house. Judges 11: 7. The
   idolater shuts the truth out of doors; he blots out the second
   commandment; he makes an image of the invisible God; he brings a lie
   into God's worship; which are clear proofs that he hates God.

   [3] Though idolaters love the false image of God in a picture, they
   hate his true image in a believer. They pretend to honour Christ in a
   crucifix, and yet persecute him in his members. Such hate God.

   Use one. This confutes those who plead for image-worshippers. They are
   very devout people; they adore images; they set up the crucifix; kiss
   it; light candles to it; therefore they love God. Nay, but who shall be
   judge of their love? God says they hate him, and give religious
   adoration to a creature. They hate God, and God hates them; and they
   shall never live with God whom he hates; he will never lay such vipers
   in his bosom. Heaven is kept as paradise, with a flaming sword, that
   they shall not enter in. He repayeth them that hate him to their face.'
   Deut. 7: 10. He will shoot all his deadly arrows among idolaters. All
   the plagues and curses in the book of God shall befall the idolater.
   The Lord repays him that hates him to his face.

   Use two. Let it exhort all to flee from Romish idolatry. Let us not be
   among God-haters. Little children, keep yourselves from idols.' 1 John
   5: 21. As you would keep your bodies from adultery, keep your souls
   from idolatry. Take heed of images, they are images of jealousy to
   provoke God to anger; they are damnable. You may perish by false
   devotions as much as by real scandal; by image-worship, as by
   drunkenness and whoredom. A man may die by poison as much as a pistol.
   We may go to hell by drinking poison in the Romish cup of fornication,
   as much as by being pistoled with gross and scandalous sins. To
   conclude, God is a jealous God,' who will admit of no co-rival; He will
   visit the iniquities of the fathers upon their children;' he will
   entail a plague upon the posterity of idolaters. He interprets
   idolaters to be such as hate him. He that is an image-lover is a
   God-hater. Therefore keep yourself pure from Romish idolatry; if you
   love your souls, keep yourselves from idols.

   V. Showing mercy unto thousands.

   Another argument against image-worship, is that God is merciful to
   those who do not provoke him with their images, and will entail mercy
   upon their posterity. Shewing mercy unto thousands.'

   The golden sceptre of God's mercy is here displayed, shewing mercy to
   thousands.' The heathen thought they praised Jupiter enough when they
   called him good and great. Both excellencies of majesty and mercy meet
   in God. Mercy is an innate propensity in God to do good to distressed
   sinners. God showing mercy, makes his Godhead appear full of glory.
   When Moses said to God, I beseech thee, show me thy glory;' I will,'
   said God, show mercy.' Exod 33: 19. His mercy is his glory. Mercy is
   the name by which he will be known. The Lord passed by, and proclaimed,
   The Lord, the Lord God, merciful and gracious.' Exod 34: 6. Mercy
   proceeds primarily, and originally from God. He is called the Father of
   mercies' (2 Cor 1: 3), because he begets all the mercies which are in
   the creature. Our mercies compared with his are scarcely so much as a
   drop to the ocean.

   What are the properties of God's mercy?

   (1) It is free and spontaneous. To set up merit is to destroy mercy.
   Nothing can deserve mercy or force it; we cannot deserve it nor force
   it, because of our enmity. We may force God to punish us, but not to
   love us. I will love them freely.' Hos 14: 4. Every link in the golden
   chain of salvation is wrought and interwoven with free grace. Election
   is free. He has chosen us in him according to the good pleasure of his
   will.' Eph 1: 4. Justification is free. Being justified freely by his
   grace.' Rom 3: 24. Say not I am unworthy; for mercy is free. If God
   should show mercy only to such as deserve it, he must show mercy to
   none.

   (2) The mercy which God shows is powerful. How powerful is that mercy
   which softens a heart of stone! Mercy changed Mary Magdalen's heart,
   out of whom seven devils were cast: she who was an inflexible adamant
   was made a weeping penitent. God's mercy works sweetly, yet
   irresistibly; it allures, yet conquers. The law may terrify, but mercy
   mollifies. Of what sovereign power and efficacy is that mercy which
   subdues the pride and enmity of the heart, and beats off those chains
   of sin in which the soul is held.

   (3) The mercy which God shows is superabundant. Abundant in goodness
   and truth, keeping mercy for thousands.' Exod 34: 6. God visits
   iniquity to the third and fourth generation' only, but he shows mercy
   to a thousand generations. Exod 20: 5, 6. The Lord has treasures of
   mercy in store, and therefore is said to be plenteous in mercy' (Psa
   86: 5), and rich in mercy' (Eph 2: 4). The vial of God's wrath drops
   only, but the fountain of his mercy runs. The sun is not so full of
   light as God is of love.

   God has mercy of all dimensions. He has depth of mercy, it reaches as
   low as sinners; and height of mercy, it reaches above the clouds.

   God has mercies for all seasons; mercies for the night, he gives sleep;
   nay, sometimes he gives a song in the night. Psa 42: 8. He has also
   mercies for the morning. His compassions are new every morning.' Lam 3:
   23.

   God has mercies for all sorts. Mercies for the poor: He raiseth up the
   poor out of the dust.' 1 Sam 2: 8. Mercies for the prisoner: he
   despiseth not his prisoners.' Psa 69: 33. Mercies for the dejected: In
   a little wrath I hid my face from thee but with everlasting kindness
   will I have mercy on thee.' Isa 54: 8. He has old mercies: Thy mercies
   have been ever of old.' Psa 25: 6. New mercies: He has put a new song
   in my mouth.' Psa 40: 3. Every time we draw our breath we suck in
   mercy. God has mercies under heaven, and those we taste; and mercies in
   heaven, and those we hope for. Thus his mercies are superabundant.

   (4) The mercy of God is abiding. The mercy of the Lord is from
   everlasting to everlasting.' Psa 103: 17. God's anger to his children
   lasts but a while (Psa 103: 9), but his mercy lasts for ever. His mercy
   is not like the widow's oil, which ran awhile, and then ceased (2 Kings
   4: 6), but overflowing and everflowing. As his mercy is without bounds,
   so is it without end. His mercy endureth for ever.' Psa 136. God never
   cuts off the entail of mercy from the elect.

   In how many ways is God said to show mercy?

   (1) We are all living monuments of his mercy. He shows mercy to us in
   daily supplying us. He supplies us with health. Health is the sauce
   which makes life sweeter. How would they prize this mercy who are
   chained to a sick-bed! God supplies us with provisions. God which fed
   me all my life long.' Gen 48: 15. Mercy spreads our tables, and carves
   for us every bit of bread we cat; we never drink but in the golden cup
   of mercy.

   (2) God shows mercy in lengthening out our gospel-liberties. 1 Cor 16:
   9. There are many adversaries; many would stop the waters of the
   sanctuary that that they should not run. We enjoy the sweet seasons of
   grace, we hear joyful sounds, we see the goings of God in his
   sanctuary, we enjoy Sabbath after Sabbath; the manna of the word falls
   about our tents, when in other parts of the land there is no manna. God
   shows mercy to us in continuing our forfeited privileges.

   (3) He shows mercy in preventing many evils from invading us. Thou, O
   Lord, art a shield for me.' Psa 3: 3. God has restrained the wrath of
   men, and been a screen between us and danger; when the destroying angel
   has been abroad, and shed his deadly arrow of pestilence, he has kept
   off the arrow that it has not come near us.

   (4) He shows mercy in delivering us. And I was delivered out of the
   mouth of the lion' (viz., Nero). 2 Tim 4: 17. He has restored us from
   the grave. May we not write the writing of Hezekiah, when he had been
   sick, and was recovered of his sickness?' Isa 38: 9. When we thought
   the sun of our life was setting God has made it return to its former
   brightness.

   (S) He shows mercy in restraining us from sin. Lusts within are worse
   than lions without. The greatest sign of God's anger is to give men up
   to their sins. So I gave them up to their own hearts' lust.' Psa 81:
   12. While they sin themselves to hell, God has laid the bridle of
   restraining grace upon us. As he said to Abimelech, I withheld thee
   from sinning against me.' Gen 20: 6. So he has withheld us from those
   sins which might have made us a prey to Satan, and a terror to
   ourselves.

   (6) God shows mercy in guiding and directing us. Is it not a mercy for
   one that is out of the way to have a guide? [1] There is a providential
   guidance. God guides our affairs for us; chalks out the way he would
   have us to walk in. He resolves our doubts, unties our knots, and
   appoints the bounds of our habitation. Acts 17: 26. [2] A spiritual
   guidance. Thou shalt guide me with thy counsel.' Psa 73: 24. As Israel
   had a pillar of fire to go before them, so God guides us with the
   oracles of his word, and the conduct of his Spirit. He guides our heads
   to keep us from error; and he guides our feet to keep us from scandal.
   Oh, what mercy is it to have God to be our guide and pilot! For thy
   name's sake, lead me and guide me.' Psa 31: 3.

   (7) God shows mercy in correcting us. He is angry in love; he smites
   that he may save. His rod is not a rod of iron to break us, but a
   fatherly rod to humble us. He, for our profit, that we might be
   partakers of his holiness.' Heb 12: l0. Either he will mortify some
   corruption, or exercise some grace. Is there not mercy in this? Every
   cross, to a child of God, is like Paul's cross wind, which, though it
   broke the ship, it brought Paul to shore upon the broken pieces. Acts
   27: 44.

   (8) God shows mercy in pardoning us, Who is a God like unto thee, that
   pardoneth iniquity?' Mic 7: 18. It is mercy to feed us, rich mercy to
   pardon us. This mercy is spun out of the bowels of the free grace, and
   is enough to make a sick man well. The inhabitant shall not say, I am
   sick; the people that dwell therein shall be forgiven their iniquity.'
   Isa 33: 24. Pardon of sin is a mercy of the first magnitude. God seals
   the sinner's pardon with a kiss. This made David put on his best
   clothes, and anoint himself. His child was newly dead, and God had told
   him the sword should not depart from his house, yet he anoints himself.
   The reason was that God had sent him pardon by the prophet Nathan. The
   Lord has put away thy sin.' 2 Sam 12: 13. Pardon is the only fit remedy
   for a troubled conscience. What can give ease to a wounded spirit but
   pardoning mercy? Offer him the honours and pleasure of the world. It is
   as if flowers and music were brought to one that is condemned.

   How may I know that my sins are pardoned?

   Where God removes the guilt, he breaks the power of sin. He will have
   compassion: he will subdue our iniquities.' Mic 7: 19. With pardoning
   love God gives subduing grace.

   (9) God shows his mercy in sanctifying us. I am the Lord which sanctify
   you.' Lev 20: 8. This is the partaking of the divine nature. 2 Pet 1:
   4. God's Spirit is a spirit of consecration; though it sanctify us but
   in part, yet it is in every part. 1 Thess 5: 23. It is such a mercy
   that God cannot give it in anger. If we are sanctified, we are elected.
   God has chosen you to salvation through sanctification.' 2 Thess 2: 13.
   This prepares for happiness, as the seed prepares for harvest. When the
   virgins had been anointed and perfumed, they were to stand before the
   king (Esth 2: 12); SO, when we have had the anointing of God, we shall
   stand before the King of heaven.

   (10) God shows mercy in hearing our prayers. Have mercy upon me, and
   hear my prayer.' Psa 4: 1. Is it not a favour, when a man puts up a
   petition to the king, to have it granted? So when we pray for pardon,
   adoption, and the sense of God's love, it is a signal mercy to have a
   gracious answer. God may delay an answer, and yet not deny. You do not
   throw a musician money at once, because you love to hear his music. God
   loves the music of prayer, but does not always let us hear from him at
   once; but in due season gives an answer of peace. Blessed be God, which
   has not turned away my prayer, nor his mercy from me.' Psa 66: 20. If
   God does not turn away our prayer, he does not turn away his mercy.

   (11) God shows mercy in saving us. According to his mercy he saved us.'
   Titus 3: 5. This is the top-stone of mercy, and it is laid in heaven.
   Here mercy displays itself in all its orient colours. Mercy is mercy
   indeed, when God perfectly refines us from all the lees and dregs of
   corruption; when our bodies are made like Christ's glorious body, and
   our souls like the angels. Saving mercy is crowning mercy. It is not
   merely to be freed from hell, but enthroned in a kingdom. In this life
   we desire God, rather than enjoy him; but what rich mercy will it be to
   be fully possessed of him, to see his smiling face, and to lay us in
   his bosom! This will fill us with joy unspeakable and full of glory.' 1
   Peter 1: 8. I shall be satisfied, when I awake, with thy likeness.' Psa
   17: 15.

   Use one. Let us not despair. What an encouragement we have here to
   serve God. He shows mercy to thousands. Who would not be willing to
   serve a prince who is given to mercy and clemency? God is represented
   with a rainbow round about him, as an emblem of his mercy. Rev 4: 3.
   Acts of severity are forced from God; judgement is his strange work.
   Isa 28: 21. The disciples, who are not said to wonder at the other
   miracles of Christ, did wonder when the fig-tree was cursed and
   withered, because it was not his manner to put forth acts of severity.
   God is said to delight in mercy. Mic 7: 18. Justice is God's left hand:
   mercy is his right hand. He uses his right hand most; he is more used
   to mercy than to justice. Pronior est Deus ad parcendum quam ad
   puniendum [God is more inclined to mercy than to punishment]. God is
   said to be slow to anger (Psa 103: 8), but ready to forgive. Psa 86: 5.
   This may encourage us to serve him. What argument will prevail, if
   mercy will not? Were God all justice, it might frighten us from him,
   but his mercy is a loadstone to draw us to him.

   Use two. Hope in God's mercies. The Lord taketh pleasure in them that
   fear him, in those that hope in his mercy.' Psa 147: 11. He counts it
   his glory to scatter pardons among men.

   But I have been a great sinner and sure there is no mercy for me!

   Not if thou goest on in sin, and art so resolved; but, if thou wilt
   break off thy sins, the golden sceptre of mercy shall be held forth to
   thee. Let the wicked forsake his way, and let him return unto the Lord,
   and he will have mercy upon him.' Isa 55: 7. Christ's blood is a
   fountain opened for sin and for uncleanness.' Zech 13: 1. Mercy more
   overflows in God, than sin in us. His mercy can drown great sins, as
   the sea covers great rocks. Some of the Jews who had their hands
   imbrued in Christ's blood, were saved by that blood. God loves to
   magnify his goodness, to display the trophies of free grace, and to set
   up his mercy in spite of sin. Therefore, hope in his mercy.

   Use three. Labour to know that God's mercy is for you. He is the God of
   my mercy.' Psa. 59: 17. A man who was being drowned, seeing a rainbow,
   said, What am I the better, though God will not drown the world, if I
   am drowned?' So, what are we the better, though God is merciful, if we
   perish? Let us labour to know God's special mercy is for us.

   How shall we know it belongs to us?

   (1) If we put a high value and estimate upon it. He will not throw away
   his mercy on them that slight it. We prize health, but we prize
   adopting mercy more. This is the diamond ring; it outshines all other
   comforts.

   (2) If we fear God, if we have a reverend awe upon us, if we tremble at
   sin, and flee from it, as Moses did from his rod turned into a serpent.
   His mercy is on them that fear him.' Luke 1: 50.

   (3) If we take sanctuary in God's mercy, we trust in it as a man saved
   by catching hold of a cable. God's mercy to us is a cable let down from
   heaven. By taking fast hold of this by faith, we are saved. I trust in
   the mercy of God for ever.' Psa 52: 8. As a man trusts his life and
   goods in a garrison, so we trust our souls in God's mercy.

   How shall we get a share in God's special mercy?

   (1) If we would have mercy, it must be through Christ. Out of Christ no
   mercy is to be had. We read in the old law, that none might come unto
   the holy of holies, where the mercy-seat stood, but the high-priest: to
   signify that we have nothing to do with mercy but through Christ our
   High-priest; that the high-priest might not come near the mercy-seat
   without blood, to show that we have no right to mercy, but through the
   expiatory sacrifice of Christ's blood, Lev 16: 14; that the high-priest
   might not, upon pain of death, come near the mercy-seat without
   incense, Lev 16: 13, to show that there is no mercy from God without
   the incense of Christ's intercession. If we would have mercy, we must
   get a part in Christ. Mercy swims to us through Christ's blood.

   (2) If we would have mercy, we must pray for it. Show us thy mercy, O
   Lord, and grant us thy salvation.' Psa 85: 7. Turn thee unto me, and
   have mercy upon me.' Psa 25: 16. Lord, put me not off with common
   mercy; give me not only mercy to feed and clothe me, but mercy to
   pardon me; not only sparing mercy, but saving mercy. Lord, give me the
   cream of thy mercies; let me have mercy and loving kindness. Who
   crowneth thee with loving kindness and tender mercies.' Psa 103: 4. Be
   earnest suitors for mercy; let your wants quicken your importunity. We
   pray most fervently when we pray most feelingly.

   VI. Of them that love me.

   God's mercy is for them that love him. Love is a grace that shines and
   sparkles in his eye, as the precious stone upon Aaron's breastplate.
   Love is a holy expansion or enlargement of soul, by which it is carried
   with delight after God, as the chief good. Aquinas defines love --
   Complacentia amantis in amato; a complacent delight in God, as our
   treasure. Love is the soul of religion; it is a momentous grace. If we
   had knowledge as the angels, or faith of miracles, yet without love it
   would profit nothing. 1 Cor 13: 2. Love is the first and great
   commandment.' Matt. 22: 38. It is so, because, if it be wanting, there
   can be no religion in the heart; there can be no faith, for faith works
   by love. Gal 5: 6. All else is but pageantry, or a devout compliment.
   It meliorates and sweetens all the duties of religion, it makes them
   savoury meat, without which God cares not to taste them. It is the
   first and great commandment, in respect of the excellence of this
   grace. Love is the queen of graces; it outshines all others, as the sun
   the lesser planets. In some respects it is more excellent than faith;
   though in one sense faith is more excellent, virtute unionis, as it
   unites us to Christ. It puts upon us the embroidered robe of Christ's
   righteousness, which is brighter than any the angels wear. In another
   sense it is more excellent, respectu durationis, in respect of the
   continuance of it: it is the most durable grace; as faith and hope will
   shortly cease, but love will remain. When all other graces, like
   Rachel, shall die in travail, love shall revive. The other graces are
   in the nature of a lease, for the term of life only; but love is a
   freehold that continues for ever. Thus love carries away the garland
   from all other graces, it is the most long-lived grace, it is a bud of
   eternity. This grace alone will accompany us in heaven.

   How must our love to God be characterised?

   (1) Love to God must be pure and genuine. He must be loved chiefly for
   himself; which the schoolmen call amor amicitiae. We must love God, not
   only for his benefits, but for those intrinsic excellencies with which
   he is crowned. We must love God not only for the good which flows from
   him, but for the good which is in him. True love is not mercenary, he
   who is deeply in love with God, needs not be hired with rewards, he
   cannot but love God for the beauty of his holiness; though it is not
   unlawful to look for benefits. Moses had an eye to the recompense of
   reward (Heb 11: 26); but we must not love God for his benefits only,
   for then it is not love of God, but self-love.

   (2) Love to God must be with all the heart. Thou shalt love the Lord
   thy God with all thy heart.' Mark 12: 30. We must not love God a
   little, give him a drop or two of our love; but the main stream must
   flow to him. The mind must think of God, the will choose him, the
   affections pant after him. The true mother would not have the child
   divided, nor will God have the heart divided. We must love him with our
   whole heart. Though we may love the creature, yet it must be a
   subordinate love. Love to God must be highest, as oil swims above the
   water.

   (3) Love to God must be flaming. To love coldly is the same as not to
   love. The spouse is said to be amore perculsa, sick of love.' Cant 2:
   5. The seraphim are so called from their burning love. Love turns
   saints into seraphim; it makes them burn in holy love to God. Many
   waters cannot quench this love.

   How may we know whether we love God?

   (1) He who loves God desires his presence. Lovers cannot be long
   asunder, they soon have their fainting fits, for want of a sight of the
   object of their love. A soul deeply in love with God desires the
   enjoyment of him in his ordinances, in word, prayer, and sacraments.
   David was ready to faint away and die when he had not a sight of God.
   My soul fainteth for God.' Psa 84: 2. Such as care not for ordinances,
   but say, When will the Sabbath be over? plainly discover want of love
   to God.

   (2) He who loves God, does not love sin. Ye that love the Lord, hate
   evil.' Psa 97: 10. The love of God, and the love of sin, can no more
   mix together than iron and clay. Every sin loved, strikes at the being
   of God; but he who loves God, has an antipathy against sin. He who
   would part two lovers is a hateful person. God and the believing soul
   are two lovers; sin parts between them, therefore the soul is
   implacably set against it. By this try your love to God. How could
   Delilah say she loved Samson, when she entertained correspondence with
   the Philistine, who were his mortal enemies? How can he say he loves
   God who loves sin, which is God's enemy?

   (3) He who loves God is not much in love with anything else. His love
   is very cool to worldly things. His love to God moves swiftly, as the
   sun in the firmament; to the world it moves slowly, as the sun on the
   dial. The love of the world eats out the heart of religion; it chokes
   good affections, as earth puts out the fire. The world was a dead thing
   to Paul. The world is crucified unto me and I to the world.' Gal 6: 14.
   In Paul we may see both the picture and pattern of a mortified man. He
   that loves God, uses the world but chooses God. The world is his
   pension, but God is his portion. Psa 119: 57. The world engages him,
   but God delights and satisfies him. He says as David, God my exceeding
   joy,' the gladness or cream of my joy. Psa 43: 4.

   (4) He who loves God cannot live without him. Things we love we cannot
   be without. A man can do without music or flowers, but not food; so a
   soul deeply in love with God looks upon himself as undone without him.
   Hide not thy face from me, lest I be like them that go down into the
   pit.' Psa 143: 7. He says as Job, I went mourning without the sun;'
   chap. 30: 28. I have starlight, I want the Sun of Righteousness; I
   enjoy not the sweet presence of my God. Is God our chief good, and we
   cannot live without him? Alas! how do they show they have no love to
   God who can do well enough without him! Let them have but corn and oil,
   and you shall never hear them complain of the want of God.

   (5) He who loves God will be at any pains to get him. What pains the
   merchant takes, what hazards he runs, to have a rich return from the
   Indies! Extremos currit mercator ad Indos [The merchant races to the
   farthest Indies]. Jacob loved Rachel, and he could endure the heat by
   day, and the frost by night, that he might enjoy her. A soul that loves
   God will take any pains for the fruition of him. My soul followeth hard
   after thee.' Psa 63: 8. Love is pondus animae [the pendulum of the
   soul]. Augustine. It is as the weight which sets the clock going. It is
   much in prayer, weeping, fasting; it strives as in agony, that he may
   obtain him whom his soul loves. Plutarch reports of the Gauls, an
   ancient people of France, that after they had tasted the sweet wine of
   Italy, they never rested till they had arrived at that country. He who
   is in love with God, never rests till he has a part in him. I will seek
   him whom my soul loveth.' Cant 3: 2. How can they say they love God,
   who are not industrious in the use of means to obtain him? A slothful
   man hideth his hand in his bosom.' Prov 19: 24. He is not in agony, but
   lethargy. If Christ and salvation would drop as a ripe fig into his
   mouth, he would be content to have them; but he is loath to put himself
   to too much trouble. Does he love his friend, who will not undertake a
   journey to see him?

   (6) He who loves God, prefers him before estate and life. [1] Before
   estate. For whom I have suffered the loss of all things.' Phil 3: 8.
   Who that loves a rich jewel would not part with a flower for it?
   Galeacius, marquis of Vico, parted with a fair estate to enjoy God in
   his pure ordinances. When a Jesuit persuaded him to return to his
   popish religion in Italy, promising him a large sum of money, he said,
   Let their money perish with them who esteem all the gold in the world
   worth one day's communion with Jesus Christ and his Holy Spirit.' [2]
   Before life. They loved not their lives unto the death.' Rev 12: 2:
   Love to God carries the soul above the love of life and the fear of
   death.

   (7) He who loves God loves his favourites, the saints. 1 John 5: 1.
   Idem est motus animi in imaginem et rem [The mind reacts to the
   likeness of an object just as it does to the object itself]. To love a
   man for his grace, and the more we see of God in him, the more we love
   him, is an infallible sign of love to God. The wicked pretend to love
   God, but hate and persecute his image. Does he love his prince who
   abuses his statue, or tears his picture? They seem indeed to show great
   reverence to saints departed; they have great reverence for St. Paul,
   and St. Stephen, and St. Luke; they canonise dead saints, but persecute
   living saints; and do they love God? Can it be imagined that he loves
   God who hates his children because they are like him? If Christ were
   alive again, he would not escape a second persecution.

   (8) If we love God we cannot but be fearful of dishonouring him, as the
   more a child loves his father the more he is afraid to displease him,
   and we weep and mourn when we have offended him. Peter went out and
   wept bitterly.' Matt 26: 75. Peter might well think that Christ dearly
   loved him when he took him up to the mount where he was transfigured,
   and showed him the glory of heaven in a vision. That he should deny
   Christ after he had received such signal tokens of his love, broke his
   heart with grief He wept bitterly.' Are our eyes dropping tears of
   grief for sin against God? It is a blessed evidence of our love to God;
   and such shall find mercy. He shows mercy to thousands of them that
   love him.

   Use. Let us be lovers of God. We love our food, and shall we not love
   him that gives it? All the joy we hope for in heaven is in God; and
   shall not he who shall be our joy then, be our love now? It is a saying
   of Augustine, Annon poena satis magna est non amare te? Is it not
   punishment enough, Lord, not to love thee?' And again, Animam meam in
   odio haberem. I would hate my own soul if I did not find it loving
   God.'

   What are the incentives to provoke and inflame our love to God?

   (1) God's benefits bestowed on us. If a prince bestows continual
   favours on a subject, and that subject has any ingenuity, he cannot but
   love his prince. God is constantly heaping benefits upon us, filling
   our hearts with food and gladness.' Acts 14: 17. As streams of water
   out of the rock followed Israel whithersoever they went, so God's
   blessings follow us every day. We swim in a sea of mercy. That heart is
   hard that is not prevailed with by all God's blessings to love him.
   Magnes amoris amor [Love attracts love]. Kindness works even on a
   brute: the ox knows his owner.

   (2) Love to God would make duties of religion facile and pleasant. I
   confess that to him who has no love to God, religion must needs be a
   burden; and I wonder not to hear him say, What a weariness is it to
   serve the Lord!' It is like rowing against the tide. But love oils the
   wheels, it makes duty a pleasure. Why are the angels so swift and
   winged in God's service, but because they love him? Jacob thought seven
   years but little for the love he bare to Rachel. Love is never weary.
   He who loves money is not weary of telling it: and he who loves God is
   not weary of serving him.

   (3) It is advantageous. There is nothing lost by love to God. Eye has
   not seen, &c., the things which God has prepared for them that love
   him.' 1 Cor 2: 9. Such glorious rewards are laid up for them that love
   God, that as Augustine says, they not only transcend our reason, but
   faith itself is not able to comprehend them.' A crown is the highest
   ensign of worldly glory; but God has promised a crown of life to them
   that love him,' and a never-fading crown. James 1: 12. 1 Pet 5: 4.

   (4) By loving God we know that he loves us. We love him because he
   first loved us.' 1 John 5: 19. If ice melts, it is because the sun has
   shone upon it; so if the frozen heart melts in love, it is because the
   Sun of Righteousness has shone upon it.

   What means should be used to excite our love to God?

   (1) Labour to know God aright. The schoolmen say truly, Bonum non
   amatur quod non cognoscitur; we cannot love that which we do not know.'
   God is the most eligible good; all excellencies which lie scattered in
   the creature are united in him; he is Optimus maximus. Wisdom, beauty,
   riches, love, all concentrate in him. How fair was that tulip which had
   the colours of all tulips in it! All perfections and sweetnesses are
   eminently in God. Did we know God more, and by the eye of faith see his
   orient beauty, our hearts would be fired with love to him.

   (2) Make the Scriptures familiar to you. Augustine says that before his
   conversion he took no pleasure in Scripture, but afterwards it was his
   chief delight. The book of God discovers God to us, in his holiness,
   wisdom, veracity, and truth; it represents him as rich in mercy, and
   encircled with promises. Augustine calls the Scripture a golden
   epistle, or love-letter, sent from God to us. By reading this
   love-letter we become more enamoured with God; as by reading lascivious
   books, comedies, romances, &c., lust is excited.

   (3) Meditate much upon God, and this will promote love to him. While I
   was musing, the fire burned.' Psa 39: 3. Meditation is as bellows to
   the affections. Meditate on God's love in the gift of Christ. God so
   loved the world that he gave his only begotten Son,' &c. John 3: 16.
   That God should give Christ to us, and not to angels that fell, that
   the Sun of Righteousness should shine in our horizon, that he is
   revealed to us, and not to others; what wonderful love is this! Can one
   go upon hot coals, and his feet not be burned?' Prov 6: 28. Who can
   meditate on God's love, who can tread on these hot coals, and his heart
   not burn in love? Beg a heart to love God. The affection of love is
   natural, but not the grace of love. Gal 5: 22. This fire of love is
   kindled from heaven; beg that it may burn upon the altar of your heart.
   Surely the request is pleasing to God, and he will not deny such a
   prayer as Lord, give me a heart to love thee.'

   VII. And keep my commandments.

   Love and obedience, like two sisters, must go hand and hand. If ye love
   me, keep my commandments.' John 14: 15. Probatio delectionis est
   exhibitio operis [We show our love by performing the work]. The son
   that loves his father will obey him. Obedience pleases God. To obey is
   better than sacrifice.' 1 Sam 15: 22. In sacrifice, a dead beast only
   is offered; in obedience, a living soul; in sacrifice, only a part of
   the fruit is offered; in obedience, fruit and tree and all; man offers
   himself up to God. Keep my commandments.' It is not said, God shows
   mercy to thousands that know his commandments, but that keep them.
   Knowing his commandments, without keeping them, does not entitle any to
   mercy. The commandment is not only a rule of knowledge, but of duty.
   God gives us his commandments, not only as a landscape to look upon,
   but as his will and testament, which we are to perform. A good
   Christian, like the sun, not only sends forth light, but makes a
   circuit round the world. He has not only the light of knowledge; but
   moves in a sphere of obedience.

   [1] We should keep the commandments from faith. Our obedience ought,
   profluere a fide to spring from faith.' It is called, therefore, the
   obedience of faith.' Rom 16: 26. Abel, by faith, offered up a better
   sacrifice than Cain. Heb 11: 4. Faith is a vital principle, without
   which all our services are opera mortua, dead works. Heb 6: 1. It
   meliorates and sweetens obedience, and makes it come off with a better
   relish.

   But why must faith be mixed with obedience to the commandments?

   Because faith eyes Christ in every duty, in whom both the person and
   offering are accepted. The high-priest under the law laid his hand upon
   the head of the slain beast, which pointed to the Messiah. Exod 29: 10.
   So faith in every duty lays its hand upon the head of Christ. His blood
   expiates their guilt, and the sweet odour of his intercession perfumes
   our works of obedience. He has made us accepted in the beloved.' Eph 1:
   6.

   [2] Keeping the commandments must be uniform. We must make conscience
   of one commandment as well as of another. Then shall I not be ashamed,
   when I have respect unto all thy commandments.' Psa 119: 6. Every
   commandment has jus divinum, the same stamp of divine authority upon
   it; and if I obey one precept because God commands, by the same reason
   I must obey all. Some obey the commands of the first table, but are
   careless of the duties of the second: some of the second and not of the
   first. Physicians have a rule that when the body sweats in one part,
   and is cold in another, it is a sign of a distemper; so when men seem
   zealous in some duties of religion, but are cold and frozen in others,
   it is a sign of hypocrisy. We must have respect to all God's
   commandments.

   But who can keep all his commandments?

   There is a fulfilling God's commands, and a keeping of them. Though we
   cannot fulfil all, yet we may be said to keep them in an evangelical
   sense. We may facere, though not perficere [build, though not
   complete]. We keep the commandments evangelically: (1) When we make
   conscience of every command, when, though we come short in every duty,
   we dare not neglect any. (2) When our desire is to keep every
   commandment. O that my ways were directed to keep thy statutes!' Psa
   119: 5. What we want in strength we make up in will. (3) When we grieve
   that we can do no better; weep when we fail; prefer bills of complaint
   against ourselves; and judge ourselves for our failings. Rom 7: 24. (4)
   When we endeavour to obey every commandment, elicere conatum. I press
   toward the mark.' Phil 3: 14. We strive as in agony; and, if it lay in
   our power, we would fully comport with every commandment. (5) When,
   falling short, and unable to come up to the full latitude of the law,
   we look to Christ's blood to sprinkle our imperfect obedience, and,
   with the grains of his merits cast into the scales, to make it pass
   current. This, in an evangelical sense, is to keep all the
   commandments; and though it be not to satisfaction, yet it is to
   acceptation.

   [3] Keeping God's commandments must be voluntary. If ye be willing and
   obedient.' Isa 1: 19. God required a free-will offering. Deut 16: 10.
   David will run the way of God's commandments, that is freely and
   cheerfully. Psa 119: 32. Lawyers have a rule that adverbs are better
   than adjectives; that it is not the bonum, but the bene; not the doing
   much, but the doing well. A musician is not commended for playing long,
   but for playing well. Obeying God willingly is accepted. Virtus
   nolentium nulla est [Righteous deeds done unwillingly are worthless].
   The Lord hates that which is forced; which is paying a tax rather than
   an offering. Cain served God grudgingly; he brought his sacrifice, not
   his heart. To obey God's commandments unwillingly, is like the devils
   who came out of the men possessed, at Christ's command, but with
   reluctance, and against their will. Matt 8: 29. Obedientia praest and
   adest non timore poenae, sed amore Dei [Obedience is the chief thing,
   and this not through fear of punishment, but for love of God]. God
   duties must not be pressed nor beaten out of us, as the waters came
   from the rock, when Moses smote it with his rod, but must drop freely
   from us as myrrh from the tree, or honey from the comb. If a willing
   mind be wanting, the flower is wanting to perfume our obedience, and to
   make it a sweet-smelling savour to God.

   That we may keep God's commandments willingly, let these things be well
   weighed: (1) Our willingness is more esteemed than our service. David
   counsels Solomon not only to serve God, but with a willing mind. 1
   Chron 28: 9. The will makes sin to be worse, and duty to be better. To
   obey willingly shows we do it with love; and this crowns all our
   services.

   (2) There is that in the law-giver which may make us willing to obey
   the commandments, which is God's indulgence to us. [1] God does not
   require the summum jus as absolutely necessary to salvation; he expects
   not perfect obedience, he requires sincerity only. Do but act from a
   principle of love, and aim at honouring God in your obedience, and it
   is accepted. [2] In the gospel a surety is admitted. The law would not
   favour us so far; but now God so indulges us, that what we cannot do of
   ourselves we may do by proxy. Jesus Christ is a Surety of a better
   testament.' Heb 7: 22. We fall short in everything, but God looks upon
   us in our Surety; and Christ having fulfilled all righteousness, it is
   as if we had fulfilled the law in our own persons. [3] God gives
   strength to do what he requires. The law called for obedience, but
   though it required brick, it gave no straw; but in the gospel, God,
   with his commands, gives power. Make ye a new heart.' Ezek 18: 31.
   Alas! it is above our strength, we may as well make a new world. A new
   heart also will I give you.' Ezek 36: 26. God commands us to cleanse
   ourselves. Wash you, make you clean.' Isa 1: 16. But who can bring a
   clean thing out of an unclean?' Job 14: 4. Therefore the precept is
   turned into a promise. From all your filthiness will I cleanse you.'
   Ezek 36: 25. When the child cannot go, the nurse takes it by the hand.
   I taught Ephraim also to go, taking them by their arms.' Hos 11: 3.

   (3) There is that in God's commandments which may make us willing. They
   are not burdensome.

   [1] A Christian, so far as he is regenerate, consents to God's
   commands. I consent to the law that it is good.' Rom 7: 16. What is
   done with consent is no burden. If a virgin gives her consent, the
   match goes on cheerfully; if a subject consents to his prince's laws
   because he sees the equity and reasonableness of them they are not
   irksome. A regenerate person in his judgement approves, and in his will
   consents, to God's commandments and therefore they are not burdensome.

   [2] God's commandments are sweetened with joy and peace. Cicero
   questions whether that can properly be called a burden which is carried
   with delight and pleasure. Utrum onus appellatur quod laetitia fertur
   [Is a task performed with joy rightly so called]? If a man carries a
   bag of money that has been given him, it is heavy, but the delight
   takes off the burden. When God gives inward joy, it makes the
   commandments delightful. I will make them joyful in my house of
   prayer.' Isa 56: 7. Joy is like oil to the wheels, which makes a
   Christian run in the way of God's commandments, so that it is not
   burdensome.

   [3] God's commandments are advantageous. They are preventive of evil; a
   curb-bit to check us from sin. What mischiefs should we not run into if
   we had not afflictions to humble us, and the commandments to restrain
   us! God's commandments keep us within bounds, as the yoke keeps the
   beast from straggling. We should be thankful to God for precepts. Had
   he not set his commandments as a hedge or bar in our way, we might have
   run to hell and never stopped. There is nothing in the commandments but
   what is for our good. To keep the commandments of the Lord, and his
   statutes, which I command thee for thy good.' Deut 10: 13. God commands
   us to read his word; and what hurt is in this? He bespangles the word
   with promises; as if a father should bid his son read his last will and
   testament, wherein he makes over a fair estate to him. He bids us pray
   and tells us if we ask, it shall be given.' Matt 7: 7. Ask power
   against sin, ask salvation, and it shall be given. If you had a friend
   who should say, Come when you will to me, I will supply you with
   money,' would you think it a trouble to visit that friend often? God
   commands us to fear him. But fear thy God.' Lev 25: 43. There is honey
   in the mouth of this command. His mercy is on them that fear him.' Luke
   1: 50. God commands us to believe, and why so? Believe, and thou shalt
   be saved.' Acts 16: 31. Salvation is the crown set upon the head of
   faith. Good reason then have we to obey God's commands willingly, since
   they are for our good, and are not so much our duty as our privilege.

   [4] God's commandments are ornamental. Omnia quae praestari jubet Deus,
   non onerant nos sed ornant. Salvianus. God's commandments do not burden
   us, but adorn us.' It is an honour to be employed in a king's service;
   and much more to be employed in his by whom kings reign.' To walk in
   God's commandments proves us to be wise. Behold, I have taught you
   statutes: keep, therefore, and do them; for this your wisdom.' Deut 4:
   5, 6. To be wise is a great honour. We may say of every commandment of
   God, as Prov 4: 9: It shall give to thy head an ornament of grace.'

   [5] The commands of God are infinitely better than the commands of sin,
   which are intolerable. Let a man be under the command of any lust, and
   how he tires himself! What hazards he runs to endangering his health
   and soul, that he may satisfy his lust! They weary themselves to commit
   iniquity.' Jer 9: 5. And are not God's commandments more equal, facile,
   pleasant, than the commands of sin? Chrysostom says true, To act virtue
   is easier than to act vice.' Temperance is less troublesome than
   drunkenness; meekness is less troublesome than passion and envy. There
   is more difficulty in the contrivance and pursuit of a wicked design
   than in obeying the commands of God. Hence a sinner is said to travail
   with iniquity. Psa 7: 14. A woman while she is in travail is in pain --
   to show what pain and trouble a wicked man has in bringing forth sin.
   Many have gone with more pains to hell, than others have to heaven.
   This may make us obey the commandments willingly.

   [6] Willingness in obedience makes us resemble the angels. The
   cherubim, types representing the angels, are described with wings
   displayed, to show how ready the angels are to serve God. God no sooner
   speaks the word, but they are ambitious to obey. How are they ravished
   with joy while praising God! In heaven we shall be as the angels, and
   by our willingness to obey God's commands, we should be like them here.
   We pray that God's will may be done by us on earth as it is in heaven;
   and is it not done willingly there? It is also done constantly. Blessed
   is he who does righteousness at all times.' Psa 106: 3. Our obedience
   to the command must be as the fire of the altar, which never went out.
   Lev 6: 13. It must be as the motion of the pulse, always beating. The
   wind blows off the fruit; but the fruits of our obedience must not be
   blown off by any wind of persecution. I have chosen you that ye should
   go and bring forth fruit, and that your fruit should remain.' John 15:
   16.

   Use. They are reproved who live in a wilful breach of God's
   commandments, in malice, uncleanness, intemperance; and walk antipodes
   to the commandments. To live in a wilful breach of the commandment is:

   (1) Against reason. Are we able to stand out against God? Do we provoke
   the Lord, are we stronger than he?' 1 Cor 10: 22. Can we measure arms
   with God? Can impotence stand against omnipotence? A sinner acts
   against reason.

   (2) It is against equity. We have our being from God; and is it not
   just that we should obey him who gives us our being? We have all our
   subsistence from him; and is it not fitting, that as he gives us our
   allowance, we should give him our allegiance? If a general gives his
   soldiers pay, he expects them to march at his command; so for us to
   live in violation of the divine commands, is manifestly unjust.

   (3) It is against nature. Every creature in its kind obeys God's law.
   [1] Animate creatures obey him. God spake to the fish, and it set Jonah
   ashore. Jonah 2: 10. [2] Inanimate creatures. The wind and the sea obey
   him. Mark 4: 41, The very stones, if God give them a commission, will
   cry out against the sins of men. The stone shall cry out of the wall,
   and the beam out of the timber shall answer it.' Hab 2: 11. None
   disobey God but wicked men and devils; and can we find no better
   companions?

   (4) It is against kindness. How many mercies have we to allure us to
   obey! We have miracles of mercy; the apostle therefore joins these two
   together, disobedient and unthankful, which dyes sin with a crimson
   colour. 2 Tim 3: 2. As the sin is great, for it is a contempt of God, a
   hanging out of the flag of defiance against him, and rebellion is as
   the sin of witchcraft, so the punishment will be great. It cuts off
   from mercy. God's mercy is for them that keep his commandments, but
   there is no mercy for them that live in a wilful breach of them. All
   God's judgements set themselves in battle array against the
   disobedient: temporal judgements and eternal. Lev 26: 15, 16. Christ
   comes in flames of fire, to take vengeance on them that obey not God. 2
   Thess 1: 8. God has iron chains to hold those who break the golden
   chain of his commands; chains of darkness by which the devils are held
   ever. Jude 6. God has time enough, as long as eternity, to reckon with
   all the wilful breakers of his commandments.

   How shall we keep God's commandments?

   Pray for the Spirit of God. We cannot do it in our strength. The Spirit
   must work in us both to will and to do. Phil 2: 13. When the loadstone
   draws, the iron moves; so, when God's Spirit draws, we run in the way
   of his commandments.
     __________________________________________________________________

  2.3 The Third Commandment

   Thou shalt not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain: For the Lord
   will not hold him guiltless that taketh his name in vain.' Exod 20: 7.

   This commandment has two parts: 1. A negative expressed, that we must
   not take God's name in vain; that is, cast any reflections and
   dishonour on his name. 2. An affirmative implied. That we should take
   care to reverence and honour his name. Of this latter I shall speak
   more fully, under the first petition in the Lord's Prayer, Hallowed be
   thy name.' I shall now speak of the negative expressed in this
   commandment, or the prohibition, Thou shalt not take the name of the
   Lord thy God in vain.' The tongue is an unruly member. All the parts
   and organs of the body are defiled with sin, as every branch of
   wormwood is bitter; but the tongue is full of deadly poison.' James 3:
   8. There is no one member of the body breaks forth more in God's
   dishonour than the tongue. We have this commandment, therefore, as a
   bridle for the tongue, to bind it to its good behaviour. This
   prohibition is backed with a strong reason, For the Lord will not hold
   him guiltless;' that is he will not hold him innocent. Men of place and
   eminence deem it disgraceful to have their names abused and inflict
   heavy penalties on the offenders. The Lord will not hold him guiltless
   that taketh his name in vain;' but looks upon him as a criminal, and
   will severely punish him. The thing here insisted on is, that great
   care must be had, that the holy and reverend name of God be not
   profaned by us, or taken in vain. We take God's name in vain:

   [1] When we speak slightly and irreverently of his name. That thou
   mayest fear this glorious and fearful name, The Lord thy God.' Deut 28:
   58. David speaks of God with reverence. The mighty God, even the Lord.'
   Psa 50: 1. That men may know, that thou, whose name alone is Jehovah,
   art the Most High over all the earth. Psa 83: 18. The disciples, when
   speaking of Jesus, hallowed his name. Jesus of Nazareth, which was a
   prophet mighty in deed and word before God and all the people.' Luke
   24: 19. When we mention the names of kings, we give them some title of
   honour, as excellent majesty;' so should we speak of God with the
   sacred reverence that is due to the infinite majesty of heaven. When we
   speak slightly of God or his works, he interprets it as a contempt, and
   taking his name in vain.

   [2] When we profess God's name, but do not live answerably to it, we
   take it in vain. They profess that they know God, but in works they
   deny him.' Titus 1: 16. When men's tongues and lives are contrary to
   one another, when, under a mask of profession, they lie and cozen, and
   are unclean, they make use of God's name to abuse him, and take it in
   vain. Simulata sanctitas duplex iniquitas [Pretended holiness is merely
   double wickedness]. The name of God is blasphemed among the Gentiles
   through you.' Rom 2: 24. When the heathen saw the Jews, who professed
   to be God's people, to be scandalous, it made them speak evil of God,
   and hate the true religion for their sakes.

   [3] When we use God's name in idle discourse. He is not to be spoken of
   but with a holy awe upon our hearts. To bring his name in at every
   turn, when we are not thinking of him, to say, O God!' or, O Christ!'
   or, As God shall save my soul' -- is to take God's name in vain. How
   many are guilty here! Though they have God in their mouths, they have
   the devil in their hearts. It is a wonder that fire does not come out
   from the Lord to consume them, as it did Nadab and Abihu. Lev 10: 2.

   [4] When we worship him with our lips, but not with our hearts. God
   calls for the heart, My son, give me thy heart.' Prov 23: 26. The heart
   is the chief thing in religion; it draws the will and affections after
   it, as the Primum Mobile draw the other orbs along with it. The heart
   is the incense that perfumes our holy things; is the altar that
   sanctifies the offering. When we seem to worship God, but withdraw our
   heart from him, we take his name in vain. This people draw near me with
   their mouth, and with their lips do honour me, but have removed their
   heart far from me.' Isa 29: 13.

   (1) Hypocrites take God's name in vain: their religion is a lie; they
   seem to honour God, but they do not love him; their hearts go after
   their lusts. They set their heart on their iniquity.' Hos 4: 8. Their
   eyes are lifted up to heaven, but their hearts are rooted in the earth.
   Ezek 33: 31. These are devils in Samuel's mantle. (2) Superstitious
   persons take God's name in vain. They bring him a few ceremonies which
   he never appointed, bow at Christ's name and cringe to the altar, but
   hate and persecute God's image.

   [5] When we pray to him, but do not believe in him. Faith is a grace
   that greatly honours God. Abraham was strong in faith, giving glory to
   God.' Rom 4: 20. But when we pray to God, but do not mix faith with our
   prayer, we take his name in vain. I may pray,' says a Christian, but I
   shall be never the better.' I question whether God ever hears or
   answers such. It is to dishonour God and take his name in vain; it
   makes him either an idol, that has ears and hears not; or a liar, who
   promises mercy to the penitent, but will not make good his word. He
   that believeth not God has made him a liar.' 1 John 5: 10. When the
   apostle says (Rom 10: 14): How shall they call on him in whom they have
   not believed?' the meaning is, How shall they call on God aright, and
   not believe in him? But how many do call on him who do not believe on
   him! They ask for pardon, but unbelief whispers their sins are too
   great to be forgiven. Thus to pray and not believe, is to take God's
   name in vain, and highly dishonours God, as if he were not such a God
   as the word represents him. Plenteous in mercy unto all them that call
   upon him.' Psa 86: 5.

   [6] When in any way we profane and abuse his word. The word of God is
   profaned, in general, when profane men meddle with it. It is unseemly
   and unbecoming a wicked man to talk of sacred things, of God's
   providence, and the decrees of God and heaven. It was very distasteful
   to Christ to hear the devil quote Scripture, It is written.' To hear a
   wicked man who wallows in sin talk of God and religion is offensive; it
   is taking God's name in vain. When the word of God is in a drunkard's
   mouth, it is like a pearl hung upon a swine. Under the law, the lips of
   the leper were to be covered. Lev 13: 45. The lips of a profane,
   drunken minister ought to be covered; he is unfit to speak God's word,
   because he takes his name in vain.

   More particularly they profane God's word, and take his name in vain:
   (1) That speak scornfully of his word. Where is the promise of his
   coming? For since the fathers fell asleep, all things continue as they
   were from the beginning of the creation.' 2 Pet 3: 4. As if they had
   said, the preachers make much ado about the day of judgement, when all
   must be called to account for their works; but where is the appearing
   of that day? We see things keep their course, and continue as they were
   since the creation. Thus they speak scornfully of Scripture, and take
   God's name in vain. If sentence be not speedily executed, men scorn and
   deride; but, Judgements are prepared for scorners.' Prov 19: 29.

   (2) That speak jestingly. Such are they who sport and play with
   Scripture. This is playing with fire. Some cannot be merry unless they
   make bold with God; they make the Scripture a harp to drive away the
   spirit of sadness. Eusebius relates of one who made a jest of
   Scripture, and God struck him with frenzy. To play with Scripture shows
   a very profane heart. Some will rather lose their souls than lose their
   jests. These are guilty of taking God's name in vain. Tremble at it.
   Such as mock at Scripture, God will mock at their calamity. Prov 1: 26.

   (3) That bring Scripture to countenance any sin. The word, which was
   written for the suppression of sin, is brought by some for the defence
   of sin. For instance, if we tell a covetous man of his sin that
   covetousness is idolatry, he will say, Has not God bid me live in a
   calling? Has he not said, "Six days shalt thou labour;" and "he who
   provides not for his family is worse than an infidel"?' Thus he
   endeavours to support his covetousness by Scripture. Now, it is true
   that God has bid us take pains in our calling, but not to hurt our
   neighbour; he has bid us provide for a family, but not by oppression.
   Ye shall not oppress one another.' Lev 25: 25. He has bid us look after
   a livelihood, but not to the neglect of the soul: he has bid us lay up
   treasure in heaven (Matt 6: 20); but he has commanded us to lay out, as
   well as lay up; to sow seeds of charity on the backs and bellies of the
   poor, which is neglected by such. To bring Scripture therefore to
   uphold us in sin, is a high profanation of Scripture, and taking God's
   name in vain. Again, if we tell a man of his inordinate passions --
   that he may be drunk with rash anger as well as wine -- he will bring
   Scripture to justify it by saying, Does not the word say, "Be ye angry
   and sin not"?' Eph 4: 26. True, anger is good when mixed with holy
   zeal. Anger is without sin when it is against sin: but to sin in anger,
   to speak unadvisedly with the lips, is to have the tongue set on fire
   of hell. To bring Scripture to defend any sin is to profane it, and to
   take God's name in vain.

   (4) That adulterate the word, and wrest it in a wrong sense. Such are
   heretics, who put their own gloss upon Scripture, and make it speak
   that which the Holy Ghost never meant. As, for instance, when they
   expound those texts literally, which were meant figuratively. Thus the
   Pharisees, because God said in the law, Thou shalt bind them (the
   commandments) for a sign upon thy hand, and they shall be as frontlets
   between thine eyes' (Deut 6: 8), took it in a literal sense, got two
   scrolls of parchment, wherein they wrote the two tables, putting one on
   their left arms and binding the other to their eyebrows; and thus
   wrested that Scripture, and took God's name in vain. It was intended to
   be understood spiritually, of meditating on God's law, and putting it
   in practice. The Papists expound the words, This is my body,'
   literally, of the very body of Christ; as though, when Christ gave the
   bread, he had two bodies, one in the bread, and the other out of the
   bread, whereas he meant it figuratively as a sign of his body. Again,
   when those Scriptures are expounded figuratively and allegorically
   which the Holy Ghost meant literally. For example, Christ said to
   Peter, Launch out into the deep, and make a draught,' Luke 5: 4. This
   text was spoken in a plain, literal sense of launching out the ship,
   but the Papists take it in a mystic and allegorical sense. It proves,'
   say they, that the Pope, who is Peter's successor, shall launch forth,
   and catch the ecclesiastical and political power over the western parts
   of the world;' but I think the Papists have launched out too far beyond
   the meaning of the text. When men strain their wits to wrest the word
   to such a sense as pleases them, they profane God's word, and take his
   name in vain.

   [7] When we swear by God's name. Many seldom mention God's name but in
   oaths, for which sin the land mourns. Swear not at all,' that is,
   rashly and sinfully, so as to take God's name in vain. Matt 5: 34. Not
   but in some cases it is lawful to take an oath before a magistrate.
   Thou shalt fear the Lord thy God and serve him, and swear by his name.'
   Deut 6: 13. An oath for confirmation is the end of all strife.' Heb 6:
   16. When Christ says, Swear not at all;' he forbids such swearing as
   takes God's name in vain. There is a threefold swearing forbidden:

   (1) Vain swearing, as when men in their ordinary discourse, let fly
   oaths. Some excuse their swearing. It is a coarse wool that will take
   no dye, and a bad sin indeed that has no excuse.

   Excuse 1. I swear little trifling oaths; as Faith, or, By the mass. The
   devil has two false glasses, which he sets before men's eyes; the one
   is a little glass, in which the sin appears so small that it can hardly
   be seen, which the devil sets before men's eyes when they are going to
   commit sin; the other is a great magnifying glass, wherein sin appears
   so big that it cannot be forgiven, which the devil sets before men's
   eyes when they have sinned. Thou that sayest, sin is small, when God
   shall open the eye of thy conscience, thou wilt see it to be great, and
   be ready to despair. Thou sayest, they are but small oaths; but Christ
   forbids vain oaths. Swear not at all.' If God will reckon with us for
   idle words, will not idle oaths be put in the account?

   Excuse 2. I swear to the truth. See how this harlot-sin would paint
   itself with an excuse. Though it be true, yet, if it be a rash oath, it
   is sinful. Besides, he that swears commonly, must sometimes swear to
   more than is true. Where much water runs, some gravel or mud will pass
   along with it; so, where there is much swearing, some lies will run
   along with it.

   Excuse 3. I shall not be believed unless I seal up my words with an
   oath. A man that is honest will be believed without an oath; his bare
   word carries authority with it, and is as good as letters testimonial.
   Again, the more a man swears, the less others will believe him. Juris
   credit minus [Less trust is placed in his oaths. Thou art a swearer.
   Another thinks an oath weighs very light with him, and he cares not
   what he swears to, so that the more he swears the less others believe
   him. He will trust thy bond, but not thy oath.

   Excuse 4. It is a custom of swearing I have got, and I hope God will
   forgive me. Though among men custom has influence, and is pleadable in
   law, yet it is not so in the case of sin; here custom is no plea. Thou
   hast got a habit of swearing, and canst not leave it off, is this an
   excuse? Is a thing well done because it is commonly done? This is so
   far from being an excuse that it is an aggravation of sin. As if one
   that had been accused of killing a man, should plead with the judge to
   spare him because it was his custom to murder. Would not this be an
   aggravation of the offence? So it is here. Therefore, all excuses for
   this sin of vain-swearing are taken away. Dare not to live in this sin,
   for it is taking God's name in vain.

   (2) Vile swearing, horrid, prodigious oaths not to be named. Swearers,
   like mad dogs, fly in the face of heaven; and when they are angered,
   spue out their blasphemous venom on God's sacred majesty. Some in
   gaming, when things go cross and the dice runs against them, run
   against God in oaths and curses. Tell them of their sin, seek to bring
   home these asses from going astray, and it is but pouring oil on the
   flame; they will swear the more. Augustine says, They do no less sin
   who blaspheme Christ now in heaven, than the Jews did who crucified him
   on earth.' Swearers profane Christ's blood, and tear his name. A woman
   told her husband, that of her three sons, one of them only was his: the
   father dying, desired the executors to find out which was the true
   natural son, and bequeath all his estate to him. The father being dead,
   the executors set up his corpse against a tree and delivered to every
   one of these three sons a bow and arrows, telling them, that he who
   could shoot nearest the father's heart should have the whole of the
   estate. Two sons shot as near as they could to his heart, but the third
   felt nature so to work in him, that he refused to shoot; whereupon the
   executors judged him to be the true son, and gave him all the estate.
   Such as are the true children of God, fear to shoot at him; but such as
   are bastards, and not sons, care not though they shoot at him in heaven
   with their oaths and curses. That which makes swearing yet more
   heinous, is, that when men have resolved upon any wicked action, they
   bind themselves with an oath to do it. Such were they who bound
   themselves with an oath and curse to kill Paul. Acts 23: 12. To commit
   sin is bad enough; but to swear to commit sin, is a high profanation of
   God's name, and as it were, calls God to approve our sin.

   (3) Forswearing, which is a heaven-daring sin. Ye shall not swear by my
   name falsely, neither shalt thou profane my name.' Lev 19: 12. Perjury
   is calling God to witness to a lie. It is said of Philip of Macedon, he
   would swear and unswear, as might stand best with his interest. Thou
   shalt swear, The Lord liveth, in truth, in judgement, and in
   righteousness.' Jer 4: 2. In righteousness, therefore, it must not be
   an unlawful oath. In judgement therefore it must not be a rash oath. In
   truth, therefore, it must not be a false oath. Among the Scythians, if
   a man did forswear himself, he was to have his head stricken off;
   because, if perjury were allowed, there would be no living in a
   commonwealth; it would take away all faith and truth from among men.
   The perjurer is in as bad a case as the witch; for, by a false oath, he
   binds his soul fast to the devil. In forswearing, or taking a false
   oath in a court, there are many sins linked together; plurima peccata
   in uno [many sins in one]; for, besides taking God's name in vain, the
   perjurer is a thief; by his false oath he robs the innocent of his
   right; he is a perverter of justice; he not only sins himself, but
   occasions the jury to give a false verdict, and the judge to pass an
   unrighteous sentence. Surely God's judgements will find him out. When
   God's flying-roll, or curse, goes over the face of the earth, into
   whose house does it enter? Into the house of him that sweareth falsely
   by my name; and it shall consume the timber and stones thereof.' Zech
   5: 4. Beza relates of a perjurer, that he had no sooner taken a false
   oath, than he was immediately struck with apoplexy, never spake more,
   and died. Oh, tremble at such horrid impiety!

   [8] When we prefix God's name to any wicked action. Mentioning God in
   connection with a wicked design, is taking his name in vain. I pray,'
   said Absalom, let me pay my vow, which I have vowed unto the Lord, in
   Hebron.' 2 Sam 15: 7. This pretence of paying his vow made to God, was
   only to cover his treason. As soon as ye hear the sound of the trumpet
   ye shall say, Absalom reigneth;' chap. 15: 10. When any wicked action
   is baptised with the name of religion, it is taking God's name in vain.
   Herein the Pope is highly guilty, when he sends out his bulls of
   excommunication, or curses against the Christian; he begins with, In
   nomine Dei in the name of God.' What a provoking sin is this! It is to
   do the devil's work, and put God's name to it.

   [9] When we use our tongues any way to the dishonour of God's name. As
   when we use railing, or curse in our passions; especially when we wish
   a curse upon ourselves if a thing be not so, when we know it to be
   false. I have read of one who wished his body might rot, if that which
   he said was not true; and soon after his body rotted, and he became a
   loathsome spectacle.

   [10] When we make rash and unlawful vows. It is a good vow when a man
   binds himself to do that which the word binds him to; as, if he be
   sick, he vows if God restore him, he will live a more holy life. I will
   pay thee my vows which my lips have uttered when I was in trouble.' Psa
   66: 13, 14. But Voveri non debet quod Deo displicet; such a vow should
   not be made as is displeasing to God;' as to vow voluntary poverty, as
   friars; or to vow to live in nunneries. Jephthah's vow was rash and
   unlawful; he vowed to the Lord to sacrifice that to him which he met
   with next, and it was his daughter. Judges 11: 31. He did ill to make
   the vow, and worse to keep it; he became guilty of the breach of the
   third and sixth commandments.

   [11] When we speak evil of God. The people spake against God.' Numb 21:
   5.

   How do we speak against God?

   When we murmur at his providences, as if he had dealt hardly with us.
   Murmuring accuses God's justice. Shall not the judge of all the earth
   do right?' Gen 18: 25. Murmuring springs from a bitter root, it comes
   from pride and discontent; it reproaches God and thus takes his name in
   vain. It is a sin that God cannot bear. How long shall I bear with this
   evil congregation which murmur against me?' Numb. 14: 27.

   [12] When we falsify our promise; as when we say, if God spare our life
   we will do a certain thing, and never intend it. Our promise should be
   sacred and inviolable; but, if we make a promise, and mention God's
   name in it, but never intend to keep it, it is a double sin; it is
   telling a lie, and taking God's name in vain.

   Use. Take heed of taking God's name in vain in any of these ways.
   Remember the combination and threatening in the text, The Lord will not
   hold him guiltless.' Here is a meiosis; less is said, and more
   intended. He will not hold him guiltless;' that is, he will be severely
   avenged on such a one. The Lord will not hold him guiltless.' Here the
   Lord speaks after the manner of a judge, who holds the court assize.
   The judge here, is God himself; the accusers, Satan, and a man's own
   conscience; the charge is, Taking God's name in vain;' the accused is
   found guilty, and condemned: The Lord will not hold him guiltless.'
   Methinks these words, The Lord will not hold him guiltless,' should put
   a lock upon our lips, and make us afraid of speaking anything that may
   bring dishonour upon God, or may be taking his name in vain. It may be
   that men may hold such guiltless, when they curse, swear, speak
   irreverently of God, may let them alone, and not punish them. If one
   takes away another's good name, he shall be sure to be punished; but if
   he takes away God's good name, where is he that punishes him? He that
   robs another of his goods shall be put to death, but he that robs God
   of his glory, by oaths and curses, is spared; but God himself will take
   the matter into his own hand, and he will punish him who takes his name
   in vain.

   (1) Sometimes God punishes swearing and blasphemy in this life. In the
   county of Samurtia, when there arose a great tempest of thunder and
   lightning, a soldier burst forth into swearing; but the tempest tore up
   a great tree by the root, which fell upon him, and crushed him to
   pieces. German history tells of a youth, who was given to swearing, and
   inventing new oaths; the Lord sent a cancer into his mouth, which ate
   out his tongue and from which he died. If a man blasphemed God, the
   Lord caused him to be stoned to death. The Israelitish woman's son
   blasphemed the name of the Lord, and cursed. And Moses spake to the
   children of Israel, that they should bring forth him that had cursed,
   and stone him with stones.' Lev. 24: 11, 23. Olympias, an Arian bishop,
   reproached and blasphemed the sacred Trinity; whereupon he was suddenly
   struck with three flashes of lighting, which burned him to death.
   Felix, an officer of Julia, seeing the holy vessels which were used in
   the sacrament, said, in scorn of Christ, See what precious vessels the
   Son of Mary is served withal.' Soon after, he was taken with vomiting
   of blood from his blasphemous mouth, of which he died.

   (2) If God should not execute judgement on the profaners of his name in
   this life, their doom is to come. He will not remit their guilt, but
   deliver them to Satan the gaoler, to torment them for ever. If God
   justify a man, who shall condemn him? But if God condemn him, who shall
   justify him? If God lay a man in prison, where shall he get bail? God
   will take his full blow at the sinner in hell. It is a fearful thing to
   fall into the hands of the living God.' Heb 10: 31.
     __________________________________________________________________

  2.4 The Fourth Commandment

   Remember the Sabbath-day to keep it holy. Six days shalt thou labour,
   and do all thy work: but the seventh day is the Sabbath of the Lord thy
   God; in it thou shalt not do any work, thou, nor thy son, nor thy
   daughter, thy manservant, nor thy maid-servant, nor thy cattle, nor thy
   stranger that is within thy gates. For in six days the Lord made heaven
   and earth, the sea, and all that in them is, and rested the seventh
   day; wherefore the Lord blessed the Sabbath-day and hallowed it. Exod
   20: 8-11.

   This commandment was engraven in stone by God's own finger, and it will
   be our comfort to have it engraven in our hearts.

   The Sabbath-day is set apart for God's solemn worship; it is his own
   enclosure, and must not be alienated to common uses. As a preface to
   this commandment, he has put a memento to it, Remember to keep the
   Sabbath day holy.' This word, remember,' shows that we are apt to
   forget Sabbath holiness; therefore we need a memorandum to put us in
   mind of sanctifying the day.

   I. There is in these words a solemn command. Remember the Sabbath-day
   to keep it holy.'

   [1] The matter of it. The sanctifying the Sabbath, which Sabbath
   sanctification consists in two things, in resting from our own works,
   and in a conscientious discharge of our religious duty.

   [2] The persons to whom the command of sanctifying the Sabbath is
   given. Either superiors, and they are, more private, as parents and
   masters; or more public, as magistrates; or inferiors, as natives,
   children, and servants, Thy son, and thy daughter, thy man-servant, and
   thy maidservant;' or foreigners, thy stranger that is within thy
   gates.'

   II. The arguments to obey this commandment of keeping holy the Sabbath
   are,

   [1] From the rationality of it. Six days shalt thou labour and do all
   thy work;' as if God had said, I am not a hard master, I do not grudge
   thee time to look after thy calling, and to get an estate. I have given
   thee six days, to do all thy work in, and have taken but one day for
   myself. I might have reserved six days for myself, and allowed thee but
   one; but I have given thee six days for the works of thy calling, and
   have taken but one day for my own service. It is just and rational,
   therefore, that thou shouldest set this day in a special manner apart
   for my worship.

   [2] The second argument for sanctifying the Sabbath, is taken from the
   justice of it. The seventh day is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God;' as
   if God had said, The Sabbath-day is my due, I challenge a special right
   in it, and no other has any claim to it. He who robs me of this day,
   and puts it to common uses, is a sacrilegious person, he steals from
   the crown of heaven, and I will in nowise hold him guiltless.

   [3] The third argument for sanctifying the Sabbath, is taken from God's
   own observance of it. He rested the seventh day;' as if the Lord should
   say, Will you not follow me as a pattern? Having finished all my works
   of creation, I rested the seventh day; so having done all your secular
   work on the six days, you should now cease from the labour of your
   calling, and dedicate the seventh day to me, as a day of holy rest.

   [4] The fourth argument for Sabbath-sanctification, is taken ab utili,
   from the benefit which redounds from a religious observation of the
   Sabbath. The Lord blessed the seventh day and hallowed it.' God not
   only appointed the seventh day, but he blessed it. It is not only a day
   of honour to God, but a day of blessing to us; it is not only a day
   wherein we give God worship, but a day wherein he gives us grace. On
   this day a blessing drops down from heaven. God himself is not
   benefited by it, we cannot add one cubit to his essential glory; but we
   ourselves are benefited. This day, religiously observed, entails a
   blessing upon our souls, our estate, and our posterity. Not keeping it,
   brings a curse. Jer 17: 27. God curses a man's blessings. Mal 2: 2. The
   bread which he eats is poisoned with a curse; so the conscientious
   observation of the Sabbath, brings all manner of blessings with it.
   These are the arguments to induce Sabbath-sanctification.

   The thing I would have you now observe is, that the commandment of
   keeping the Sabbath was not abrogated with the ceremonial law, but is
   purely moral, and the observation of it is to be continued to the end
   of the world. Where can it be shown that God has given us a discharge
   from keeping one day in seven?

   Why has God appointed a Sabbath?

   (1) With respect to himself. It is requisite that God should reserve
   one day in seven for his own immediate service, that thereby he might
   be acknowledged to be the great Plenipotentiary, or sovereign Lord, who
   has power over us both to command worship, and appoint the time when he
   will be worshipped.

   (2) With respect to us. The Sabbath-day is for our interest; it
   promotes holiness in us. The business of week-days makes us forgetful
   of God and our souls: the Sabbath brings him back to our remembrance.
   When the falling dust of the world has clogged the wheels of our
   affections, that they can scarce move towards God, the Sabbath comes,
   and oils the wheels of our affections, and they move swiftly on. God
   has appointed the Sabbath for this end. On this day the thoughts rise
   to heaven, the tongue speaks of God, and is as the pen of a ready
   writer, the eyes drop tears, and the soul burns in love. The heart,
   which all the week was frozen, on the Sabbath melts with the word. The
   Sabbath is a friend to religion; it files off the rust of our graces;
   it is a spiritual jubilee, wherein the soul is set to converse with its
   Maker.

   I should next show you the modes, or manner, how we should keep the
   Sabbath day holy; but before I come to that, we have a great question
   to consider.

   How comes it to pass that we do not keep the seventh-day Sabbath as it
   was in the primitive institution, but have changed it to another day?

   The old seventh-day Sabbath, which was the Jewish Sabbath, is
   abrogated, and in the room of it the first day of the week, which is
   the Christian Sabbath, succeeds. The morality or substance of the
   fourth commandment does not lie in keeping the seventh day precisely,
   but keeping one day in seven is what God has appointed.

   But how comes the first day in the week to be substituted in the room
   of the seventh day?

   Not by ecclesiastic authority. The church,' says Mr Perkins, has no
   power to ordain a Sabbath.'

   (1) The change of the Sabbath from the last day of the week to the
   first was by Christ's own appointment. He is Lord of the Sabbath.' Mark
   2: 28. And who shall appoint a day but he who is Lord of it? He made
   this day. This is the day which the Lord has made.' Psa 118: 24.
   Arnobius and most expositors understand it of the Christian Sabbath,
   which is called the Lord's-day.' Rev 1: 10. As it is called the Lord's
   Supper,' because of the Lord's instituting the bread and wine and
   setting it apart from a common to a special and sacred use; so it is
   called the Lord's-day, because of the Lord's instituting it, and
   setting it apart from common days, to his special worship and service.
   Christ rose on the first day of the week, out of the grave, and
   appeared twice on that day to his disciples, John 20: 19, 26, which was
   to intimate to them, as Augustine and Athanasius say, that he
   transferred the Jewish Sabbath to the Lord's day.

   (2) The keeping of the first day was the practice of the apostles. Upon
   the first day of the week, when the disciples came together to break
   bread, Paul preached unto them.' Acts 20: 7; 1 Cor 16: 2. Here was both
   preaching and breaking of bread on this day. Augustine and Innocentius,
   and Isidore, make the keeping of our gospel Sabbath to be of apostolic
   sanction, and affirm, that by virtue of the apostles' practice, this
   day is to be set apart for divine worship. What the apostles did, they
   did by divine authority; for they were inspired by the Holy Ghost.

   (3) The primitive church had the Lord's-day, which we now celebrate, in
   high estimation. It was a great badge of their religion to observe this
   day. Ignatius, the most ancient father, who lived in the time of John
   the apostle, has these words, Let every one that loveth Christ keep
   holy the first day of the week, the Lord's-day.' This day has been
   observed by the church of Christ above sixteen hundred years, as the
   learned Bucer notes. Thus you see how the seventh-day Sabbath came to
   be changed to the first-day Sabbath.

   The grand reason for changing the Jewish Sabbath to the Lord's-day is
   that it puts us in mind of the Mystery of our redemption by Christ.'
   The reason why God instituted the old Sabbath was to be a memorial of
   the creation; but he has now brought the first day of the week in its
   room in memory of a more glorious work than creation, which is
   redemption. Great was the work of creation, but greater was the work of
   redemption. As it was said, The glory of this latter house shall be
   greater than of the former.' Hag 2: 9. So the glory of the redemption
   was greater than the glory of the creation. Great wisdom was seen in
   making us, but more miraculous wisdom in saving us. Great power was
   seen in bringing us out of nothing, but greater power in helping us
   when we were worse than nothing. It cost more to redeem than to create
   us. In creation it was but speaking a word (Psa 148: 5); in redeeming
   there was shedding of blood. 1 Pet 1: 19. Creation was the work of
   God's fingers, Psa 8: 3, redemption was the work of his arm. Luke 1:
   51. In creation, God gave us ourselves; in the redemption, he gave us
   himself. By creation, we have life in Adam; by redemption, we have life
   in Christ. Col 3: 3. By creation, we had a right to an earthly
   paradise: by redemption, we have a title to a heavenly kingdom. Christ
   might well change the seventh day of the week into the first, as it
   puts us in mind of our redemption, which is a more glorious work than
   creation.

   Use one. The use I shall make of this is, that we should have the
   Christian Sabbath, we now celebrate, in high veneration. The Jews
   called the Sabbath, The desire of days, and the queen of days.' This
   day we must call a delight, the holy of the Lord, honourable.' Isa 58:
   13. Metal that has the king's stamp upon it is honourable, and of great
   value. God has set his royal stamp upon the Sabbath; it is the Sabbath
   of the Lord, and this makes it honourable. We should look upon this day
   as the best day in the week. What the phoenix is among birds, what the
   sun is among planets the Lord's-day is among other days. This is the
   day which the Lord has made.' Psa 118: 24. God has made all the days,
   but he has blessed this. As Jacob got the blessing from his brother, so
   the Sabbath got the blessing from all other days in the week. It is a
   day in which we converse in a special manner with God. The Jews called
   the Sabbath a day of light;' so on this day the Sun of Righteousness
   shines upon the soul. The Sabbath is the market-day of the soul, the
   cream of time. It is the day of Christ's rising from the grave, and the
   Holy Ghost's descending upon the earth. It is perfumed with the sweet
   odour of prayer, which goes up to heaven as incense. On this day the
   manna falls, that is angels' food. This is the soul's festival-day, on
   which the graces act their part: the other days of the week are most
   employed about earth, this day about heaven; then you gather straw, now
   pearl. Now Christ takes the soul up into the mount, and gives it
   transfiguring sights of glory. Now he leads his spouse into the
   wine-cellar, and displays the banner of his love. Now he gives her his
   spiced wine, and the juice of the pomegranate. Cant 2: 4, 8: 2. The
   Lord usually reveals himself more to the soul on this day. The apostle
   John was in the Spirit on the Lord's-day. Rev 1: 10. He was carried up
   on this day in divine raptures towards heaven. This day a Christian is
   in the altitudes; he walks with God, and takes as it were a turn with
   him in heaven. 1 John 1: 3. On this day holy affections are quickened;
   the stock of grace is improved; corruptions are weakened; and Satan
   falls like lightning before the majesty of the word. Christ wrought
   most of his miracles upon the Sabbath; so he does still: dead souls are
   raised and hearts of stone are made flesh. How highly should we esteem
   and reverence this day! It is more precious than rubies. God has
   anointed it with the oil of gladness above its fellows. On the Sabbath
   we are doing angels' work, our tongues are tuned to God's praises. The
   Sabbath on earth is a shadow and type of the glorious rest and eternal
   Sabbath we hope for in heaven, when God shall be the temple, and the
   Lamb shall be the light of it. Rev 21: 22, 23.

   Use two. SIX days shalt thou labour.' God would not have any live out
   of a calling: religion gives no warrant for idleness. It is a duty to
   labour six days, as well as keep holy rest on the seventh day. We hear
   that there are some which walk among you disorderly, working not at
   all. Now, them that are such, we command and exhort by our Lord Jesus,
   that with quietness they work, and eat their own bread.' 2 Thess 3: 11.
   A Christian must not only mind heaven, but his calling. While the pilot
   has his eye to the star, he has his hand to the helm. Without labour
   the pillars of a commonwealth will dissolve, and the earth, like the
   sluggard's field, will be overrun with briers. Prov 24: 31. Adam in
   innocence, though monarch of the world, must not be idle, but must
   dress and till the ground. Gen 2: 15. Piety does not exclude industry.
   Standing water putrifies. Inanimate creatures are in motion. The sun
   goes its circuit, the fountain runs, and the fire sparkles. Animate
   creatures work. Solomon sends us to the ant and pismire to learn
   labour. Prov 6: 6; 30: 25. The bee is the emblem of industry; some of
   the bees trim the honey, others work the wax, others frame the comb,
   others lie sentinel at the door of the hive to keep out the drone. And
   shall not man much more innate himself to labour? That law in paradise
   was never repeated. In the sweat of thy face shalt thou eat bread.' Gen
   3: 19. Such professors are to be disliked who talk of living by faith,
   but live out of a calling; they are like the lilies which toil not,
   neither do they spin.' Matt 6: 28. It is a speech of holy and learned
   Mr Perkins, Let a man be endowed with excellent gifts, and hear the
   word with reverence, and receive the sacrament, yet if he practice not
   the duties of his calling, all is but hypocrisy.' What is an idle
   person good for? What benefit is a ship that lies always on the shore?
   or armour that hangs up and rusts? To live out of a calling exposes a
   person to temptation. Melanchthon calls idleness the Devil's bath,
   because he bathes himself with delight in an idle soul. We do not sow
   seed in ground when it lies fallow; but Satan sows most of his seed of
   temptation in such persons as lie fallow, and are out of a calling.
   Idleness is the nurse of vice. Seneca, an old heathen, could say,
   Nullus mihi per otium dies exit; No day passes me without some labour.'
   An idle person stands for a cipher in the world, and God writes down no
   ciphers in the book of life. We read in Scripture of eating the bread
   of idleness,' and drinking the wine of violence.' Prov 31: 27; 4: 17.
   It is as much a sin to eat the bread of idleness,' as to drink the wine
   of violence.' An idle person can give no account of his time. Time is a
   talent to trade with, both in our particular and general callings. The
   slothful person hides his talent in the earth;' he does no good; his
   time is not lived, but lost. An idle person lives unprofitably, he
   cumbers the ground. God calls the slothful servant wicked.' Thou wicked
   and slothful servant.' Matt 25: 26. Draco, whose laws were written in
   blood, deprived those of their life who would not work for their
   living. In Hetruria they caused such persons to be banished. Idle
   persons live in the breach of the commandment, Six days shalt thou
   labour.' Let them take heed they be not banished from heaven. A man may
   as well go to hell for not working in his calling, as for not
   believing.

   Having spoken of the reasons of sanctifying the Sabbath I come now to

   III. The manner of sanctifying the Sabbath.

   [1] Negatively. We must do no work in it. This is the commandment. In
   it thou shall do no manner of work.' God has set apart this day for
   himself; therefore we are not to use it in common, by doing any civil
   work. As when Abraham went to sacrifice he left his servants and the
   ass at the bottom of the hill; so, when we are to worship God on this
   day, we must leave all worldly business behind, leave the ass at the
   bottom of the hill. Gen 22: 5. As Joseph, when he would speak with his
   brethren, thrust out the Egyptians, so, when we would converse with God
   on this day, we must thrust out all earthly employments. The Lord's day
   is a day of holy rest. All secular work must be forborne and suspended,
   as it is a profanation of the day. In those days saw I in Judah some
   treading winepresses on the Sabbath, and bringing in sheaves, and
   lading asses; as also wine, grapes and figs, and all manner of burdens
   which they brought into Jerusalem on the Sabbath-day; and I testified
   against them. Then I contended with the nobles of Judah, and said unto
   them, "What evil thing is this that ye do, and profane the
   Sabbath-day?' " Neh 13: 15, 17. It is sacrilege to rob for civil work
   the time which God has set apart for his worship. He that devotes any
   time of the Sabbath to worldly business, is a worse thief than he who
   robs on the highway; for the one does but rob man, but the other robs
   God. The Lord forbade mamma to be gathered on the Sabbath. Exod 16: 26.
   One might think it would have been allowed, as manna was the staff of
   their life,' and the time when it fell was between five and six in the
   morning, so that they might have gathered it betimes, and all the rest
   of the Sabbath might have been employed in God's worship; and besides,
   they needed not to have taken any great journey for it, for it was but
   stepping out of their doors, and it fell about their tents: and yet
   they might not gather it on the Sabbath; and for purposing only to do
   it, God was very angry. There went out some of the people on the
   seventh day for to gather, and they found none. And the Lord said, How
   long refuse ye to keep my commandments and my laws?' Exod 16: 27, 28.
   Surely anointing Christ when he was dead was a commendable work; but,
   though Mary Magdalene, and Mary the mother of James, had prepared sweet
   ointments to anoint the dead body of Christ, they went not to the
   sepulchre to embalm him till the Sabbath was past. They rested the
   Sabbath-day, according to the commandment.' Luke 23: 56. The hand
   cannot be busied on the Lord's-day but the heart will be defiled. The
   very heathen, by the light of nature, would not do any secular work in
   the time which they had set apart for the worship of their false gods.
   Clemens Alexandrinus reports of one of the emperors of Rome, who, on
   the day of set worship for his gods, put aside warlike affairs and
   spent the time in devotion. To do servile work on the Sabbath shows an
   irreligious heart, and greatly offends God. To do secular work on this
   day is to follow the devil's slough; it is to debase the soul. God made
   this day on purpose to raise the heart to heaven, to converse with him,
   to do angels' work; and to be employed in earthly work is to degrade
   the soul of its honour. God will not have his day entrenched upon, or
   defiled in the least thing. The man that gathered sticks on the Sabbath
   he commanded to be stoned. Numb. 15: 35. It would seem a small thing to
   pick up a few sticks to make a fire; but God would not have this day
   violated in the smallest matters. Nay, the work which had reference to
   a religious use might not be done on the Sabbath, as the hewing of
   stones for the building of the sanctuary. Bezaleel, who was to cut the
   stones, and carve the timber out for the sanctuary, must forbear to do
   it on the Sabbath. Exod 31: 15. A temple is a place of God's worship,
   but it was a sin to build a temple on the Lord's-day. This is keeping
   the Sabbath-day holy negatively, in doing no servile work.

   Works of necessity and charity however may be done on this day. In
   these cases God will have mercy and not sacrifice. (1) It is lawful to
   take the necessary supplies of nature. Food is to the body as oil to
   the lamp. (2) It is lawful to do works of mercy, as helping a neighbour
   when either life or estate are in danger. Herein the Jews were too nice
   and precise, who would not suffer works of charity to be done on the
   Sabbath. If a man was sick, they thought they might not on this day use
   means for his recovery. Christ charges them with being angry because he
   had wrought a cure on the Sabbath. John 7: 23. If a house were on fire,
   the Jews thought they might not bring water to quench it; if a vessel
   leaked on this day, they thought they might not stop it. They were
   righteous overmuch;' it was seeming zeal, but wanted discretion to
   guide it. Except in these two cases, of necessity and charity, all
   secular work is to be suspended and laid aside on the Lord's-day. In it
   thou shalt do no manner of work.' This arraigns and condemns many among
   us who too much foul their fingers with work on that day; some in
   dressing great feasts, others in opening their shop-doors, and selling
   meat on the Sabbath. The mariner will not put to sea but on the
   Sabbath, and so runs full sail into the violation of this command.
   Others work on this day privately, put up their shop-windows, and
   follow their trade within doors; but though they think to hide their
   sin under a canopy, God sees it. Whither shall I flee from thy
   presence?' The darkness hideth not from thee.' Psa 139: 7, 12. Such
   profane the day, and God will have an action of trespass against them.

   [2] Positively. We keep the Sabbath-day holy, by consecrating and
   dedicating' this day to the service of the high God.' It is good to
   rest on the Sabbath-day from the works of our calling; but if we rest
   from labour and do no more, the ox and the ass keep the Sabbath as well
   as we; for they rest from labour. We must dedicate the day to God; we
   must not only keep a Sabbath,' but sanctify' a Sabbath.
   Sabbath-sanctification consists in two things: (1) Solemn preparation
   for it. If a prince were to come to your house, what preparation would
   you make for his entertainment! You would sweep the house, wash the
   floor, adorn the room with the richest tapestry and hangings, that
   there might be something suitable to the state and dignity of so great
   a person. On the blessed Sabbath, God intends to have sweet communion
   with you; he seems to say to you, as Christ to Zacchaeus, Make haste
   and come down, for this day I must abide at thy house.' Luke 19: 5.
   Now, what preparation should you make for entertaining this King of
   glory? When Saturday evening approaches, sound a retreat; call your
   minds off from the world and summon your thoughts together, to think of
   the great work of the approaching day. Purge out all unclean
   affections, which may indispose you for the work of the Sabbath.
   Evening preparation will be like the tuning of an instrument, it will
   fit the heart better for the duties of the ensuing Sabbath.

   (2) The sacred observation of it. Rejoice at the approach of the day,
   as a day wherein we have a prize for our souls, and may enjoy much of
   God's presence. John 8: 56. Abraham rejoiced to see my day.' So, when
   we see the light of a Sabbath shine, we should rejoice, and call the
   Sabbath a delight:' this is the queen of days, which God has crowned
   with a blessing. Isa 58: 13. As there was one day in the week on which
   God rained manna twice as much as upon any other day, so he rains down
   the manna of heavenly blessings twice as much on the Sabbath as on any
   other. This is the day wherein Christ carries the soul into the house
   of wine, and displays the banner of love over it; now the dew of the
   Spirit falls on the soul, whereby it is revived and comforted. How many
   may write the Lord's day, the day of their new birth! This day of rest
   is a pledge and earnest of the eternal rest in heaven. Shall we not
   then rejoice at its approach? The day on which the Sun of Righteousness
   shines should be a day of gladness.

   Get up betides on the Sabbath morning. Christ rose early on this day,
   before the sun was up. John 20: 1. Did he rise early to save us, and
   shall not we rise early to worship and glorify him? Early will I seek
   thee.' Psa 63: 1. Can we be up betimes on other days? The husband man
   is early at his slough, the traveller rises early to go his journey,
   and shall not we, who on this day are travelling to heaven? Certainly,
   if we loved God as we should, we should rise on this day betimes, that
   we may meet with him whom our souls love. Such as sit up late at work
   on the night before, are so buried in sleep, that they will hardly be
   up betides on a Sabbath morning.

   IV. Having dressed your bodies, you must dress your souls for hearing
   the word. As the people of Israel were to wash themselves before the
   law was delivered to them, so we must wash and cleanse our souls; and
   that is done by reading, meditation, and prayer. Exod 19: 10.

   [1] By reading the word. The word is a great means to sanctify the
   heart, and bring it into a Sabbath-frame. Sanctify them through thy
   truth,' &c. John 17: 17. Read not the word carelessly, but with
   seriousness and affection; as the oracle of heaven, the well of
   salvation, the book of life. David, for its preciousness, esteemed it
   above gold; and for its sweetness, above honey. Psa 19: 10. By reading
   the word aright, our hearts, when dull, are quickened; when hard, are
   mollified; when cold and frozen are inflamed; and we can say as the
   disciples, Did not our heart burn within us?' Some step out of their
   bed to hearing. The reason why many get no more good on a Sabbath by
   the word preached, is because they did not breakfast with God in the
   morning by reading his word.

   [2] Meditation. Get upon the mount of meditation, and there converse
   with God. Meditation is the soul's retiring within itself, that, by a
   serious and solemn thinking upon God, the heart may be raised up to
   divine affections. It is a work fit for the morning of a Sabbath.
   Meditate on four things.

   (1) On the works of creation. This is expressed in the commandment.
   "The Lord made heaven and earth, the sea,' &c. The creation is a
   looking glass, in which we see the wisdom and power of God gloriously
   represented. God produced this fair structure of the world without any
   pre-existent matter, and with a word. By the word of the Lord were the
   heavens made.' Psa 33: 6. The disciples wondered that Christ could,
   with a word, calm the sea, but it was far more astounding with a word
   to make the sea. Matt 8: 26. On the Sabbath let us meditate on the
   infiniteness of the Creator. Look up to the firmament and see God's
   wonders in the deep.' Psa 107: 24. Look into the earth, where we may
   behold the nature of minerals, the power of the loadstone, the virtue
   of herbs, and the beauty of flowers. By meditating on these works of
   creation, so curiously embroidered, we shall learn to admire God and
   praise him. O Lord, how manifold are thy works, in wisdom hast thou
   made them all.' Psa 104: 24. By meditating on the works of creation, we
   shall learn to confide in God. He who can create, can provide; he that
   could make us when we were nothing, can raise us when we are low. Our
   help is in the name of the Lord who made heaven and earth.' Psa 124: 8.

   (2) Meditate on God's holiness. Holy and reverend is his name.' Psa
   111: 9. Thou art of purer eyes than to behold evil.' Hab 1: 13. God is
   essentially, originally, and efficiently holy. A11 the holiness in men
   and angels is but a crystal stream that runs from this glorious
   fountain. God loves holiness because it is his own image. A king cannot
   but love to see his own effigies stamped on coin. God counts holiness
   his glory, and the most sparkling jewel of his crown. Glorious
   unholiness.' Exod 15: 2: Here is meditation fit for the first entrance
   upon a Sabbath. The contemplation of this would work in us such a frame
   of heart as is suitable to a holy God; it would make us reverence his
   name and hallow his day. While musing; upon the holiness of God's
   nature, we shall begin to be transformed into his likeness.

   (3) Meditate on Christ's love in redeeming us. Rev 1: 5. Redemption
   exceeds creation; the one is a monument of God's power, the other of
   his love. Here is fit work for a Sabbath. Oh, the infinite stupendous
   love of Christ in raising poor lapsed creatures from a state of guilt
   and damnation! That Christ who was God should die! that this glorious
   Sun of Righteousness should be in an eclipse! We can never admire
   enough this love, no, not in heaven. That Christ should die for
   sinners! not sinful angels, but sinful men. That such clods of earth
   and sin should be made bright stars of glory! Oh, the amazing love of
   Christ! This was Illustre amoris Christi mnemosynum. Brugensis. That
   Christ should not only die for sinners, but die as a sinner! He has
   made him to be sin for us' 2 Cor 5: 21. He who was among the glorious
   persons of the Trinity, was numbered with the transgressors.' Isa 53:
   12. Not that he had sin, but he was like a sinner, having our sins
   imputed to him. Sin did not live in him, but it was laid upon him. Here
   was an hyperbole of love enough to strike us with astonishment. That
   Christ should redeem us, when he could not expect to gain anything, or
   to be advantaged at all by us! Men will not lay out their money upon
   purchase unless it will turn to their profit; but what benefit could
   Christ expect in purchasing and redeeming us? We were in such a
   condition that we could neither deserve nor recompense Christ's love.
   We could not deserve it; for we were in our blood. Ezek 16: 6. We had
   no spiritual beauty to tempt him. Nay, we were not only in our blood,
   but we were in arms against him. When we were enemies, we were
   reconciled to God by the death of his Son;' Rom 5: 10. When he was
   shedding his blood, we were spitting out poison. As we could not
   deserve, so neither could we recompense it. After he had died for us,
   we could not so much as love him, till he made us love him. We could
   give him nothing in lieu of his love. Who has first given to him?' Rom
   11: 35. We were fallen into poverty. If we have any beauty, it is from
   him, It was perfect through my comeliness which I had put upon thee.'
   Ezek 16: 14. If we bring forth any good fruit, it is not of our own
   growth, it comes from him, the true vine. From me is thy fruit found.'
   Hos 14: 8. It was nothing but pure love for Christ to lay out his blood
   to redeem such as he could not expect to be really bettered by. That
   Christ should die so willingly! I lay down my life.' John 10: 17. The
   Jews could not have taken it away if he had not laid it down. He could
   have called to his Father for legions of angels to be his life-guard;
   but what need for even that, when his own Godhead could have defended
   himself from all assaults? He laid down his life. The Jews did not so
   much thirst for his death, as he thirsted for our redemption. I have a
   baptism to be baptised with, and how am I straitened till it be
   accomplished?' Luke 12: 50. He called his sufferings a baptism; he was
   to be baptised and sprinkled with his own blood; and he thought the
   time long before he suffered. To show Christ's willingness to die, his
   sufferings are called an offering. Through the offering of the body of
   Jesus.' Heb 10: 10. His death was a free-will offering. That Christ
   should not grudge nor think much of all his sufferings! Though he was
   scourged and crucified, he was well contented with what he had done,
   and, if it were needful, he would do it again. He shall see of the
   travail of his soul, and shall be satisfied.' Isa 53: 11. As the mother
   who has had hard labour, does not repent of her pangs when she sees a
   child brought forth, but is well contented; so Christ, though he had
   hard travail upon the cross, does not think much of it; he is not
   troubled, but thinks his sweat and blood well bestowed, because he sees
   the man-child of redemption brought forth into the world. That Christ
   should make redemption effectual to some, and not to others! Here is
   surprising love. Though there is sufficiency in his merits to save all,
   yet some only partake of their saving virtue; all do not believe. There
   are some of you that believe not.' John 6: 64. Christ does not pray for
   all. John 17: 9. Some refuse him. This is the stone which the builders
   refused.' Psa 118: 22. Others deride him. Luke 16: 14. Others throw off
   his yoke. We will not have this man to reign over us.' Luke 19: 14. SO
   that all have not the benefit of salvation by him. Herein appears the
   distinguishing love of Christ, that the virtue of his death should
   reach some, and not others. Not many wise men after the flesh, not many
   mighty, not many noble are called.' 1 Cor 1: 26. That Christ should
   pass by many of birth and parts, and that the lot of free grace should
   fall upon thee; that he should sprinkle his blood upon thee; Oh, the
   depth of the love of Christ!' That Christ should love us with such a
   transcendent love! The apostle calls it Love which passeth knowledge.'
   Eph 3: 19. That he should love us more than the angels. He loves them
   as his friends, but believers as his spouse. He loves them with such a
   kind of love as God the Father bears to him. As the Father has loved
   me, so have I loved you.' John 15: 9. Oh, what an hyperbole of love
   does Christ show in redeeming us! That Christ's love in our redemption
   should be everlasting! Having loved his own, he loved them unto the
   end.' John 13: 1. As Christ's love is matchless, so it is endless. The
   flower of his love is sweet; and that which makes it sweeter is that it
   never dies. His love is eternized. Jer 31: 3. He will never divorce his
   elect spouse. The failings of his people cannot quite take off his
   love; they may eclipse it, but not wholly remove it; their failings may
   make Christ angry with them, but not hate them. Every failing does not
   break the marriagebond. Christ's love is not like the saint's love.
   They sometimes have strong affections towards him, at other times the
   fit is off, and they find little or no love stirring in them; but it is
   not so with Christ's love to them, it is a love of eternity. When the
   sunshine of Christ's electing love is once risen upon the soul, it
   never finally sets. Death may take away our life from us, but not
   Christ's love. Behold here a rare subject for meditation on a Sabbath
   morning. The meditation of Christ's wonderful love in redeeming us
   would work in us a Sabbath-frame of heart.

   It would melt us in tears for our spiritual unkindness, that we should
   sin against so sweet a Saviour; that we should be no more affected with
   his love, but requite evil for good; that like the Athenians, who,
   notwithstanding all the good service Aristides had done them, banished
   him out of their city, we should banish him from our temple; that we
   should grieve him with our pride, rash anger, unfruitfulness,
   animosities, and strange factions. Have we none to abuse but our
   friend? Have we nothing to kick against but the bowels of our Saviour?
   Did not Christ suffer enough upon the cross, but we must needs make him
   suffer more? Do we give him more gall and vinegar to drink?' Oh, if
   anything can dissolve the heart in sorrow, and melt the eyes to tears,
   it is unkindness offered to Christ. When Peter thought of Christ's love
   to him, how he had made him an apostle, and revealed his bosom-secrets
   to him, and taken him to the mount of transfiguration, and yet that he
   should deny him; it broke his heart with sorrow; he went out and wept
   bitterly.' Matt 26: 75. What a blessed thing is it to have the eyes
   dropping tears on a Sabbath! and nothing would sooner fetch tears than
   to meditate on Christ's love to us, and our unkindness to him.

   Meditating on a Lord's-day morning on Christ's love, would kindle love
   in our hearts to him. How can we look on his bleeding and dying for us
   and our hearts not be warmed with love to him? Love is the soul of
   religion, the purest affection. It is not rivers of oil, but sparks of
   love that Christ values. And sure, as David said, While I was musing
   the fire burned' (Psa 39: 3), so, while we are musing of Christ's love
   in redeeming us, the fire of our love will burn towards him; and then
   the Christian is in a blessed Sabbath-frame, when, like a seraphim, he
   is burning in love to Christ.

   (4) On a Sabbath morning meditate on the glory of heaven. Heaven is the
   extract and essence of happiness. It is called a kingdom. Matt 25: 34.
   A kingdom for its riches and magnificence. It is set forth by precious
   stones, and gates of pearl. Rev 21: 19, 21. There is all that is truly
   glorious; transparent light, perfect love, unstained honour, unmixed
   joy; and that which crowns the joy of the celestial paradise is
   eternity. Suppose earthly kingdoms were more glorious than they are,
   their foundations of gold, their walls of pearl, their windows of
   sapphire, yet they are corruptible; but the kingdom of heaven is
   eternal; those rivers of pleasure run for evermore.' Psa 16: 11. That
   wherein the essence of glory consists, and makes heaven to be heaven,
   is the immediate sight and fruition of the blessed God. I shall be
   satisfied, when I awake, with thy likeness.' Psa 17: 15. Oh, think of
   the Jerusalem above!

   This is proper for a Sabbath. The meditation of heaven would raise our
   hearts above the world. oh, how would earthly things disappear and
   shrink into nothing, if our minds were mounted above visible things,
   and we had a prospect of glory! How would the meditation of heaven make
   us heavenly in our Sabbath exercises! It would quicken affection, would
   add wings to devotion, and cause us to be in the Spirit on the
   Lord's-day.' Rev 1: 10. How vigorously does he serve God who has a
   crown of glory always in his eye!

   [3] We dress our souls on a Sabbath-morning by prayer; When thou
   prayest, enter into thy closet,' &c. Matt 6: 6. Prayer sanctifies a
   Sabbath.

   (1) The things we should pray for in the morning of the Sabbath. Let us
   beg a blessing upon the word which is to be preached; that it may be a
   savour of life to us; that by it our minds may be more illuminated, our
   corruptions more weakened, and our stock of grace more increased. Let
   us pray that God's special presence may be with us, that our hearts may
   burn within us while God speaks, that we may receive the word into meek
   and humble hearts, and that we may submit to it, and bring forth
   fruits. James 1: 21. Nor should we only pray for ourselves, but for
   others.

   Pray for him who dispenses the word; that his tongue may be touched
   with a coal from God's altar; that God would warm his heart who is to
   help to warm others. Your prayers may be a means to quicken the
   minister. Some complain they find no benefit by the word preached;
   perhaps they did not pray for their minister as they should. Prayer is
   like the whetting and sharpening of an instrument, which makes it cut
   better. Pray with and for your family. Yea, pray for all the
   congregations that meet on this day in the fear of the Lord; that the
   dew of the Spirit may fall with the manna of the word; that some souls
   may be converted, and others strengthened; that gospel ordinances may
   be continued, and have no restraint put upon them. These are the things
   we should pray for. The tree of mercy will not drop its fruit, useless
   it be shaken by the hand of prayer.

   (2) The manner of our prayer. It is not enough to say a prayer; to pray
   in a dull, cold manner, which asks God to deny; but we must pray with
   reverence, humility, fervency, and hope in God's mercy. Luke 22: 44.
   Christ prayed more earnestly. That we may pray with more fervency, we
   must pray with a sense of our wants. He who is pinched with wants, will
   be earnest in craving alms. He prays most fervently who prays most
   feelingly. This is to sanctify the morning of a Sabbath; and it is a
   good preparation for the word preached. When the ground is broken up by
   the slough, it is fit to receive the seed; when the heart has been
   broken by prayer, it is fit to receive the seed of the preached word.

   V. Having thus dressed your souls on a morning, for the further
   sanctification of the Sabbath, address yourself to the hearing of the
   preached word.

   When you sit down in your seat, lift up your eyes to heaven for a
   blessing upon the word to be dispensed; for you must know that the word
   preached does not work as physic, by its own inherent virtue, but by a
   virtue from heaven, and the co-operation of the Holy Ghost. Therefore
   put up a short ejaculatory prayer for a blessing upon the word, that it
   may be made effectual to you.

   The word being begun to be preached, hear it with reverence and holy
   attention. A certain woman, named Lydia, attended unto the things which
   were spoken of Paul.' Acts 16: 14. Constantine, the emperor, was noted
   for his reverent attention to the word. Christ taught daily in the
   temple: and all the people were very attentive to hear him.' Luke 19:
   48. In the Greek, they hung upon his lip.' Could we tell men of a rich
   purchase, they would diligently attend; and should they not much more,
   when the gospel of grace is preached unto them? That we may sanctify
   and hallow the Sabbath by attentive hearing, beware of these two things
   in hearing: distraction and drowsiness.

   [1] Distraction. That ye may attend open the Lord without distraction.'
   1 Cor 7: 35. It is said of Bernard, that when he came to the
   church-door, he would say, Stay here all my earthly thoughts.' So
   should we say to ourselves, when we are at the door of God's house,
   Stay here all my worldly cares and wandering cogitations; I am now
   going to hear what the Lord will say to me.' Distraction hinders
   devotion. The mind is tossed with vain thoughts, and diverted from the
   business in hand. It is hard to make a quicksilver heart fix. Jerome
   complains of himself, Sometimes when I am about God's service, per
   porticus diambulo, I am walking in the galleries, and sometimes casting
   up accounts.' How often in hearing the word, the thoughts dance up and
   down; and, when the eye is upon the minister, the mind is upon other
   things. Distracted hearing is far from sanctifying the Sabbath. It is
   very sinful to give way to vain thoughts at this time; because, when we
   are hearing the word, we are in God's special presence. To do any
   treasonable action in the king's presence is high great impudence. Yea,
   in my house have I found their wickedness.' Jer 23: 11. So the Lord may
   say, In my house, while they are hearing my word, I have found
   wickedness; they have wanton eyes, and their soul is set on vanity.'

   Whence do these roving and distracting thoughts in hearing come?

   (1) Partly from Satan. The devil is sure to be present in our
   assemblies. If he cannot hinder us from hearing, he will hinder us in
   hearing. When the sons of God came to present themselves before the
   Lord, Satan came also among them.' Job 1: 6. The devil sets vain
   objects before the fancy to cause a diversion. His great design is to
   render the word fruitless. As when one is writing, another jogs him
   that he cannot write even, so when we are hearing, the devil will be
   jogging us with a temptation, that we should not attend to the word
   preached. He shewed me Joshua the high-priest standing before the angel
   of the Lord, and Satan standing at his right hand to resist him.' Zech
   3: 1.

   (2) These wandering thoughts in hearing come partly from ourselves. We
   must not lay all the blame upon Satan.

   They come from the eye. A wandering eye causes wandering thoughts. As a
   thief may come into the house at a window, so vain thoughts may be at
   the eye. As we are bid to keep our feet when we enter into the house of
   God (Eccl 5: 1), so we had need make a covenant with our eyes, that we
   be not distracted by beholding other objects. Job 31: 1.

   Wandering thoughts in hearing rise out of the heart. These sparks come
   out of our own furnace. Vain thoughts are the mud which the heart, as
   from a troubled sea, casts up. For from within, out of the heart of
   men, proceed evil thoughts.' Mark 7: 21. As the foulness of the stomach
   sends up fumes into the head, so the corruption of the heart sends up
   evil thoughts into the mind.

   Distracted thoughts in hearing proceed from an evil habit. We inure
   ourselves to vain thoughts at other times, and therefore we cannot
   hinder them on a Sabbath. Habit is a second nature. Can the Ethiopian
   change his skin, or the leopard his spots? then may ye also do good
   that are accustomed to do evil?' Jer 13: 23. He that is used to bad
   company, knows not how to leave it; so such as have vain thoughts to
   keep them company all the week, know not how to get rid of them on the
   Sabbath. Let me show you how evil these vain distracting thoughts in
   hearing are: --

   [1] To have the heart distracted in hearing, is a disrespect to God's
   omniscience. God is an all-seeing Spirit; and thoughts speak louder in
   his ears than words do in ours. He declareth unto man what is his
   thought.' Amos 4: 13. To make no conscience of wandering thoughts in
   hearing, is an affront to God's omniscience, as if he knew not our
   heart, or did not hear the language of our thoughts.

   [2] To give way to wandering thoughts in hearing is hypocrisy. We
   pretend to hear what God says, and our minds are quite upon another
   thing. We present God with our bodies, but do not give him our hearts.
   Hos 7: 11. This hypocrisy God complains of. This people draw near me
   with their mouth, and with their lips do honour me, but have removed
   their hearts far from me.' Isa 29: 13. This is to prevaricate and deal
   falsely with God.

   [3] Vain thoughts in hearing discover much want of love to God. Did we
   love him we should listen to his words as oracles, and write them upon
   the table of our heart. Prov 3: 3. When a friend whom we love speaks to
   us, and gives us advice, we attend with seriousness, and suck in every
   word. Giving our thoughts leave to ramble in holy duties, shows a great
   defect in our love to God.

   [4] Vain impertinent thoughts in hearing defile an ordinance. They are
   as dead flies in the box of ointment. When a string of a lute is out of
   tune, it spoils the music; so distraction of thought puts the mind out
   of tune, and makes our services sound harsh and unpleasant. Wandering
   thoughts poison a duty, and turn it into sin. Let his prayer become
   sin.' Psa 109: 7. What can be worse than to have a man's praying and
   hearing of the word become sin? Would it not be sad, if the meat we eat
   should increase bad humours? How much more when hearing the word, which
   is the food of the soul, is turned into sin!

   [5] Vain thoughts in hearing offend God. If the king were speaking to
   one of his subjects, and he should not give heed to what the king says,
   but be thinking on another business, or playing with a feather, would
   not the king be provoked? So, when we are in God's presence, and he is
   speaking to us in his word, and we mind not much what he says, but our
   hearts go after covetousness, will it not offend God to be thus
   slighted? Ezek 33: 31. He has pronounced a curse upon such. Cursed be
   the deceiver, which has in his flock a male, and sacrificeth unto the
   Lord a corrupt thing.' Mal 1: 14. To have strong lively affections is
   to have a male in the flock; but to hear the word with distraction, is
   to give God duties fly-blown with vain thoughts, and to offer to the
   Lord a corrupt thing, which brings a curse. Cursed be the deceiver.'

   [6] Vain thoughts in hearing, when allowed and not resisted, make way
   for hardening the heart. A stone in the heart is worse than in the
   kidneys. Distracted thoughts in hearing do not better the heart, but
   harden it. Vain thoughts take away the holy awe of God which should be
   upon the heart; they make conscience less tender, and hinder the
   efficacy the word should have upon the heart.

   [7] Vain and distracting thoughts rob us of the comfort of an
   ordinance. A gracious soul often meets with God in the sanctuary, and
   can say, I found him whom my soul loveth.' Cant 3: 4. He is like
   Jonathan, who, when he had tasted the honey on the rod, had his eyes
   enlightened. But vain thoughts hinder the comfort of an ordinance, as a
   black cloud hides the warm comfortable beams of the sun. Will God speak
   peace to us when our minds are wandering and our thoughts are
   travelling to the ends of the earth? Prov 17: 24. If ever you would
   hear the word with attention, do as Abraham when he drove away the
   fowls from the sacrifice. Gen 15: 2. When you find these excursions and
   sinful wanderings in hearing, labour to drive away the fowls; get rid
   of these vain thoughts; they are vagrants, and must not be entertained.

   How shall we get rid of these vagabond thoughts?

   (1) Pray and watch against them. (2) Let the sense of God's omniscient
   eye overawe your hearts. The servant will not sport in his master's
   presence. (3) Labour for a holy frame of heart. Were the heart more
   spiritual, the mind would be less feathery. (4) Bring more love to the
   word. We fix our minds upon that which we love. He that loves his
   pleasures and recreations, fixes his mind upon them, and can follow
   them without distraction. Were our love more set upon the preached
   word, our minds would be more fixed upon it; and surely there is enough
   to make us love the word preached; for it is the word of life, the
   inlet to knowledge, the antidote against sin, the quickener of all holy
   affections. It is the true manna, which has all sorts of sweet tastes
   in it; the pool of Bethesda, in which the rivers of life spring forth
   to heal the broken in heart; and a sovereign elixir or cordial to
   revive the sorrowful spirit. Get love to the word preached, and you
   will not be so distracted in hearing. What the heart delights in, the
   thoughts dwell upon.

   [2] Take heed of drowsiness in hearing. Drowsiness shows much
   irreverence. How lively are many when they are about the world, but in
   the worship of God how drowsy, as if the devil had given them opium to
   make them sleep! A drowsy feeling here is very sinful. Are you not in
   prayer asking pardon of sin? Will the prisoner fall asleep when he is
   begging pardon? In the preaching of the word, is not the bread of life
   broken to you? and will a man fall asleep over his food? Which is
   worse, to stay from a sermon, or sleep at a sermon? While you slept,
   perhaps the truth was delivered which might have converted your souls.
   Besides, sleeping is very offensive in a holy assembly; it not only
   grieves the Spirit of God, but makes the hearts of the righteous sad.
   Ezek 13: 22. It troubles them to see any show such contempt of God and
   his worship; to see them busy in the shop, but drowsy in the temple.
   Therefore, as Christ said, Could ye not watch one hour?' so, can ye not
   wake one hour? Matt 26: 40. I deny not but a child of God may
   sometimes, through weakness and indisposition of body, drop asleep at a
   sermon, but not voluntarily or ordinarily. The sun may be in an
   eclipse, but not often. If sleeping be customary and allowed, it is a
   very bad sign, and a profanation of the ordinance. A good remedy
   against drowsiness is to use a spare diet upon the Sabbath. Such as
   indulge their appetite too much on a Sabbath, are fitter to sleep on a
   couch than pray in the temple. That you may throw off distracting
   thoughts and drowsiness on the Lord's-day, and may hear the word with
   reverend attention, consider --

   (1) It is God that speaks to us in his word; therefore the preaching of
   the word is called the breath of his lips.' Isa 11: 4. Christ is said
   now to speak to us from heaven,' as a king speaks in his ambassador.
   Heb 12: 25. Ministers are but pipes and organs, it is the Spirit of the
   living God that breathes in them. When we come to the word, we should
   think within ourselves, God is speaking in this preacher. The
   Thessalonians heard the word Paul preached, as if God himself had
   spoken unto them. When ye received the word of God, which ye heard of
   us, ye received it not as the word of men, but (as it is in truth) the
   word of God.' 1 Thess 2: 13. When Samuel knew it was the Lord that
   spake to him, he lent his ear. 1 Sam 3: 10. If we do not regard God
   when he speaks to us, he will not regard us when we pray to him.

   (2) Consider how serious and weighty the matters delivered to us are.
   Moses said, I call heaven and earth to record this day, that I have set
   before you life and death.' Deut 30: 19. Can men be regardless of the
   word, or drowsy when the weighty matters of eternity are set before
   them? We preach faith, and holiness of life, and the day of judgement
   and eternal retribution. Here life and death are set before you; and
   does not all this call for serious attention? If a letter were read to
   one of special business, wherein his life and estate were concerned,
   would he not be very serious in listening to it? In the preaching of
   the word your salvation is concerned; and if ever you would attend, it
   should be now. It is not a vain thing for you; because it is your
   life.' Deut 32: 47.

   (3) To give way to vain thoughts and drowsiness in hearing, gratifies
   Satan. He knows that not to mind a duty, is all one in religion as not
   to do it. What the heart does not do, is not done.' Therefore Christ
   says of some, Hearing, they hear not.' Matt 13: 13. How could that be?
   Because, though the word sounded in their ear, yet they minded not what
   was said to them, their thoughts were upon other things; therefore, it
   was all as one as if they did not hear. Does it not please Satan to see
   men come to the word, and as good stay away? They are haunted with vain
   thoughts; they are taken off from the duty while they are in it; their
   body is in the assembly, their heart in their shop. Hearing, they hear
   not.'

   (4) Each Sabbath may be the last we shall ever keep; we may go from the
   place of hearing to the place of judging; and shall not we give
   reverend attention to the word? Did we think when we come into God's
   house Perhaps this will be the last time that ever God will counsel us
   about our souls, and before another sermon death's alarm will sound in
   our ears; with what attention and devotion should we feel, and our
   affections would be all on fire in hearing!

   (5) You must give an account for every sermon you hear. Redde rationem:
   Give an account of thy stewardship.' Luke 16: 2. So will God say, Give
   an account of thy hearing. Hast thou been affected with the word? Hast
   thou profited by it?' How can we give a good account, if we have been
   distracted in hearing, and have not taken notice of what has been said
   to us? The judge to whom we must give an account is God. Were we to
   give account to man, we might falsify accounts; but we must give an
   account to God. Nec donis corrumpitur, nec blanditiis fallitur.
   Bernard. He is so just a God that he cannot be bribed, and so wise that
   he cannot be deceived.' Therefore, having to give an account to such an
   impartial Judge, how should we observe every word preached, remembering
   the account! Let all this make us shake off distraction and drowsiness
   in hearing, and have our ears chained to the word.

   VI. IN order to hear the word aright, let the following things be
   attended to: --

   [1] Lay aside those dispositions which may render the preached word
   ineffectual. As,

   (1) Curiosity. Some go to hear the word preached, not so much to get
   grace, as to enrich themselves with notions: having itching ears.' 2
   Tim 4: 3. Augustine confesses that, before his conversion, he went to
   hear Ambrose for his eloquence rather than for the spirituality of the
   matter. Thou art unto them as a very lovely song of one that has a
   pleasant voice, and can play well on an instrument.' Ezek 33: 32. Many
   go to the word to feast their ears only; they like the melody of the
   voice, the mellifluous sweetness of the expression, and the novelty of
   the opinions. Acts 17: 21. This is to love the garnishing of the dish
   more than the food; it is to desire to be pleased rather than edified.
   Like a woman that paints her face, but neglects her health -- they
   paint and adorn themselves with curious speculations, but neglect their
   soul's health. This hearing neither sanctifies the heart nor the
   Sabbath.

   (2) Lay aside prejudice. Prejudice is sometimes against the truths
   preached. The Sadducees were prejudiced against the doctrine of the
   resurrection. Luke 20: 27. Sometimes prejudice is against the person
   preaching. There is one Micaiah, by whom we may inquire of the Lord,
   but I hate him.' 1 Kings 22: 8. This hinders the power of the word. If
   a patient has an ill opinion of his physician, he will not take any of
   his medicines, however good they may be. Prejudice in the mind is like
   an obstruction in the stomach, which hinders the nutritive virtue of
   the meat. It poisons the word, and causes it to lose its efficacy.

   (3) Lay aside covetousness. Covetousness is not only getting worlds
   gain unjustly, but loving it inordinately. This is a great hindrance to
   the preached word. The seed which fell among thorns was choked, Matt
   13: 22; a fit emblem of the word when preached to a covetous hearer.
   The covetous man is thinking on the world when he is hearing; his heart
   is in his shop. They sit before thee as my people, and they hear thy
   words, but their heart goes after their covetousness.' Ezek 33: 31. A
   covetous hearer derides the word. The Pharisees, who were covetous,
   heard all these things, and they derided him.' Luke 16: 14.

   (4) Lay aside partiality. Partiality in hearing is, when we like to
   hear some truths preached, but not all. We love to hear of heaven, but
   not of self-denial; of reigning with Christ, but not of suffering with
   him; of the more facile duties of religion, but not those which are
   more knotty and difficult; as mortification, laying the axe to the
   root, and hewing down our beloved sin. Speak smooth things' (Isa 30:
   10), such as may not grate upon the conscience. Many like to hear of
   the love of Christ, but not of loving their enemies; they like the
   comforts of the word, but not its reproofs. Herod heard John the
   Baptist gladly; he liked many truths, but not when he spake against his
   incest.

   (5) Lay aside censoriousness. Some, instead of judging themselves for
   sin, sit as judges upon the preacher; his sermon had either too much
   gall in it, or it was too long. They would sooner censure a sermon than
   practice it. God will judge the judger. Matt 7: 1.

   (6) Lay aside disobedience. All day long I have stretched forth my
   hands unto a disobedient people.' Rom 10: 21. It is said of the Jews
   that God stretched out his hands in the preaching of the word, but they
   rejected Christ. Let there be none among you that wilfully refuse the
   counsels of the word. It is sad to have an adder's ear and an adamant
   heart. Zech 7: 11, 12. If, when God speaks to us in his word, we are
   deaf, when we speak to him in prayer, he will be dumb.

   [2] If you would hear the word aright, have good ends in hearing. Come
   to the word to be made better.' Some have no other end in hearing but
   because it is in fashion, or to gain repute, or stop the mouth of
   conscience; but come to the word to be made more holy. There is a great
   difference between one who goes to a garden for flowers to wear in her
   bosom, and another that goes for flowers to make syrups and medicines.
   We should go to the word for medicine to cure us; as Naaman the Syrian
   went to Jordan to be healed of his leprosy. Desire the sincere milk of
   the word, that ye may grow thereby.' 1 Pet 2: 2. Go to the word to be
   changed into its similitude. As the seal leaves its print upon the wax,
   so labour that the word preached may leave the print of its own
   holiness upon your heart.

   Labour that the word' may have such a virtue in you, as the water of
   jealousy, to kill and make fruitful; that it may kill your sins, and
   make your souls fruitful in grace. Numb 5: 27.

   [3] If you would hear the word aright, go to it with delight. The word
   preached is a feast of fat things. With what delight do men go to a
   feast! The word preached anoints the blind eye; mollifies the rocky
   heart; it beats off our fetters, and turns us from the power of Satan
   unto God.' Acts 26: 18. The word is the seed of regeneration, and the
   engine of salvation. James 1: 18. Hear the word with delight and
   complacency. Thy words were found, and I did eat them; and thy word was
   the joy and rejoicing of mine heart.' Jer 15: 16. How sweet are thy
   words unto my taste! yea, sweeter than honey to my mouth.' Psa 119:
   103. Love the word that comes most home to the conscience; bless God
   when your corruptions have been met with, when the sword of the Spirit
   has divided between you and your sins. Who cares for the physic which
   will not work?

   [4] If you would hear the word aright, mix it with faith. Believe the
   truth of the word preached, that it is the word by which you must be
   judged. Not only give credence to the word preached, but apply it to
   your own souls. Faith digests the word, and turns it into spiritual
   nourishment. Many hear the word, but it may be said of them, as in Psa
   106: 24 They believed not his word.' As Melanchthon once said to some
   Italians Ye Italians worship God in the bread, when ye do not believe
   him to be in heaven;' so, many hear God's words, but do not believe
   that God is; they question the truth of his oracles. If we do not mix
   faith with the word, it is like leaving out the chief ingredient in a
   medicine, which makes it ineffectual. Unbelief hardens men's hearts
   against the word. Divers were hardened, and believed not.' Acts 19: 9.
   Men hear many truths delivered concerning the preciousness of Christ,
   the beauty of holiness, and the felicity of a glorified estate; but, if
   through unbelief and atheism, they question these truths, we may as
   well speak to stones and pillars of the church as to them. That word
   which is not believed, can never be practised. Ubi male creditur, ibi
   nec bene vivitur [When belief is unstable, conduct also wavers].
   Jerome. Unbelief makes the word preached of no effect. The word
   preached did not profit, not being mixed with faith in them that heard
   it.' Heb 4: 2. The word to an unbeliever is like a cordial put into a
   dead man's mouth, which loses all its virtue. If there be any
   unbelievers in our congregations, what shall ministers say of them to
   God at the last day? Lord, we have preached to the people thou sentest
   us to, we have showed them our commission, we have declared unto them
   thy whole counsel, but they have not believed a word we spake. We told
   them what would be the fruit of sin, but they would not heed. They
   would drink their sugared draught, though there was death in the cup.
   Lord, we are free from their blood. God forbid that ministers should
   ever have to make this report to him of their people. But this they
   will be forced to do if their hearers live and die in unbelief. Would
   you sanctify a Sabbath by hearing the word aright? Hear it with faith.
   The apostle puts the two together, belief and salvation.' We are of
   them that believe to the saving of the soul.' Heb 10: 39.

   [5] If you would hear the word aright, hear it with meek spirits. James
   1: 21. Receive the word in mansuetudine, with meekness'. Meekness is a
   submissive frame of heart to the word. Contrary to this meekness is
   fierceness of spirit, when men rise up in rage against the word; as if
   the patient should be angry with the physician when he gives him a
   medicine to purge out his bad humours. When they heard these things,
   they were cut to the heart, and gnashed on him [Stephen] with their
   teeth.' Acts 7: 54. Asa was wroth with the seer, and put him in a
   prison house.' 2 Chron 16: 10. Pride and guilt make men fret at the
   word. What made Asa enraged but pride? He was a king, and thought he
   was too good to be told of his sin. What made Cain angry when God said
   to him, Where is Abel, thy brother?' He replied, Am I my brother's
   keeper?' What made him so touchy but guilt? He had imbrued his hands in
   his brother's blood. If you would hear the word aright, lay aside your
   passions. Receive the word with meekness;' get humble hearts to submit
   to the truths delivered. God takes the meek person for his scholar. The
   meek will he teach his way.' Psa 25: 9. Meekness makes the word
   preached to be an ingrafted word.' James 1: 21. A good scion grafted in
   a bad stock changes the nature of it, and makes it bear good and
   generous fruit; so, when the word preached is grafted into men's
   hearts, it sanctifies them and makes them bring forth the sweet fruits
   of righteousness. By meekness it becomes an ingrafted word.

   [6] If you would hear the word aright, be not only attentive, but
   retentive. Lay it up in your memories and hearts. The seed on the good
   ground are they, which, having heard the word, keep it.' Luke 8: 15.
   The Greek word for to keep,' signifies to hold the word fast, that it
   does not run from us. If the seed be not kept in the ground, but is
   presently washed away, it is sown to little purpose; so if the word
   preached be not kept in your memories and hearts, it is preached in
   vain. Many persons have memories like leaky vessels. If the word goes
   out as fast as it comes in, how can it profit? If a treasure be put in
   a chest and the chest be not locked, it may easily be taken out; so a
   bad memory is a chest without a lock, out of which the devil can easily
   take all the treasure. Then comes the devil and taketh away the word
   out of their hearts.' Luke 8: 12. Labour to keep in memory the truths
   you hear. The things we esteem are not easily forgotten. Can a maid
   forget her ornaments or a bride her attire?' Jer 2: 32. Did we prize
   the word more, we should not forget it so soon. If meat does not stay
   in the stomach, but rises up as fast as we eat it, it cannot nourish;
   so, if the word stays not in the memory, but is presently gone, it can
   do the soul but little good.

   [7] If you would hear aright, practice what you hear. Practice is the
   life of all. Blessed are they that do his commandments, that they may
   have right to the tree of life.' Rev 22: 14. Hearing only will be no
   plea at the day of judgement -- merely to say, Lord, I have heard many
   sermons.' God will say, What fruits of obedience have ye brought
   forth?' The word preached is not only to inform you but reform you; not
   only to mend your sight, but to mend your pace in the way to heaven. A
   good hearer opens and shuts to God as the heliotrope to the sun.

   (1) If you do not hear the word to practice it, you lose all your
   labour. How many a weary step have you taken, your body has been
   crowded, and your spirit faint, if you are not bettered by hearing! If
   you are as proud, as vain, and as earthly as ever, all your hearing is
   lost. You would be loath to trade in vain, and why not to hear sermons
   in vain? Why then labour I in vain?' Job 9: 29. Put this question to
   your own soul: Why labour I in vain? Why do I take all these pains to
   hear, and yet have not grace to practice it? I am as bad as ever! Why
   then do I labour in vain?

   (2) If you hear the word, and are not bettered by it, you are like the
   salamander, no hotter in the fire; and your hearing will increase your
   condemnation. That servant which knew his lord's will, neither did
   according to his will, shall be beaten with many stripes.' Luke 12: 47.
   We pity such as know not where to hear; it will be worse with such as
   care not how they hear. To graceless disobedient hearers, every sermon
   will be a faggot to heat hell. It is sad to go loaded to hell with
   ordinances. Oh, beg the Spirit to make the word preached effectual!
   Ministers can but speak to the ear, the Spirit speaks to the heart.
   While Peter spake, the Holy Ghost fell on all them which heard the
   word.' Acts 10: 44.

   [8] Having heard the word in a holy and spiritual manner, for the
   further sanctification of the Sabbath, confer with the word. We are
   forbidden on this day to speak our own words, but we must speak of
   God's word. Isa 58: 13. Speak of the sermons as you sit together; which
   is one part of sanctifying the Sabbath. Good discourse brings holy
   truths into our memories, and fastens them upon our hearts. Then they
   that feared the Lord, spake often one to another.' Mal 3: 16. There is
   great power and efficacy in good discourse. How forcible are right
   words!' Job 6: 25. By holy conference on a Sabbath, one Christian helps
   to warm another when he is frozen, and to strengthen another when he is
   weak. Latimer confessed he was much furthered in religion by having
   conference with Mr. Bilney the martyr. My tongue shall speak of thy
   word.' Psa 119: 172. One reason why preaching the word on a Sabbath
   does no more good is because there is so little good conference. Few
   speak of the word they have heard, as if sermons were such secrets that
   they must not be spoken of again, or as if it were a shame to speak of
   that which will save us.

   [9] Close the Sabbath evening with repetition, reading, singing Psalms,
   and prayer. Ask that God would bless the word you have heard. Could we
   but thus spend a Sabbath, we might be in the Spirit on the Lord's-day,'
   our souls would be nourished and comforted; and the Sabbaths we now
   keep, would be earnests of the everlasting Sabbaths which we shall
   celebrate in heaven.

   Use one. See here the Christian's duty, to keep the Sabbath-day holy.'

   (1) The whole Sabbath is to be dedicated to God. It is not said, Keep a
   part of the Sabbath holy, but the whole day must be religiously
   observed. If God has given us six days, and taken but one to himself,
   shall we grudge him any part of that day? It were sacrilege. The Jews
   kept a whole day to the Lord; and we are not to abridge or curtail the
   Sabbath, as Augustine says, more than the Jews did. The very heathen,
   by the light of nature, set apart a whole day in honour of false gods;
   and Scaevola, a high-priest of theirs, affirms that the wilful
   transgression of that day could have no expiation or pardon. If any one
   robs any part of the Christian Sabbath for servile work or recreation,
   Scaevola, the high priest of the heathenish gods, shall rise up in
   judgement to condemn him. Let those who say, that to keep a whole
   Sabbath is too Judaical, show where God has made any abatement of the
   time of worship; where he has said, you shall keep but a part of the
   Sabbath; and if they cannot show that, it robs God of his due. That a
   whole day be designed and set apart for his special worship, is a
   perpetual statute, while the church remains upon the earth, as Peter
   Martyr says. Of this opinion also were Theodore, Augustine, Irenaeus,
   and the chief of the fathers.

   (2) As the whole Sabbath is to be dedicated to God, so it must be kept
   holy. You have seen the manner of sanctifying the Lord's-day by
   reading, meditation, prayer, hearing the word, and by singing of psalms
   to make melody to the Lord. Now, besides what I have said upon keeping
   this day holy, let me make a short comment or paraphrase on that
   Scripture. If thou turn away thy foot from the Sabbath, from doing thy
   pleasure on my holy day; and call the Sabbath a delight, the holy of
   the Lord, honourable: and shalt honour him, not doing thine own ways,
   nor finding thine own pleasure, nor speaking thine own words.' Isa 58:
   13. Here is a description of rightly sanctifying a Sabbath.

   If thou turn away thy foot from the Sabbath.' This may be understood
   either literally or spiritually. Literally, that is, if thou
   withdrawest thy foot from taking long walks or journeys on the
   Sabbath-day. So the Jewish doctors expound it. Or, spiritually, if thou
   turn away thy affections (the feet of thy soul) from inclining to any
   worldly business.

   From doing thy pleasure on my holy day.' That is, thou must not do that
   which may please the carnal part, as in sports and pastimes. This is to
   do the devil's work on God's day.

   And call the Sabbath a delight.' Call it a delight, that is, esteem it
   so. Though the Sabbath be not a day for carnal pleasure, yet holy
   pleasure is not forbidden. The soul must take pleasure in the duties of
   a Sabbath. The saints of old counted the Sabbath a delight: the Jews
   called the Sabbath dies lucis, a day of light. The Lord's day, on which
   the Sun of Righteousness shines, is both a day of light and delight.
   This is the day of sweet intercourse between God and the soul. On this
   day a Christian makes his sallies out to heaven; his soul is lifted
   above the earth; and can this be without delight? The higher the bird
   flies, the sweeter it sings. On the Sabbath the soul fixes its love on
   God; and where love is, there is delight. On this day the believer's
   heart is melted, quickened, and enlarged in holy duties; and how can
   all this be, and not a secret delight go along with it? On a Sabbath a
   gracious soul can say, I sat down under his shadow with great delight,
   and his fruit was sweet to my taste.' Cant 2: 3. How can a spiritual
   heart choose but call the Sabbath a delight? Is it not delightful to a
   queen to be putting on her wedding robes in which she shall meet the
   king her bridegroom? When we are about Sabbath exercises, we are
   dressing ourselves, and putting on our wedding robes in which we are to
   meet our heavenly bridegroom the Lord Jesus; and is not this
   delightful? On the Sabbath God makes a feast of fat things; he feasts
   the ear with his word, and the heart with his grace. Well then may we
   call the Sabbath a delight. To find this holy delight, is to be in the
   Spirit on the Lord's-day.'

   The holy of the Lord, honourable.' In the Hebrew, it is glorious. To
   call the Sabbath honourable, is not to be understood so much of an
   outward honour given to it, by wearing richer apparel, or having better
   diet on this day, as the Jewish doctors corruptly gloss. This is the
   chief honour that some give to this day; but by calling the Sabbath
   honourable, is meant that honour of the heart which we give to the day,
   reverencing it, and esteeming it as the queen of days. We are to count
   the Sabbath honourable, because God has honoured it. All the persons in
   the Trinity have honoured it. God the Father blessed it, God the Son
   rose upon it, God the Holy Ghost descended on it. Acts 2: 1: This day
   is to be honoured by all good Christians, and had in high veneration.
   It is a day of renown, on which a golden sceptre of mercy is held
   forth. The Christian Sabbath is the very crepusculum and dawning of the
   heavenly Sabbath. It is honourable, because on this day God comes down
   to us and visits us.' To have the King of heaven present in a special
   manner in our assemblies, makes the Sabbath-day honourable. Besides,
   the work done on this day makes it honourable. The six days are filled
   up with servile work, which makes them lose much of their glory; but on
   this day sacred work is done. The soul is employed wholly about the
   worship of God; it is praying, hearing, meditating; it is doing angels'
   work, praising, and blessing God. Again, the day is honourable by
   virtue of a divine institution. Silver is of itself valuable; but when
   the royal stamp is put upon it, it is honourable; so God has put a
   sacred stamp upon this day, the stamp of divine authority, and the
   stamp of divine benediction. This makes it honourable; and this is
   sanctifying the Sabbath, to call it a delight, and honourable.

   Not doing thine own ways.' That is, thou shalt not defile the day by
   doing any servile work.

   Nor finding thine own pleasure.' That is, not gratifying the fleshly
   part by walks, visits, or pastimes.

   Nor speaking thine own Words.' That is, words heterogeneous and
   unsuitable for a Sabbath; vain, impertinent words; discourses of
   worldly affairs.

   Use two. If the Sabbath-day is to be kept holy, they are reproved who,
   instead of sanctifying the Sabbath, profane it. They take the time
   which should be dedicated wholly to God, and spend it in the service of
   the devil and their lusts. The Lord has set apart this day for his own
   worship, and they make it common. He has set a hedge about this
   commandment, saying, Remember;' and they break this hedge; but he who
   breaks this hedge, a serpent shall bite him. Eccl 10: 8. The Sabbath
   day in England lies bleeding; and oh! that our parliament would pour
   some balm into the wounds which it has received! How is this day
   profaned, by sitting idle at home, by selling meat, by vain discourse,
   by sinful visits, by walking in the fields, and by sports! The people
   of Israel might not gather manna on the Sabbath, and may we use sports
   and dancings on this day? Truly it should be matter of grief to us to
   see so much Sabbath-profanation. When one of Darius's eunuchs saw
   Alexander setting his feet on a rich table of Darius's, he wept.
   Alexander asked him why he wept? He said it was to see the table which
   his master so highly esteemed now made a footstool. So may we weep to
   see the Sabbath-day, which God highly esteems, and has honoured and
   blessed, made a footstool, and trampled upon by the feet of sinners. To
   profane the Sabbath is a great sin; it is a wilful contempt of God; it
   is not only casting his law behind our back, but trampling it under
   foot. He says, Keep the Sabbath holy;' but men pollute it. This is to
   despise God, to hang out the flag of defiance, to throw down the
   gauntlet, and challenge God himself. Now, how can God endure to be thus
   saucily confronted by proud dust? Surely he will not suffer this high
   impudence to go unpunished. God's curse will come upon the
   Sabbath-breaker; and it will blast where it comes. The law of the land
   lets Sabbath-breakers alone, but God will not. No sooner did Christ
   curse the fig-tree, but it withered. God will take the matter into his
   own hand; he will see after the punishing of Sabbath violation. And how
   does he punish it?

   (1) With spiritual plagues. He gives up Sabbath profaners to hardness
   of heart, and a scared conscience. Spiritual judgements are sorest. So
   I gave them up unto their own hearts' lust.' Psa 81: 12. A sear in the
   conscience is a brand-mark of reprobation.

   (2) God punishes this sin by giving men up to commit other sins. To
   revenge the breaking of his Sabbath, he suffers them to break open
   houses, and so come to be punished by the magistrate. How many such
   confessions have we heard from thieves going to be executed! They never
   regarded the Sabbath, and God suffered them to commit those sins for
   which they are to die.

   (3) God punishes Sabbath-breaking by sudden visible judgements on men
   for this sin. He punishes them in their estates and in their persons.
   While a certain man was carrying corn into his barn on the Lord's-day,
   both house and corn were consumed with fire from heaven. In Wiltshire
   there was a dancing match appointed upon the Lord's-day; and while one
   of the company was dancing, he suddenly fell down dead. The Theatre of
   God's Judgements' relates of one, who used every Lord's-day to hunt in
   sermon-time, who had a child by his wife with a head like a dog, and it
   cried like a hound. His sin was monstrous, and it was punished with a
   monstrous birth. The Lord threatened the Jews, that if they would not
   hallow the Sabbath-day, he would kindle a fire in their gates. Jer 17:
   27. The dreadful fire which broke out in London began on the
   Sabbath-day; as if God would tell us from heaven he was then punishing
   us for our Sabbath profanation. Nor does he punish it only in this life
   with death, but hereafter with damnation. Let such as break God's
   Sabbath see if they can break those chains of darkness in which they
   and the devils shall be held.

   Use three. It exhorts us to Sabbath holiness.

   Make conscience of keeping this day holy. The other commandments have
   an affirmative in them only, or a negative; this fourth commandment has
   both an affirmative in it and a negative. Thou shalt keep the Sabbath
   day holy,' and, thou shalt not do any manner of work in it,' shows how
   carefully God would have us observe this day. Not only must you keep
   this day yourselves, but have a care that all under your charge keep
   it; Thou, and thy son, and thy daughter, and thy man-servant, and thy
   maidservant;' that is, thou who art a superior, a parent or a master,
   thou must have a care that not only thou thyself, but those who are
   under thy trust and tuition, sanctify the day. Those masters of
   families are to blame who are careful that their servants serve them,
   but have no care that they serve God; who care not though their
   servants should serve the devil, so long as their bodies do them
   service. That which Paul says to Timothy, Serva depositum, That good
   thing, which was committed unto thee, keep,' is of large meaning. 1 Tim
   1: 11. Not only have a care of thy own soul, but have a care of the
   souls thou art entrusted with. See that they who are under thy charge
   sanctify the Sabbath. God's law provided, that if a man met with an ox
   or an ass going astray, he should bring him back again; much more, when
   thou sees the soul of thy child or servant going astray from God, and
   breaking his Sabbath, thou shouldest bring him back again to a
   religious observation of this day.

   That I may press you to Sabbath-sanctification, consider what great
   blessings God has promised to the strict observers of this day. Isa 58:
   14. (1) A promise of joy. Then shalt thou delight thyself in the Lord.'
   Delighting in God is both a duty and a reward. In this text it is a
   reward, Then shalt thou delight thyself in the Lord;' as if God had
   said, If thou keep the Sabbath conscientiously, I will give thee that
   which will fill thee with delight; if thou keep the Sabbath willingly,
   I will make thee keep it joyfully. I will give thee those enlargements
   in duty, and that inward comfort, which shall abundantly satisfy thee;
   thy soul shall overflow with such a stream of joy, that thou shalt say,
   Lord, in keeping thy Sabbath there is great reward. (2) Of honour. And
   I will cause thee to ride upon the high places of the earth.' That is,
   I will advance thee to honour, ascendere faciam; so Munster interprets
   it. Some, by the high places of the earth, understand Judea; so
   Grotius. I will bring thee into the land of Judea, which is situated
   higher than the other countries adjacent. (3) Of earth and heaven. And
   I will feed thee with the heritage of Jacob;' that is, I will feed thee
   with all the delicious things of Canaan, and afterwards I will
   translate thee to heaven, whereof Canaan was but a type. Another
   promise is, Blessed is the man that does this, that keepeth the Sabbath
   from polluting it.' Isa 56: 2. Blessed is the man;' in the Hebrew it
   is, blessednesses.' To him that keeps the Sabbath holy, here is
   blessedness upon blessedness belonging to him; he shall be blessed with
   the upper and nether springs; he shall be blessed in his name, estate,
   soul, progeny. Who would not keep the Sabbath from polluting it that
   shall have so many blessings entailed upon him and his posterity after
   him? Again, a conscientious keeping of the Sabbath seasons the heart
   for God's service all the week after. Christian the more holy thou art
   on a Sabbath, the more holy thou wilt be on the week following.
     __________________________________________________________________

  2.5 The Fifth Commandment

   Honour thy father and thy mother: that thy days may be long upon the
   land which the Lord thy God giveth thee.' Exod 20: 12.

   Having done with the first table, I am next to speak of the duties of
   the second table. The commandments may be likened to Jacob's ladder:
   the first table respects God, and is the top of the ladder that reaches
   to heaven; the second respects superiors and inferiors, and is the foot
   of the ladder that rests on the earth. By the first table, we walk
   religiously towards God; by the second, we walk religiously towards
   man. He cannot be good in the first table that is bad in the second.
   Honour thy father and thy mother.' In this we have a command, honour
   thy father and thy mother;' and, second, a reason for it, That thy days
   may be long in the land.' The command will chiefly be considered here,
   Honour thy father.'

   I. Father is of different kinds; as the political, the ancient, the
   spiritual, the domestic, and the natural.

   [1] The political father, the magistrate. He is the father of his
   country; he is to be an encourager of virtue, a punisher of vice, and a
   father to the widow and orphan. Such a father was Job. I was a father
   to the poor, and the cause which I knew not, I searched out.' Job 29:
   16. As magistrates are fathers, so especially the king, who is the head
   of magistrates, is a political father; he is placed as the sun among
   the lesser stars. The Scripture calls kings, fathers.' Kings shall be
   thy nursing fathers.' Isa 49: 23. They are to train up their subjects
   in piety, by good edicts and examples; and nurse them up in peace and
   plenty. Such nursing fathers were David, Hezekiah, Josiah, Constantine,
   and Theodosius. It is well for a people to have such nursing fathers,
   whose breasts milk comfort to their children. These fathers are to be
   honoured, for --

   (1) Their place deserves honour. God has set these political fathers to
   preserve order and harmony in a nation, and to prevent those state
   convulsions which otherwise might ensue. When there was no king in
   Israel, every man did that which was right in his own eyes.' Judges 17:
   6. It is a wonder that locusts have no king, yet they go forth by
   bands.

   (2) God has promoted kings, that they may promote justice. As they have
   a sword in their hand, to signify their power; so they have a sceptre,
   an emblem of justice. It is said of the Emperor Marcus Aurelius, that
   he allotted one hour of the day to hear the complaints of those who
   were oppressed. Kings place judges as cherubim about the throne, for
   distribution of justice. These political fathers are to be honoured.
   Honour the king.' 1 Pet 2: 17. This honour is to be shown by a civil
   respect to their persons, and a cheerful submission to their laws; so
   far as they agree and run parallel with God's law. Kings are to be
   prayed for, which is a part of the honour we give them. I exhort that
   supplications, prayers, intercessions, be made for kings, that we may
   lead a quiet, peaceable life, in all godliness and honesty.' 1 Tim 2:
   1. We are to pray for kings, that God would honour them to be
   blessings; that under them we may enjoy the gospel of peace, and the
   peace of the gospel. How happy was the reign of Numa Pompilius, when
   swords were beaten into ploughshares, and bees made hives of the
   soldiers' helmets!

   [2] There is the grave ancient father, who is venerable for old age;
   whose grey hairs are resembled to the white flowers of the almond-tree.
   Eccl 12: 5. There are fathers for seniority, on whose wrinkled brows,
   and in the furrows of whose cheeks is pictured the map of old age.
   These fathers are to be honoured. Thou shalt rise up before the hoary
   head, and honour the face of the old man. Lev 19: 32. Especially those
   are to be honoured who are fathers not only for their seniority, but
   for their piety; whose souls are flourishing when their bodies are
   decaying. It is a blessed sight to see springs of grace in the autumn
   of old age; to see men stooping towards the grave, yet going up the
   hill of God; to see them lose their colour, yet keep their savour. They
   whose silver hairs are crowned with righteousness, are worthy of double
   honour; they are to be honoured, not only as pieces of antiquity, but
   as patterns of virtue. If you see an old man fearing God, whose grace
   shines brightest when the sun of his life is setting, O honour him as a
   father, by reverencing and imitating him.

   [3] There are spiritual fathers, as pastors and ministers. These are
   instruments of the new birth. Though ye have ten thousand instructors,
   yet have ye not many fathers; for in Christ Jesus I have begotten you
   through the gospel.' 1 Cor 4: 15. The spiritual fathers are to be
   honoured in respect of their office. Whatever their persons are, their
   office is honourable; they are the messengers of the Lord of Hosts. Mal
   2: 7. They represent no less than God himself. Now then we are
   ambassadors for Christ.' 2 Cor 5: 20. Jesus Christ was of this calling;
   he had his mission and sanction from heaven, and this crowns the
   ministerial calling with honour. John 8: 18.

   These spiritual fathers are to be honoured for their work's sake.' They
   come, like the dove, with an olive branch in the mouth; they preach
   glad tidings of peace; their work is to save souls.' Other callings
   have only to do with men's bodies or estates, but the minister's
   calling is employed about the souls of men. Their work is to redeem
   spiritual captives, and turn men from the power of Satan unto God.'
   Acts 26: 18. Their work is to enlighten them who sit in the region of
   darkness,' and make them shine as stars in the kingdom of heaven.'
   These spiritual fathers are to be honoured for their work's sake;' and
   this honour is to be shown three ways: --

   (1) By giving them respect. Know them which labour among you and are
   over you in the Lord, and esteem them very highly in love for their
   work's sake.' 1 Thess 5: 12, 13. I confess the scandalous lives of some
   ministers have been a great reproach, and have made the offering of the
   Lord to be abhorred' in some places of the land. The leper in the law
   was to have his lip covered; so such as are angels by office, but
   lepers in their lives, ought to have their lips covered, and to be
   silenced. But though some deserve no honour', yet such as are faithful,
   and make it their work to bring souls to Christ, are to be reverenced
   as spiritual fathers. Obadiah honoured the prophet Elijah. 1 Kings 18:
   7. Why did God reckon the tribe of Levi for the first-born, Num 3: 13;
   why did he appoint that the prince should ask counsel of God by the
   priest, Num 27: 21; why did the Lord show, by that miracle of Aaron's
   rod flourishing, that he had chosen the tribe of Levi to minister
   before him,' Num 17; why does Christ call his apostles the lights of
   the world'; why does he say to all his ministers, Lo, I am with you to
   the end of the world;' but because he would have these spiritual
   fathers reverenced? In ancient times the Egyptians chose their kings
   out of their priests. They are far from showing this respect and honour
   to their spiritual fathers who have slight thoughts of such as have the
   charge of the sanctuary, and do minister before the Lord. Know them,'
   says the apostle, which labour among you.' Many can be content to know
   their ministers in their infirmities, and are glad when they have
   anything against them, but do not know them in the apostle's sense, so
   as to give them double honour.' Surely, were it not for the ministry,
   you would not be a vineyard but a desert. Were it not for the ministry,
   you would be destitute of the two seals of the covenant, baptism and
   the Lord's Supper; you would be infidels; for faith comes by hearing;
   and how shall they hear without a preacher?' Rom 10: 14.

   (2) Honour these spiritual fathers, by becoming advocates for them, and
   wiping off those slanders and calumnies which are unjustly cast upon
   them. 1 Tim 5: 19. Constantine was a great honourer of the ministry; he
   vindicated them; he would not read the envious accusations brought
   against them, but burnt them. Do the ministers open their mouths to God
   for you in prayer, and will not you open your mouths in their behalf?
   Surely, if they labour to preserve you from hell, you should preserve
   them from slander; if they labour to save your souls, you ought to save
   their credit.

   (3) Honour them by conforming to their doctrine. The greatest honour
   you can put upon your spiritual fathers, is to believe and obey their
   doctrine. He is an honourer of the ministry who is not only a hearer,
   but a follower of the word. As disobedience reproaches the ministry, so
   obedience honours it. The apostle calls the Thessalonians his crown.
   What is our crown of rejoicing? are not ye?' 1 Thess 2: 19. A thriving
   people are a minister's crown. When there is a metamorphosis, a change
   wrought; when people come to the word proud, but go away humble; when
   they come earthly, but they go away heavenly; when they come, as Naaman
   to Jordan, lepers, but they go away healed; then the ministry is
   honoured. Need we, as some others, epistles of commendation?' 2 Cor 3:
   1. Though other ministers might need letters of commendation, yet Paul
   needed none; for, when men heard of the obedience wrought in these
   Corinthians by Paul's preaching, it would be a sufficient certificate
   that God had blessed his labours. The Corinthians were a sufficient
   honour to him; they were his letters-testimonial. You cannot honour
   your spiritual fathers more, than by thriving under their ministry, and
   living upon the sermons which they preach.

   [4] There is the domestic father, that is, the master. He is
   paterfamilias, the father of the family'; therefore Naaman's servants
   called their master, father. 2 Kings 5: 13. The centurion calls his
   servant, son. Matt 8: 6. (Greek.) The servant is to honour his master,
   as the father of the family. Though the master be not so qualified as
   he should be, yet the servant must not neglect his duty, but show some
   kind of honour to him.

   (1) In obeying his master in licitis et honestis, in things that are
   lawful and honest.' Servants, be subject to your masters; not only to
   the good and gentle, but also to the froward.' 1 Pet 2: 18. God has
   nowhere given a charter of exemption to free you from your duty. You
   cannot disobey your earthly master but you disobey your master in
   heaven. Think not that birth, or high parts, no, nor even grace, will
   exempt you from obedience to your master. To obey him is an ordinance
   of God; and an apostle says, They that resist the ordinance, shall
   receive to themselves damnation.' Rom 13: 2.

   (2) The servant's honouring his master, is seen in being diligent in
   his service. Apelles painted a servant with his hands full of tools, as
   an emblem of diligence. The loitering servant is a kind of thief, who,
   though he does not steal his master's goods, steals the time which he
   should have employed in his master's service. The slothful servant is
   called a wicked servant.' Matt 25: 26.

   (3) The servant is to honour his master by being faithful. Who then is
   a faithful and wise servant?' Matt 24: 45. Faithfulness is the chief
   thing in a servant. Faithfulness in a servant is seen in six things:
   [1] In tenaciousness; in concealing the secrets the master has
   intrusted you with. If those secrets are not sins, you ought not to
   betray them. What is whispered in your ear you are not to publish on
   the house-top. Servants who do this are spies. Who would keep a glass
   that is cracked? Who would keep a servant that has a crack in his
   brain, and cannot keep a secret? [2] Faithfulness in a servant is seen
   in designing the master's advantage. A faithful servant esteems his
   master's goods as his own. Such a servant had Abraham; who, when his
   master sent him to transact business for him, was as careful about it,
   as if it had been his own. O Lord God of my master Abraham, I pray thee
   send me good speed this day, and show kindness unto my master Abraham.'
   Gen 24: 12. Doubtless Abraham's servant was as glad he had got a wife
   for his master's son, as if he had got a wife for himself. [3]
   Faithfulness in a servant is seen in standing up for the honour of his
   master. When he hears him spoken against, he vindicates him. As the
   master is careful of the servant's body, so the servant should be
   careful of the master's name. When the master is unjustly reproached
   the servant cannot be excused if he be possessed with a dumb devil. [4]
   Faithfulness is, when a servant is true to his word. He dares not tell
   a lie, but will speak the truth, though it be against himself. A lie
   doubles the sin. He that telleth lies, shall not tarry in my sight.'
   Psa 101: 7. A liar is near akin to the devil. John 8: 44. And who would
   let any of the devil's kindred live with him? The lie that Gehazi told
   his master Elisha, entailed leprosy on Gehazi and his seed for ever. 2
   Kings 5: 27. In a faithful servant, the tongue is the true index of the
   heart. [5] Faithfulness is, when a servant is against impropriation. He
   dares not convert his master's goods to his own use. Not purloining.'
   Tit 2: 10. What a servant filches from his master, is damnable gain. He
   who enriches himself by stealing from his master, stuffs his pillow
   with thorns, on which his head will lie very uneasy when he comes to
   die. [6] Faithfulness consists in preserving the master's person, if
   unjustly in danger. Banister betrayed his master the Duke of
   Buckingham, in King Richard the Third's reign; and the judgements of
   God fell upon the traitorous servant. His eldest son became mad; his
   daughter, of a singular beauty, was suddenly struck with leprosy; his
   younger son was drowned, and he himself was arraigned, and would have
   been executed, had he not been saved by his clergy. That servant who is
   not true to his master, will never be true to God or his own soul.

   (4) The servant is to honour his master, by serving him, as with love,
   so with silence, that is, without repining, and without replying.
   Exhort servants to be obedient unto their own masters, not answering
   again.' Tit 2: 9. In the Greek, not giving cross answers.' Some
   servants who are slow at work, are quick at speech; and instead of
   being sorry for a fault, provoke by unbecoming language. Were the heart
   more humble, the tongue would be more silent. The apostle's words are,
   not answering again.' To those servants who honour their masters, or
   family-fathers, by submission, diligence, faithfulness, love, and
   humble silence, great encouragement is given. Servants, obey in all
   things your masters according to the flesh, not with eye-service,
   knowing that of the Lord ye shall receive the reward of the
   inheritance, for ye serve the Lord Christ.' Col 3: 22, 24. In serving
   your masters, you serve Christ, and he will not let you lose your
   labour; ye shall receive the reward of the inheritance.' From serving
   on earth, you shall be taken up to reign in heaven, and shall sit with
   Christ upon his throne. Rev 3: 21.

   Having shown how servants are to honour their masters, I shall next
   show how masters are to conduct themselves towards their servants, so
   as to be honoured by them.

   In general, masters must remember that they have a master in heaven,
   who will call them to account. Knowing that your Master also is in
   heaven.' Eph 6: 9. More particularly: --

   (1) Masters must take care to provide for their servants. As they
   appoint them work, so they must give them their meat in due season.
   Luke 17: 7. They should see that the food be wholesome and sufficient.
   It is most unworthy of some governors of families, to lay out so much
   upon their own back, as to pinch their servants' bellies.

   (2) Masters should encourage their servants in their work, by
   commending them when they do well. Though a master is to tell a servant
   of his faults, yet he is not always to beat on one string, but
   sometimes to take notice of that which is praiseworthy. This makes a
   servant more cheerful in his work, and gains the master the love from
   his servant.

   (3) Masters must not overburden their servants, but proportion their
   work to their strength. They must not lay too much load on their
   servants, to make them faint under it. Christianity teaches compassion.

   (4) Masters must seek the spiritual good of their servants. They must
   be seraphim to kindle their love to religion; they must be monitors to
   put them in mind of their souls; they must bring them to the pool of
   the sanctuary, to wait till the angel stir the waters. John 5: 4. They
   must seek God for them, that their servants may be his servants; and
   must allow them time convenient for secret devotion. Some are cruel to
   the souls of their servants; they expect them to do the work about the
   house, but abridge them of the time they should employ in working out
   their salvation.

   (5) Masters should be mild and gentle in their behaviour towards
   servants. Forbearing threatening.' Eph. 6: 9. Thou shalt not rule over
   him with rigour, but shalt fear thy God.' Lev 25: 43. It requires
   wisdom in a master to know how to keep up his authority, and yet avoid
   austerity. We have a good copy to write after our Master in heaven, who
   is slow to anger, and of great mercy.' Psa 145: 8. Some masters are so
   harsh and implacable that they are enough to spoil a good servant.

   (6) Be very exact and punctual in the agreements you make with your
   servants. Do not prevaricate; keep not back any of their wages; nor
   deal deceitfully with them, as Laban did with Jacob, changing his
   wages. Gen 31: 7. Falseness in promise is as bad as false weights.

   (7) Be careful of your servants, not only in health, but in sickness.
   If they have become sick while in your service, use what means you can
   for their recovery; and be not like the Amalekite, who forsook his
   servant when he was sick; but be as the good centurion, who kept his
   sick servant, and sought to Christ for a cure. 1 Sam 30: 13; Matt 8: 6.
   If you have a beast that falls sick, you will not turn it off, but have
   it looked to, and pay for its cure; and will you be kinder to your
   horses than to your servants? Thus should masters carry themselves
   prudently and piously, that they may gain honour from their servants,
   and may give up their accounts to God with joy.

   [S] The natural father, the father of the flesh. Heb 12: 9. Honour thy
   natural father. This is so necessary a duty, that Philo the Jew placed
   the fifth commandment in the first table, as though we had not
   performed our whole duty to God till we had paid this debt of honour to
   our natural parents. Children are the vineyard of the parent's
   planting, and honour done to the parent is some of the fruit of the
   vineyard.

   II. Children are to show honour to their parents,

   {I] By a reverential esteem of their persons. They must give them a
   civil veneration.' Therefore, when the apostle speaks of fathers of our
   bodies, he speaks also of giving them reverence.' Heb 12: 9. This
   veneration or reverence must be shown: --

   (1) Inwardly, by fear mixed with love. Ye shall fear every man his
   mother and his father.' Lev 19: 3. In the commandment the father is
   named first, but here the mother is first named. Partly to put honour
   upon the mother, because, by reason of many weaknesses incident to her
   sex, she is apt to be more slighted by children. And partly because the
   mother endures more for the child.

   (2) Reverence must be shown to parents outwardly, both in word and
   gesture.

   In word: and that either in speaking to parents, or speaking of them.
   In speaking of parents, children must speak respectfully. Ask on, my
   mother,' said king Solomon to his mother Bathsheba. 1 Kings 2: 20. In
   speaking of parents, children must speak honourably. They ought to
   speak well of them, if they deserve well. Her children arise up, and
   call her blessed' (Prov 31: 28); and, in case a parent betrays weakness
   and indiscretion, the child should make the best of it, and, by wise
   apologies, cover his parent's nakedness.

   In gesture. Children are to show reverence to their parents by
   submissive behaviour, by uncovering the head, and bending the knee.
   Joseph, though a great prince, and his father had grown poor, bowed to
   him, and behaved himself as humbly as if his father had been the
   prince, and he the poor man. Gen 46: 29. King Solomon, when his mother
   came to him, rose off his throne, and bowed himself unto her.' 1 Kings
   2: 19. Among the Lacedemonians, if a child had carried himself
   arrogantly or saucily to his father, it was lawful for the father to
   appoint whom he would to be his heir. Oh, how many children are far
   from thus giving reverence to their parents! They despise their
   parents; they carry themselves with such pride and neglect towards
   them, that they are a shame to religion, and bring their parents' grey
   hairs with sorrow to the grave. Cursed be he that setteth light by his
   father or his mother.' Deut 27: 16. If all that set light by their
   parents are cursed, how many children in our age are under a curse! If
   such as are disrespectful to parents live to have children, their own
   children will be thorns in their sides, and God will make them read
   their sins in their punishment.

   [2] The second way of showing honour to parents is by careful
   obedience. Children, obey your parents in all things.' Col 3: 20. Our
   Lord Christ herein set a pattern to children. He was subject to his
   parents. Luke 2: 51. He to whom angels were subject was subject to his
   parents. This obedience to parents is shown three ways: --

   (1) In hearkening to their counsel, Hear the instruction of thy father,
   and forsake not the law of thy mother.' Prov 1: 8. Parents are, as it
   were, in the room of God; if they would teach you the fear of the Lord,
   you must listen to their words as oracles, and not be as the deaf adder
   to stop your ears. Eli's sons hearkened not to the voice of their
   father, but were called sons of Belial.' 1 Sam 2: 12, 25. And as
   children must hearken to the counsel of their parents in spiritual
   matters, so in affairs which relate to this life as in the choice of a
   calling, and in case of entering into marriage. Jacob would not dispose
   of himself in marriage, though he was forty years old, without the
   advice and consent of his parents. Gen 28: 1, 2. Children are, as it
   were, the parents' proper goods and possession, and it is great
   injustice in a child to give herself away without the parents' leave.
   If parents should indeed counsel a child to match with one that is
   irreligious or Popish, I think the case is plain, and many of the
   learned are of opinion that here the child may have a negative voice,
   and is not obliged to be ruled by the parent. Children are to marry in
   the Lord;' not, therefore, with persons irreligious, for that is not to
   marry in the Lord. 1 Cor 7: 39.

   (2) Obedience to parents is shown in complying with their commands. A
   child should be the parents' echo; when the father speaks, the child
   should echo back obedience. The Rechabites were forbidden by their
   father to drink wine; and they obeyed him, and were commended for it.
   Jer 35: 14. Children must obey their parents in all things. Col 3: 20.
   In things against the grain, to which they have most reluctance, they
   must obey their parents. Esau would obey his father, when he commanded
   him to fetch him venison, because it is probable he took pleasure in
   hunting; but refused to obey him in a matter of greater concernment, in
   the choice of a wife. But though children must obey their parents in
   all things,' yet restringitur ad licita et honesta; it is with the
   limitation of things just and honest.' Obey in the Lord,' that is, so
   far as the commands of parents agree with God's commands. Eph 6: 1. If
   they command against God, they lose their right of being obeyed, and in
   this case we must unchild ourselves.

   [3] Honour is to be shown to parents in relieving their wants. Joseph
   cherished his father in his old age. Gen 47: 12. It is but paying a
   just debt. Parents brought up children when they were young, and
   children ought to nourish their parents when they are old. The young
   storks, by an instinct of nature, bring meat to the old ones when, by
   reason of age, they are not able to fly. Pliny calls it Lex pelargica
   [a law of the storks]. The memory of Aeneas was honoured for carrying
   his aged father out of Troy when it was on fire. I have read of a
   daughter, whose father being condemned to be starved to death, who gave
   him in his prison suck with her own breasts; which, being known to the
   governors, procured his freedom. Such children, or monsters shall I
   say, are to blame who are ashamed of their parents when they are old
   and fallen into decay; and when they ask for bread give them a stone.
   When houses are shut up, we say the plague is there; when children's
   hearts are shut up against their parents, the plague is there. Our
   blessed Saviour took great care for his mother. When on the cross, he
   charged his disciple John to take her home to him as his mother, and
   see that she wanted nothing. John 19: 26, 27.

   III. The reasons why children should honour their parents are: --

   [1] It is a solemn command of God, Honour thy father,' &c. As God's
   word is the rule, so his will must be the reason of our obedience.

   [2] They deserve honour in respect of the great love and affection
   which they bear to their children; and the evidence of that love both
   in their care and cost. Their care in bringing up their children is a
   sign their hearts are full of love to them. Parents often take more
   care of their children than for themselves. They take care of them when
   they are tender, lest, like wall fruit, they should be nipped in the
   bud. As children grow older, the care of parents grows greater. They
   are afraid of their children falling when young, and of worse than
   falls when they are older. Their love is evidenced by their cost. 2 Cor
   12: 14. They lay up and they lay out for their children; and are not
   like the raven or ostrich, which are cruel to their young. Job 39: 16.
   Parents sometimes impoverish themselves to enrich their children.
   Children never can equal a parent's love, for parents are the
   instruments of life to their children, and children cannot be so to
   their parents.

   [3] To honour parents is well pleasing to the Lord. Col 3: 20. As it is
   joyful to parents, so it is pleasing to the Lord. Children! is it not
   your duty to please God? In honouring and obeying your parents, you
   please God as well as when you repent and believe. And that you may see
   how well it pleases God, he bestows a reward upon it. That thy days may
   be long in the land which the Lord thy God giveth thee.' Jacob would
   not let the angel go till he had blessed him; and God would not part
   with this commandment till he had blessed it. Paul calls this the first
   commandment with promise. Eph 6: 2. The second commandment has a
   general promise to mercy; but this is the first commandment that has a
   particular promise made to it. Long life is mentioned as a blessing.
   Thou shalt see thy children's children.' Psa 128: 6. It was a great
   favour of God to Moses that, though he was a hundred and twenty years
   old, he needed no spectacles: His eye was not dim, nor his natural
   force abated.' Deut 34: 7. God threatened it as a curse to Eli, that
   there should not be an old man in his family. 1 Sam 2: 31. Since the
   flood, life is much abbreviated and cut short: to some the womb is
   their tomb; others exchange their cradle for their grave; others die in
   the flower of their age; death serves its warrant every day upon one or
   other. Now, when death lies in ambush continually for us, if God
   satisfies us with long life, saying (as in Psa 91: 16), With long life
   will I satisfy him;' it is to be esteemed a blessing. It is a blessing
   when God gives a long time to repent, and a long time to do service,
   and a long time to enjoy the comforts of relations. Upon whom is this
   blessing of long life entailed, but obedient children? Honour thy
   father, that thy days may be long.' Nothing sooner shortens life than
   disobedience to parents. Absalom was a disobedient son, who sought to
   deprive his father of his life and crown; and he did not live out half
   his days. The mule he rode upon, being weary of such a burden, left him
   hanging in the oak betwixt heaven and earth, so as not fit to tread
   upon the one, or to enter into the other. Obedience to parents spins
   out the life. Nor does obedience to parents lengthen life only, but
   sweetens it. To live long, and not to have a foot of land, is a misery;
   but obedience to parents settles land of inheritance upon the child.
   Hast thou but one blessing, O my father,' said Esau. Behold, God has
   more blessings for an obedient child than one; not only shall he have a
   long life, but a fruitful land: and not only shall he have land, but
   land given in love, the land which the Lord thy God giveth thee.' Thou
   shalt have thy land not only with God's leave, but with his love. All
   these are powerful arguments to make children honour and obey their
   parents.

   Use one. If we are to honour our fathers on earth, much more our Father
   in heaven. If then I be a father, where is mine honour?' Mal 1: 6. A
   father is but the instrument of conveying life, but God is the original
   cause of our being. For it is he that has made us, and not we
   ourselves.' Psa 100: 3. Honour and adoration is a pearl which belongs
   to the crown of heaven only.

   (1) We show honour to our heavenly Father by obeying him. Thus Christ
   honoured his Father. I came down from heaven, not to do mine own will,
   but the will of him that sent me.' John 6: 38. This he calls honouring
   God. I do always those things which please him.' I honour my Father.'
   John 8: 29, 49. The wise men not only bowed the knee to Christ, but
   presented him with gold and myrrh.' Matt 2: 11. So we must not only bow
   the knee, give God adoration, but bring him presents, give him golden
   obedience.

   (2) We show honour to our heavenly Father by advocating his cause, and
   standing up for his truth in an adulterous generation. That son honours
   his father who stands up in his defence, and vindicates him when he is
   calumniated and reproached. Do they honour God who are ashamed of him?
   Many believed on him, but did not confess him.' John 12: 42. They are
   bastard-sons who are ashamed to own their heavenly Father. Such as are
   born of God, are steeled with courage for his truth; they are like the
   rock, which no waves can break; like the adamant, which no sword can
   cut. Basil was a champion for truth in the time of the emperor Valens;
   and Athanasius, when the world was Arian, appeared for God.

   (3) We show honour to our heavenly Father by ascribing the honour of
   all we do to him. I laboured more abundantly than they all, yet not I,
   but the grace of God which was with me.' 1 Cor 15: l0. If a Christian
   has any assistance in duty, any strength against corruption, he rears
   up a pillar and writes upon it, Hitherto has the Lord helped me.' As
   when Joab had fought against Rabbah, and had like to have taken it,
   sent for king David, that he might carry away the honour of the
   victory; so when a child of God has any conquest over Satan, he give
   all the honour to God. 2 Sam 12: 27, 28. Hypocrites, whose lamp is fed
   with the oil of vain glory, while they do any eminent service to God,
   seek to honour themselves; and so their very serving him is
   dishonouring him.

   (4) We show honour to our heavenly Father by celebrating his praise.
   Let my mouth be filled with thy praise, and with thy honour all the
   day.' Psa 71: 8. Blessing and honour and glory and power, be unto him
   that sitteth upon the throne.' Rev 5: 13. Blessing God is honouring
   God. It lifts him up in the eyes of others, and spreads his fame and
   renown in the world. In this manner the angels, the choristers of
   heaven, are now honouring God; they trumpet forth his praise. In
   prayer, we act like saints, in praise like angels.

   (5) We show honour to our heavenly Father, by suffering dishonour, yea,
   death for his sake. Paul did bear in his body the marks of the Lord
   Jesus.' Gal 6: 17. As they were the marks of honour to him, so they
   were trophies of honour to the gospel. The honour which comes to God,
   is not by bringing the outward pomp and glory to him, which we do to
   kings; but it comes in another way, by the suffering of his people, by
   which they let the world see what a good God they serve, and how they
   love him, and will fight under his banner to the death.

   God is worthy of honour.' Thou art clothed with honour and majesty.'
   Psa 104: 1: What are all his attributes but glorious beams shining from
   this sun? He deserves more honour than men or angels can give him. I
   will call on the Lord who is worthy to be praised.' 2 Sam 22: 4. He is
   worthy of honour. We often confer honour upon those that do not deserve
   it. To many noble persons, who are sordid and vicious, we give titles
   of honour: they do not deserve honour; but God is worthy of honour.
   Blessed be thy glorious name, which is exalted above all blessing and
   praise.' Neh 9: 5. He is above all the acclamations and triumphs of the
   archangels. O then, let every true child of God honour his heavenly
   Father! Though the wicked dishonour him by their flagitous lives, let
   not his own children dishonour him. Sins in them are worse than in
   others. A fault in a stranger is not so much taken notice of as in a
   child. A spot in black cloth is not so much observed, but a spot in
   scarlet attracts every one's eye; so a sin in the wicked is not so much
   wondered at, it is a spot in black; but a sin in a child of God is a
   spot in scarlet, which is more visible, and brings odium and dishonour
   upon the gospel. The sins of God's own children go nearer to his heart.
   When the Lord saw it, he abhorred them, because of the provoking of his
   sons and of his daughters.' Deut 32: 19. O forbear doing anything that
   may reflect dishonour upon God. Will you disgrace your heavenly Father?
   Let not God complain of the provocations of his sons and daughters; let
   him not cry out, I have nourished and brought up children, and they
   have rebelled against me.' Isa 1: 2.

   Use two. Does God command us to honour father and mother? Then let
   children put this great duty in practice; be living commentaries upon
   this commandment. Honour and reverence your parents; not only obey
   their commands, but submit to their rebukes. You cannot honour your
   Father in heaven unless you honour your earthly parents. To deny
   obedience to parents, entails God's judgements upon children. The eye
   that mocketh at his father, and despiseth to obey his mother, the
   ravens of the valley shall pick it out, and the young eagle shall eat
   it.' Prov 30: 17. Eli's two disobedient sons were slain. 1 Sam 4: 2:
   God made a law that the rebellious son should be stoned;' the same
   death the blasphemer had. Lev 24: 14. If a man have a stubborn and
   rebellious son, which will not obey the voice of his father, or the
   voice of his mother; then shall his father and his mother lay hold on
   him, and bring him out unto the elders of his city, and all the men of
   his city shall stone him with stones, that he die.' Deut 21: 18, 19,
   21. A father having once complained, Never had a father a worse son
   than I have;' Yes,' said the son, my grandfather had.' This was a
   prodigy of impudence hardly to be paralleled. Manlius, when grown old
   and poor, had a son very rich, of whom he desired some food, but the
   son denied him relief, yea, disowned him from being his father, and
   sent him away with reproachful language. The poor old father let fall
   tears in grief. But God, to revenge the disobedience, struck the
   unnatural son with madness, of which he could never be cured.
   Disobedient children stand in a place where all God's arrows fly.

   Use three. Let parents so act that they may gain honour from their
   children.

   How should parents so act towards their children as to be honoured and
   reverenced by them?

   (1) Be careful to bring them up in the fear and nurture of the Lord.
   Bring them up in the admonition of the Lord.' Eph 6: 4. You conveyed
   the plague of sin to them, therefore endeavour to get them healed and
   sanctified. Augustine says that his mother, Monica, travailed more for
   his spiritual birth than his natural. Timothy's mother instructed him
   from a child. 2 Tim 3: 15. She not only gave him her breast-milk, but
   the sincere milk of the word.' Season your children with good
   principles betides, that they may, with Obadiah, fear the Lord from
   their youth. 1 Kings 18: 12. When parents instruct not their children,
   they seldom prove blessings. God often punishes the carelessness of
   parents with undutifulness in their children. It is not enough that in
   baptism your child is dedicated to God, but it must be educated for
   him. Children are young plants which you must be continually watering
   with good instruction. Train up a child in the way he should go: and
   when he is old, he will not depart from it.' Prov 22: 6. The more your
   children fear God, the more they will honour you.

   (2) If you would have your children honour you, keep up parental
   authority: be kind, but do not spoil them. If you let them get too much
   ahead, they will condemn you instead of honouring you. The rod of
   discipline must not be withheld. Thou shalt beat him with the rod, and
   deliver his soul from hell.' Prov 23: 14. A child indulged and humoured
   in wickedness, will be a thorn in the parent's eye. David spoiled
   Adonijah. His father had not displeased him at any time, in saying, Why
   hast thou done so?' 1 Kings 1: 6, 7, 9. Afterwards he became a grief of
   heart to his father, and was false to the crown. Keep up your
   authority, and you keep up your honour.

   (3) Provide for your children what is fitting, both in their minority
   and when they come to maturity. The children ought not to lay up for
   the parents, but the parents for the children.' 2 Cor 12: 14. They are
   your own flesh and, as the apostle says, No man ever yet hated his own
   flesh.' Eph 5: 29. The parents' bountifulness will cause dutifulness in
   the child. If you pour water into a pump, the pump will send water
   again out freely; so, if parents pour in something of their estate to
   their children, children worthy of the name will pour out obedience
   again to their parents.

   (4) When your children are grown up, put them to some lawful calling,
   wherein they may serve their generation. It is good to consult the
   natural genius and inclination of a child, for forced callings do as
   ill, sometimes, as forced matches. To let a child be out of a calling,
   is to expose him to temptation. Melanchthon says, Odium balneum diaboli
   [Idleness is the devil's pleasure resort]. A child out of a calling is
   like fallow ground; and what can you expect should grow up but weeds of
   disobedience.

   (5) Act lovingly to your children. In all your counsels and commands
   let them read love. Love will command honour; and how can a parent but
   love the child who is his living picture, nay, part of himself. The
   child is the father in the second edition.

   (6) Act prudently towards your children. It is a great point of
   prudence in a parent not to provoke his children to wrath. Fathers,
   provoke not your children to anger, lest they be discouraged.' Col 3:
   21.

   How may a parent provoke his children to wrath?

   (1) By giving them opprobrious terms. Thou son of the perverse
   rebellious woman,' said Saul to his son Jonathan. 1 Sam 20: 30. Some
   parents use imprecations and curses to their children, which provoke
   them to wrath. Would you have God bless your children, and do you curse
   them?

   (2) Parents provoke children to wrath when they strike them without a
   cause, or when the correction exceeds the fault. This is to be a tyrant
   rather than a father. Saul cast a javelin at his son to smite him, and
   his son was provoked to anger. So Jonathan arose from the table in
   fierce anger.' 1 Sam 20: 33, 34. In filium pater obtinet non tyrannicum
   imperium, set basilicum [A father exercises a kingly power over his
   son, not that of a tyrant]. Davenant.

   (3) When parents deny their children what is absolutely needful. Some
   have thus provoked their children: they have stinted them, and kept
   them so short, that they have forced them upon indirect courses, and
   made them put forth their hands to iniquity.

   (4) When parents act partially towards their children, showing more
   kindness to one than to another. Though a parent may have a greater
   love to one child, yet discretion should lead him not to show more love
   to one than to another. Jacob showed more love to Joseph than to all
   his other children, which provoked the envy of his brethren. Now Israel
   loved Joseph more than all his children, and when his brethren saw
   that, they hated him, and could not speak peaceably to him.' Gen 37: 3,
   4.

   (5) When a parent does anything which is sordid and unworthy, which
   casts disgrace upon himself and his family, as to defraud or take a
   false oath, it provokes the child to wrath. As the child should honour
   his father, so the father should not dishonour the child.

   (6) When parents lay commands upon their children which they cannot
   perform without wronging their consciences. Saul commanded his son
   Jonathan to bring David to him. Fetch him to me, for he shall surely
   die.' 1 Sam 20: 31. Jonathan could not do this with a good conscience;
   but was provoked to anger. Jonathan arose from the table in fierce
   anger.' 1 Sam 20: 34. The reason why parents should show their prudence
   in not provoking their children to wrath, is this: Lest they be
   discouraged.' Col 3: 21. This word discouraged' implies three things.
   Grief. The parent's provoking the child, the child so takes it to
   heart, that it causes premature death. Despondency. The parents'
   austerity dispirits the child, and makes it unfit for service; like
   members of the body stupefied, which are unfit for work. Contumacy and
   refractoriness. The child being provoked by the cruel and unnatural
   carriage of the parent, grows desperate, and often studies to irritate
   and vex his parents; which, though it be evil in the child, yet the
   parent is accessory to it, as being the occasion of it.

   (7) If you would have honour from your children, pray much for them.
   Not only lay up a portion for them, but lay up a stock of prayer for
   them. Monica prayed much for her son Augustine; and it was said, it was
   impossible that a son of so many prayers and tears should perish. Pray
   that your children may be preserved from the contagion of the times;
   pray that as your children bear your images in their faces, they may
   bear God's image in their hearts; pray that they may be instruments and
   vessels of glory. One fruit of prayer may be, that the child will
   honour a praying parent.

   (8) Encourage that which you see good and commendable in your children.
   Virtus laudata crescit [Goodness increases when praised]. Commending
   that which is good in your children makes them more in love with
   virtuous actions; and is like the watering of plants, which makes them
   grow more. Some parents discourage the good they see in their children,
   and so nip virtue in the bud, and help to damn their children's souls.
   They have their children's curses.

   (9) If you would have honour from your children, set them a good
   example. It makes children despise parents, when the parents live in
   contradiction to their own precepts; when they bid their children be
   sober, and yet they themselves get drunk; or bid their children fear
   God, and are themselves loose in their lives. Oh if you would have your
   children honour you, teach them by a holy example. A father is a
   looking-glass, which the child often dresses himself by; let the glass
   be clear and not spotted. Parents should observe great decorum in their
   whole conduct, lest they give occasion to their children to say to
   them, as Plato's servant, My master has made a book against rash anger,
   but he himself is passionate;' or, as a son once said to his father, If
   I have done evil, I have learned it of you.'
     __________________________________________________________________

  2.6 The Sixth Commandment

   Thou shalt not kill.' Exod 20: 13.

   In this commandment is a sin forbidden, which is murder, Thou shalt not
   kill,' and a duty implied, which is, to preserve our own life, and the
   life of others.

   The sin forbidden is murder: Thou shalt not kill.' Here two things are
   to be understood, the not injuring another, nor ourselves.

   I. The not injuring another.

   [1] We must not injure another in his name. A good name is a precious
   balsam.' It is a great cruelty to murder a man in his name. We injure
   others in their name, when we calumniate and slander them. David
   complains, They laid to my charge things that I knew not.' Psa 35: 11.
   The primitive Christians were traduced for incest, and killing their
   children, as Tertullian says, Dicimur infanaticidii incestus rei [They
   charge us with infanticide and label us incestuous]. This is to behead
   others in their good name; it is an irreparable injury. No physician
   can heal the wounds of the tongue.

   [2] We must not injure another in his body. Life is the most precious
   thing; and God has set this commandment as a fence about it, to
   preserve it. He made a statute which has never to this day been
   repealed. Whose sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed.'
   Gen 9: 6. In the old law, if a man killed another unawares, he might
   take sanctuary; but if he killed him willingly, though he fled to the
   sanctuary, the holiness of the place would not defend him. If a man
   come presumptuously upon his neighbour, to slay him with guile, thou
   shalt take him from mine altar, that he may die.' Exod 21: 14. In the
   commandment, Thou shalt do no murder,' all sins are forbidden which
   lead to it, and are the occasions of it: As,

   (1) Unadvised anger. Anger boils in the veins, and often produces
   murder. In their anger they slew a man.' Gen 49: 6.

   (2) Envy. Satan envied our first parents the robe of innocence, and the
   glory of paradise, and could not rest till he had procured their death.
   Joseph's brethren, because his father loved him, and gave him a coat of
   divers colours,' envied him, and took counsel to slay him. Gen 37: 20.
   Envy and murder are near akin, therefore the apostle puts them
   together. Envyings, murders.' Gal 5: 21. Envy is a sin which breaks
   both tables at once; it begins in discontent against God, and ends in
   injury against man, as we see in Cain. Gen 4: 6, 8. Envious Cain was
   first discontented with God, by which he broke the first table; and
   then fell out with his brother and slew him, and thus broke the second
   table. Anger is sometimes 'soon over,' like fire kindled in straw,
   which is quickly out; but envy is deep rooted, and will not quench its
   thirst without blood. Who is able to stand before envy?' Prov 27: 4.

   (3) Hatred. The Pharisees hated Christ because he excelled them in
   gifts, and had more honour among the people than they. They never left
   him till they had nailed him to the cross, and taken away his life.
   Hatred is a vermin which lives upon blood. Because thou hast had a
   perpetual hatred, and hast shed the blood of the children of Israel.'
   Ezek 35: 5. Haman hated Mordecai because he would not bow to him, and
   presently sought revenge, by getting a bloody warrant sealed for the
   destruction of the whole race and seed of the Jews. Esth 3: 9. Hatred
   is ever cruel. All these sins are forbidden in this commandment.

   How many ways is murder committed?

   We may be said to murder another twelve ways. (1) With the hand; as
   Joab killed Abner and Amass. He smote him in the fifth rib, and shed
   out his bowels.' 2 Sam 20: 10. (2) With the mind. Malice is mental
   murder. Whosoever hates his brother is a murderer.' 1 John 3: 15. To
   malign another, and wish evil against him in the heart, is murdering
   him. (3) With the tongue, by speaking to the prejudice of another, and
   causing him to be put to death. Thus the Jews killed the Lord of life,
   when they inveighed against him, and accused him falsely to Pilate.
   John 18: 30. (4) With the pen. Thus David killed Uriah by writing to
   Joab to set Uriah in the forefront of the battle.' 2 Sam 11:15. Though
   the Ammonites' sword cut off Uriah, yet David's pen was the cause of
   his death; and therefore the Lord tells David by the prophet Nathan,
   Thou hast killed Uriah.' 2 Sam 12: 9. (5) By plotting another's death.
   Thus, though Jezebel did not lay her own hands upon Naboth, yet because
   she contrived his death, and caused two false witnesses to swear
   against him, and bring him within the compass of treason, she was the
   murderer. 1 Kings 21: 9, 10. (6) By putting poison into cups. Thus the
   wife of Commodes the emperor killed her husband by poisoning the wine
   which he drank. So, many kill little children by medicines that cause
   their death. (7) By witchcraft and sorcery -- which were forbidden
   under the law. There shall not be found among you an enchanter, or a
   witch, or a consulter with familiar spirits.' Deut 18: 10, 11. (8) By
   having an intention to kill another; as Herod, under a pretence of
   worshipping Christ, would have killed him. Matt 2: 8, 13. So, when Saul
   made David go against the Philistines, he designed that the Philistine
   should have killed him. Saul said, Let not mine hand be upon him, but
   let the hand of the Philistines be upon him.' 1 Sam 18: 17. Here was
   intentional murder, and it was in God's account as bad as actual
   murder. (g) By consenting to another's death; as Saul to the death of
   Stephen. I also was standing by and consenting unto his death.' Acts
   22: 20. He that gives consent is accessory to the murder. (10) By not
   hindering the death of another when in our power. Pilate knew Christ
   was innocent. I find no fault in him,' he said, but did not hinder his
   death; therefore he was guilty. Washing his hands in water could not
   wash away the guilt of Christ's blood. (11) By unmercifullness. By
   taking away that which is necessary for the support of life; as to take
   away the tools or utensils by which a man gets his living. No man shall
   take the upper or the nether millstone to pledge, for he taketh a man's
   life.' Deut 24: 6. Or by not helping him when he is ready to perish.
   You may be the death of another, as well by not relieving him, as by
   offering him violence. If thou dost not feed him that is starving, thou
   killest him. How many are thus guilty of the breach of this
   commandment! (12) By not executing the law upon capital offenders. A
   felon having committed six murders, the judge may be said to be guilty
   of five of them, because he did not execute the felon for his first
   offence.

   What are the aggravations of this sin of murder?

   (1) To shed the blood of another ceaselessly; as to kill another in a
   humour or frolic. A bee will not sting unless provoked, but many when
   not provoked, will take away the life of another. This makes the sin of
   blood more bloody. The less provocation to a sin the greater sin.

   (2) To shed the blood of another contrary to promise. Thus, after the
   princes of Israel had sworn to the Gibeonites that they should live,
   Saul slew them. Josh 9: 15. 2 Sam 21: 1. Here were two sins bound
   together, perjury and murder.

   (3) To take away the life of any public person enhances the murder, and
   makes it greater, as to kill a judge upon the bench, because he
   represents the king's person. To murder a person whose office is
   sacred, and comes on the King of heaven's embassage; the murdering of
   whom may be the murdering of many. Herod added this sin above all, that
   he shut up John the Baptist in prison, much more to behead him in
   prison. Luke 3: 20. To stain one's hands with royal blood. David's
   heart smote him because he did but cut off the lap of king Saul's
   garment. 1 Sam 24: 5. How would David's heart have smitten him if he
   had cut off Saul's head?

   (4) To shed the blood of a near relation aggravates the murder, and
   dyes it of a deeper crimson. For a son to kill his father is horrid.
   Parricides are monsters in nature. Qui occidit patrem, plurima
   committit peccata in uno. Cicero. He who takes away his father's life,
   commits many sins in one;' he is not guilty of murder only, but of
   disobedience, ingratitude, and diabolical cruelty. He who striketh his
   father or mother, shall be surely put to death.' Exod 21: 15. Then how
   many deaths is he worthy of that destroys his father or mother! Such a
   monster was Nero, who caused his mother, Agrippina, to be slain.

   (5) To shed the blood of any righteous person aggravates the sin.
   Hereby justice is perverted. Such a person being innocent, is unworthy
   of death. A saint being a public blessing, lies in the breach to turn
   away wrath; so that to destroy him is to pull down the pillars of a
   nation. He is precious to God. Psa 116: 15. He is a member of Christ's
   body; therefore what injury is offered to him is done to God himself.
   Acts 9: 4.

   Though, however, this commandment forbids private persons to shed the
   blood of another, unless in their own defence, yet, such as are in
   office must punish public offenders, even with death. To kill an
   offender is not murder, but justice. A private person sins if he draws
   the sword; a public person sins if he puts up the sword. A magistrate
   ought not to let the sword of justice rust in the scabbard. As he
   should not let the sword be too sharp by severity, so neither should
   the edge of it be blunted by too much levity.

   Neither does this commandment prohibit a just war. When men's sins grow
   ripe, and long plenty has bred surfeit, God says, Sword, go through the
   land.' Ezek 14: 17. He encouraged the war between the tribes of Israel
   and Benjamin. When the iniquity of the Amorites was full, he sent
   Israel to war against them. Judges 11: 21.

   Use one. It should be for a lamentation that this land is defiled with
   blood. Numb 35: 33. How common is this sin in this boasting age!
   England's sins are written in letters of blood. Some make no more of
   killing men than sheep. In thy skirts is found the blood of the poor
   innocents.' Jer 2: 34. Junius reads it, in alis; and so in Hebrew, in
   thy wings' is found the blood of innocents. It alludes to the birds of
   prey, which stain their wings with the blood of other birds. May not
   the Lord justly take up a controversy with the inhabitants of the land,
   because blood toucheth blood'? Hos 4: 2. There are wholesale murders.
   And that which should increase our lamentation is, that not only man's
   blood is shed among us, but Christ's blood. Profane flagitious sinners
   are said to crucify the son of God afresh.' Heb 6: 6. (1) They swear by
   his blood, and so, as it were, make his wounds bleed afresh. (2) They
   crucify Christ in his members. Why persecutes thou me?' Acts 9: 4. The
   foot being trodden on, the head cries out. (3) If it lay in their
   power, were Christ alive on earth, they would nail him again to the
   cross. Thus men crucify Christ afresh; and, if man's blood so cries,
   how loud will Christ's blood cry against sinners?

   Use two. Beware of having your hands imbrued in the blood of others.

   But such a one has wronged me by defamation, or otherwise; and if I
   spill his blood, I shall but revenge my own quarrel!

   If he has done you wrong, the law is open; but take heed of shedding
   blood. What! Because he has wronged you, will you therefore wrong God?
   Is it not doing wrong to God to take his work out of his hand? He has
   said Vengeance is mine; I will repay.' Rom 12: 19. You would undertake
   to revenge yourself; would be plaintiff, and judge, and executioner, in
   yourself. This is a great wrong done to God, and he will not hold you
   guiltless.

   To deter all from having their hands defiled with blood, consider what
   a sin murder is. It is (1) A God-affronting sin. It is a breach of his
   command, and trampling upon his royal edict. It is a wrong offered to
   God's image. In the image of God made he man.' Gen 9: 6. It is tearing
   God's picture, and breaking in pieces the King of heaven's broad seal.
   Man is the temple of God. Know ye not that your body is the temple of
   the Holy Ghost?' 1 Cor 6: 19. The man-slayer destroys God's temple; and
   will God endure to be thus confronted by proud dust?

   (2) It is a crying sin. Clamitat in coelum vox sanguinis [The voice of
   blood cries to Heaven]. There are three sins in Scripture which are
   said to cry. Oppression. Psa 12: 5. Sodomy. Gen 18: 21. Bloodshed. This
   cries so loud, that it drowns all the other cries. The voice of thy
   brother's blood crieth unto me from the ground.' Gen 4: 10. Abel's
   blood had as many tongues as drops, to cry aloud for vengeance. This
   sin of blood lay heavy on David's conscience; though he had sinned by
   adultery, yet, what he cried out for most was, this crimson sin of
   blood. Deliver me from blood-guiltiness, O God.' Psa 51: 14. Though the
   Lord visits for every sin, yet he will in a special manner make
   inquisition for blood.' Psa 9: 12. If a beast killed a man it was to be
   stoned, and its flesh was not to be eaten. Exod 21: 28. If God would
   have a beast stoned that killed a man, which had not the use of reason
   to restrain it, much more will he be incensed against those who,
   against both reason and conscience, take away the life of a man.

   (3) Murder is a diabolical sin. It makes a man the devil's first born,
   for he was a murderer from the beginning. John 8: 44. By saying to our
   first parents, Ye shall not die,' he brought death into the world.

   (4) It is a cursed sin. If there be a curse for him that smites his
   neighbour secretly, he is doubly cursed that kills him. Deut 27: 24.
   The first man that was born was a murderer. And now art thou cursed
   from the earth.' Gen 4: 11. He was an excommunicated person, banished
   from the place of God's public worship. God set a mark upon bloody
   Cain. Gen 4: 15. Some think that mark was horror of mind, which, above
   all sins, accompanies the sin of blood. Others think it was a continual
   shaking and trembling in his flesh. He carried a curse along with him.

   (5) It is a wrath-procuring sin. 2 Kings 24: 4.

   It procures temporal judgements. Phocas, to get the empire, put to
   death all the sons of Mauritius the emperor, and then slew the emperor
   himself; but he was pursued by Priscus, his son-in-law, who cut off his
   ears and feet, and then killed him. Charles IX, who caused the massacre
   of so many Christians at Paris, died from blood issuing out of several
   parts of his body. Albania killed a man and made of his skull a cup to
   drink in. His own wife, soon afterwards, caused him to be murdered in
   his bed. Vengeance as a bloodhound pursues the murderer. Bloody men
   shall not live out half their days.' Psa 55: 23. It brings eternal
   judgements. It binds men over to hell. The Papists make nothing of
   massacres, because theirs is a bloody religion; they give a
   dispensation for murder, if it be to propagate the Catholic cause. If a
   cardinal puts his red hat upon the head of a murderer going to
   execution, he saves him from death. Let all impenitent murderers read
   their doom in Rev 21: 8: Murderers shall have their part in the lake
   which burneth with fire and brimstone, which is the second death.' We
   read of fire mingled with blood.' Rev 8: 7. Such as have their hands
   full of blood must undergo the wrath of God. Here is fire mingled with
   blood, and this fire is inextinguishable. Mark 9: 44. Time will not
   finish it, tears will not quench it.

   [3] We must not injure another in his soul. This is the greatest murder
   of all, because there is more of God's image in the soul than in the
   body. Though the soul cannot be annihilated, it is said to be murdered
   when it is deprived of its happiness, and is for ever in torment. How
   many are soul murderers!

   (1) Such as corrupt others by bad example. The world is led by example;
   especially by the examples of great ones, which are very pernicious. We
   are apt to do as we see others before us, especially those above us.
   Such as are placed in high power, are like the pillar of cloud; where
   that went, Israel went. When great ones move, others will follow them,
   though it be to hell. Evil magistrates, like the tail of the dragon,
   draw the third part of the stars after them.'

   (2) Such as entice others to sin. The harlot by curling her hair,
   rolling her eyes, laying open her breasts, does what in her lies to be
   both a tempter and a murderer. Such a one was Messalina, wife to
   Claudius the emperor. I discerned a young man, and there met him a
   woman with the attire of a harlot; so she caught him and kissed him.'
   Prov 7: 10, 13. Better are the reproofs of a friend, than the kisses of
   a harlot.

   (3) Ministers are murderers, who either starve, or poison, or infect
   souls. [1] That starve souls. Feed the flock of God which is among
   you.' 1 Pet 5: 2. These feed themselves and starve the flock; either
   through non-residing, they do not preach, or through insufficiency,
   they cannot. There are many in the ministry so ignorant that they had
   need to be taught the first principles of the oracles of God.' Heb 5:
   12. Was he fit to be a preacher in Israel, think ye, who being asked
   something concerning the decalogue, answered he never saw any such
   book? [2] That poison souls. Such are heterodox ministers, who poison
   people with error. The basilisk poisons herbs and flowers by breathing
   on them; so the breath of heretical ministers poisons souls. The
   Socinian, who would rob Christ of his Godhead; the Armenian, who by
   advancing the power of the will, would take off the crown from the head
   of free-grace; the Antinomian, who denies the use of the moral law to a
   believer, as if it were antiquated and out of date -- poison men's
   souls. Error is as damnable as vice. There shall be false teachers
   among you, who privily shall bring in damnable heresies, denying the
   Lord that bought them.' 2 Pet 2: 1. [3] That infect souls by their
   scandalous lives. Let the priests which come near to the Lord sanctify
   themselves.' Exod 19: 22. Ministers who by their places are nearer to
   God, should be holier than others. The higher the elements are, the
   purer they are; air is purer than water; fire is purer than air. The
   higher men are in office, the holier they should be. John the Baptist
   was a shining lamp. But there are many who infect their people with
   their bad life; they preach one thing, and live another. Qui Curios
   simulant et bacchanalia vivunt [They make a show of goodness, but live
   a life of riot]. Like Eli's sons, they are in white linen, but have
   scarlet sins. Some say, that Prester John, the lord of Africa, caused
   to be carried before him a golden cup full of dirt; a fit emblem of
   such ministers as have a golden office, but are dirty and polluted in
   their lives. They are murderers, and the blood of souls will cry
   against them at the last day.

   (4) Such as destroy others by getting them into bad company, and so
   make them proselytes to the devil. Vitia in proximum quamque
   transiliunt [Our vices leap on to the man next to us]. Seneca. A man
   cannot live in the Ethiopian climate but he will be discoloured with
   the sun, nor can he be in bad company but he will partake of their
   evil. One drunkard makes another; as the prophet speaks in another
   sense. I set before them pots full of wine, and cups, and said unto
   them, Drink ye wine;' so the wicked set pots of wine before others, and
   made them drink till reason be stupefied, and lust inflamed. Jer 35: 5.
   Such are guilty of the breach of this commandment. How sad will it be
   with those who have not only their own sins, but the blood of others to
   answer for! So much for the first thing forbidden in the commandment,
   the injuring of others.

   II. THE second thing forbidden in this commandment is, injuring
   ourselves. Thou shalt not kill:' thou shalt do no hurt to thyself.

   Thou shalt not hurt thy own body. One may be guilty of self-murder,
   either 1. Indirectly or occasionally. Or, 2. Directly and absolutely.

   [1] Indirectly and occasionally; as

   (1) When a man thrusts himself into danger which he might prevent. If a
   company of archers were shooting, and one should put himself in the
   place where the arrows fly, so that an arrow kills him, he is accessory
   to his own death. In the law, God would have the leper shut up, to keep
   others from being infected. Lev 13: 4. If any should be so presumptuous
   as to go to a leper, and get the plague of leprosy, he might thank
   himself for his own death. (2) A person may be guilty of his own death,
   in some sense, by neglecting the use of means for preserving life. If
   sick, and he uses no remedy; if he has received a wound, and will not
   apply a cure, he hastens his own death. God commanded Hezekiah to lay a
   lump of figs upon the boil.' Isa 38: 21. If he had not done so, he
   would have been the cause of his own death. (3) By immoderate grief.
   The sorrow of the world worketh death.' 2 Cor 7: 10. When God takes
   away a dear relation, and any one is swallowed up with sorrow, he
   endangers his life. How many weep themselves into their graves! Queen
   Mary grieved so excessively for the loss of Calais, that it broke her
   heart. (4) By intemperance or excess in diet. Surfeiting shortens life.
   Plures periere crapula, quam gladio [More perish by drink than by the
   sword]. Many dig their grave with their teeth. Too much oil chokes the
   lamp. The cup kills more than the cannon. Excessive drinking causes
   untimely death.

   {2] One may be guilty of self-murder, directly and absolutely.

   (1) By envy. Envy is tristitia de bonis alienis, a secret repining at
   the welfare of another.' Invidus alterius rebus macrescit opimis. An
   envious man is more sorry at another's prosperity, than at his own
   adversity.' He never laughs but when another weeps. Envy is a
   self-murder, a fretting canker. Cyprian calls it vulnus occultum, a
   secret wound;' it hurts a man's self most. Envy corrodes the heart,
   dries up the blood, rots the bones. Envy is the rottenness of the
   bones.' Prov 14: 30. It is to the body what the moth is to the cloth,
   that eats it and makes its beauty consume. Envy drinks its own venom.
   The viper, which leaped on Paul's hand, thought to have hurt Paul, but
   fell into the fire itself. Acts 28: 3. So, while the envious man thinks
   to hurt another, he destroys himself.

   (2) By laying violent hands on himself, and thus he commits felo de se;
   as Saul fell upon his own sword and killed himself. It is the most
   unnatural and barbarous kind of murder for a man to butcher himself and
   imbrue his hands in his own blood. A man's self is most near to him,
   therefore this sin of self-murder breaks both the law of God, and the
   bonds of nature. The Lord has placed the soul in the body, as in a
   prison; and it is a sin to break open this prison till God opens the
   door. Self-murderers are worse than the brute-creatures, which will
   tear and gore open one another, but not destroy themselves. Self-murder
   is occasioned usually by discontent, and a sullen melancholy. The bird
   that beats itself in the cage, and is ready to kill itself, is a true
   emblem of a discontented spirit.

   Whence comes this discontent?

   This discontent arises -- (1) From pride. A man who swells with a high
   opinion of himself, and thinks he deserves better than others, when any
   great calamity befalls him, is discontented, and in a sudden passion
   will make away with himself. Ahithophel had high thoughts of himself,
   his words were esteemed oracles, and he could not bear to have his wise
   counsel rejected. He put his household in order, and hanged himself.' 2
   Sam 17: 23. (2) From poverty. Poverty is a sore temptation. Give me not
   poverty.' Prov 30: 8. Many have brought themselves to poverty by their
   sin; and when a great estate is boiled away to nothing, they are
   discontented, and think it better to die quickly, than languish in
   misery, and the devil soon helps them to dispatch themselves. (3) From
   covetousness. Avarice is a dry drunkenness, a horse-leech that is never
   satisfied. The covetous man is like behemoth. Behold he drinketh up a
   river,' and yet his thirst is not allayed. Job 40: 33. The covetous
   miser hoards up corn; and if he hears the price of corn begins to fall,
   he is troubled, and there is no cure for his discontent but a halter.
   (4) From horror of mind. A man has sinned a great sin, has swallowed
   down some pills of temptation the devil has given him, and these pills
   begin to work in his conscience, and the horror becomes so great, that
   he chooses strangling. Judas having betrayed innocent blood, was in
   such an agony of conscience, that he hanged himself; as if, to avoid
   the stinging of a gnat, any one should endure the bite of a serpent. I
   can see no ground of hope for such as make away with themselves; for
   they die in the very act of sin, and cannot have time to repent.

   Hurting our own souls is forbidden in the command, Thou shalt not
   kill.' Many who are free from other murders, are guilty here. They
   murder their own souls. They wilfully damn themselves, and throw
   themselves into hell.

   Who are they that murder their own souls?

   (1) They wilfully murder their souls who have no sense of God, or the
   world to come, and are past feeling. Eph 4: 19. Tell them of God's
   holiness and justice, and they are not at all affected. They made their
   hearts as an adamant stone.' Zech 7: 12, The adamant,' says Pliny, is
   insuperable, the hammer cannot conquer it.' Sinners have adamantine
   hearts. When the prophet spake to the altar of stone, it rent asunder,
   but sinner's hearts are so hardened in sin (1 Kings 13: 5), nothing
   will work upon them, neither ordinances nor judgements. They do not
   believe in a God; they laugh at hell. Thus they murder their own souls,
   and throw themselves into hell as fast as they can.

   (2) They wilfully murder their own souls who resign themselves to their
   lusts, let what will come of it. The soul cries out in you, I am
   killing myself; I am murdering myself. They have given themselves over
   to work all uncleanness with greediness.' Eph 4: 19. Let ministers
   speak to them about their sins, let conscience speak, let affliction
   speak, they will have their lusts, even though they go to hell for
   them. Do not these murder their own souls? As Agrippina, mother of
   Nero, said, occidat modo imperet, let my son kill me, so he may reign;
   so many say in their hearts, let our sins damn us, so that they but
   please us. Herod will have his incestuous lusts, though it costs him
   his soul; and for a drop of pleasure men will drink a sea of wrath. Do
   not these massacre and damn their own souls?

   (3) They murder their souls who avoid all means of saving them. They
   will go to plays, to drunken meetings, but will not set their foot in
   God's house, or come near the sound of the gospel-trumpet; as if one
   that is diseased should shun the bath for fear of being healed. These
   are self murderers as much as one who has the means of cure offered
   him, but chooses rather to die.

   (4) They voluntarily murder their souls who take false prejudices
   against religion; as if it were so strict and severe that they must
   live a melancholy life, like hermits and anchorites, and drown all
   their joys in tears. It is a slander which the devil casts upon
   religion, for there is no true joy but in believing. Rom 15: 1, 3. No
   honey is so sweet as that which drops from a promise. Some men
   foolishly take up a prejudice against religion; they are resolved never
   to go to heaven, rather than go through the strait gate. I may say of
   prejudice, as Paul to Elymas, O prejudice, thou child of the devil,
   thou enemy of all righteousness,' how many souls hast thou damned? Acts
   13: 10.

   (5) They wilfully murder their own souls who will neither be good
   themselves, nor suffer others to be so. Ye neither go [into the kingdom
   of heaven] yourselves, neither suffer ye them that are entering to go
   in.' Matt 23: 13. Such are they who persecute others for their
   religion. Drunken meetings may escape punishments from them, but if men
   meet to serve God, all severity will be used. They are resolved to
   shipwreck others, though they themselves are cast away in the storm.
   Oh! take heed of murdering your own souls. No creature but man
   willingly kills itself.

   III. THE positive duty implied in the command is, that we should do all
   the good we can to ourselves and others.

   [1] In reference to others. We should endeavour to preserve the lives
   and souls of others. [2] In reference to ourselves. We should preserve
   our own life and soul.

   [1] In reference to others. We are to preserve the life of others. We
   should comfort them in their sorrows, relieve them in their wants, and
   like the good Samaritan, pour wine and oil into their wounds. I was a
   father to the poor.' Job 29: 16. The blessing of him that was ready to
   perish came upon me.' Ver 13. It is a great means of preserving the
   life of another to relieve him when he is ready to perish. When there
   was a great dearth in Rome, Pompey provided corn for its relief; and
   when the mariners were afraid to sail thither in a tempest, he said, It
   is not necessary that we should live, but it is necessary that Rome be
   relieved.' Grace makes the heart tender, it causes sympathy and
   charity. As it melts the heart in contrition towards God, so in
   compassion towards others. He has dispersed, he has given to the poor.'
   Psa 29: 9. This commandment implies that we should be so far from
   ruining others, that we should do all we can to preserve the lives of
   others. When you see the picture of death drawn in their faces,
   administer to their necessities; be temporal saviours to then; draw
   them out of the waters of affliction with a silver cord of charity.
   That I may persuade you to this, let me lay before you some arguments:
   --

   (1) Works of charity evidence grace. As Faith. I will show thee my
   faith by my works.' James 2: 18. Works are faith's letters of credence.
   We judge of the health of the body by the pulse where the blood stirs
   and operates; so Christian, judge of the health of thy faith by the
   pulse of charity. The word of God is the rule of faith, and good works
   are the witnesses of faith. It evidences also Love. Love loves mercy;
   it is a noble bountiful grace. Mary loved Christ, and how liberal was
   her love! She bestowed on Christ her tears, kisses, and costly
   ointments. Love, like a full vessel, will have vent; it vents itself in
   acts of liberality.

   (2) To communicate to the necessities of others is not left to our
   choice, but is an incumbent duty. Charge them that are rich in this
   world that they do good; that they be rich in good works.' 1 Tim 6: 17,
   18. This is not only a counsel, but a charge. If God should lay a
   charge upon the inanimate creatures, they would obey; if he should
   charge the rocks, they would send forth water; if he should charge the
   clouds, they would melt into showers; if he should charge the stones,
   they would become bread. And shall we be harder than the stones, not to
   obey God when he charges us to be rich in good works?'

   (3) God supplies our wants, and shall not we supply the wants of
   others? We could not live without mercy.' God makes every creature
   helpful to us: the sun to enrich us with its golden beams; the earth to
   yield us its increase, veins of gold, crops of corn, and store of
   flowers. God opens the treasury of his mercy; he feeds us every day out
   of the alms-basket of his providence. Thou openest thy hand, and
   satisfies the desire of every living thing.' Psa 145: 16. Does God
   supply our wants, and shall we not minister to the wants of others?
   Shall we be as a sponge to suck in mercy, and not as breasts to milk it
   out to others?

   (4) Herein we resemble God, to be doing good to others. It is our
   excellence to be like God. Godliness is Godlikeness.' When are we more
   like him than in acts of bounty and munificence? Thou art good, and
   does good.' Psa 119: 68. Thou art good,' there is his essential
   goodness; and doest good,' there is his communicative goodness. The
   more helpful we are to others, the more like we are to God. We cannot
   be like God in omniscience, or in working miracles; but we may be like
   him in doing works of mercy.

   (5) God remembers all our deeds of charity, and takes them kindly at
   our hands. God is not unrighteous to forget your labour of love which
   ye have shewed towards his name, in that you have ministered to the
   saints.' Heb 6: 10. The chief butler may forget Joseph's kindness, but
   the Lord will not forget any kindness we show to his people. I was an
   hungred and ye gave me meat; thirsty, and ye gave me drink.' Matt 25:
   35. Christ takes the kindness done to his saints as done to himself.
   God has a bottle for your tears, and a book to write down your alms. A
   book of remembrance was written before him.' Mal 3: 16. Tamerlane had a
   register to write down all the names and good services of his soldiers;
   so God has a book of remembrance to write down all your charitable
   works; and at the day of judgement there shall be an open and
   honourable mention made of them in the presence of the angels.

   (6) Hardheartedness to others in misery reproaches the gospel. When
   men's hearts are like pieces of rock, or as the scales of the
   leviathan, shut up as with a close seal,' you may as well extract oil
   out of flint, as the golden oil of charity out of them. Job 41: 15.
   They unchristianize themselves. Unmercifullness is the sin of the
   heathen. Unmerciful.' Rom 1: 31. It eclipses the glory of the gospel.
   Does the gospel teach uncharitableness? Does it not bid us draw out thy
   soul to the hungry'? Isa 58: 10. These things I will that thou affirm,
   that they which have believed in God, might be careful to maintain good
   works.' Tit 3: 8. While you relieve not such as are in want, you walk
   in opposition to the gospel; you cause it to be evil spoken of, and lay
   it open to the lash and censure of others.

   (7) There is nothing lost by relieving the necessitous. The Shunammite
   woman was kind to the prophet, she welcomed him to her house, and she
   received kindness from him another way; he restored her dead child to
   life. 2 Kings 4: 35. Such as are helpful to others, shall find grace to
   help in time of need.' Such as pour out the golden oil of compassion to
   others, shall have the golden oil of salvation by God poured out to
   them; for a cup of cold water' they shall have rivers of pleasure.' God
   will make it up some way or other in this life. The liberal soul shall
   be made fat.' Prov 11: 25. It shall be as the loaves in breaking
   multiplied; or, as the widow's oil, increased in pouring out. 1 Kings
   17: 16. An estate may be imparted without being impaired.

   (8) To do good to others in necessity keeps up the credit of religion.
   Works of mercy adorn the gospel, as the fruit adorns the tree. When one
   light so shines that others see our good works,' it glorifies God,
   crowns religion, and silences the lips of gainsayers. Basil says
   nothing rendered the true religion more famous in the primitive times,
   and made more proselytes to it, than the bounty and charity of
   Christians.

   (9) The evil that accrues by not preserving the lives of others, and
   helping them in their necessities. God often sends a secret moth into
   their estate. There is that withholdeth more than is meet, but it
   tendeth to poverty.' Prov 11: 24. Whose stoppeth his ears at the cry of
   the poor, he also shall cry himself, but shall not be heard.' Prov 21:
   13. He shall have judgement without mercy, that has shewed no mercy.'
   James 2: 13. Dives denied Lazarus a crumb of bread, and Dives was
   denied a drop of water. Depart from me, ye cursed; for I was an
   hungred, and ye gave me no meat.' Matt 15: 41. Christ says not, Ye took
   away my meat;' but Ye gave me no meat;' ye did not feed my members,
   therefore depart from me.' By all this, be ready to distribute to the
   necessities of others. This is included in the commandment, Thou shalt
   not kill.' Not only thou shalt not destroy another's life, but thou
   shalt preserve it by ministering to his necessities.

   It is implied that we should endeavour to preserve the souls of others:
   counsel them about their souls; set life and death before them; help
   them to heaven. In the law, if one met his neighbour's ox or ass going
   astray, he must bring him back again. Exod 23: 4. Much more, if we see
   our neighbour's soul going astray, we should use all means to bring him
   back to God by repentance.

   [2] In reference to ourselves. The commandment, Thou shalt not kill,'
   requires that we should preserve our own life and soul. It is engraven
   upon every creature that he should preserve his own natural life. We
   must be so far from self-murder, that we must do all we can to preserve
   natural life. We must use all means of diet, exercise, and lawful
   recreation, which, like oil, preserves the lamp of life from going out.
   Some have been tempted by Satan to believe they are such sinners that
   they do not deserve a bit of bread, and so they have been ready to
   starve themselves. This is contrary to the commandment, Thou shalt do
   no murder,' which implies that we are to use all proper means for the
   preservation of life. Drink no longer water, but use a little wine for
   thy stomach's sake.' 1 Tim 5: 23. Timothy was not, by drinking too much
   water, to overcool his stomach, and weaken nature, but to use means for
   self-preservation -- to drink a little wine,' &c.

   This commandment requires that we should also endeavour to preserve our
   own souls. Omnia si perdas animam servare memento [Though you lose all
   else, remember to save your soul]. It is engraven upon every creature,
   as with the point of a diamond, to look to its own preservation. If the
   life of the body must be preserved, much more the life of the soul. If
   he who does not provide for his own house is worse than an infidel,
   much more he who does not provide for his own soul. 1 Tim 5: 8. A main
   thing implied in the commandment is a special care for preserving our
   souls. The soul is a jewel, a diamond set in a ring of clay; Christ
   puts the soul in balance with the world, and it outweighs all. Matt 16:
   26. The soul is a glass. in which some rays of divine glory shine; it
   has in it some faint idea and resemblance of a Deity; it is a celestial
   spark lighted by the breath of God. The body was made of the dust, but
   the soul is of a more noble origin. God breathed into man a living
   soul. Gen 2: 7.

   (1) The soul is excellent in its nature. It is a spiritual being, it is
   a kind of angelical thing.' The mind sparkles with knowledge, the will
   is crowned with liberty, and all the affections are as stars shining in
   their orb. The soul being spiritual, it is of quick operation. How
   quick are the motions of a spark! How swift the wing of a cherubim! So
   quick and agile is the motion of the soul! What is quicker than
   thought? How many miles can the soul travel in an instant! The soul,
   being spiritual, moves upwards, it contemplates God and glory. Whom
   have I in heaven but thee?' Psa 73: 25. The motion of the soul is
   upward; but sin has put a wrong bias upon it, and made it move
   downward. The soul, being spiritual, has a self-moving power; it can
   subsist and move when the body is dead, as the mariner can subsist when
   the ship is broken. The soul, being spiritual, is immortal (Scaliger),
   aeternitatis gemma, a bud of eternity.'

   (2) As the soul is excellent in its nature, so in its capacities. It is
   capable of grace, it is fit to be an associate and companion of angels.
   It is capable of communion with God, of being Christ's spouse. I have
   espoused you to one husband that I may present you as a chaste virgin
   to Christ.' 2 Cor 11: 2. It is capable of being crowned with glory for
   ever. Oh! then, carrying such precious souls about you, created with
   the breath of God, redeemed with the blood of God, what endeavours
   should you use for the saving of these souls! Let not the devil have
   your souls. Heliogabalus fed his lions with pheasants: the devil is
   called a roaring lion: feed him not with your souls. Besides the
   excellence of the soul, which may make you labour to get it saved,
   consider how sad it will be not to have the soul saved; it is such a
   loss as there is none like it; because in losing the soul, you lose
   many things with it. A merchant in losing his ship, loses many things
   with it: he loses money, jewels, spices, &c.; so he that loses his
   soul, loses Christ and the company of angels in heaven. It is an
   infinite loss -- an irreparable loss; it can never be made up again.
   Two eyes and one soul.' Chrysostom. Oh! what care should be taken of
   the immortal soul! I would request but this of you, that you take as
   much care for the saving of your souls as you do for getting an estate.
   Nay, do but take as much care for saving your souls as the devil does
   for destroying them. Oh! how industrious is Satan to damn souls! How
   does he play the serpent in his subtle laying of snares to catch souls!
   How does he shoot the fiery darts! He is never idle; he is a busy
   bishop in his diocese; he walketh about seeking whom he may devour.' 1
   Pet 5: 8. Now, is it not a reasonable request to take as much care for
   saving your souls as the devil does for destroying them?

   How can we have our souls saved?

   By having them sanctified. Only the pure in heart shall see God.' Get
   your souls inlaid and enamelled with holiness. 1 Pet 1: 16. It is not
   enough that we cease to do evil;' which is all the evidence some have
   to show, and lose heaven by short shooting; but we must be inwardly
   sanctified. Not only the unclean spirit' must go out, but we must be
   filled with the Holy Ghost. Eph 5: 19. This holiness must needs be, if
   you consider God is to dwell with you here, and you are to dwell with
   him hereafter.

   God is to dwell with you here. He takes up the soul for his own
   lodging. That Christ may dwell in your hearts.' Eph 3: 17. Therefore
   the soul must be consecrated. A king's palace must be kept clean,
   especially his presence chamber. The body is the temple of the Holy
   Ghost. 1 Cor 6: 19. The soul is the sanctum sanctorum; how holy should
   it be!

   You are to dwell with God. Heaven is a holy place. An inheritance
   undefiled.' 1 Pet 1: 4. And how can you dwell with God till you are
   sanctified? We do not put wine into a musty vessel; and God will not
   put the new wine of glory into a sinful heart. Oh, then, as you love
   your souls, and would have them saved eternally, endeavour after
   holiness! By this means you will have a fitness for the kingdom of
   heaven, and your souls will be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus.
     __________________________________________________________________

  2.7 The Seventh Commandment

   Thou shalt not commit adultery.' Exod 20: 14.

   God is a pure, holy spirit, and has an infinite antipathy against all
   uncleanness. In this commandment he has entered his caution against it;
   non moechaberis, Thou shalt not commit adultery.' The sum of this
   commandment is, The preservations of corporal purity. We must take heed
   of running on the rock of uncleanness, and so making shipwreck of our
   chastity. In this commandment there is something tacitly implied, and
   something expressly forbidden.

   1. The thing implied is that the ordinance of marriage should be
   observed. Let every man have his own wife, and let every woman have her
   own husband.' 1 Cor 7: 2. Marriage is honourable and the bed
   undefiled.' Heb 13: 4. God instituted marriage in paradise; he brought
   the woman to the man. Gen 2: 22. He gave them to each other in
   marriage. Jesus Christ honoured marriage with his presence. John 2: 2.
   The first miracle he wrought was at a marriage, when he turned the
   water into wine.' Marriage is a type and resemblance of the mystical
   union between Christ and his church. Eph 5: 32.

   In marriage there are general and special duties. The general duty of
   the husband is to rule. The husband is the head of the wife.' Eph 5:
   23. The head is the seat of rule and judgement; but he must rule with
   discretion. He is head, therefore must not rule without reason. The
   general duty on the wife's part is submission. Wives, submit yourselves
   unto your own husbands, as unto the Lord.' Eph 5: 22. It is observable
   that the Holy Ghost passed by Sarah's failings, not mentioning her
   unbelief; but he takes notice of that which was good in her, as her
   reverence and obedience to her husband. Sarah obeyed Abraham, calling
   him lord.' 1 Pet 3: 6.

   The special duties belonging to marriage, are love and fidelity. Love
   is the marriage of the affections. Eph 5: 25. There is, as it were, but
   one heart in two bodies. Love lines the yoke and makes it easy; it
   perfumes the marriage relation; and without it there is not conjugium
   but conjurgium [not harmony but constant wrangling]. Like two poisons
   in one stomach, one is ever sick of the other. In marriage there is
   mutual promise of living together faithfully according to God's holy
   ordinance. Among the Romans, on the day of marriage, the woman
   presented to her husband fire and water: signifying that as fire
   refines, and water cleanses, she would live with her husband in
   chastity and sincerity.

   II. The thing forbidden in the commandment is infecting ourselves with
   bodily pollution and uncleanness. Thou shalt not commit adultery.' The
   fountain of this sin is lust. Since the fall, holy love has degenerated
   to lust. Lust is the fever of the soul. There is a twofold adultery.

   [1] Mental. Whosoever looketh on a woman to lust after her has
   committed adultery with her already in his heart.' Matt 5: 28. As a man
   may die of an inward bleeding, so he may be damned for the inward
   boilings of lust, if it be not mortified.

   {2] Corporal; as when sin has conceived, and brought forth in the act.
   This is expressly forbidden under a sub poena. Thou shalt not commit
   adultery.' This commandment is set as a hedge to keep out uncleanness;
   and they that break this hedge a serpent shall bite them. Job calls
   adultery a heinous crime.' Job 31: 2: Every failing is not a crime; and
   every crime is not a heinous crime; but adultery is flagitium, a
   heinous crime.' The Lord calls it villany. They have committed villany
   in Israel, and have committed adultery with their neighbours' wives.'
   Jer 29: 23.

   Wherein appears the greatness of this sin?

   (1) It is a breach of the marriage-oath. When persons come together in
   a matrimonial way, they bind themselves by covenant to each other, in
   the presence of God, to be true and faithful in the conjugal relation.
   Unchastity falsifies this solemn oath; and herein adultery is worse
   than fornication, because it is a breach of the conjugal bond.

   (2) The greatness of the sin lies in this: that it is a great dishonour
   done to God. God says, Thou shalt not commit adultery.' The adulterer
   sets his will above God's law, tramples upon his command, affronts him
   to his face; as if a subject should tear his prince's proclamation. The
   adulterer is highly injurious to all the Persons in the Trinity. To God
   the Father. Sinner, God has given thee thy life, and thou dost waste
   the lamp of life, the flower of thine age in lewdness. He has bestowed
   on thee many mercies, health, and estate, and thou spendest all on
   harlots. Did God give thee wages to serve the devil? It is injurious to
   God the Son, in two ways. As he has purchased thee with his blood. Ye
   are bought with a price.' 1 Cor 6: 20. Now he who is bought is not his
   own; it is a sin for him to go to another, without consent, from
   Christ, who has bought him with a price. As by virtue of baptism thou
   art a Christian, and professes that Christ is thy head, and thou art a
   member of Christ; therefore, what an injury is it to Christ, to take
   the members of Christ, and make them the members of a harlot'? 1 Cor 6:
   15. It is injurious to God the Holy Ghost; for the body is his temple.
   Know ye not that your body is the temple of the Holy Ghost which is in
   you?' 1 Cor 6: 19. And how great a sin is it to defile his temple!

   (3) The sin of adultery lies in this: that it is committed with mature
   deliberation. There is contriving the sin in the mind, then consent in
   the will, and then the sin is put forth into act. To sin against the
   light of nature, and to sin deliberately, is like the dye to the wool,
   it gives sin a tincture, and dyes it of a crimson colour.

   (4) That which makes adultery so sinful is, that it is needless. God
   has provided a remedy to prevent it. To avoid fornication, let every
   man have his own wife.' 1 Cor 7: 2. Therefore, after this remedy
   prescribed, to be guilty of fornication or adultery, is inexcusable; it
   is like a rich thief, that steals when he has no need. This increases
   the sin.

   Use one. The church of Rome is here condemned, which allows the sin of
   fortification and adultery. It suffers not its priests to marry, but
   they may have their courtesans. The worst kind of uncleanness, incest
   with the nearest of kin, is dispensed with for money. It was once said
   of Rome, Urbs est jam tota lupanar, Rome was become a common stew. And
   no wonder, when the Pope, for a sum of money, could give a license and
   patent to commit uncleanness; and, if the patent were not enough, he
   would give them a pardon. Many of the Papists judge fornication to be
   venial. God condemns the very lusting. Matt 5: 28. If God condemns the
   thought, how dare they allow the fact of fornication? You see what a
   cage of unclean birds the church of Rome is. They call themselves the
   Holy Catholic Church; but how can they be holy who are so steeped and
   parboiled in fornication, incest, sodomy, and all manner of
   uncleanness?

   Use two. It is a matter for lamentation to see this commandment so
   slighted and violated among us. Adultery is the reigning sin of the
   times. They are all adulterers, as an oven heated by the baker.' Hos 7:
   4. The time of King Henry VIII was called the golden age, but this may
   be called the unclean age, wherein whore-hunting is common. In thy
   filthiness is lewdness.' Ezek 24: 13. Luther tells us of one who said,
   If he might but satisfy his lust, and be carried from one whore-house
   to another, he would desire no other heaven'; and who afterwards
   breathed out his soul betwixt two notorious strumpets. This is to love
   forbidden fruit, to love to drink of stolen waters. Son of man, dig in
   the wall; and when I had digged, behold a door; and he said, Go in and
   behold the wicked abominations that they do here.' Ezek 8: 8, 9. Could
   we, as the prophet, dig in the walls of many houses, what vile
   abominations should we see there! In some chambers we might see
   fornication; dig further, and we may see adultery; dig further, and we
   may see incest, &c. And may not the Lord go from his sanctuary? Sees
   thou the great abominations that the house of Israel committeth, that I
   should go far off from my sanctuary?' Ezek 8: 6. God might remove his
   gospel, and then we might write Ichabod on this nation, The glory is
   departed.' Let us mourn for what we cannot reform.

   Use three. For exhortation, to keep ourselves from the sin of adultery.
   Let every man have his own wife,' says Paul, not his concubine, nor his
   courtesan. 1 Cor 7: 2. That I may deter you from adultery, let me show
   you the great evil of it.

   (1) It is a thievish sin. It is the highest sort of theft. The
   adulterer steals from his neighbour that which is more than his goods
   and estate; he steals away his wife from him, who is flesh of his
   flesh.

   (2) Adultery debases a person; it makes him resemble the beasts;
   therefore the adulterer is described like a horse neighing. Every one
   neighed after his neighbour's wife.' Jer 5: 8. Nay, it is worse than
   brutish; for some creatures that are void of reason, yet by the
   instinct of nature, observe some decorum and chastity. The turtle dove
   is a chaste creature, and keeps to its mate; and the stork, wherever he
   flies, comes into no nest but his own. Naturalists write that if a
   stork, leaving his own mate, joins with any other, all the rest of the
   storks fall upon it, and pull its feathers from it. Adultery is worse
   than brutish, it degrades a person of his honour.

   (3) Adultery pollutes. The devil is called an unclean spirit. Luke 11:
   24. The adulterer is the devil's first-born; he is unclean; he is a
   moving quagmire; he is all over ulcerated with sin; his eyes sparkle
   with lust; his mouth foams out filth; his heart burns like mount Etna,
   in unclean desires; and he is so filthy, that if he die in this sin,
   all the flames of hell will never purge away his uncleanness. And, as
   for the adulteress, who can paint her black enough? The Scriptures
   calls her a deep ditch. Prov 23: 27. She is a common drain; whereas a
   believer's body is a living temple, and his soul a little heaven, be
   spangled with the graces, as so many stars. The body of a harlot is a
   walking dung hill, and her soul a lesser hell.

   (4) Adultery is destructive to the body. And thou mourn at the last,
   when thy flesh and thy body are consumed.' Prov 5: 11. It brings into a
   consumption. Uncleanness turns the body into a hospital, it wastes the
   radical moisture, rots the skull, and eats the beauty of the face. As
   the flame wastes the candle, so the fire of lust consumes the bones.
   The adulterer hastens his own death. Till a dart strike through his
   liver.' Prov 7: 23. The Romans had their funerals at the gate of
   Venus's temple, to signify that lust brings death. Venus is lust.

   (5.) Adultery is a drain upon the purse; it wastes not the body only,
   but the estate. By means of a whorish woman, a man is brought to a
   piece of bread.' Prov 6: 26. Whores are the devil's horse-leeches,
   sponges that suck in money. The prodigal son spent his portion when he
   fell among harlots. Luke 15: 30. The concubine of King Edward III, when
   he was dying, got all she could from him, and even plucked the rings
   off his fingers, and so left him. He that lives in luxury, dies in
   beggary.

   (6) Adultery destroys reputation. Whoso committeth adultery with a
   woman, a wound and dishonour shall he get, and his reproach shall not
   be wiped away.' Prov 6: 32, 33. Some, when they get wounds, get honour.
   The soldier's wounds are full of honour; the martyr's wounds for Christ
   are full of honour; but the adulterer gets wounds, but no honour to his
   name. His reproach shall not be wiped away.' Wounds of reputation no
   physician can heal. When the adulterer dies, his shame lives. When his
   body rots underground, his name rots above ground. His base-born
   children are living monuments of his shame.

   (7) This sin impairs the mind; it steals away the understanding; it
   stupefies the heart. Whoredom and wine take away the heart.' Hos 4: 11.
   It cats out all heart for good. Solomon besotted himself with women,
   and they enticed him to idolatry.

   (8) This sin incurs temporal judgements. The Mosaic law made adultery
   death. The adulterer and adulteress shall surely be put to death;' and
   the usual death was stoning. Lev 20: 10; Deut 22: 24. The Salons
   commanded persons taken in this sin to be burnt. The Romans caused
   their heads to be stricken off. Like a scorpion, this sin carries a
   sting in its tail. The adultery of Paris and Helen was the death of
   both, and the ruin of Troy. Jealousy is the rage of a man.' Prov 6: 34.
   The adulterer is often killed in the act of his sin. Adultery cost Otho
   the emperor, and Pope Sixtus IV their lives. Laeta venire Venus,
   tristis abire solet [Lust's practice is to make a joyful entrance, but
   she leaves in misery]. I have read of two citizens in London, in 1583,
   who, having defiled themselves with adultery on the Lord's-day, were
   immediately struck dead with fire from heaven. If all who are now
   guilty of this sin were to be punished in this manner, it would rain
   fire again, as on Sodom.

   (9) Adultery, without repentance, damns the soul. Neither fornicators,
   nor adulterers, nor effeminate, shall enter into the kingdom of God.' 1
   Cor 6: 9. The fire of lust brings to the fire of hell. Whoremongers and
   adulterers God will judge.' Heb 13: 4. Though men may neglect to judge
   them, yet God will judge them. But will not God judge all other
   sinners? Yes. Why then does the apostle say, Whoremongers and
   adulterers God will judge'? The meaning is, he will judge them
   assuredly; they shall not escape the hand of justice; and he will
   punish them severely. The Lord knoweth how to reserve the unjust to the
   day of judgement to be punished, but chiefly them that walk in the lust
   of uncleanness.' 2 Pet 2: 9, 10. The harlot's breast keeps from
   Abraham's bosom. Momentaneum est quod delectat, auternum quod cruciat
   [The delight lasts a moment, the torment an eternity]. Who for a cup of
   pleasure would drink a sea of wrath? Her guests are in the depths of
   hell.' Prov 9: 18. A wise traveller, though many pleasant dishes are
   set before him at the inn, forbears to taste, because of the reckoning.
   We are all travellers to Jerusalem above; and when many baits of
   temptation are set before us, we should refrain, and think of the
   reckoning which will be brought in at death. With what stomach could
   Dionysius eat his dainties, when he imagined there was a naked sword
   hung over his head as he sat at meat? While the adulterer feeds on
   strange flesh, the sword of God's justice hangs over his head. Causinus
   speaks of a tree growing in Spain, that is of a sweet smell, and
   pleasant to the taste, but the juice of it is poisonous. This is an
   emblem of a harlot; who is perfumed with powders, and fair to look on,
   but poisonous and damnable to the soul. She has cast down many wounded,
   yea, many strong men have been slain by her.' Prov 7: 26.

   (10) The adulterer not only wrongs his own soul, but does what in him
   lies to destroy the soul of another, and so kills two at once. He is
   worse than the thief; for, suppose a thief robs a man, yea, takes away
   his life, the man's soul may be happy; he may go to heaven as well as
   if he had died in his bed. But he who commits adultery, endangers the
   soul of another, and deprives her of salvation so far as in him lies.
   Now, what a fearful thing is it to be an instrument to draw another to
   hell!

   (11) The adulterer is abhorred of God. The mouth of strange women is a
   deep pit: he that is abhorred of the Lord shall fall therein.' Prov 22:
   14. What can be worse than to be abhorred of God? God may be angry with
   his own children; but for God to abhor a man, is the highest degree of
   hatred.

   How does the Lord show his abhorrence of the adulterer?

   In giving him up to a reprobate mind, and a seared conscience. Rom 1:
   28. He is then in such a condition that he cannot repent. He is
   abhorred of God. He stands upon the threshold of hell; and when death
   gives him a push, he tumbles in. All this should sound a retreat in our
   ears, and call us off from the pursuit of so damnable a sin as
   uncleanness. Hear what the Scriptures say: Come not nigh the door of
   her house.' Prov 5: 8. Her house is the way to hell.' Prov 7: 27.

   (12) Adultery sows discord. It destroys peace and love, the two best
   flowers that grow in a family. It sets husband against wife, and wife
   against husband; and so causes the joints of the same body to smite one
   against another.' This division in a family works confusion; for A
   house divided against a house falleth.' Luke 11: 17. Omne divisibile
   est corruptibile.

   Use four. I shall give some directions, by way of antidote, to keep
   from the infection of this sin.

   (1) Come not into the company of a whorish woman; avoid her house, as a
   seaman does a rock. Come not nigh the door of her house.' Prov 5: 8. He
   who would not have the plague, must not come near infected houses;
   every whore-house has the plague in it. Not to beware of the occasion
   of sin, and yet pray, Lead us not into temptation,' is, as if one
   should put his finger into the candle, and yet pray that it may not be
   burnt.

   (2) Look to your eyes. Much sin comes in by the eye. Having eyes full
   of adultery.' 2 Pet 2: 14. The eye tempts the fancy, and the fancy
   works upon the heart. A wanton amorous eye may usher in sin. Eve first
   saw the tree of knowledge, and then she took. Gen 3: 6. First she
   looked and then she loved. The eye often sets the heart on fire;
   therefore Job laid a law upon his eyes. I made a covenant with my eyes,
   why then should I think upon a maid?' Job 31: 1. Democritus the
   philosopher plucked out his eyes, because he would not be tempted with
   vain objects; the Scripture does not bid us do this, but to set a watch
   before our eyes.

   (3) Look to your lips. Take heed of any unseemly word that may enkindle
   unclean thoughts in yourselves or others. Evil communications corrupt
   good manners.' 1 Cor 15: 33. Impure discourse is the bellows to blow up
   the fire of lust. Much evil is conveyed to the heart by the tongue. Set
   a watch, O Lord, before my mouth.' Psa 141: 3.

   (4) Look in a special manner to your heart. Keep thy heart with all
   diligence.' Prov 4: 23. Every one has a tempter in his own bosom. Out
   of the heart proceed evil thoughts.' Matt 15: 19. Thinking of sin makes
   way for the act of sin. Suppress the first risings of sin in your
   heart. As the serpent, when danger is near, keeps his head, so keep
   your heart, which is the spring from whence all lustful motions
   proceed.

   (5) Look to your attire. We read of the attire of a harlot. Prov 7: 10.
   A wanton dress is a provocation to lust. Cuttings and braidings of the
   hair, a painted face, naked breasts, are allurements to vanity. Where
   the sign is hung out, people will go in and taste the liquor. Jerome
   says, they who by their lascivious attire endeavour to draw others to
   lust, though no evil follows, are tempters, and shall be punished,
   because they offered the poison to others, though they would not drink.

   (6) Take heed of evil company. Serpunt vitia et in proximum quemque
   transiliunt [Vices spread abroad and spring on to any standing by].
   Seneca. Sin is a very catching disease; one tempts another to sin, and
   hardens him in it. There are three cords that draw men to adultery: the
   inclination of the heart, the persuasion of evil company, and the
   embraces of the harlot; and this threefold cord is not easily broken. A
   fire was kindled in their company.' Psa 106: 18. The fire of lust is
   kindled in bad company.

   (7) Beware of going to plays. A play-house is often a preface to a
   whorehouse. Ludi praebent semina nequitiae [Plays furnish the seeds of
   wickedness]. We are bid to avoid all appearance of evil: and are not
   plays the appearance of evil? Such sights are there that are not fit to
   be beheld with chaste eyes. Both Fathers and Councils have shown their
   dislike to going to plays. A learned divine observes, that many have on
   their death-beds confessed, with tears, that the pollution of their
   bodies has been occasioned by going to plays.

   (8) Take heed of mixed dancing. Instrumenta luxuriae tripudia [Dances
   are instruments of wantonness]. From dancing, people come to dalliance
   with another, and from dalliance to uncleanness. There is,' says
   Calvin, for the most part, some unchaste behaviour in dancing.' Dances
   draw the heart to folly by wanton gestures, by unchaste touches, and by
   lustful looks. Chrysostom inveighed against mixed dancing in his time.
   We read,' he says, of a marriage feast, and of virgins going before
   with lamps, but of dancing there we read not.' Matt 25: 7. Many have
   been ensnared by dancing; as the duke of Normandy, and others. Saltatio
   adadulteras non ad pudicas pertinet [Dancing is the province not of the
   chaste woman, but of the adulteress]. Ambrose. Chrysostom says, where
   dancing is, there the devil is. I speak chiefly of mixed dancing. We
   read of dances in Scripture, but they were sober and modest. Exod 15:
   20. They were not mixed dances, but pious and religious, being usually
   accompanied with singing praises to God.

   (9) Take heed of lascivious books, and pictures that provoke to lust.
   As the reading of the Scripture stirs up love to God, so reading bad
   books stirs up the mind to wickedness. I could name one who published a
   book to the world full of effeminate, amorous, and wanton expressions,
   who, before he died, was much troubled for it, and burned the book
   which made so many burn in lust. To lascivious books I may add
   lascivious pictures, which bewitch the eye, and are incendiaries to
   lust. They secretly convey poison to the heart. Qui aspicit innocens
   aspectu fit nocens. Popish pictures are not more prone to stir up
   idolatry than unclean pictures are to stir up to concupiscence.

   (10) Take heed of excess in diet. When gluttony and drunkenness lead
   the van, chambering and wantonness bring up the rear. Vinum fomentum
   libidinis; any wine inflames lust;' and fulness of bread is made the
   cause of Sodom's uncleanness. Ezek 16: 49. The rankest weeds grow out
   of the fattest soil. Uncleanness proceeds from excess. When I had fed
   them to the full, every one neighed after his neighbour's wife.' Jer 5:
   8. Get the golden bridle of temperance.' God allows recruits of nature,
   and what may fit us the better for his service; but beware of surfeit.
   Excess in the creature clouds the mind, chokes good affections, and
   provokes lust. Paul did keep under his body.' 1 Cor 9: 27. The flesh
   pampered is apt to rebel. Corpus impinguatum recalcitrat.

   (11) Take heed of idleness. When a man is out of a calling, he is ready
   to receive any temptation. We do not sow seed in fallow-ground; but the
   devil sows most seed of temptation in such as lie fallow. Idleness is
   the cause of sodomy and uncleanness. Ezek 16: 49. When David was idle
   on the top of his house, he espied Bathsheba, and took her to him. 2
   Sam 11: 4. Jerome gave his friend counsel to be always well employed in
   God's vineyard, that when the devil came, he might have no leisure to
   listen to temptation.

   (12) To avoid fornication and adultery, let every man have a chaste,
   entire love to his own wife. Ezekiel's wife was the desire of his eyes.
   Chap 24: 16. When Solomon had dissuaded from strange women, he
   prescribed a remedy against it. Rejoice with the wife of thy youth.'
   Prov 5: 18. It is not having a wife, but loving a wife, that makes a
   man live chastely. He who loves his wife, whom Solomon calls his
   fountain, will not go abroad to drink of muddy, poisoned waters. Pure
   conjugal love is a gift of God, and comes from heaven; but, like the
   vestal fire, it must be cherished, that it go not out. He who loves not
   his wife, is the likeliest person to embrace the bosom of a stranger.

   (13) Labour to get the fear of God into your hearts. By the fear of the
   Lord men depart from evil.' Prov 16: 6. As the embankment keeps out the
   water, so the fear of the Lord keeps out uncleanness. Such as want the
   fear of God, want the bridle that should check them from sin. How did
   Joseph keep from his mistress's temptation? The fear of God pulled him
   back. How can I do this great wickedness, and sin against God?' Gen.
   39: 9. Bernard calls holy fear, janitor animae, the door-keeper of the
   soul.' As a nobleman's porter stands at the door, and keeps out
   vagrants, so the fear of God stands and keeps out all sinful
   temptations from entering.

   (14) Take delight in the word of God. How sweet are thy words unto my
   taste.' Psa 119: 103. Chrysostom compares God's word to a garden. If we
   walk in this garden, and suck sweetness from the flowers of the
   promises, we shall never care to pluck the forbidden fruit.' Sint
   castae deliciae meae scripturae [Let the Scriptures be my pure
   pleasure]. Augustine. The reason why persons seek after unchaste,
   sinful pleasures, is because they have no better. Caesar riding through
   a city, and seeing the women play with dogs and parrots, said, Sure
   they have no children.' So they that sport with harlots have no better
   pleasures. He that has once tasted Christ in a promise, is ravished
   with delight; and how would he scorn a motion to sin! Job said, the
   word was his appointed food.' Job 23: 12. No wonder then he made a
   covenant with his eyes.'

   (15) If you would abstain from adultery, use serious consideration.
   Consider, [1] God sees thee in the act of sin. He sees all thy curtain
   wickedness. He is totus oculus, all eye.' The clouds are no canopy, the
   night is no curtain to hide thee from God's eye. Thou canst not sin,
   but thy Judge looks on. I have seen thy adulteries and thy neighings.'
   Jer 13: 27. They have committed adultery with their neighbours' wives;
   even I know, and am a witness, saith the Lord.' Jer 29: 23. [2] Few
   that are entangled in the sin of adultery, recover from the snare. None
   that go to her return again.' Prov 2: 19. This made some of the
   ancients conclude that adultery was an unpardonable sin; but it is not
   so. David repented. Mary Magdalene was a weeping penitent; upon her
   amorous eyes that sparkled with lose, she sought to be revenged, by
   washing Christ's feet with her tears. Some, therefore have recovered
   from the snare. None that go to her return,' that is, very few;' it is
   rare to hear of any who are enchanted and bewitched with this sin of
   adultery, that recover from it. Her heart is snares and nets, and her
   hands are bands.' Eccl 7: 26. Her heart is snares,' that is, she is
   subtle to deceive those who come to her; and her hands are bands,' that
   is her embraces are powerful to hold and entangle her lovers. Plutarch
   said of the Persian kings, They were captives to their concubines,'
   they were so inflamed, that they had no power to leave their company.
   This consideration should make all fearful of this sin. Soft pleasures
   harden the heart. [3] Consider what Scripture says, which may ponere
   obicem, lay a bar in the way' to this sin. I will be a swift witness
   against the adulterers.' Mal 3: 5. It is good when God is a witness for
   us', when he witnesses to our sincerity, as he did to Job's; but it is
   sad to have God a witness against us.' I,' says God, will be a witness
   against the adulterer.' And who shall disprove his witness? He is both
   witness and judge. Whoremongers and adulterers God will judge.' Heb 13:
   4. [4] Consider the sad farewell the sin of adultery leaves. It leaves
   a hell in the conscience. The lips of a strange woman drop as a
   honeycomb, but her end is bitter as wormwood.' Prov 5: 4. The goddess
   Diana was so artificially drawn, that she seemed to smile upon those
   that came into her temple, but frown on those that went out. So the
   harlot smiles on her lovers as they come to her, but at last come the
   frown and the sting. Till a dart strike through his liver.' Prov 7: 23.
   Her end is bitter.' When a man has been virtuous, the labour is gone,
   but the comfort remains; but when he has been vicious and unclean, the
   pleasure is gone, but the sting remains. Delectat in momentum, cruciat
   in aeternum [He gains momentary pleasure and then eternal torment].
   Jerome. When the senses have been feasted with unchaste pleasures, the
   soul is left to pay the reckoning. Stolen waters are sweet; but, as
   poison, though sweet in the mouth, it torments the bowels. Sin always
   ends in a tragedy. Memorable is that which Fincelius reports of a
   priest in Flanders, who enticed a maid to uncleanness. She objected how
   vile a sin it was, he told her that by authority from the Pope he could
   commit any sin; so at last he drew her to his wicked purpose. But when
   they had been together a while, in came the devil, and took away the
   harlot from the priest's side, and, notwithstanding all her crying out,
   carried her away. If the devil should come and carry away all that are
   guilty of bodily uncleanness in this nation, I fear more would be
   carried away than would be left behind.

   (16) Pray against this sin. Luther gave a lady this advice, that when
   any lust began to rise in her heart, she should go to prayer. Prayer is
   the best armour of proof; it quenches the wild fire of lust. If prayer
   will cast out the devil,' why may it not cast out those lusts that come
   from the devil?

   Use five. If the body must be kept pure from defilement, much more the
   soul of a Christian must be kept pure.' The meaning of the commandment
   is not only that we should not stain our bodies with adultery, but that
   we should keep our souls pure. To have a chaste body, but an unclean
   soul, is like a fair face with bad lungs; or a gilt chimney-piece, that
   is all soot within. Be ye holy, for I am holy.' 1 Pet 1: 16. The soul
   cannot be lovely to God till it has Christ's image stamped upon it,
   which consists in righteousness and true holiness. Eph 4: 24. The soul
   must especially be kept pure, because it is the chief place of God's
   residence. Eph 3: 17. A king's palace must be kept clean, especially
   his presence-chamber. If the body is the temple, the soul is the Holy
   of holies,' and must be consecrated. We must not only keep our bodies
   from carnal pollution, but our souls from envy and malice.

   How shall we know our souls are pure?

   (1) If our souls are pure, we flee from the appearance of evil. 1 Thess
   5: 22. We shall not do that which looks like sin. When Joseph's
   mistress courted and tempted him, he left his garment in her hand, and
   fled.' Gen 39: 12 He was suspicious to be near her. Polycarp would not
   be seen in company with Marcion the heretic, because it would not be
   good report.

   (2) If our souls are pure, the light of purity will shine forth. Aaron
   had Holiness to the Lord' written upon his golden plate. Where there is
   sanctity in the soul, there Holiness to the Lord' is engraven upon the
   life. We are adorned with patience, humility, good works, and shine as
   Lights in the world.' Phil 2: 15. Carry Christ's picture in your
   conversation. 1 John 2: 6. O let us labour for this soul purity!
   Without it there is no seeing God. Heb 12: 14. What communion has light
   with darkness?' 2 Cor 6: 14. To keep the soul pure, have recourse to
   the blood of Christ: which is the fountain open for sin and
   uncleanness.' Zech 13: 1. A soul steeped in the briny tears of
   repentance, and bathed in the blood of Christ, is made pure. Pray much
   for a pureness of soul. Create in me a clean heart, O God.' Psa 51: 10.
   Some pray for children, others for riches; but pray thou for soul
   purity. Say, Lord, though my body is kept pure, yet my soul is defiled,
   I pollute all I touch. O purge me with hyssop, let Christ's blood
   sprinkle me, let the Holy Ghost come upon me and anoint me. O make me
   evangelically pure, that I may be translated to heaven, and placed
   among the cherubim, where I shall be as holy as thou wouldst have me to
   be, and as happy as I can desire to be.'
     __________________________________________________________________

  2.8 The Eighth Commandment

   Thou shalt not steal.' Exod 20: 15.

   AS the holiness of God sets him against uncleanness, in the command
   Thou shalt not commit adultery;' so the justice of God sets him against
   rapine and robbery, in the command, Thou shalt not steal.' The thing
   forbidden in this commandment, is meddling with another man's property.
   The civil lawyers define furtum, stealth or theft to be the laying
   hands unjustly on that which is another's;' the invading another's
   right.

   I. The causes of theft.

   [1] The internal causes are, (1) Unbelief. A man has a high distrust of
   God's providence. Can God furnish a table in the wilderness?' Psa 78:
   19. Can God spread a table for me? says the unbeliever. No, he cannot.
   Therefore he is resolved he will spread a table for himself, but it
   shall be at other men's cost, and both first and second course shall be
   served in with stolen goods. (2) Covetousness. The Greek word for
   covetousness signifies an immoderate desire of getting;' which is the
   root of theft. A man covets more than his own, and this itch of
   covetousness makes him scratch what he can from another. Achan's
   covetous humour made him steal the wedge of gold, a wedge which cleaved
   asunder his soul from God. Joshua 7: 21.

   [2] The external cause of theft is Satan's solicitation. Judas was a
   thief. John 12: 6. How came he to be a thief? Satan entered into him'.
   John 13: 27. The devil is the great master-thief, he robbed us of our
   coat of innocence, and he persuades men to take up his trade; he tells
   men how bravely they shall live by thieving, and how they may catch an
   estate. As Eve listened to the serpent's voice, so do they. As birds of
   prey, they live upon spoil and plunder.

   II. The kinds of theft.

   [1] There is stealing from God. They are thieves who rob God of any
   part of his day. Remember to keep holy the Sabbath day.' Not a part of
   the day only, but the whole day must be dedicated to God. And, lest any
   should forget this, the Lord has prefixed a memento, remember.'
   Therefore, after morning sacrifice, to spend the other part of the
   Sabbath in vanity and pleasure, is spiritual theft. It robs God of his
   due, and the very heathen will rise up in judgement against such
   Christians; for the heathen, as Macrobius notes, observed a whole day
   to their false gods.

   [2] There is stealing from others. A stealing away souls, as heretics,
   by robbing men of the truth, rob them of their souls. Stealing money
   and goods. There is

   (1) The highway thief, who takes a purse, contrary to the letter of the
   commandment. Thou shalt not rob thy neighbour.' Lev 19: 13. Do not
   steal.' Mark 10: 19. This is not the violence which takes the kingdom
   of heaven by force.' Matt 11: 12.

   (2) The house-thief, who purloins and filches out of his master's cash,
   or steals his wares and drugs. The apostle says, Some have entertained
   angels unawares' (Heb 13: 2), but many masters have entertained thieves
   in their houses unawares. The house-thief is a hypocrite as well as a
   thief; for he has demure looks, and pretends to be helping his master,
   when he only helps himself.

   (3) The thief that shrouds himself under law, as the unjust attorney or
   lawyer, who prevaricates and deals falsely with his client. This is to
   steal from the client. By deceit and prevarication, the lawyer robs the
   client of his land, and may be the means of ruining his family, and is
   no better than a thief in God's account.

   (4) The church-thief or pluralist, who holds several benefices, but
   seldom or never preaches to the people. He gets the golden fleece, but
   lets the flock starve. Woe be to the shepherds of Israel.' Ezek 34: 2.
   They fed themselves, and fed not my flock;' ver. 8. These ministers
   will be indicted for thieves at God's bar.

   (5) The shop-thief, who steals in selling. He who uses false weights
   and measures steals from others what is their due. Making the ephah
   small.' Amos 8: 5. The ephah was a measure the Jews used in selling.
   Some made the ephah small, and gave scant measure, which was plainly
   stealing. The balances of deceit are in his hand.' Hos 12: 7. By making
   their weights lighter, men make their accounts heavier. He steals in
   selling who puts excessive prices on his commodities. He takes thrice
   as much for an article as it cost him, or as it is worth. To overreach
   others in selling, is to steal money from them. Thou shalt not defraud
   thy neighbour, neither rob him.' Lev 19: 13. To defraud him is to rob
   him; to overreach others in selling is a cunning way of stealing, and
   is against both law and gospel. It is against the law of God. If thou
   sell ought to thy neighbour, ye shall not oppress one another.' Lev 25:
   14. It is against the gospel. That no man go beyond, and defraud his
   brother.' 1 Thess 4: 6.

   (6) The usurer, who takes by extortion from others. He seems to help
   another by letting him have money in his necessity, but gets him into
   bonds, and sucks out his very blood and marrow. I read of a woman whom
   Satan had bound (Luke 13: 16), and truly he is almost in as bad a
   condition whom the usurer has bound. The usurer is a robber. A usurer
   once asked a prodigal when he would leave off spending? The prodigal
   replied, I will leave off spending what is my own, when thou leanest
   off stealing from others.' Zacchaeus was an extortioner who, after his
   conversion, made restitution. Luke 19: 8. He thought all he got by
   extortion was theft.

   (7) The trustee, who has the orphan's estate committed to him, is
   deputed to be his guardian, and manages his estate for him; if he
   curtails the estate, and gets a fleece out of it for himself, and
   wrongs the orphan, he is a thief. This is worse than taking a purse by
   violence, because he betrays his trust, which is the highest piece of
   treachery and injustice.

   (8) The borrower, who borrows money from others, with an intention
   never to pay them again. The wicked borroweth, and payeth not again.'
   Psa 37: 21. What is it but thievery to take money and goods from
   others, and not restore them again. The prophet Elisha bade the widow
   sell her oil, and pay her debts, and then live upon the rest. 2 Kings
   4: 7.

   (9) The last sort of theft is, the receiver of stolen goods. The
   receiver, if he be not the principal, yet is accessory to the theft,
   and the law makes him guilty. The thief steals the money, and the
   receiver holds the sack to put it in. The root would die if it were not
   watered, and thieving would cease if it were not encouraged by the
   receiver. I am apt to think that he who does not scruple to take stolen
   goods into his house, would as little scruple to have stolen them.

   What are the aggravations of this sin?

   (1) To steal when there is no need; to be a rich thief.

   (2) To steal sacrilegiously; to devour things set apart to holy uses.
   It is a snare to the man who devoureth that which is holy.' Prov 20:
   25. Such an one was Dionysius, who robbed the temple, and took away the
   silver vessels.

   (3) To commit the sin of theft against checks of conscience, and
   examples of God's justice; which, like the dye to the wool, dyes the
   sin of a crimson colour.

   (4) To rob the widow and orphan. Ye shall not afflict the widow or
   fatherless.' Peccatum clamans [This sin shrieks aloud]. If they cry
   unto me, I will surely hear them.' Exod 22: 23.

   (5) To rob the poor. How angry was David that the rich man should take
   away the poor man's lamb! As the Lord lives, he shall surely die.' 2
   Sam 12: 5. What is inclosing of commons but robbing the poor!

   [3] There is a stealing from a man's self. A man may be a thief to
   himself.

   How so?

   (1) By niggardliness. The niggard is a thief; he steals from himself in
   not allowing himself what is needful. He thinks that lost which is
   bestowed upon himself; he robs himself of necessaries. A man to whom
   God has given riches, yet God giveth him not power to eat thereof' Eccl
   6: 2. He gluts his chest and starves his belly; he is like the ass that
   is loaded with gold, but feeds upon thistles; he robs himself of what
   God allows him. This is to be punished with riches; to have an estate
   and want a heart to take the comfort of it.

   (2) A man may rob himself by foolishly wasting his estate. The prodigal
   lavishes gold out of the bag; he is like Crates, the philosopher, who
   threw his gold into the sea. The prodigal boils a great estate to
   nothing. He is a thief to himself who spends away that estate which
   might conduce to the comfort of life.

   (3) He is a thief to himself, by idleness, when he misspends his time.
   He who spends his hours in pleasure and vanity robs himself of that
   precious time which God has given him to work out salvation in. Time is
   a rich commodity, because on well spending present time a happy
   eternity depends. He that spends his time idly and vainly, is a thief
   to himself; he robs himself of golden seasons, and by consequence, of
   salvation.

   (4) A man may be a thief to himself by suretiship. Be not thou one of
   them that are sureties for debts.' Prov 22: 26. The creditor comes upon
   the surety for debt, and so, by paying another's debt, he is a thief to
   himself. Let not any man say he would have been counted unkind if he
   had not entered into a bond for his friend. Better thy friend should
   count thee unkind than all men count thee unwise. Lend another what you
   can spare; nay, give him if he needs, but never be a surety. It is no
   wisdom for a man so to help another as to undo himself. It is to rob
   himself and his family.

   Use one. For confutation of the doctrine of community, that all things
   are common, and one man has a right to another's estate. This is
   confuted by Scripture. When thou comest into the standing corn of thy
   neighbour, thou shalt not move a sickle unto thy neighbour's corn.'
   Deut 23: 25. Property must be respected; God has set this eighth
   commandment as a hedge about a man's estate, and this hedge cannot be
   broken without sin. If all things be common, there can be no theft, and
   so this commandment would be in vain.

   Use two. For reproof of such as live by stealing. Instead of living by
   faith, they live by their shifts. The apostle exhorts that every man
   eat his own bread.' 2 Thess 3: 12. The thief does not eat his own
   bread, but another's. If there be any who are guilty of this sin, let
   them labour to recover out of the snare of the devil, by repentance,
   and let them show their repentance by restitution. Non remittitur
   peccatum nisi restituatur ablatum. Augustine. Without restitution, no
   remission.' If I have taken away any thing from any man by false
   accusation, I restore him fourfold.' Luke 19: 8. Ill-gotten things may
   be restored by one's own hand, or by proxy. Better a thousand times
   restore goods unlawfully gotten, than stuff your pillow with thorns,
   and have guilt trouble your conscience upon a death-bed.

   Use three. For exhortation to all to take heed of the sin of thieving;
   which is against the light of nature. Some may endeavour to excuse this
   sin. It is a coarse wool that will take no dye, and a bad sin that has
   no excuse.

   I am (says one) grown low in the world, and trading is bad, and I have
   no other way to a livelihood.

   (1) This shows great distrust in God, as if he could not provide for
   thee without thy sin. (2) It shows sin to be at a great height, that,
   because a man is grown low in the world, therefore he will Acheronta
   movere [knock at Hell's door], go to the devil for a livelihood.
   Abraham would not have it said, that the king of Sodom had made him
   rich.' Gen 14: 22. O let it never be said, that the devil has made thee
   rich! (3) Thou oughtest not to undertake any action upon which thou
   canst not pray for a blessing; but thou canst not pray for a blessing
   upon stolen goods. Therefore take heed of this sin; lucrum in arca,
   damnum in conscientia [you gain materially, but your conscience suffers
   loss]. Augustine. Take heed of getting the world with the loss of
   heaven.

   Use four. To dissuade all from this horrid sin, consider -- (1) Thieves
   are the caterpillars of the earth, enemies to civil society. (2) God
   hates them. In the law, the cormorant was unclean, because a thievish,
   devouring creature, a bird of prey; by which God showed his hatred of
   this sin. Lev 11: 17. (3) The thief is a terror to himself, he is
   always in fear. There were they in great fear,' is true of the thief.
   Psa 53: 5. Guilt breeds fear: if he hears but the shaking of a tree,
   his heart shakes. It is said of Catiline, he was afraid of every noise.
   If a briar does but take hold of a thief's garment, he is afraid it is
   the officer to apprehend him; and fear has torment in it. 1 John 4: 18.
   (4) The judgements that follow this sin. Achan the thief was stoned to
   death. Josh 7: 25. What sees thou? And I answered, A flying roll. . . .
   This is the curse that goes forth over the face of the whole earth; I
   will bring it forth, saith the Lord, and it shall enter into the house
   of the thief' Zech 5: 2, 3, 4. Fabius, a Roman censor, condemned his
   own son to die for theft. Thieves die with ignominy, the ladder is
   their preferment: and there is a worse thing than death; for while they
   rob others of money, they rob themselves of salvation.

   What is to be done to avoid stealing?

   (1) Live in a calling. Let him that stole steal no more, but rather let
   him labour, working with his hands.' Eph 4: 28, &c. The devil hires
   such as stand idle, and puts them to the pilfering trade. An idle
   person tempts the devil to tempt him.

   (2) Be content with the estate that God has given you. Be content with
   such things as ye have.' Heb 13: 5. Theft is the daughter of avarice.
   Study contentment. Believe that condition best which God has carved out
   to you. He can bless the little meal in the barrel. We shall not need
   these things long: we shall carry nothing out of the world with us but
   our winding sheet. If we have but enough to bear out our charges to
   heaven, it is sufficient.
     __________________________________________________________________

  2.9 The Ninth Commandment

   Thou shalt not bear false witness against thy neighbour.' Exod 20: 16.

   THE tongue which at first was made to be an organ of God's praise, is
   now become an instrument of unrighteousness. This commandment binds the
   tongue to its good behaviour. God has set two natural fences to keep in
   the tongue, the teeth and lips; and this commandment is a third fence
   set about it, that it should not break forth into evil. It has a
   prohibitory and a mandatory part: the first is set down in plain words,
   the other is clearly implied.

   I. The prohibitory part of the commandment, or, what it forbids in
   general. It forbids anything which may tend to the disparagement or
   prejudice of our neighbour. More particularly, two things are forbidden
   in this commandment.

   [1] Slandering our neighbour. This is a sin against the ninth
   commandment. The scorpion carries his poison in his tail, the slanderer
   carries his poison in his tongue. Slandering is to report things of
   others unjustly.' They laid to my charge things that I knew not.' Psa
   35: 11. It is usual to bring in a Christian beheaded of his good name.
   They raised for a slander of Paul, that he preached Men might do evil
   that good might come of it.' We be slanderously reported; and some
   affirm that we say, "Let us do evil, that good may come".' Rom 3: 8.
   Eminence is commonly blasted by slander. Holiness itself is no shield
   from slander. The lamb's innocence will not preserve it from the wolf.
   Christ, the most innocent upon earth, was reported to be a friend of
   sinners. John the Baptist was a man of a holy and austere life, and yet
   they said of him, He has a devil.' Matt 11: 18. The Scripture calls
   slandering, smiting with the tongue. Come, and let us smite him with
   the tongue.' Jer 18: 18. You may smite another and never touch him.
   Majora sunt linguae vulnera quam gladii [The tongue inflicts greater
   wounds than the sword]. Augustine. The wounds of the tongue no
   physician can heal; and to pretend friendship to a man, and slander
   him, is most odious. Jerome says: The Arian faction made a show of
   kindness; they kissed my hands, but slandered me, and sought my life.'
   As it is a sin against this commandment to raise a false report of
   another, so it is to receive a false report before we have examined it.
   Lord, who shall dwell in thy holy hill?' Psa 15: 1. Quis ad coelum? He
   that backbiteth not, nor taketh up a reproach against his neighbour;'
   ver. 3. We must not only not raise a false report, but not take it up.
   He that raises a slander, carries the devil in his tongue; and he that
   receives it, carries the devil in his car. [2] The second thing
   forbidden in this commandment is false witness. Here three sins are
   condemned: (1) Speaking. (2) Witnessing. (3) Swearing that which is
   false, contra proximum [against your neighbour].

   (1) Speaking that which is false. Lying lips are abomination to the
   Lord.' Prov 12: 22. To lie is to speak that which one knows to be an
   untruth. There is nothing more contrary to God than a lie. The Holy
   Ghost is called the Spirit of Truth.' 1 John 4: 6. Lying is a sin that
   does not go alone; it ushers in other sins. Absalom told his father a
   lie, when he said that he was going to pay his vow at Hebron, and this
   was a preface to his treason. 2 Sam 15: 7. Where there is a lie in the
   tongue, the devil is in the heart. Why has Satan filled thine heart to
   lie?' Acts 5: 3. Lying is a sin that unfits men for civil society. How
   can you converse or bargain with a man when you cannot trust a word he
   says? This sin highly provokes God. Ananias and Sapphire were struck
   dead for telling a lie. Acts 5: 5. The furnace of hell is heated for
   liars. Without are sorcerers, and whosoever loveth and maketh a lie.'
   Rev 22: 15. O abhor this sin! Quicquid dixeris jura tum putes [Consider
   your every word an oath]. Jerome. When thou speakest, let thy word be
   as authentic as thy oath. Imitate God, who is the pattern of truth.
   Pythagoras being asked what made men like God, answered, cum vera
   loquuntur, when they speak the truth.' The character of a man that
   shall go to heaven, is that He speaketh the truth in his heart.' Psa
   15: 2.

   (2) That which is condemned in the commandment is, witnessing that
   which is false. Thou shalt not bear false witness.' There is a twofold
   bearing false witness: 1. There is bearing false witness for another.
   2. Bearing false witness against another.

   Bearing false witness for another; as when we give our testimony for a
   person who is criminal and guilty, and we justify him as if he were
   innocent. Which justify the wicked for reward.' Isa 5: 23. He that
   seeks to make a wicked man just, makes himself unjust.

   It is bearing false witness against another, when we accuse him in open
   court falsely. This is to imitate the devil, who is the accuser of the
   brethren.' Though the devil is no adulterer, yet he is a false witness.
   Solomon says, A man that beareth false witness against his neighbour,
   is a maul and a sword.' Prov 25: 18. In his face he is hardened like a
   hammer: he cannot blush, he cares not what lie he witnesses to; and he
   is a sword: his tongue is a sword to wound the person he witnesses
   against in his goods or life. There came in two men, children of
   Belial, and witnessed against Naboth, saying, Naboth did blaspheme God
   and the king:' and their witness took away his life. 1 Kings 21: 13.
   The queen of Persia being sick, the magicians accused two godly virgins
   of having by charms procured the queen's sickness; whereupon she caused
   those virgins to be sawn asunder. A false witness perverts the place of
   judicature; he corrupts the judge by making him pronounce a wrong
   sentence, and causes the innocent to suffer. Vengeance will find out
   the false witness. A false witness shall not be unpunished.' Prov 19:
   5. If the witness be a false witness, and has testified falsely against
   his brother; then shall ye do unto him, as he had thought to have done
   unto his brother;' if, for instance, he had thought to have taken away
   his life, his own life shall go for it. Deut 19: 18, 19.

   (3) That which is condemned in the commandment is, swearing to what is
   false; as when men take a false oath, and by that take away the life of
   another. Love no false oath.' Zech 8: 17. What seest thou? I said, a
   flying roll,' chap. 5: 2. This is the curse that goes forth, and it
   shall enter, saith the Lord, into the house of him that sweareth
   falsely by my name; and it shall consume it, with the timber and stones
   thereof;' ver 3, 4. The Scythians made a law that when a man bound
   together a lie with an oath, he was to lose his head; because these
   sins took away all truth and faith from among men. The devil has taken
   great possession of those who dare swear to a lie.

   Use one. For reproof. (1) The church of Rome is reproved, which
   dispenses with a lie, or a false oath, if it promotes the Catholic
   cause. It approves of an officious lie; and holds some sins to be
   lawful. It may as well hold some lies to be lawful. God has no need of
   our lie. It is not lawful to tell a lie, propter Dei gloriam [for the
   glory of God], if we were sure to bring glory to God by it, as
   Augustine speaks.

   (2) They are reproved who make no conscience of slandering others. Thou
   fittest and slenderest thine own mother's son.' Psa 50: 20. Report, say
   they, and we will report.' Jer 20: 10. This city (i.e. Jerusalem) is a
   rebellious city, and hurtful to kings and provinces.' Ezra 4: 15. Paul
   was slandered as a mover of sedition, and the head of a faction. Acts
   24: 5. The same word signifies both a slanderer and a devil. 1 Tim 3:
   11. Not slanderers;' in the Greek, not devils.' Some think it is no
   great matter, to misrepresent and slander others; but it is to act the
   part of a devil. Clipping a man's credit, to make it weigh lighter, is
   worse than clipping coin. The slanderer wounds three at once: he wounds
   him that is slandered; he wounds him to whom he reports the slander, by
   causing uncharitable thoughts to arise up in his mind against the party
   slandered; and he wounds his own soul, by reporting of another what is
   false. This is a great sin; and I wish I could say it is not common.
   You may kill a man in his name as well as in his person. Some are loath
   to take away their neighbour's goods -- conscience would fly in their
   face; but better take away their corn out of their field, their wares
   out of their shop, than take away their good name. This is a sin for
   which no reparation can be made; a blot in a man's name, being like a
   blot on white paper, which will never be got out. Surely God will visit
   for this sin. If idle words shall be accounted for, shall not unjust
   slanders? The Lord will make inquisition one day, as well for names as
   for blood. Oh therefore take heed of this sin! Was it not a sin under
   the law to defame a virgin? Deut 22: 19. And is it not a greater sin to
   defame a saint, who is a member of Christ? The heathen, by the light of
   nature, abhorred the sin of slandering. Diogenes used to say, Of all
   wild beasts, a slanderer is the worst.' Antonius made a law, that, if a
   person could not prove the crime he reported another to be guilty of,
   he should be put to death.

   (3) They are reproved who are so wicked as to bear false witness
   against others. These are monsters in nature, unfit to live in a civil
   society. Eusebius relates of one Narcissus, a man famous for piety, who
   was accused by two false witnesses of unchastity. To prove their
   accusations, they endeavoured to confirm it with oaths and curses. One
   said, If I speak not true, I pray God I may perish by fire:' the other
   said, If I speak not true, I wish I may be deprived of my sight.' It
   pleased God that the first witness who forswore himself should be
   burned in the flames, his house being set on fire: the other being
   troubled in conscience, confessed his perjury, and continued to weep so
   long that he wept himself blind. Jezebel, who suborned two false
   witnesses against Naboth, was thrown down from a window and the dogs
   licked her blood.' 2 Kings 9: 33. Oh, tremble at this sin! A perjured
   person is the devil's excrement. He is cursed in his name, and seared
   in his conscience. Hell gapes for such a windfall.

   Use two. For exhortation. (1) Let all take heed of breaking this
   commandment, by lying, slandering, and bearing false witness. To avoid
   these sins get the fear of God. Why does David say, The fear of the
   Lord is clean'? Psa 19: 9. Because it cleanses the heart from malice,
   and the tongue from slander. The fear of the Lord is clean:' it is to
   the soul as lightning to the air, which cleanses it. Get love to your
   neighbour. Lev 19: 18. If we love a friend, we shall not speak or
   attest anything to his prejudice. Men's minds are cankered with envy
   and hatred; hence come slandering and false witnessing. Love is a
   lovely grace; love thinketh no evil.' 1 Cor 13: 5. It puts the best
   interpretation upon another's words. Love is a well-wisher, and it is
   rare to speak ill of him we wish well to. Love is that which cements
   Christians together; it is the healer of division, and the hinderer of
   slander.

   (2) Let those whose lot it is to meet with slanderers and false
   accusers -- [1] Labour to make a sanctified use of it. When Shimei
   railed on David, David made a sanctified use of it. The Lord has said
   unto him, Curse David.' 2 Sam 16: 10. So, if you are slandered, or
   falsely accused, make a good use of it. See if you have no sin
   unrepented of, for which God may suffer you to be calumniated and
   reproached. See if you have not at any time wronged others in their
   name, and said that of them which you cannot prove; then lay your hand
   on your mouth, and confess the Lord is righteous to let you fall under
   the scourge of the tongue. [2] If you are slandered, or falsely
   accused, but know your own innocence, be not too much troubled; let
   your rejoicing be the witness of your conscience. Murus aheneus esto
   nil conscire sibi [Let this be a bulwark, to know oneself guiltless]. A
   good conscience is a wall of brass, that will be able to stand against
   a false witness. As no flattery can heal a bad conscience, so no
   slander can hurt a good one. God will clear up the names of his people.
   He shall bring forth thy righteousness as the light.' Psa 37: 6. As he
   will wipe away tears from the eyes, so will he wipe off reproaches from
   the name. Believers shall come forth out of all their slanders and
   reproaches, as the wings of a dove, covered with silver, and her
   feathers with yellow gold.'

   (3) Be very thankful to God, if he has preserved you from slander and
   false witness. Job calls it the scourge of the tongue;' chap 5: 21. As
   a rod scourges the back, so the slanderer's tongue scourges the name.
   It is a great mercy to be kept from the scourge of a tongue; a mercy
   that God stops malignant mouths from bearing false witness. What
   mischief might not a lying report or a false oath do! One destroys the
   name, the other the life. It is the Lord who muzzles the mouths of the
   wicked, and keeps those dogs, that snarl at us, from flying upon us.
   Thou shalt keep them secretly in a pavilion, from the strife of
   tongues.' Psa 31: 20. There is, I suppose, an allusion to kings, who
   being resolved to protect their favourites against the accusation of
   men, take them into their bed-chamber, or bosom, where none may touch
   them. So God has a pavilion, or secret hiding-place for his favourites,
   where he preserves their credit and reputation untouched; he keeps them
   from the 'strife of tongues.' We ought to acknowledge this to be a
   great mercy before God.

   II. The mandatory part of the commandment implied is that we stand up
   for others and vindicate them when they are injured by lying lips. This
   is the sense of the commandment, not only that we should not slander
   falsely or accuse others; but that we should witness for them, and
   stand up in their defence, when we know them to be traduced. A man may
   wrong another as well by silence as by slander, when he knows him to be
   wrongfully accused, yet does not speak in his behalf. If others cast
   false aspersions on any, we should wipe them off. When the apostles
   were filled with the wine of the Spirit, and were charged with
   drunkenness, Peter openly maintained their innocence. These are not
   drunken, as ye suppose.' Acts 2: 15. Jonathan knowing David to be a
   worthy man, and all those things Saul said of him to be slanders,
   vindicated him. David has not sinned against thee; his works have been
   to thee-ward very good. Wherefore then wilt thou sin against innocent
   blood, to slay David without a cause?' 1 Sam 19: 4, 5. When the
   primitive Christians were falsely accused for incest, and killing their
   children, Tertullian wrote a famous apology in their vindication. This
   is to act the part both of a friend and of a Christian, to be an
   advocate for another, when he is wronged in his good name.
     __________________________________________________________________

  2.10The Tenth Commandment

   Thou shalt not covet thy neighbour's house, thou shalt not covet thy
   neighbour's wife, nor his man-servant, nor his maid-servant, nor his
   ox, nor his ass, nor any thing that is thy neighbour's.' Exod 20: 17.

   THIS commandment forbids covetousness in general, Thou shalt not
   covet;' and in particular, Thy neighbour's house, thy neighbour's wife,
   &c.

   I. It forbids covetousness in general. Thou shalt not covet.' It is
   lawful to use the world, yea, and to desire so much of it as may keep
   us from the temptation of poverty: Give me not poverty, lest I steal,
   and take the name of my God in vain' (Prov 30: 8, 9); and as may enable
   us to honour God with works of mercy. Honour the Lord with thy
   substance.' Prov 3: 9. But all the danger is, when the world gets into
   the heart. Water is useful for the sailing of the ship: all the danger
   is when the water gets into the ship; so the fear is, when the world
   gets into the heart. Thou shalt not covet.'

   What is it to covet?

   There are two words in the Greek which set forth the nature of
   covetousness. Pleonexia, which signifies an insatiable desire of
   getting the world.' Covetousness is a dry dropsy. Augustine defines
   covetousness Plus velle quam sat est; to desire more than enough;' to
   aim at a great estate; to be like the daughter of the horse-leech,
   crying, Give, give.' Prov 30: 15. Or like behemoth, He trusteth that he
   can draw up Jordan into his mouth.' Job 40: 23. The other word is
   Philarguria, which signifies an inordinate love of the world.' The
   world is the idol: it is so loved, that a man will not part with it for
   any good use. He may be said to be covetous not only who gets the world
   unrighteously, but who loves it inordinately.

   [1] For a more full answer to the question, What is it to covet?' I
   shall show in six particulars, when a man may be said to be given to
   covetousness: --

   (1) When his thoughts are wholly taken up with the world. A good man's
   thoughts are in heaven; he is thinking of Christ's love and eternal
   recompense. When I awake I am still with thee,' that is, in divine
   contemplation. Psa 139: 18. A covetous man's thoughts are in the world;
   his mind is wholly taken up with it; he can think of nothing but his
   shop or farm. The fancy is a mint-house, and most of the thoughts in a
   covetous man's mint are worldly. He is always plotting and projecting
   about the things of this life; like a virgin whose thoughts all centre
   upon her suitor.

   (2) A man may be said to be given to covetousness, when he takes more
   pains for getting earth than for getting heaven. He will turn every
   stone, break his sleep, take many a weary step for the world; but will
   take no pains for Christ or heaven. After the Gauls, who were an
   ancient people of France, had tasted the sweet wine of the Italian
   grape, they inquired after the country, and never rested till they had
   arrived at it; so a covetous man, having had a relish of the world,
   pursues after it, and never ceases till he has got it; but he neglects
   the things of eternity. He would be content if salvation were to drop
   into his mouth, as a ripe fig into the mouth of the eater (Nahum 3:
   12); but he is loath to put himself to too much sweat or trouble to
   obtain Christ or salvation. He hunts for the world, he wishes only for
   heaven.

   (3) A man may be said to be given to covetousness, when all his
   discourse is about the world. He that is of the earth, speaketh of the
   earth.' John 3: 31. It is a sign of godliness to be speaking of heaven,
   to have the tongue turned to the language of Canaan. The words of a
   wise man's mouth are gracious;' he speaks as if he had been already in
   heaven. Eccl. 10: 12. So it is a sign of a man given to covetousness to
   speak always of secular things, of his wares and drugs. A covetous
   man's breath, like a dying man's, smells strong of the earth. As it was
   said to Peter, Thy speech bewrayeth thee;' so a covetous man's speech
   betrayeth him. Matt 26: 73. He is like the fish in the gospel, which
   had a piece of money in its mouth. Matt 17: 27. Verba sunt speculum
   mentis. Bernard. The words are the looking-glass of the heart,' they
   show what is within. Ex abundantia cordis [From the abundance of the
   heart].

   (4) A man is given to covetousness when he so sets his heart upon
   worldly things, that for the love of them, he will part with heavenly;
   for the wedge of gold,' he will part with the pearl of price.' When
   Christ said to the young man in the gospel, Sell all, and come and
   follow me;' abiit tristis, he went away sorrowful.' Matt 19: 22. He
   would rather part with Christ than with all his earthly possessions.
   Cardinal Bourbon said, he would forego his part in paradise, if he
   might keep his cardinalship in Paris. When it comes to the critical
   point that men must either relinquish their estate or Christ, and they
   will rather part with Christ and a good conscience than with their
   estate, it is a clear case that they are possessed with the demon of
   covetousness.

   (5) A man is given to covetousness when he overloads himself with
   worldly business. He has many irons in the fire; he is in this sense a
   pluralist; he takes so much business upon him, that he cannot find time
   to serve God; he has scarce time to eat his meat, but no time to pray.
   When a man overcharges himself with the world, and as Martha, cumbers
   himself about many things, that he cannot have time for his soul, he is
   under the power of covetousness.

   (6) He is given to covetousness whose heart is so set upon the world,
   that, to get it, he cares not what unlawful means he uses. He will have
   the world per fas et nefas [by fair means or foul]; he will wrong and
   defraud, and raise his estate upon the ruins of another. The balances
   of deceit are in his hand, he loveth to oppress. . . . Ephraim said,
   Yet I am become rich.' Hos 12: 7, 8. Pope Sylvester II sold his soul to
   the devil for a popedom.

   Use. Take heed and beware of covetousness.' Luke 12: 15. It is a direct
   breach of the tenth commandment. It is a moral vice, it infects and
   pollutes the whole soul.

   (1) It is a subtle sin, a sin that many cannot so well discern in
   themselves; as some have the scurvy, but do not know it. This sin can
   dress itself in the attire of virtue. It is called the cloak of
   covetousness.' 1 Thess 2: 5. It is a sin that wears a cloak, it cloaks
   itself under the name of frugality and good husbandry. It has many
   pleas and excuses for itself; more than any other sin: as providing for
   one's family. The more subtle the sin is, the less discernible it is.

   (2) Covetousness is a dangerous sin, as it checks all that is good. It
   is an enemy to grace; it damps good affections, as the earth puts out
   the fire. The hedgehog, in the fable, came to the cony-burrows, in
   stormy weather, and desired harbour; but when once he had got
   entertainment, he set up his prickles, and never ceased till he had
   thrust the poor conies out of their burrows; so covetousness, by fair
   pretences, winds itself into the heart; but as soon as you have let it
   in, it will never leave till it has choked all good beginnings, and
   thrust all religion out of your hearts. Covetousness hinders the
   efficacy of the word preached.' In the parable, the thorns, which
   Christ expounded to be the care of this life, choked the good seed.
   Matt 13: 22. Many sermons lie dead and buried in earthly hearts. We
   preach to men to get their hearts in heaven; but where covetousness is
   predominant, it chains them to earth, and makes them like the woman
   which Satan had bowed together, that she could not lift up herself.
   Luke 13: 11. You may as well bid an elephant fly in the air, as a
   covetous man live by faith. We preach to men to give freely to Christ's
   poor; but covetousness makes them like the man in the gospel, who had a
   withered hand.' Mark 3: 1. They have a withered hand, and cannot
   stretch it out to the poor. It is impossible to be earthly-minded and
   charitably-minded. Covetousness obstructs the efficacy of the word, and
   makes it prove abortive. They whose hearts are rooted in the earth,
   will be so far from profiting by the word, that they will be ready
   rather to deride it. The Pharisees, who were covetous, derided him.'
   Luke 16: 14.

   (3) Covetousness is a mother sin, a radical vice. The love of money is
   the root of all evil.' 1 Tim 6: 10. Quid non mortalia pectora cogis,
   auri sacra fames! [O accursed lust for gold! what crimes do you not
   urge upon the human heart!] Virgil. He who has an earthly itch, a
   greedy desire of getting the world, has in him the root of all sin.
   Covetousness is a mother sin. I shall make it appear that covetousness
   is a breach of all the ten commandments. It breaks the first
   commandment; Thou shalt have no other gods but one.' The covetous man
   has more gods than one; Mammon is his god. He has a god of gold,
   therefore he is called an idolater. Col 3: 5. Covetousness breaks the
   second commandment: Thou shalt not make any graven image, thou shalt
   not bow thyself to them.' A covetous man bows down, though not to the
   graven image in the church, yet to the graven image in his coin.
   Covetousness is a breach of the third commandment; Thou shalt not take
   the name of the Lord thy God in vain.' Absalom's design was to get his
   father's crown, which was covetousness; but he talked of paying his vow
   to God,' which was to take God's name in vain. Covetousness is a breach
   of the fourth commandment; Remember the Sabbath-day to keep it holy.' A
   covetous man does not keep the Sabbath holy; he will ride to fairs on a
   Sabbath; instead of reading in the Bible, he will cast up his accounts.
   Covetousness is a breach of the fifth commandment; Honour thy father
   and thy mother.' A covetous person does not honour his father, if he
   does not feed him with money. Nay; he will get his father to make over
   his estate to him in his lifetime, so that the father may be at his
   son's command. Covetousness is a breach of the sixth commandment; Thou
   shalt not kill.' Covetous Ahab killed Naboth to get his vineyard. 1
   Kings 21: 13. How many have swum to the crown in blood? Covetousness is
   a breach of the seventh commandment, Thou shalt not commit adultery.'
   It causes uncleanness; you read of the hire of a whore.' Deut 23: 18.
   An adulteress for money sets both conscience and chastity to sale.
   Covetousness is a breach of the eighth commandment Thou shalt not
   steal.' It is the root of theft: covetous Achan stole the wedge of
   gold. Thieves and covetous are put together. 1 Cor 6: 10. Covetousness
   is a breach of the ninth commandment; Thou shalt not bear false
   witness.' What makes the perjurer take a false oath but covetousness?
   He hopes for a reward. It is plainly a breach of the last commandment;
   Thou shalt not covet.' The mammonist covets his neighbour's house and
   goods, and endeavours to get them into his own hands. Thus you see how
   vile a sin covetousness is; it is a mother sin; it is a plain breach of
   every one of the ten commandments.

   (4) Covetousness is a sin dishonourable to religion. For men to say
   their hopes are above, while their hearts are below; to profess to be
   above the stars, while they lick the dust' of the serpent; to be born
   of God, while they are buried in the earth; how dishonourable is this
   to religion! The lapwing, which wears a little coronet on its head, and
   yet feeds on dung, is an emblem of such as profess to be crowned kings
   and priests unto God, and yet feed immoderately on terrene dunghill
   comforts. And seekest thou great things for thyself? seek them not.'
   Jer 45: 5. What, thou Baruch, who art ennobled by the new birth, and
   art illustrious by thy office, a Levite, dost thou seek earthly things,
   and seek them now? When the ship is sinking, art thou trimming thy
   cabin? O do not so degrade thyself, nor blot thy escutcheon! Seekest
   thou great things? seek them not. The higher grace is, the less earthly
   should Christians be; as the higher the sun is, the shorter is the
   shadow.

   (5) Covetousness exposes us to God's abhorrence, The covetous, whom the
   Lord abhorreth.' Psa 10: 3. A king abhors to see his statue abused, so
   God abhors to see man, made in his image, having the heart of a beast.
   Who would live in such a sin as makes him abhorred of God? Whom God
   abhors he curses, and his curse blasts wherever it comes.

   (6) Covetousness precipitates men to ruin, and shuts them out of
   heaven. This ye know, that no covetous man, who is an idolater, has any
   inheritance in the kingdom of Christ and of God.' Eph 5: 5. What could
   a covetous man do in heaven? God can no more converse with him than a
   king can converse with a swine. They that will be rich fall into a
   snare, and many hurtful lusts, which drown men in perdition.' 1 Tim 6:
   9. A covetous man is like a bee that gets into a barrel of honey, and
   there drowns itself. As a ferry man takes in so many passengers to
   increase his fare, that he sinks his boat; so a covetous man takes in
   so much gold to increase his estate, that he drowns himself in
   perdition. I have read of some inhabitants near Athens, who, living in
   a very dry and barren island, took much pains to draw a river to the
   island to water it and make it fruitful; but when they had opened the
   passages, and brought the river to it, the water broke in with such
   force, that it drowned the land, and all the people in it. This is an
   emblem of a covetous man, who labours to draw riches to him, and at
   last they come in such abundance, that they drown him in perdition. How
   many, to build up an estate, pull down their souls! Oh, then, flee from
   covetousness! I shall next prescribe some remedies against
   covetousness.

   [2] I AM, in the next place, to solve the question, What is the cure
   for this covetousness?'

   (1) Faith. This is the victory that overcometh the world, even our
   faith.' 1 John 5: 4. The root of covetousness is distrust of God's
   providence. Faith believes that God will provide; that he who feeds the
   birds will feed his children; that he who clothes the lilies will
   clothe his lambs; and thus faith overcomes the world. Faith is the cure
   of care. It not only purifies the heart, but satisfies it; it makes God
   our portion, and in him we have enough. The lord is the portion of mine
   inheritance, the lines are fallen unto me in pleasant places; yea, I
   have a goodly heritage.' Psa 16: 5, 6. Faith, by a divine chemistry,
   extracts comfort out of God. A little with God is sweet. Thus faith is
   a remedy against covetousness; it overcomes, not only the fear of the
   world, but the love of the world.

   (2) The second remedy is, judicious considerations. As what poor things
   these things below are that we should covet them! They are far below
   the worth of the soul, which carries in it an idea and resemblance of
   God. The world is but the workmanship of God, the soul is his image. We
   covet that which will not satisfy us. He that loveth silver, shall not
   be satisfied with silver.' Eccl 5: 10. Solomon had put all the
   creatures in a retort, and distilled out their essence, and behold, All
   was vanity.' Eccl 2: 11. Covetousness is a dry dropsy -- the more a man
   has the more he thirsts. Quo plus sunt potae, plus sitiuntur aquae [The
   more water is drunk, the more is craved]. Ovid. Worldly things cannot
   remove trouble of mind. When King Saul was perplexed in conscience, his
   crown jewels could not comfort him. 1 Sam 28: 15. The things of the
   world can no more ease a troubled spirit than a gold cap can cure the
   headache. The things of the world cannot continue with you. The
   creature has a little honey in its mouth, but it has wings to fly away.
   These things either go from us, or we from them. What poor things are
   they to covet!

   The second consideration is the frame and texture of the body. God has
   made the face look upward towards heaven. Os homini sublime dedit,
   coelumque tueri jussit [He gave man an uplifted face, with the order to
   gaze up to Heaven]. Ovid. Anatomists observe, that whereas other
   creatures have but four muscles to their eyes, man has a fifth muscle,
   by which he is able to look up to heaven; and as for the heart, it is
   made narrow and contracted downwards, but wide and broad upwards. As
   the frame and texture of the body teaches us to look to things above,
   so especially the soul is planted in the body, as a divine spark, to
   ascend upwards. Can it be imagined that God gave us intellectual and
   immortal souls to covet earthly things only? What wise man would fish
   for gudgeons with golden hooks? Did God give us glorious souls only to
   fish for the world? Sure our souls are made for a higher end; to aspire
   after the enjoyment of God in glory.

   The third consideration is the examples of those who have been
   condemners and despisers of the world. The primitive Christians, as
   Clemens Alexandrinus observes, were sequestered from the world, and
   were wholly taken up in converse with God; they lived in the world
   above the world; like the birds of paradise, who soar above in the air,
   and seldom or never touch the earth with their feet. Luther says that
   he was never tempted to the sin of covetousness. Though the saints of
   old lived in the world they traded in heaven. Our conversation is in
   heaven.' Phil 3: 20. The Greek word signifies our commerce, or traffic,
   or citizenship, is in heaven. Enoch walked with God.' Gen 5: 24. His
   affections were sublimated, and took a turn in heaven every day. The
   righteous are compared to a palm-tree. Psa 92: 12. Philo observes, that
   whereas all other trees have their sap in their root, the sap of the
   palm-tree is towards the top; and thus is an emblem of saints, whose
   hearts are in heaven, where their treasure is.

   (3) The third remedy for covetousness is to covet spiritual things
   more. Covet grace, for it is the best blessing, it is the seed of God.
   1 John 3: 9. Covet heaven, which is the region of happiness -- the most
   pleasant clime. If we covet heaven more, we shall covet earth less. To
   those who stand on the top of the Alps, the great cities of Campania
   seem but as small villages; so if our hearts were more fixed upon the
   Jerusalem above, all worldly things would disappear, would diminish,
   and be as nothing in our eyes. We read of an angel coming down from
   heaven, and setting his right foot on the sea, and his left foot on the
   earth. Rev 10: 2. Had we been in heaven, and viewed its superlative
   glory, how should we, with holy scorn, trample with one foot upon the
   earth and with the other foot upon the sea! O covet after heavenly
   things! There is the tree of life, the mountains of spices, the rivers
   of pleasure, the honeycomb of God's love dropping, the delights of
   angels, and the flower of joyfully ripe and blown. There is the pure
   air to breathe in; no fogs or vapours of sin arise to infect that air,
   but the Sun of Righteousness enlightens the whole horizon continually
   with his glorious beams. O let your thoughts and delights be always
   taken up with the city of pearls, the paradise of God! It is reported
   of Lazarus that, after he was raised from the grave, he was never seen
   to smile or take delight in the world. Were our hearts raised by the
   power of the Holy Ghost up to heaven we should not be much taken with
   earthly things.

   (4) The fourth remedy is to pray for a heavenly mind. Lord, let the
   loadstone of thy Spirit draw my heart upward. Lord, dig the earth out
   of my heart; teach me how to possess the world, and not love it; how to
   hold it in my hand, and not let it get into my heart.

   II. Having spoken of the command in general, I proceed to speak of it
   more particularly. Thou shalt not covet thy neighbour's house, thou
   shalt not covet thy neighbour's wife,' &c. Observe the holiness and
   perfection of the law that forbids the motus primo primi, the first
   motions and risings of sin in the heart. Thou shalt not covet.' The
   laws of men take hold of actions, but the law of God goes further, it
   forbids not only actions, but desires. Thou shalt not covet thy
   neighbour's house.' It is not said, Thou shalt not take away his
   house;' but Thou shalt not covet it.' These lusts and desires after the
   forbidden fruit are sinful. The law has said, Thou shalt not covet.'
   Rom 7: 7. Though the tree bears no bad fruit, it may be faulty at the
   root; so though a man does not commit any gross sin, he cannot say his
   heart is pure. There may be faultiness at the root: there may be sinful
   covetings and lustings in the soul.

   Use. Let us be humbled for the sin of our nature, the risings of evil
   thoughts coveting that which we ought not. Our nature is a seed-plot of
   iniquity; like charcoal that is ever sparkling, the sparks of pride,
   envy, covetousness, arise in the mind. How should this humble us! If
   there be not sinful acting, there are sinful covetings. Let us pray for
   mortifying grace, which like the water of jealousy, may make the thigh
   of sin to rot.

   Why is the house here put before the wife? In Deuteronomy the wife is
   put first. Neither shalt thou desire thy neighbour's wife, neither
   shalt thou covet thy neighbour's house.' Deut 5: 21.

   In Deuteronomy the wife is set down first, in respect of her value. She
   (if a good wife) is of far greater value and estimate than the house.
   Her price is far above rubies.' Prov 31: 10. She is the furniture of
   the house and this furniture is more worth than the house. When
   Alexander had overcome King Darius in battle, Darius seemed not to be
   much dismayed, but when he heard his wife was taken prisoner, his eyes,
   like spouts gushed forth water, for he valued his wife more than his
   life. But in Exodus the house is put before the wife, because the house
   is first in order, the house is erected before the wife can live in it;
   the nest is built before the bird is in it; the wife is first esteemed,
   but the house must be first provided.

   [1] Then, Thou shalt not covet thy neighbour's house.' How depraved is
   man since the fall! He knows not how to keep within bounds, but covets
   more than his own. Ahab, one would think, had enough: he was a king;
   and we should suppose his crown-revenues would have contented him; but
   he was coveting more. Naboth's vineyard was in his eye, and stood near
   the smoke of his chimney, and he could not be quiet till he had it in
   possession. Were there not so much coveting, there would not be so much
   bribing. One man takes away another's house from him. It is only the
   prisoner who lives in such a tenement that he may be sure none will
   seek to take it from him.

   [2] Thou shalt not covet thy neighbour's wife.' This is a bridle to
   check the inordinate and brutish lusts. It was the devil that sowed
   another man's ground. Matt 13: 25. But how is the hedge of this
   commandment trodden down in our times! There are many who do more than
   covet their neighbours' wives! they take them. Cursed be he that lieth
   with his father's wife; and all the people shall say, Amen.' Deut 27:
   20. If it were to be proclaimed, Cursed be he that lieth with his
   neighbour's wife,' and all that were guilty should say, Amen,' how many
   would curse themselves!

   [3] Thou shalt not covet thy neighbour's man-servant, nor his
   maidservant.' Servants, when faithful, are a treasure. What a true and
   trusty servant had Abraham! He was his right hand. How prudent and
   faithful he was in the matter entrusted with him, of getting a wife for
   his master's son! Gen 24: 9. It would surely have grieved Abraham if
   any one had enticed away his servant from him. But this sin of coveting
   servants is common. If one has a good servant, others will be laying
   snares for him, and endeavour to draw him away from his master. This is
   a sin against the tenth commandment. To steal away another's servant by
   enticement, is no better than direct thieving.

   [4] Nor his ox, nor his ass, nor any thing that is thy neighbour's.'
   Were there no coveting ox and ass, there would not be so much stealing.
   First men break the tenth commandment by coveting, and then the eighth
   commandment by stealing. It was an excellent appeal that Samuel made to
   the people when he said, Witness against me before the Lord, whose ox
   have I taken, or whose ass, or whom have I defrauded?' 1 Sam 12: 3. It
   was a brave speech of Paul, when he said, I have coveted no man's
   silver, or gold, or apparel.' Acts 20: 33.

   What means should we use to keep us from coveting that which is our
   neighbour's?

   The best remedy is contentment. If we are content with our own, we
   shall not covet that which is another's. Paul could say, I have coveted
   no man's gold or silver.' Whence was this? It was from contentment. I
   have learned, in whatsoever state I am, therewith to be content.' Phil
   4: 11. Content says, as Jacob did, I have enough. Gen 33: 11. I have a
   promise of heaven, and have sufficient to bear my charges thither; I
   have enough. He who has enough, will not covet that which is another's.
   Be content: and the best way to be contented, is, (1) Believe that
   condition to be best which God by his providence carves out to you. If
   he had seen fit for us to have more, we should have had it. Perhaps we
   could not manage a great estate; it is hard to carry a full cup without
   spilling, and a full estate without sinning. Great estates may be
   snares. A boat may be overturned by having too much sail. The believing
   that estate to be best which God appoints us, makes us content; and
   being contented, we shall not covet that which is another's. (2) The
   way to be content with such things as we have, and not to covet
   another's, is to consider the less we have, the less account we shall
   have to give at the last day. Every person is a steward, and must be
   accountable to God. They who have great estates have the greater
   reckoning. God will say, What good have you done with your estates?
   Have you honoured me with your substance? Where are the poor you have
   fed and clothed? If you cannot give a good account, it will be sad. It
   should make us contented with a less portion, to consider, the less
   riches, the less reckoning. This is the way to have contentment. There
   is no better antidote against coveting that which is another's than
   being content with that which is our own.
     __________________________________________________________________

3. THE LAW AND SIN
     __________________________________________________________________

  3.1 Man's Inability to keep the Moral Law

   Is any man able perfectly to keep the commandments of God?

   No mere man, since the fall, is able in this life perfectly to keep the
   commandments of God, but does daily break them, in thought, word, and
   deed.

   In many things we offend all.' James 3: 2. Man in his primitive state
   of innocence, was endowed with ability to keep the whole moral law. He
   had rectitude of mind, sanctity of will, and perfection of power. He
   had the copy of God's law written on his heart; no sooner did God
   command but he obeyed. As the key is suited to all the wards in the
   lock, and can open them, so Adam had a power suited to all God's
   commands, and could obey them. Adam's obedience ran parallel with the
   moral law, as a well made dial goes exactly with the sun. Man in
   innocence was like a well tuned organ, he was sweetly in tune to the
   will of God; he was adorned with holiness as the angels, but not
   confirmed in holiness as the angels. He was holy, but mutable; he fell
   from his purity, and we with him. Sin cut the lock of original
   righteousness where our strength lay; it brought a languor and
   faintness into our souls; and has so weakened us, that we shall never
   recover our full strength till we put on immortality. What I am now to
   demonstrate, is, that we cannot yield perfect obedience to the moral
   law.

   I. The case of an unregenerate man is such, that he cannot perfectly
   obey all God's commands. He may as well touch the stars, or span the
   ocean, as yield exact obedience to the law. A person unregenerate
   cannot act spiritually, he cannot pray in the Holy Ghost, he cannot
   live by faith, he cannot do duty out of love to duty; and if he cannot
   do duty spiritually, much less perfectly. Now, that a natural man
   cannot yield perfect obedience to the moral law, is evident. (1)
   Because he is spiritually dead. Eph 2: 1. How can he, being dead, keep
   the commandments of God perfectly? A dead man is not fit for action. A
   sinner has the symptoms of death upon him. He has no sense; he has no
   sense of the evil of sin, of God's holiness and veracity; therefore he
   is said to be without feeling. Eph 4: 19. He has no strength. Rom 5: 6.
   What strength has a dead man? A natural man has no strength to deny
   himself, or to resist temptation; he is dead; and can a dead man fulfil
   the moral law? (2) A natural man cannot perfectly keep all God's
   commandments, because he is born in sin, and lives in sin. Psa 51: 5.
   He drinketh iniquity like water.' Job 15: 16. All the imaginations of
   his thoughts are evil, and only evil. Gen 6: 5. The least evil thought
   is a breach of the royal law; and if there be defection, there cannot
   be perfection. As a natural man has no power to keep the moral law, so
   he has no will. He is not only dead, but worse than dead. A dead man
   does no hurt, but there is a life of resistance against God that
   accompanies the death of sin. A natural man not only cannot keep the
   law through weakness, but he breaks it through wilfulness. We will do
   whatsoever goes out of our own mouth, to burn incense unto the queen of
   heaven.' Jer 44: 17.

   II. As the unregenerate cannot keep the moral law perfectly, so neither
   can the regenerate. There is not a just man upon earth, that does good
   and sinneth not;' nay, that sins not in doing good.' Eccl 7: 20. There
   is that in the best actions of a righteous man that is damnable, if God
   should weigh him in the balance of justice. Alas! how are his duties
   fly-blown! He cannot pray without wandering, nor believe without
   doubting. To will is present with me, but how to perform I find not.'
   In the Greek it is, How to do it thoroughly I find not.' Rom 7: 18.
   Paul, though a saint of the first magnitude, was better at willing than
   at performing. Mary asked where they had laid Christ; for she had a
   mind to have carried him away, but she wanted strength: so the
   regenerate have a will to obey God's law perfectly, but they want
   strength; their obedience is weak and sickly. The mark they are to
   shoot at, is perfection of holiness; but though they take a right aim,
   yet do what they can, they come short of the mark. The good that I
   would, I do not.' Rom 7: 19. A Christian, while serving God, like a
   ferry man that plies the oar, and rows hard, is hindered, for a gust of
   wind carries him back again: so says Paul, The good I would, I do not,'
   I am driven back by temptation. Now, if there be any failure in a man's
   obedience, he cannot be a perfect commentary upon God's law. The Virgin
   Mary's obedience was not perfect; she needed Christ's blood to wash her
   tears. Aaron was to make atonement for the altar, to show that the most
   holy offering has defilement in it, and needs atonement to be made for
   it. Exod 29: 37.

   If a man has no power to keep the whole moral law, why does God require
   it of him? Is this justice?

   Though man has lost his power of obeying, God has not lost his right of
   commanding. If a master entrusts a servant with money to lay out, and
   the servant spends it dissolutely, may not the master justly demand it?
   God gave us power to keep the moral law, which by tampering with sin,
   we lost; but may not God still call for perfect obedience, or, in case
   of default, justly punish us?

   Why does God permit such an inability in man to keep the law?

   He does it: (1) To humble us. Man is a self-exalting creature; and if
   he has but anything of worth, he is ready to be puffed up; but when he
   comes to see his deficiencies and failings, and how far short he comes
   of the holiness and perfection which God's law requires, it pulls down
   the plumes of his pride, and lays them in the dust; he weeps over his
   inability; he blushes over his leprous spots; he says with Job, I abhor
   myself in dust and ashes.' (2) God lets this inability be upon us, that
   we may have recourse to Christ to obtain pardon for our defects, and to
   sprinkle our best duties with his blood. When a man sees that he owes
   perfect obedience to the law, but has nothing to pay, it makes him flee
   to Christ to be his friend, and answer for him all the demands of the
   law, and set him free in the court of justice.

   Use one. Here is matter of humiliation for our fall in Adam. In the
   state of innocence we were perfectly holy; our minds were crowned with
   knowledge, and our wills, as a queen, swayed the sceptre of liberty;
   but now we may say, The crown is fallen from our head.' Lam 5: 16. We
   have lost that power which was inherent in us. When we look back to our
   primitive glory, when we shone as earthly angels, we may take up Job's
   words, Oh that I were as in months past!' chap 29: 2. that it were with
   us as at first, when there was no stain upon our virgin nature, when
   there was a perfect harmony between God's law and man's will! But,
   alas! how is the scene altered, our strength is gone from us; we tread
   awry at every step: we come below every precept; our dwarfishness will
   not reach the sublimity of God's law; we fail in our obedience; and
   while we fail, we forfeit. This should put us in deep mourning, and
   spring a leak of sorrow in all our souls.

   Use two. Of confutation. (1) It confutes the Armenians, who cry up the
   power of the will. They hold they have a will to save themselves. But
   by nature, we not only want strength, but we want will to that which is
   good. Rom 5: 6. The will is not only full of weakness, but obstinacy.
   Israel would none of me.' Psa 81: 11. The will hangs forth a flag of
   defiance against God. Such as speak of the sovereign power of the will,
   forget It is God that worketh in you both to will and to do.' Phil 2:
   13. If the power be in the will of man, then what need is there for God
   to work in us to will? If the air can enlighten itself, what need is
   there for the sun to shine? Such as talk of the power of nature, and
   their ability to save themselves, disparage Christ's merits. I may say
   (as Gal 5: 4), Christ has become of no effect to them.' They who
   advance the power of their will in matters of salvation, without the
   medicinal grace of Christ, do absolutely put themselves under the
   covenant of works. I would ask, Can they perfectly keep the moral law?'
   Malum oritur ex quolibet defectu [Evil is manifested in any blemish at
   all]. If there be but the least defect in their obedience, they are
   lost. For one sinful thought the law of God curses them, and the
   justice of God condemns them. Confounded be their pride, who cry up the
   power of nature, as if, by their own inherent abilities, they could
   rear up a building, the top whereof should reach to heaven.

   (2) It confutes that sort of people who brag of perfection; and who,
   according to that principle, can keep all God's commandments perfectly.
   I would ask such whether at no time a vain thought has come into their
   minds? If there has, then they are not perfect. The Virgin Mary was not
   perfect. Though her womb was pure (being overshadowed by the Holy
   Ghost), yet her soul was not perfect. Christ tacitly supposes a failing
   in her. Luke 2: 49. And are they more perfect than the blessed Virgin
   was? Such as hold perfection, need not confess sin. David confessed
   sin, and Paul confessed sin. Psa 32: 5; Rom 7: 25. But they are got
   beyond David and Paul; they are perfect, they never transgress; and
   where there is no transgression, what need for confession? Again, if
   they are perfect, they need not ask pardon. They can pay God's justice
   what they owe; therefore, why pray, Forgive us our debts'? Oh, that the
   devil should rock men so fast asleep, as to make them dream of
   perfection! Do they plead, Let us therefore as many as be perfect be
   thus minded'? Phil 3: 15. Perfection there, is meant of sincerity. God
   is best able to interpret his own word. He calls sincerity perfection.
   A perfect and an upright man.' Job 1: 8. But who is exactly perfect? A
   man full of diseases may as well say he is healthful, as a man full of
   sins say he is perfect.

   Use three. For encouragement to regenerate persons. Though you fail in
   your obedience, and cannot keep the moral law exactly, yet be not
   discouraged.

   What comfort may be given to a regenerate person under the failures and
   imperfections of his obedience?

   That a believer is not under the covenant of works, but under the
   covenant of grace. The covenant of works requires perfect, personal,
   perpetual obedience; but in the covenant of grace, God will make some
   abatements; he will accept less than he required in the covenant of
   works. (1) In the covenant of works God required perfection of degrees;
   in the covenant of grace he accepts perfection of parts. There he
   required perfect working, here he accepts sincere believing. In the
   covenant of works, God required us to live without sin; in the covenant
   of grace he accepts of our combat with sin. (2) Though a Christian
   cannot, in his own person, perform all God's commandments; yet Christ,
   as his Surety, and in his stead, has fulfilled the law for him: and God
   accepts of Christ's obedience, which is perfect, to satisfy for that
   obedience which is imperfect. Christ being made a curse for believers,
   all the curses of the law have their sting pulled out. (3) Though a
   Christian cannot keep the commands of God to satisfaction, yet he may
   to approbation.

   How is that?

   (1) He gives his full assent and consent to the law of God. The law is
   holy and just:' there was assent in the judgement. Rom 7: 12. I consent
   unto the law;' there was consent in the will. Rom 7: 16.

   (2) A Christian mourns that he cannot keep the commandments fully. When
   he fails he weeps; he is not angry with the law because it is so strict
   but he is angry with himself because he is so deficient.

   (3) He takes a sweet complacent delight in the law. I delight in the
   law of God after the inward man.' Rom 7: 22. Greek: I take pleasure in
   it.' O! how love I thy law.' Psa 119: 97. Though a Christian cannot
   keep God's law, yet he loves his law; though he cannot serve God
   perfectly, yet he serves him willingly.

   (4) It is his cordial desire to walk in all God's commands. O that my
   ways were directed to keep thy statutes.' Psa 119: 5. Though his
   strength fails, yet his pulse beats.

   (5) He really endeavours to obey God's law perfectly; and wherein he
   comes short he runs to Christ's blood to supply his defects. This
   cordial desire, and real endeavour, God esteems as perfect obedience.
   If there be a willing mind, it is accepted.' 2 Cor 8: 12. Let me hear
   thy voice, for sweet is thy voice.' Cant 2: 14. Though the prayers of
   the righteous are mixed with sin, yet God sees they would pray better.
   He picks out the weeds from the flowers; he sees the faith and bears
   with the failing. The saints' obedience, though short of legal
   perfection, yet having sincerity in it, and Christ's merits mixed with
   it, finds gracious acceptance. When the Lord sees endeavours after
   perfect obedience, he takes it well at our hands; as a father who
   receives a letter from his child, though there be blots in it, and
   false spellings, takes all in good part. Oh! what blotting are there in
   our holy things; but God is pleased to take all in good part. He says,
   It is my child, and he would do better if he could; I will accept it.'
     __________________________________________________________________

  3.2 Degrees of Sin

   Are all transgressions of the law equally heinous?

   Some sins in themselves, and by reason of several aggravations, are
   more heinous in the sight of God than others.

   He that delivered me unto thee, has the greater sin.' John 19: 11. The
   Stoic philosophers held that all sins were equal; but this Scripture
   clearly holds forth that there is a gradual difference in sin; some are
   greater than others; some are mighty sins,' and crying sins.' Amos 5:
   12; Gen 18: 21. Every sin has a voice to speak, but some sins cry. As
   some diseases are worse than others, and some poisons more venomous, so
   some sins are more heinous. Ye have done worse than your fathers, your
   sins have exceeded theirs.' Jer 16: 12; Ezek 16: 47. Some sins have a
   blacker aspect than others; to clip the king's coin is treason; but to
   strike his person is a higher degree of treason. A vain thought is a
   sin, but a blasphemous word is a greater sin. That some sins are
   greater than others appears, (1) Because there was difference in the
   offerings under the law; the sin offering was greater than the trespass
   offering. (2) Because some sins are not capable of pardon as others
   are, therefore they must needs be more heinous, as the blasphemy
   against the Holy Ghost. Matt 12: 31. (3) Because some sins have a
   greater degree of punishment than others. Ye shall receive the greater
   damnation.' Matt 23: 14. Shall not the Judge of all the earth do
   right?' God would not punish one more than another if his sin was not
   greater. It is true, all sins are equally heinous in respect of the
   object,' or the infinite God, against whom sin is committed, but, in
   another sense, all sins are not alike heinous; some sins have more
   bloody circumstances in them, which are like the dye to the wool, to
   give it a deeper colour.

   [1] Such sins are more heinous as are committed without any occasion
   offered; as when a man swears or is angry, and has no provocation. The
   less the occasion of sin, the greater is the sin itself.

   [2] Such sins are more heinous that are committed presumptuously. Under
   the law there was no sacrifice for presumptuous sins. Num 15: 30.

   What is the sin of presumption, which heightens and aggravates sin, and
   makes it more heinous?

   To sin presumptuously, is to sin against convictions and illuminations,
   or an enlightened conscience. They are of those that rebel against the
   light.' Job 24: 13. Conscience, like the cherubim, stands with a
   flaming sword in its hand to deter the sinner; and yet he will sin. Did
   not Pilate sin against conviction, and with a high hand, in condemning
   Christ? He knew that for envy the Jews had delivered him. Matt 27: 18.
   He confessed he found no fault in him.' Luke 23: 14. His own wife sent
   to him saying, Have nothing to do with that just man.' Matt 27: 19. Yet
   for all this, he gave the sentence of death against Christ. He sinned
   presumptuously, against an enlightened conscience. To sin ignorantly
   does something to extenuate and pare off the guilt. If I had not come
   and spoken unto them, they had not had sin,' that is, their sin had
   been less. John 15: 22. But to sin against illuminations and
   convictions enhances men's sins. These sins make deep wounds in the
   soul; other sins fetch blood; they are a stab at the heart.

   How many ways may a man sin against illuminations and convictions?

   (1) When he lives in the total neglect of duty. He is not ignorant that
   it is a duty to read the Word, yet he lets the Bible lie by as rusty
   armour, seldom made us of. He is convinced that it is a duty to pray in
   his family, yet he can go days and months, and God never hears of him;
   he calls God Father, but never asks his blessing. Neglect of
   family-prayer, as it were, uncovers the roof of men's houses, and makes
   way for a curse to be rained down upon their table.

   (2) When a man lives in the same sins he condemns in others. Thou that
   judges, does the same things.' Rom 2: 1. As Augustine says of Seneca,
   He wrote against superstition, yet he worshipped those images which he
   reproved.' One man condemns another for rash censuring, yet lives in
   the same sin himself; a master reproves his apprentice for swearing,
   yet he himself swears. The snuffers of the tabernacle were of pure
   gold: they who reprove and snuff the vices of others, had need
   themselves be free from those sins. The snuffers must be of gold.

   (3) When a man sins after vows. Thy vows are upon me, O God.' Psa 56:
   12. A vow is a religious promise made to God, to dedicate ourselves to
   him. A vow is not only a purpose, but a promise. Every votary makes
   himself a debtor; he binds himself to God in a solemn manner. Now, to
   sin after a vow, to vow himself to God, and give his soul to the devil,
   must needs be against the highest convictions.

   (4) When a man sins after counsels, admonitions, warnings, he cannot
   plead ignorance. The trumpet of the gospel has been blown in his ears,
   and sounded a retreat to call him off from his sins, he has been told
   of his injustice, living in malice, keeping bad company, yet he would
   venture upon sin. This is to sin against conviction; it aggravates the
   sin, and is like a weight put into the scale, to make his sin weigh the
   heavier. If a sea-mark be set up to give warning that there are shelves
   and rocks in that place, yet if the mariner will sail there, and split
   his ship, it is presumption; and if he be cast away, who will pity him?

   (5) When a man sins against express combinations and threatening. God
   has thundered out threatenings against such sins. God shall would the
   hairy scalp of such an one as goes on still in his trespasses.' Psa 68:
   21. Though God set the point of his sword to the breast of a sinner, he
   will still commit sin. The pleasure of sin delights him more than the
   threatenings affright him. Like the leviathan, he laugheth at the
   shaking of a spear.' Job 41: 29. Nay, he derides God's threatenings.
   Let him make speed, and hasten his work, that we may see it:' we have
   heard much what God intends to do, and of judgement approaching, we
   would fain see it. Isa 5: 19. For men to see the flaming sword of God's
   threatening brandished, yet to strengthen themselves in sin, is in an
   aggravated manner to sin against illumination and conviction.

   (6) When a man sins under affliction. God not only thunders by
   threatening, but lets his thunderbolt fall. He inflicts judgements on a
   person so that he may read his sins in his punishment, and yet he sins.
   His sin was uncleanness, by which he wasted his strength, as well as
   his estate. He has had a fit of apoplexy; and yet while feeling the
   smart of sin, he retains the love of sin. This is to sin against
   conviction. In his distress did he trespass yet more; this is that king
   Ahab' 2 Chron 28: 22. It makes the sin greater to sin against an
   enlightened conscience. It is full of obstinacy. Men give no reason,
   make no defence for their sins, and yet are resolved to hold fast
   iniquity. Voluntas est regula et mensura actionis [An action can be
   measured and judged by the will involved], the more of the will in a
   sin, the greater the sin. We will walk after our own devices.' Jer 18:
   12. Though there be death and hell at every step, we will march on
   under Satan's colours. What made the sin of apostate angels so great
   was that it was wilful; they had no ignorance in their mind, no passion
   to stir them up; there was no tempter to deceive them, but they sinned
   obstinately and from choice. To sin against convictions and
   illuminations, is joined with rejection and contempt of God. It is bad
   for a sinner to forget God, but it is worse to condemn him. Wherefore
   does the wicked condemn God?' Psa 10: 13. An enlightened sinner knows
   that by his sin he disobliges and angers God; but he cares not whether
   God be pleased or not, he will have his sin; therefore such a one is
   said to reproach God. The soul that does ought presumptuously, the same
   reproacheth the Lord.' Numb 15: 30. Every sin displeases God, but sins
   against an enlightened conscience reproach the Lord. To condemn the
   authority of a prince, is a reproach done to him. It is accompanied
   with impudence. Fear and shame are banished, the veil of modesty is
   laid aside. The unjust knoweth no shame.' Zeph 3: 5. Judas knew Christ
   was the Messiah; he was convinced of it by an oracle from heaven, and
   by the miracles he wrought, and yet he impudently went on in his
   treason, even when Christ said, He that dips his hand with me in the
   dish, he shall betray me:' and he knew Christ meant him. When he was
   going about his treason, and Christ pronounced a woe to him, yet, for
   all that, he proceeded in his treason. Luke 22: 22. Thus to sin
   presumptuously, against an enlightened conscience, dyes the sin of a
   crimson colour, and makes it greater than other sins.

   [3] Such sins are more heinous than others, which are sins of
   continuance. The continuing of sin is the enhancing of sin. He who
   plots treason, makes himself a greater offender. Some men's heads are
   the devil's minthouse, they are a mint of mischief. Inventors of evil
   things.' Rom 1: 30. Some invent new oaths, others new snares. Such were
   those presidents that invented a decree against Daniel, and got the
   king to sign it. Dan 6: 9.

   [4] Those sins are greater which proceed from a spirit of malignity. To
   malign holiness is diabolical. It is a sin to want grace, it is worse
   to hate it. In nature there are antipathies, as between the vine and
   laurel. Some have an antipathy against God because of his purity. Cause
   the Holy One of Israel to cease from before us.' Isa 30: 11. Sinners,
   if it lay in their power, would not only enthrone God, but annihilate
   him; if they could help it, God should no longer be God. Thus sin is
   boiled up to a greater height.

   [5] Those sins are of greater magnitude, which are mixed with
   ingratitude. Of all things God cannot endure to have his kindness
   slighted. His mercy is seen in reprieving men so long, in wooing them
   by his Spirit and ministers to be reconciled, in crowning them with so
   many temporal blessings: and to abuse all this love -- when God has
   been filling up the measure of his mercy, for men to fill up the
   measure of their sins -- is high ingratitude, and makes their sins of a
   deeper crimson. Some are worse for mercy. The vulture,' says Aelian,
   draws sickness from perfumes.' So the sinner contracts evil from the
   sweet perfumes of God's mercy. The English chronicle reports of one
   Parry, who being condemned to die, Queen Elizabeth sent him her pardon;
   and after he was pardoned, he conspired and plotted the queen's death.
   Just so some deal with God, he bestows mercy, and they plot treason
   against him. I have nourished and brought up children, and they have
   rebelled against me.' Isa 1: 2. The Athenians, in lieu of the good
   service Themistocles had done them, banished him their city. The snake,
   in the fable, being frozen, stung him that gave it warmth. Certainly
   sins against mercy are more heinous.

   [6] Those sins are more heinous than others which are committed with
   delectation. A child of God may sin through a surprisal, or against his
   will. The evil which I would not, that I do.' Rom 7: 19. He is like one
   that is carried down the stream involuntarily. But to sin with delight
   heightens and greatens the sin. It is a sign the heart is in the sin.
   They set their heart on their iniquity,' as a man follows his gain with
   delight. Hos 4: 8. Without are dogs, and whosoever loveth and maketh a
   lie.' Rev 22: 15. To tell a lie is a sin; but to love to tell a lie is
   a greater sin.

   [7] Those sins are more heinous than others which are committed under a
   pretence of religion. To cheat and defraud is a sin, but to do it with
   a Bible in one's hand, is a double sin. To be unchaste is a sin; but to
   put on a mask of religion to play the whore makes the sin greater. I
   have peace offerings with me; this day have I paid my vows; come let us
   take our fill of love.' Prov 7: 14, 15. She speaks as if she had been
   at church, and had been saying her prayers: who would ever have
   suspected her of dishonesty? But, behold her hypocrisy; she makes her
   devotion a preface to adultery. Which devour widows' houses, and for a
   show make long prayers.' Luke 20: 47. The sin was not in making long
   prayers; for Christ was a whole night in prayer; but to make long
   prayers that they might do unrighteous actions, made their sin more
   horrid.

   [8] Sins of apostasy are more heinous than others. Demas forsook the
   truth and afterwards became a priest in an idol temple, says Dorotheus.
   2 Tim 4: 10. To fall is a sin; but to fall away is a greater sin.
   Apostates cast a disgrace upon religion. The apostate,' says
   Tertullian, seems to put God and Satan in the balance; and having
   weighed both their services, prefers the devil's, and proclaims him to
   be the best master.' In which respect the apostate is said to put
   Christ to open shame.' Heb 6: 6. This dyes a sin in grain, and makes it
   greater. It is a sin not to profess Christ, but it is a greater to deny
   him. Not to wear Christ's colours is a sin, but to run from his colours
   is a greater sin. A pagan sins less than a baptised renegade.

   [9] To persecute religion makes sin greater. Acts 7: 52. To have no
   religion is a sin, but to endeavour to destroy religion is a greater.
   Antiochus Epiphanes took more tedious journeys and ran more hazards, to
   vex and oppose the Jews, than all his predecessors had done to obtain
   victories. Herod added this above all, that he shut up John in prison.'
   Luke 3: 20. He sinned before by incest; but by imprisoning the prophet
   he added to his sin and made it greater. Persecution fills up the
   measure of sin. Fill ye up the measure of your fathers.' Matt 23: 32.
   If you pour a porringer of water into a cistern it adds something to
   it, but if you pour in a bucketful or two it fills up the measure of
   the cistern; so persecution fills up the measure of sin, and makes it
   greater.

   [10] To sin maliciously makes sin greater. Aquinas, and other of the
   schoolmen, place the sin against the Holy Ghost in malice. The sinner
   does all he can to vex God, and despite the Spirit of grace. Heb 10:
   29. Thus Julia threw up his dagger in the air, as if he would have been
   revenged upon God. This swells sin to its full size, it cannot be
   greater. When a man is once come to this, blasphemously to despite the
   Spirit, there is but one step lower he can fall, and that is to hell.

   [11] It aggravates sin, and makes it greater, when a man not only sins
   himself, but endeavours to make others sin. (1) Such as teach errors to
   the people, who decry Christ's deity, or deny his virtue, making him
   only a political head, not a head of influence: who preach against the
   morality of the Sabbath, or the immortality of the soul; these men's
   sins are greater than others. If the breakers of God's law sin, what do
   they that teach men to break them? Matt 5: 19. (2) Such as destroy
   others by their bad example. The swearing father teaches his son to
   swear, and damns him by his example. Such men's sins are greater than
   others, and they shall have a hotter place in hell.

   Use. You see all sins are not equal; some are more grievous than
   others, and bring greater wrath; therefore especially take heed of
   these sins. Keep back thy servant from presumptuous sins.' Psa 19: 13.
   The least sin is bad enough; you need not aggravate your sins, and make
   them more heinous. He that has a little wound will not make it deeper.
   Oh, beware of those circumstances which increase your sin and make it
   more heinous! The higher a man is in sinning, the lower he shall lie in
   torment.
     __________________________________________________________________

  3.3 The Wrath of God

   What does every sin deserve?

   God's wrath and curse, both in this life, and in that which is to come.

   Depart from me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire.' Matt 25: 41. Man
   having sinned, is like a favourite turned out of the king's favour, and
   deserves the wrath and curse of God. He deserves God's curse. Gal 3:
   10. As when Christ cursed the fig-tree, it withered; so, when God
   curses any, he withers in his soul. Matt 21: 19. God's curse blasts
   wherever it comes. He deserves also God's wrath, which is nothing else
   but the execution of his curse.

   What is this wrath?

   I. It is privative; that is, deprives of the smiles of God's face. It
   is hell enough to be excluded his presence: in whose presence is
   fulness of joy.' Psa 16: 11. His smiling face has that splendour and
   beauty in it that ravishes the angels with delight. This is the diamond
   in the ring of glory. If it were such a misery for Absalom, that he
   might not see the King's face, what will it be for the wicked to be
   shut out from beholding God's pleasant face! Privatio Divinae visionis
   omnium suppliciorum summum [To be deprived of the sight of God is the
   greatest of all punishments].

   II. This wrath has something in it positive. It is wrath come upon them
   to the uttermost.' 1 Thess 2: 16.

   [I] God's wrath is irresistible. Who knoweth the power of thine anger?'
   Psa 90: 2: Sinners may oppose God's ways, but not his wrath. Shall the
   briers contend with the fire? Shall finite contend with infinite? Hast
   thou an arm like God?' Job 40: 9.

   [2] God's wrath is terrible. The Spanish proverb is, The lion is not so
   fierce as he is painted. We are apt to have slight thoughts of God's
   wrath; but it is very tremendous and dismal, as if scalding lead should
   be dropped into one's eyes. The Hebrew word for wrath signifies heat.
   To show that the wrath of God is hot, therefore it is compared to fire
   in the text. Fire, when in its rage, is dreadful. So the wrath of God
   is like fire, it is the terrible of terrible. Other fire is but painted
   to this. If when God's wrath is kindled but a little, and a spark of it
   flies into a wicked man's conscience in this life, it is so terrible,
   what will it be when God shall stir up all his wrath'? Psa 78: 38. How
   sad is it with a soul in desertion! God then dips his pen in gall, and
   writes bitter things;' his poisoned arrows stick fast into the heart.
   While I suffer thy terrors, I am distracted; thy fierce wrath goes over
   me.' Psa 88: 15, 16. Luther, in desertion, was in such horror of mind,
   that nec calor, nec sanguis superesset [no warmth or blood remained];
   he had no blood seen in his face, but he lay as one dead. Now, if God's
   wrath be such towards those whom he loves, what will it be towards
   those whom he hates? If they who sip of the cup find it so bitter, what
   will they do who drink its dregs? Psal 75: 8. Solomon says, The king's
   wrath is as the roaring of a lion.' Prov 19: 12. What then is God's
   wrath? When God musters up all his forces, and sets himself in battalia
   against a sinner, how can his heart endure? Ezek 22: 14. Who is able to
   lie under mountains of wrath? God is the sweetest friend but the sorest
   enemy.

   (1) The wrath of God shall seize upon every part of a sinner. Upon the
   body. The body, which was so tender that it could not bear heat or
   cold, shall be tormented in the wine press of God's wrath. Those eyes
   which before could behold amorous objects, shall be tormented with the
   sight of devils. The ears, which before were delighted with music,
   shall be tormented with the hideous shrieks of the damned. The wrath of
   God shall seize upon the soul of a reprobate. Ordinary fire cannot
   touch the soul. When the martyrs' bodies were consuming, their souls
   triumphed in the flames; but God's wrath burns the soul. The memory
   will be tormented to remember what means of grace have been abused. The
   conscience will be tormented with self-accusations. The sinner will
   accuse himself for presumptuous sins, for misspending his precious
   hours, and for resisting the Holy Ghost.

   (2) The wrath of God is without intermission. Hell is an abiding place,
   but no resting place; there is not a minute's rest. Outward pain has
   some abatement. If it be the stone or colic, the patient has sometimes
   ease; but the torments of the damned have no intermission; he who feels
   God's wrath never says, I have ease.'

   (3) The wrath of God is eternal. So says the text. Everlasting fire.'
   No tears can quench the flame of God's anger; no, though we could shed
   rivers of tears. In all pains of this life men hope for cessation --
   the suffering will not continue long; either the tormentor dies or the
   tormented; but the wrath of God is always feeding upon the sinner. The
   terror of natural fire is, that it consumes what it burns; but what
   makes the fire of God's wrath terrible is, that it does not consume
   what it burns. Sic morientur damnati ut semper vivunt [Those that are
   lost will so die as to remain always alive]. Bernard. The sinner will
   ever be in the furnace. After innumerable millions of years the wrath
   of God is as far from ending as it was at the beginning. If all the
   earth and sea were sand, and every thousand years a bird should come
   and take away a grain, it would be a long while ere that vast heap of
   sand were emptied; but if, after all that time, the damned might come
   out of hell, there would be some hope; but this word Ever' breaks the
   heart.

   How does it consist with God's justice to punish sin, which perhaps was
   committed in a moment, with eternal fire?

   On account of the heinous nature of sin. Consider the Person offended;
   it is Crimen laesae majestatis [a charge of the highest treason]. Sin
   is committed against an infinite majesty, therefore it is infinite, and
   the punishment must be infinite. Because the nature of man is but
   finite, and a sinner cannot at once bear infinite wrath, therefore he
   must be satisfying in enmity what he cannot satisfy at once.

   (4) While the wicked lie scorching in the flames of wrath, they have
   none to commiserate them. It is some ease of grief to have some to
   condole with us; but the wicked have wrath and no pity shown them. Who
   will pity them? God will not. They derided his Spirit, and he will now
   laugh at their calamity. Prov 1: 26. The saints will not pity them.
   They persecuted them upon earth, therefore they will rejoice to see
   God's justice executed on them. The righteous shall rejoice when he
   sees the vengeance.' Psa 58: 10.

   (5) The sinner under wrath has no one to speak a good word for him. If
   an elect person sins, he has one to intercede for him. We have an
   advocate, Jesus Christ the righteous.' 1 John 2: 1. Christ will say, It
   is one of my friends, one for whom I have shed my blood; Father, pardon
   him.' But the wicked who die in sin have none to solicit for them; they
   have an accuser, but no advocate; Christ's blood will not plead for
   them; they slighted Christ and refused to come under his government,
   therefore Christ's blood cries against them.

   [3] God's wrath is just. The Greek word for vengeance signifies
   justice. The wicked shall drink a sea of wrath, but not one drop of
   injustice, It is just that God's honour be repaired, and how can that
   be but by punishing offenders? He who infringes the king's laws
   deserves the penalty. Mercy goes by favour, punishment by desert. To us
   belongeth confusion of face.' Dan 9: 8. Wrath is that which belongs to
   us as we are simmers; it is due to us as any wages that are paid.

   Use one. For information. (1) God is justified in condemning sinners at
   the last day. They deserve wrath, and it is no injustice to give them
   that which they deserve. If a malefactor deserves death, the judge does
   him no wrong in condemning him.

   (2) See what a great evil sin is, which exposes a person to God's wrath
   for ever. You may know the lion by his paw; and you may know what an
   evil sin is by the wrath and curse it brings. When you see a man drawn
   upon a hurdle to execution, you conclude he is guilty of some capital
   crime that brings such a punishment; so when a man lies under the
   torrid zone of God's wrath, and roars out in flames, you must say, How
   horrid an evil sin is!' They who now see no evil in swearing, or
   Sabbath breaking, will see it looks black in the glass of
   hell-torments.

   (3) See here a handwriting upon the wall; that which may check a
   sinner's mirth. He is now brisk and frolicsome, he chants to the sound
   of the viol, and invents instruments of music (Amos 6: 5); he drinks
   stolen waters,' and says, they are sweet;' but let him remember that
   the wrath and curse of God hang over him, which will shortly, if he
   repent not, be executed on him. Dionysus thought, as he sat at table,
   that he saw a naked sword hang over his head; but the sword of God's
   justice hangs over a sinner, and when the slender thread of life is cut
   asunder it falls upon him. Rejoice, O young man, in thy youth; and let
   thy heart cheer thee in the days of thy youth . . . but know thou, that
   for all these things God will bring thee into judgement.' Eccl 11: 9.
   For a drop of pleasure thou must drink a sea of wrath. Your pleasure
   cannot be so sweet as wrath is bitter. The delights of the flesh cannot
   countervail the horror of conscience. Better want the devil's honey
   than be stung with the wrath of God. The garden of Eden, which
   signifies pleasure, had a flaming sword placed at the east end of it.
   Gen 3: 24. The garden of carnal and sinful delight is surrounded with
   the flaming sword of God's wrath.

   Use two. For reproof. The stupidity of sinners is reproved who are no
   more affected with the curse and wrath of God which is due to them.
   None considereth in his heart.' Isa 44: 19. If they were in debt and
   the sergeant was about to arrest them, they would be affected with
   that; but though the fierce wrath of God is ready to arrest them, they
   remember it not. Though a beast has no shame, he has fear: he is afraid
   of fire; but sinners are worse than brutish, for they fear not the fire
   of hell' till they are in it. Most have their consciences asleep, or
   seared; but when they shall see the vials of God's wrath dropping, they
   will cry out as Dives, Oh! I am tormented in this flame!' Luke 16: 24.

   Use three. For exhortation. (1) Let us adore God's patience, who has
   not brought this wrath and curse upon us all this while. We have
   deserved wrath, yet God has not given us our desert. We may all
   subscribe to Psa 103: 8, The Lord is slow to anger;' and to ver 10, He
   has not rewarded us according to our iniquities.' God has deferred his
   wrath, and given us space to repent. Rev 2: 21. He is not like a hasty
   creditor, who requires the debt, and gives no time for payment; he
   shoots off his warning-piece, that he may not shoot off his
   murdering-piece. The Lord is long suffering to usward, not willing that
   any perish.' 2 Pet 3: 9. God adjourns the assizes, to see if sinners
   will turn; he keeps off the storm of his wrath: but if men will not be
   warned, let them know that long forbearance is no forgiveness.

   (2) Let us labour to prevent the wrath we have deserved. How careful
   are men to prevent poverty or disgrace! O labour to prevent God's
   eternal wrath, that it may not only be deferred, but removed.

   What shall we do to prevent and escape the wrath to come?

   [1] By getting an interest in Jesus Christ. Christ is the only screen
   to stand betwixt us and the wrath of God; he felt God's wrath that they
   who believe in him should never feel it. Jesus which delivered us from
   the wrath to come.' 1 Thess 1: 10. Nebuchadnezzar's fiery furnace was a
   type of God's wrath, and that furnace did not singe the garments of the
   three children, nor had the smell of fire passed upon them.' Dan 3: 27.
   Jesus Christ went into the furnace of his Father's wrath; and the smell
   of the fire of hell shall never pass upon those that believe in him.

   [2] If we would prevent the wrath of God, let us take heed of those
   sins which will provoke it. Edmund, successor of Anselm, had a saying,
   I had rather leap into a furnace of fire, than willingly commit a sin
   against God.' There are several fiery sins we must take heed of, which
   will provoke the fire of God's wrath. The fire of rash anger. Some who
   profess religion cannot bridle their tongue; they care not what they
   say in their anger; they will even curse their passions. James says,
   The tongue is set on fire of hell;' chap 3: 6. Oh! take heed of a fiery
   tongue,' lest it bring thee to fiery torment.' Dives begged a drop of
   water to cool his tongue. Cyprian says he had offended most in his
   tongue, and now that was most set on fire. Take heed of the fire of
   malice. Malice is a malignant humour, whereby we wish evil to others;
   it is a vermin that lives on blood; it studies revenge. Caligula had a
   chest where he kept deadly poisons for those against whom he had
   malice. The fire of malice brings men to the fiery furnace of God's
   wrath. Take heed of the sin of uncleanness. Whoremongers and adulterers
   God will judge.' Heb 13: 4. Such as burn in uncleanness are in great
   danger to burn one day in hell. Let one fire put out another; let the
   fire of God's wrath put out the fire of lust.

   (3) To you who have a well-grounded hope that you shall not feel this
   wrath, which you have deserved, let me exhort you to be very thankful
   to God, who has given his Son to save you from this tremendous wrath.
   Jesus has delivered you from wrath to come. The Lamb of God was
   scorched in the fire of God's wrath for you. Christ felt the wrath
   which he did not deserve, that you might escape the wrath which you
   have deserved. Pliny observes, that there is nothing better to quench
   fire than blood. Christ's blood has quenched the fire of God's wrath
   for you. Upon me be thy curse,' said Rebekah to Jacob. Gen 27: 13. So
   said Christ to God's justice, Upon me be the curse, that my elect may
   inherit the blessing.' Be patient under all the afflictions which you
   endure. Affliction is sharp, but it is not wrath, it is not hell. who
   would not willingly drink in the cup of affliction that knows he shall
   never drink in the cup of damnation? Who would not be willing to bear
   the wrath of man that knows he shall never feel the wrath of God?

   Christian, though thou mayest feel the rod, thou shalt never feel the
   bloody axe. Augustine once said, Strike, Lord, where thou wilt, if sin
   be pardoned.' So say, Afflict me, Lord, as thou wilt in this life,
   seeing I shall escape the wrath to come.'
     __________________________________________________________________

4. THE WAY OF SALVATION
     __________________________________________________________________

  4.1 Faith

   What does God require of us, that we may escape his wrath and curse due
   to us for our sin?

   Faith in Jesus Christ, repentance unto life, with the diligent use of
   all the outward means, whereby Christ communicateth to us the benefits
   of redemption.

   I begin with the first, faith in Jesus Christ. Whom God has set forth
   to be a propitiation through faith in his blood.' Rom 3: 25. The great
   privilege in the text is, to have Christ for a propitiation; which is
   not only to free us from God's wrath, but to ingratiate us into his
   love and favour. The means of having Christ to be our propitiation is,
   Faith in his blood.' There is a twofold faith, Fides quae creditur [the
   faith which is believed], which is the doctrine of faith;' and Fides
   qua creditur [the faith by which we believe], which is the grace of
   faith.' The act of justifying faith lies in recumbency; we rest on
   Christ alone for salvation. As a man that is ready to drown catches
   hold on the bough of a tree, so a poor trembling sinner, seeing himself
   ready to perish, catches hold by faith on Christ the tree of life, and
   is saved. The work of faith is by the Holy Spirit; therefore faith is
   called the fruit of the Spirit.' Gal 5: 22. Faith does not grow in
   nature, it is an outlandish plant, a fruit of the Spirit. This grace of
   faith is sanctissimum humani pectoris bonum [the most hallowed
   possession of the human heart]; of all others, the most precious rich
   faith, and most holy faith, and faith of God's elect: hence it is
   called precious faith.' 2 Pet 1: 1. As gold is most precious among
   metals, so is faith among the graces. Faith is the queen of the graces;
   it is the condition of the gospel. Thy faith has saved thee,' not thy
   tears. Luke 7: 50. Faith is the vital artery of the soul' that animates
   it. The just shall live by his faith.' Hab 2: 4. Though unbelievers
   breathe, they want life. Faith, as Clemens Alexandrinus calls it, is a
   mother grace; it excites and invigorates all the graces; not a grace
   stirs till faith sets it to work. Faith sets repentance to work; it is
   like fire to the still; it sets hope to work. First we believe the
   promise, then we hope for it. If faith did not feed the lamp of hope
   with oil, it would soon die. It sets love to work. Faith which worketh
   by love.' Gal 5: 6. Who can believe in the infinite merits of Christ,
   and his heart not ascend in a fiery chariot of love? It is a
   catholicon, or remedy against all troubles; a sheet anchor cast into
   the sea of God's mercy to keep us from sinking in despair. Other graces
   have done worthily; thou, O faith, excellest them all. In heaven love
   will be the chief grace; but while we are here love must give place to
   faith. Love takes possession of glory, but faith gives a title to it.
   Love is the crowning grace in heaven, but faith is the conquering grace
   upon earth. This is the victory that overcometh the world, even our
   faith.' 1 John 5: 4. Faith carries away the garland from all the other
   graces. Other graces help to sanctify us, but faith only has the honour
   to justify us. Being justified by faith.' Rom 5: 1.

   How comes faith to be so precious?

   Not that it is a more holy quality, or has more worthiness than other
   graces, but respectu objecti [with respect to its object], as it lays
   hold on Christ the blessed object,' and fetches in his fulness. John 9:
   36. Faith in itself considered, is but manus mendica, the beggar's
   hand;' but as this hand receives the rich alms of Christ's merits, so
   it is precious, and challenges a superiority over the rest of the
   graces.

   Use one. Of all sins, beware of the rock of unbelief Take heed lest
   there be in any of you an evil heart of unbelief' Heb 3: 12. Men think,
   as long as they are not drunkards or swearers, it is no great matter to
   be unbelievers. This is the gospel sin, it dyes your other sins in
   grain.

   (1) Unbelief is a Christ-reproaching sin. It disparages Christ's
   infinite merit as if it could not save; it makes the wound of sin to be
   broader than the plaister of Christ's blood. This is a high contempt
   offered to Christ, and is a deeper spear than that which the Jews
   thrust into his side.

   (2) Unbelief is an ungrateful sin. Ingratus vitandus est ut dirum
   selus, tellus ipsa foedius nihil creat [The ungrateful man is to be
   avoided like a fearful crime; the world herself produces nothing more
   shameful]. Ingratitude is a prodigy of wickedness; and unbelief is
   being ungrateful for the richest mercy. Suppose a king, to redeem a
   captive, should part with his crown of gold, and when he had done this
   should say to the redeemed man, All I desire of thee in lieu of my
   kindness, is to believe that I love thee.' If he should say No, I do
   not believe any such thing, or that thou carest at all for me;' I
   appeal to you whether this would not be odious ingratitude? So is the
   case here. God has sent his Son to shed his blood; he requires us only
   to believe in him, that he is able and willing to save us. No, says
   unbelief, his blood was not shed for me, I cannot persuade myself that
   Christ has any purpose of love to me. Is not this horrid ingratitude?
   This enhances a sin, and makes it of a crimson colour.

   (3) Unbelief is a leading sin. It is the breeder of sin. Qualitas malae
   vitae initium summit ab infidelitate [A life of wickedness has unbelief
   as its point of origin]. Unbelief is a root sin, and the devil labours
   to water this root, that the branches may be fruitful. It breeds
   hardness of heart; therefore they are put together. Mark 16: 14. Christ
   upbraids them with their unbelief and hardness of heart. Unbelief
   breeds the stone of the heart. He who believes not in Christ, is not
   affected with his sufferings, he melts not in tears of love. Unbelief
   freezes the heart; first it defiles and then hardens. Unbelief breeds
   profaneness. An unbeliever will stick at no sin, neither at false
   weights, nor false oaths. He will swallow down treason. Judas was first
   an unbeliever, and then a traitor. John 6: 64. He who has no faith in
   his heart, will have no fear of God before his eyes.

   (4) Unbelief is a wrath procuring sin. It is inimica salutis [an enemy
   of salvation]. Bernard. John 3: 18. Jam condemnatus est [he is already
   condemned], dying so, he is as sure to be condemned as if he were so
   already. He that believeth not on the Son of God, the wrath of God
   abideth on him.' John 3: 36. He who believes not in the blood of the
   Lamb, must feel the wrath of the Lamb. The Gentiles that believe not in
   Christ will be damned as well as the Jews who blaspheme him. And if
   unbelief be so fearful and damnable a sin, shall we not be afraid to
   live in it?

   Use two. Above all graces set faith to work on Christ. That whosoever
   believeth in him should not perish.' John 3: 15. Above all, taking the
   shield of faith.' Eph 6: 16. Say as queen Esther, I will go in unto the
   king: and if I perish, I perish.' She had nothing to encourage her; she
   ventured against law, yet the golden sceptre was held forth to her. We
   have promises to encourage our faith. Him that comes unto me, I will in
   no wise cast out.' John 6: 37. Let us then advance faith by a holy
   recumbency on Christ's merits. Christ's blood will not justify without
   believing; they are both put together in the text, Faith in his blood.'
   The blood of God, without faith in Christ, will not save. Christ's
   sufferings are the plaister to heal a sin-sick soul, but this plaister
   must be applied by faith. It is not money in a rich man's hand, though
   offered to us, that will enrich us, unless we receive it. So Christ's
   virtues or benefits will do us no good unless we receive them by the
   hand of faith. Above all graces set faith on work. It is a faith most
   acceptable to God upon many accounts.

   (1) Because it is a God-exalting grace. It glorifies God. Abraham was
   strong in faith, giving glory to God.' Rom 4: 20. To believe that there
   is more mercy in God and merit in Christ than sin in us, and that
   Christ has answered all the demands of the law, and that his blood has
   fully satisfied for us, is in a high degree to honour God. Faith in the
   Mediator brings more glory to God than martyrdom, or the most heroic
   act of obedience.

   (2) Faith in Christ is acceptable to God because it is a self-denying
   grace; it makes a man go out of himself, renounce all
   self-righteousness, and wholly rely on Christ for justification. It is
   very humble, it confesses its own indigence, and lives wholly upon
   Christ. As the bee sucks sweetness from the flower, so faith sucks all
   its strength and comfort from Christ.

   (3) Faith is a grace acceptable to God, because by faith we present a
   righteousness to him which best pleases him; we bring the righteousness
   of Christ into court, which is called the righteousness of God. 2 Cor
   5: 21. To bring Christ's righteousness, is to bring Benjamin with us. A
   believer may say, Lord, it is not the righteousness of Adam, or of the
   angels, but of Christ who is God-Man, that I bring before thee. The
   Lord cannot but smell a sweet savour in Christ's righteousness.

   Use three. Let us try our faith. There is something that looks like
   faith, and is not. Pliny says there is a Cyprian stone which is in
   colour like a diamond, but it is not of the right kind; so there is a
   spurious faith in the world. Some plants have the same leaf with
   others, but the herbalist can distinguish them by the root and taste;
   so something may look like true faith, but it may be distinguished
   several ways: --

   (1) True faith is grounded upon knowledge. Knowledge carries the torch
   before faith. There is a knowledge of Christ's orient excellencies.
   Phil 3: 8. He is made up of all love and beauty. True faith is a
   judicious intelligent grace, it knows whom it believes, and why it
   believes. Faith is seated as well in the understanding as in the will.
   It has an eye to see Christ, as well as a wing to fly to him. Such
   therefore as are veiled in ignorance, or have only an implicit faith to
   believe as the church believes, have no true and genuine faith.

   (2) Faith lives in a broken heart. The father cried out with tears,
   Lord, I believe.' Mark 9: 24. True faith is always in a heart bruised
   for sin. They, therefore, whose hearts were never touched for sin, have
   no faith. If a physician should tell us there was a herb that would
   help us against all infections, but it always grows in a watery place;
   if we should see a herb like it in colour, leaf, smell, blossom, but
   growing upon a rock, we should conclude that it was the wrong herb. So
   saving faith always grows in a heart humbled for sin, in a weeping eye
   and a tearful conscience. If, therefore, there be a show of faith, but
   it grows upon the rock of a hard impenitent heart, it is not the true
   faith.

   (3) True faith is at first nothing but an embryo, it is minute and
   small; it is full of doubts, temptations, fears; it begins in weakness.
   It is like the smoking flax. Matt 12: 20. It smokes with desires, but
   does not flame with comfort; it is at first so small, that it is scarce
   discernible. They who, at the first dash, have a strong persuasion that
   Christ is theirs, who leap out of sin into assurance, have a false and
   spurious faith, The faith which comes to its full stature on its
   birth-day is a monster. The seed that sprung up suddenly withered. Matt
   13: 5, 6.

   (4) Faith is a refining grace, it consecrates and purifies. Moral
   virtue may wash the outside, but faith washes the inside. Purifying
   their hearts by faith.' Acts 15: 9. Faith makes the heart a temple with
   this inscription, Holiness to the Lord.' They whose hearts have legions
   of lust in them, were never acquainted with the true faith. For one to
   say he has faith, and yet live in sin, is, as if one should say he was
   in health when his vitals are perished. Faith is a virgin grace, it is
   joined with sanctity. Holding the mystery of the faith in a pure
   conscience.' 1 Tim 3: 9. The jewel of faith is always put in the
   cabinet of a pure conscience. The woman that touched Christ by faith,
   fetched a healing and cleansing virtue from him.

   (5) True faith is obediential. The obedience of faith.' Rom 16: 26.
   Faith melts our will into the will of God. If God commands duty, though
   cross to flesh and blood, faith obeys. By faith Abraham obeyed.' Heb
   11: 8. It not only believes the promise, but obeys the command. It is
   not having a speculative knowledge that will evidence you to be
   believers. The devil has knowledge; but that which makes him a devil is
   that he has no obedience.

   (6) True faith is increasing. From faith to faith,' i.e. from one
   degree of faith to another. Rom 1: 17. Faith does not lie in the heart,
   as a stone in the earth, but as seed that grows. Joseph of Arimathaea
   was a disciple of Christ, but was afraid to confess him; afterwards he
   went boldly to Pilate and begged the body of Jesus. John 19: 38. A
   Christian's increase in faith is known two ways: --

   By steadfastness. He is a pillar in the temple of God, Rooted and built
   up in him; and established in the faith.' Col 2: 7. Unbelievers are
   sceptics in religion; they are unsettled; they question every truth;
   but when faith is on the increasing hand, it does stabilire animum
   [strengthen the spirit], it corroborates a Christian. He is able to
   prove his principles; he holds no more than he will die for; as that
   martyr woman said, I cannot dispute for Christ, but I can burn for
   him.' An increasing faith is not like a ship in the midst of the sea,
   that fluctuates, and is tossed upon the waves; but like a ship at
   anchor, which is firm and steadfast.

   A Christian's increase in faith is known by his strength. He can do
   that now which he could not do before. When one is man-grown, he can do
   that which he was not able to do when he was a child; he can carry a
   heavier burden: so a growing Christian can bear crosses with more
   patience.

   But I fear I have no faith, it is so weak!

   If you have faith, though but in its infancy, be not discouraged. For,
   (1) A little faith is faith, as a spark of fire is fire. (2) A weak
   faith may lay hold on a strong Christ; as a weak hand can tie the knot
   in marriage as well as a strong one. She, in the gospel, who but
   touched Christ, fetched virtue from him. (3) The promises are not made
   to strong faith, but to true. The promise does not say, he who has a
   giant faith, who can believe God's love through a frown, who can
   rejoice in affliction, who can work wonders, remove mountains, stop the
   mouth of lions, shall be saved, but whosoever believes, be his faith
   never so small. A reed is but weak, especially when it is bruised; yet
   a promise is made to it. A bruised reed shall he not break.' Matt 12:
   20. (4) A weak faith may be fruitful. Weakest things multiply most. The
   vine is a weak plant, but it is fruitful. The thief on the cross, who
   was newly converted, was but weak in grace; but how many precious
   clusters grew upon that tender plant! He chided his fellow-thief. Dost
   thou not fear God?' Luke 23: 40. He judged himself, We indeed suffer
   justly.' He believed in Christ, when he said, Lord.' He made a heavenly
   prayer, Remember me when thou comest into thy kingdom.' Weak Christians
   may have strong affections. How strong is the first love, which is
   after the first planting of faith! (5) The weakest believer is a member
   of Christ as well as the strongest; and the weakest member of the body
   mystic shall not perish. Christ will cut off rotten members, but not
   weak members. Therefore, Christian, be not discouraged. God, who would
   have us receive them that are weak in faith, will not himself refuse
   them. Rom 14: 1.
     __________________________________________________________________

  4.2 Repentance

   Then has God also to the Gentiles granted repentance unto life.' Acts
   11: 18.

   Repentance seems to be a bitter pill to take, but it is to purge out
   the bad humour of sin. By some Antinomian spirits it is cried down as a
   legal doctrine; but Christ himself preached it. From that time Jesus
   began to preach, and to say, Repent,' &c. Matt 4: 17. In his last
   farewell, when he was ascending to heaven, he commanded that Repentance
   should be preached in his name.' Luke 24: 47. Repentance is a pure
   gospel grace. The covenant of works would not admit of repentance; it
   cursed all that could not perform perfect and personal obedience. Gal
   3: 10. Repentance comes in by the gospel; it is the fruit of Christ's
   purchase that repenting sinners shall be saved. It is wrought by the
   ministry of the gospel, while it sets before our eyes Christ crucified.
   It is not arbitrary, but necessary; there is no being saved without it.
   Except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish.' Luke 13: 3. We may be
   thankful to God that he has left us this plank after shipwreck.

   I. I shall show first the counterfeits of repentance.

   [1] Natural softness and tenderness of spirit. Some have a tender
   affection, arising from their constitution, whereby they are apt to
   weep and relent when they see any object of pity. These are not
   repenting tears: for many weep to see another's misery, who cannot weep
   at their own sin.

   [2] Legal terrors. A man who has lived in a course of sin, at last is
   made sensible; he sees hell ready to devour him, and is filled with
   anguish and horror; but after a while the tempest of conscience is
   blown over, and he is quiet. He then concludes he is a true penitent,
   because he has felt some bitterness in sin, but this is not repentance.
   Judas had some trouble of mind. If anguish and trouble were sufficient
   for repentance, then the damned would be most penitent, for they are
   most in anguish of mind. There may be trouble of mind where there is no
   grieving for the offence against God.

   [3] A slight superficial sorrow. When God's hand lies heavy upon a man,
   as when he is sick or lame, he may vent a sigh or tear, and say, Lord,
   have mercy;' yet this is not true repentance. Ahab did more than all
   this. He rent his clothes, and fasted, and lay in sackcloth, and went
   softly.' 1 Kings 21: 27. His clothes were rent, but not his heart. The
   eye may be watery, and the heart flinty. An apricot may be soft
   without, but it has a hard stone within.

   [4] God motions rising in the heart. Every good motion is not
   repentance. Some think if they have motions in their hearts to break
   off their sins, and become religious, it is repentance. As the devil
   may stir up bad motions in the godly, so the Spirit of God may stir up
   good motions in the wicked. Herod had many good thoughts and
   inclinations stirred up in him by John Baptist's preaching, yet he did
   not truly repent, for he still lived in incest.

   [5] Vows and resolutions. What vows and solemn protestations do some
   make in their sickness, that if God should recover them they will be
   new men, but afterwards they are as bad as ever! Thou saidst, I will
   not transgress;' here was a resolution: but for all this, she ran after
   her idols. Under every green tree thou wanderest, playing the harlot.'
   Jer 2: 20.

   [6] Leaving off some gross sin. (1) A man may leave off some sins, and
   keep others. Herod reformed many things that were amiss, but kept his
   Herodias. (2) An old sin may be left to entertain a new one. A man may
   leave off riot and prodigality, and turn covetous; which is merely to
   exchange one sin for another.

   These are the counterfeits of repentance. Now, if you find that yours
   is a counterfeit repentance, and you have not repented aright, mend
   what you have done amiss. As in the body, if a bone be set wrong, the
   surgeon has no way but to break it again, and set it aright; so you
   must do by repentance; if you have not repented aright, you must have
   your heart broken again in a godly manner, and be more deeply afflicted
   for sin than ever.

   II. This brings me to show wherein repentance consists. It consists in
   two things: humiliation and transformation.

   [1] Humiliation. If their uncircumcised hearts be humbled.' Lev 26: 41.
   There is, as the schoolmen say, a twofold humiliation, or breaking of
   the heart. (1) Attrition; as when a rock is broken in pieces. This is
   done by the law, which is a hammer to break the heart. (2) Contrition;
   as when ice is melted into water. This is done by the gospel, which is
   as a fire to melt the heart.' Jer 23: 9. The sense of abused kindness
   causes contrition.

   [2] Transformation, or change. Be ye transformed by the renewing of
   your mind.' Rom 12: 2. Repentance works a change in the whole man. As
   when wine is put into a glass of water, it runs into every part of the
   water, and changes its colour and taste; so true repentance does not
   rest in one part, but diffuses and spreads itself into every part.

   (1) Repentance causes a change in the mind. Before, a man liked sin
   well, and said in defence of it, as Jonah, I do well to be angry;' chap
   4: 9; or I did well to swear, and break the Sabbath. When he becomes
   penitent, his judgement is changed, he looks upon sin as the greatest
   evil. The Greek word for repentance signifies after-wisdom; when,
   having seen how deformed and damnable a thing sin is, we change our
   mind. Paul, before conversion, verily thought he ought to do many
   things contrary to the name of Jesus (Acts 26: 9); but, when he became
   a penitent, he was of another mind. I count all things but loss for the
   excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus.' Phil 3: 8. Repentance
   causes a change of judgement.

   (2) Repentance causes a change in the affections, which move under the
   will as the commander-in-chief. It metamorphoses the affections. It
   turns rejoicing in sin into sorrowing for sin; it turns boldness in sin
   into holy shame; it turns the love of sin into hatred. As Ammon hated
   Tamar more than ever he loved her (2 Sam 13: 15), so the true penitent
   hates sin more than ever he loved it. I hate every false way.' Psa 119:
   104.

   (3) Repentance works a change in the life. Though repentance begins at
   the heart, it does rest there, but goes into the life. It begins at the
   heart. O Jerusalem, wash thy heart.' Jer 4: 14. If the spring be
   corrupt, no pure stream can run from it. But though repentance begins
   at the heart, it does not rest there, but changes the life. What a
   change did repentance make in Paul! It changed a persecutor into a
   preacher. What a change did it make in the jailer! Acts 16: 33. He took
   Paul and Silas, and washed their stripes, and set meat before them.
   What a change did it make in Mary Magdalene! She who before kissed her
   lovers with wanton embraces, now kisses Christ's feet; she that used to
   curl her hair, and dress it with costly jewels, now makes it a towel to
   wipe Christ's feet; her eyes that used to sparkle with lust, and with
   impure glances to entice her lovers, now become fountains of tears to
   wash her Saviour's feet; her tongue that used to speak vainly and
   loosely, now is an instrument set in tune to praise God. This change of
   life has two things in it: --

   [1] The terminus a quo, a breaking off sin. Break off thy sins by
   righteousness.' Dan 4: 27. This breaking off sin must have three
   qualifications. (1) It must be universal, a breaking off all sin. One
   disease may kill as well as more. One sin lived in, may damn as well as
   more. The real penitent breaks off secret, gainful, habitual sins; he
   takes the sacrificing knife of mortification, and runs it through the
   heart of his dearest lusts. (2) Breaking off sin must be sincere; it
   must not be out of fear, but upon spiritual grounds; as from antipathy
   and disgust, and a principle of love to God. If sin had not such evil
   effects, a true penitent would forsake it out of love to God. The best
   way to separate things that are frozen, is by fire. When sin and the
   heart are frozen together, the best way to separate them is by the fire
   of love. Shall I sin against a gracious Father, and abuse that love
   which pardons me? (3) The breaking off sin must be perpetual, so as
   never to have to do with sin any more. What have I to do any more with
   idols?' Hos 14: 8. Repentance is a spiritual divorce, which must be
   till death.

   [2] Change of life has in it terminus ad quem, a returning unto the
   Lord. It is called Repentance towards God.' Acts 20: 21. It is not
   enough, when we repent, to leave old sins; but we must engage in God's
   service; as when the wind leaves the west, it turns into a contrary
   corner. The repenting prodigal not only left his harlots, but arose and
   went to his father. Luke 15: 18. In true repentance the heart points
   directly to God, as the needle to the north pole.

   Use. Let us all set upon this great work of repentance; let us repent
   sincerely and speedily: let us repent of all our sins, our pride, rash
   anger, and unbelief. Without repentance, no remission.' It is not
   consistent with the holiness of God's nature to pardon a sinner while
   he is in the act of rebellion. O meet God, not with weapons, but tears
   in your eyes. To stir you up to a melting penitent frame: --

   (1) Consider what there is in sin, that you should continue in the
   practice of it. It is the accursed thing.' Josh 7: 11. It is the
   spirits of mischief distilled. It defiles the soul's glory; it is like
   a stain to beauty. It is compared to a plague-sore. 1 Kings 8: 38.
   Nothing so changes one's glory into shame as sin. Without repentance
   sin tends to final damnation. Peccatum transit actu, manet reatu [The
   moment of sin passes, the guilt remains]. Sin at first shows its colour
   in the glass, but afterwards it bites like a serpent. Those locusts in
   Rev 9: 7, are an emblem of sin: On their heads were crowns like gold,
   and they had hair as the hair of women, and their teeth were as the
   teeth of lions, and there were stings in their tails.' Sin unrepented
   of ends in a tragedy. It has the devil for its father, shame for its
   companion, and death for its wages. Rom 6: 23. What is there in sin
   then, that men should continue in it? Say not it is sweet. Who would
   desire the pleasure which kills?

   (2) Repentance is very pleasing to God. No sacrifice like a broken
   heart. A broken and a contrite heart, O God, thou wilt not despise.'
   Psa 51: 17. Augustine caused this sentence to be written over his bed
   when he was sick. When the widow brought empty vessels to Elisha, the
   oil was poured into them. 2 Kings 4: 6. Bring God the broken vessel of
   a contrite heart, and he will pour in the oil of mercy. Repenting tears
   are the joy of God and of angels. Luke 15: 7. Doves delight to be about
   the waters; and surely God's Spirit, who once descended in the likeness
   of a dove, takes great delight in the waters of repentance. Mary stood
   at Jesus' feet weeping. Luke 7: 38. She brought two things to Christ,
   tears and ointment; but her tears were more precious to Christ than her
   ointment.

   (3) Repentance ushers in pardon. Therefore they are joined together.
   Repentance and remission.' Luke 24: 47. Pardon of sin is the richest
   blessing; it is enough to make a sick man well. The inhabitant shall
   not say, I am sick; the people that dwell therein shall be forgiven
   their iniquity.' Isa 33: 24. Pardon settles upon us the richer charter
   of the promises. Pardoning mercy is the sauce that makes all other
   mercies relish the sweeter; it sweetens our health, riches, and honour.
   David had a crown of pure gold set upon his head. Psa 21: 3. That which
   David most blessed God for, was not that God had set a crown of gold
   upon his head, but that he had set a crown of mercy upon his head. Who
   crowneth thee with mercies.' Psa 103: 4. What was this crown of mercy?
   You may see in ver 3: Who forgiveth all thine iniquities.' David more
   rejoiced that he was crowned with forgiveness than that he wore a crown
   of pure gold. Now, what is it that makes way for pardon of sin but
   repentance? When David's soul was humbled and broken, the prophet
   Nathan brought him good news. The Lord has put away thy sin.' 2 Sam 12:
   13.

   But my sins are so great, that if I should repent, God would not pardon
   them!

   God will not go from his promise. Return, thou backsliding Israel,
   saith the Lord, and I will not cause mine anger to fall upon you, for I
   am merciful.' Jer 3: 12. If thy sins are as rocks, yet upon thy
   repentance, the sea of God's mercy can drown them. Wash you, make you
   clean.' Isa 1: 16. Wash in the lever of repentance. Come now, and let
   us reason together, saith the Lord: though your sins be as scarlet,
   they shall be as white as snow;' ver 18. Manasseh was a crimson sinner;
   but when he humbled himself greatly, the golden sceptre of mercy was
   held forth. When his head was a fountain to weep for sin, Christ's side
   was a fountain to wash away sin. It is not the greatness of sin, but
   impenitence, that destroys. The Jews, who had a hand in crucifying
   Christ, upon their repentance found the blood they had shed was a
   sovereign balm to heal them. When the prodigal came home to his father,
   he had the robe and the ring put upon him, and his father kissed him.'
   Luke 15: 20, 22. If you break off your sins, God will become a friend
   to you; all that is in God shall be yours; his power shall be yours, to
   help you; his wisdom shall be yours, to counsel you; his Spirit shall
   be yours, to sanctify you; his promises shall be yours, to comfort you;
   his angels shall be yours, to guard you; his mercy shall be yours, to
   save you.

   (4) There is much sweetness in repenting tears. The soul is never more
   enlarged and inwardly delighted than when it can melt kindly for sin.
   Weeping days are festival days. The Hebrew word to repent, nicham,
   signifies consolari, to take comfort.' Your sorrow shall be turned into
   joy.' John 16: 20. Christ turns the water of tears into wine. David,
   who was the great mourner in Israel, was the sweet singer. And the joy
   which a true penitent finds, is a pre-libation and foretaste of the joy
   of paradise. The wicked man's joy turns to sadness: the penitent's
   sadness turns to joy. Though repentance seems at first to be thorny and
   bitter, yet of this thorn a Christian gathers grapes. All which
   considerations may open a vein of godly sorrow in our souls, that we
   may both weep for sin, and turn from it. If ever God restores comfort,
   it is to his mourners. Isa 57: 18. When we have wept, let us look up to
   Christ's blood for pardon. Say, as that holy man, lava, Domine,
   lacrimas meas: Lord, wash my tears in thy blood.' We drop sin with our
   tears, and need Christ's blood to wash them. This repentance must be
   not for a few days only, like the mourning for a friend, which is soon
   over, but it must be the work of our lives; the issue of godly sorrow
   must not be stopped till death. After sin is pardoned, we must repent.
   We run afresh upon the score, we sin daily, therefore must repent
   daily.' Some shed a few tears for sin; and when, like the widow's oil,
   they have run awhile, they cease. Many, if the plaister of repentance
   begin to smart a little, pluck it off; whereas the plaister of
   repentance must still lie on, and not be plucked off till death, when,
   as all other tears, so these of godly sorrow shall be wiped away.

   What shall we do to obtain a penitential frame of heart?

   Seek to God for it. It is his promise to give a heart of flesh' (Ezek
   36:26); and to pour on us a spirit of mourning. Zech 12: 10. Beg God's
   Holy Spirit.' He causeth his wind to blow, and the waters flow.' Psa
   147: 18. When the wind of God's Spirit blows upon us, then the waters
   of repentant tears will flow from us.
     __________________________________________________________________

  4.3 The Word

   The third way to escape the wrath and curse of God, and obtain the
   benefit of redemption by Christ, is the diligent use of ordinances, in
   particular, the word, sacraments, and prayer.'

   I begin with the best of these ordinances.

   The word . . . which effectually worketh in you that believe.' 1 Thess
   2:13.

   What is meant by the word's working effectually?

   The word of God is said to work effectually when it has the good effect
   upon us for which it was appointed by God; when it works powerful
   illumination and thorough reformation. To open their eyes, and turn
   them from the power of Satan unto God.' Acts 26: 18. The opening of
   their eyes denotes illumination; and turning them from Satan to God
   denotes reformation.

   How is the word to be read and heard that it may become effectual to
   salvation.

   This question consists of two branches.

   How may the word be read effectually?

   That we may so read the word that it may conduce effectually to our
   salvation,

   (1) Let us have a reverend esteem of every part of canonical Scripture.
   More to be desired are they than gold.' Psa 19: 10. Value the book of
   God above all other books. It is a golden epistle, indited by the Holy
   Ghost, and sent us from heaven. More particularly to raise our esteem,
   the Scripture is a spiritual glass, to dress our souls by. It shows us
   more than we can see by the light of natural conscience. This may
   discover gross sins; but the glass of the word shows us heart-sins,
   vain thoughts, unbelief, &c. It not only shows us our spots, but washes
   them away. The Scripture is a magazine out of which we may fetch
   spiritual artillery to fight against Satan. When our Saviour was
   tempted by the devil, he fetched armour and weapons from Scripture; it
   is written.' Matt 4: 4, 7. The holy Scripture is a panacea, or
   universal medicine for the soul; it gives a recipe to cure deadness of
   heart, Psa 119: 50; pride, 1 Pet 5: 5; and infidelity, John 3: 36. It
   is a physic garden where we may gather a herb or antidote to expel the
   poison of sin. The leaves of Scripture, like the leaves of the tree of
   life, are for the healing of the nations.' Rev 22: 2. Should not this
   cause a reverential esteem of the word?

   (2) If we would have the written word effectual to our souls, let us
   peruse it with intenseness of mind.' Search the Scriptures.' John 5:
   39. The Greek word, ereunate, signifies to search as for a vein of
   silver.' The Bereans 'searched the Scriptures daily.' Acts 17: 11. The
   word anakrinontes signifies to make a curious and critical search.
   Apollo was mighty in the Scriptures. Acts 18: 24. Some gallop over a
   chapter in haste and get no good by it. If we would have the word
   effectual and saving, we must mind and observe every passage of
   Scripture. That we may be diligent in the perusal of Scripture,
   consider that the word written is norma cultus [the only standard of
   conduct], the rule and platform by which we are to square our lives. It
   contains in it all things needful to salvation; what duties we are to
   do, and what sins we are to avoid. Psa 19: 7. God gave Moses a pattern
   how he would have the tabernacle made; and he was to go exactly
   according to the pattern. Exod 25: 9. The word is the pattern God has
   given us in writing, for modelling our lives. How careful, therefore,
   should we be in pursuing and looking over this pattern!

   As the written word is our pattern, so it will be our judge. The word
   that I have spoken, the same shall judge him at the last day.' John 12:
   48. We read of the opening of the books. Rev 20: 12. One book which God
   will open is the book of the Scripture, and will judge men out of it.
   He will say, Have you lived according to the rule of this word?' The
   word has a double work -- to teach, and to judge.

   (3) If we would have the written word effectual, we must bring faith to
   the reading of it; believe it to be the word of the eternal Jehovah. It
   comes with authority, and shows its commission from heaven. Thus saith
   the Lord.' It is of divine inspiration. 2 Tim 3: 16. The oracles of
   Scripture must be surer to us than a voice from heaven. 2 Pet 1: 18,
   19. Unbelief enervates the virtue of Scripture, and renders it
   ineffectual. First men question the truth of the Scripture, and then
   fall away from it.

   (4) If we would have the written word effectual to salvation, we must
   delight in it as our spiritual cordial. Thy words were found, and I did
   eat them, and thy word was the joy and rejoicing of my heart.' Jer 15:
   16. All true solid comfort is fetched out of the word. The word, as
   Chrysostom says, is a spiritual garden, and the promises are the
   fragrant flowers or spices in this garden. How should we delight to
   walk among these beds of spices! Is it not a comfort, in all dubious
   perplexed cases, to have a counsellor to advise us? Thy testimonies are
   my counsellors.' Psa 119: 24, is it not a comfort to find our evidences
   for heaven? And where should we find them but in the word? 1 Thess 1:
   4, 5. The word written is a sovereign elixir, or comfort, in an hour of
   distress. This is my comfort in my affliction, for thy word has
   quickened me.' Psa 119: 50. It can turn all our water into wine.' How
   should we take a great complacence and delight in the word! They only
   who come to the word with delight, go from it with success.

   (5) If we would have the Scripture effectual and saving, we must be
   sure, when we have read the word, to hide it in our hearts. Thy word
   have I hid in my heart.' Psa 119: 11. The word, locked up in the heart,
   is a preservative against sin. Why did David hide the word in his
   heart? That I might not sin against thee.' As one would carry an
   antidote about him when he comes near a place infected, so David
   carried the word in his heart as a sacred antidote to preserve him from
   the infection of sin. When the sap is hid in the root, it makes the
   branches fruitful; when the seed is hid in the ground, the corn springs
   up; so, when the word is hid in the heart, it brings forth good fruit.

   (6) If we would have the written word effectual, let us labour not only
   to have the light of it in our heads, but its power in our hearts. Let
   us endeavour to have it copied out, and written a second time in our
   hearts. The law of his God is in his heart.' Psa 37: 31. The word says,
   Be clothed with humility.' 1 Pet 5: 5. Let us be low and humble in our
   own eyes. The word calls for sanctity. Let us labour to partake of the
   divine nature, and to have something conceived in us which is of the
   Holy Ghost. 2 Pet 1: 4. When the word is thus copied out into our
   hearts, and we are changed into its similitude, it is made effectual to
   us, and becomes a savour of life.

   (7) When we read the holy Scriptures let us look up to God for a
   blessing. Let us beg the Spirit of wisdom and revelation, that we may
   see the deep things of God.' Eph 1: 17, 1 Cor 2: 10. Pray God that the
   same Spirit that wrote the Scripture would enable us to understand it.
   Pray that God would give us the savour of his knowledge,' that we may
   relish a sweetness in the word we read. 2 Cor 2: 14. David tasted it as
   sweeter than the honeycomb.' Psa 19: 10. Let us pray that God would not
   only give us his word as a rule of holiness, but his grace as a
   principle of holiness

   How may we hear the word that it may be effectual and saving to our
   souls?

   (1) Give great attention to the word preached. Let nothing pass without
   taking special notice of it. All the people were very attentive to hear
   him.' Luke 19: 48. They hung upon his lips. Lydia, a seller of purple,
   which worshipped God, heard us, whose heart the Lord opened, that she
   attended unto the things which were spoken of Paul.' Acts 16: 14. Give
   attention to the word, as to a matter of life and death. For this
   purpose have a care to banish vain impertinent thoughts, which will
   distract yell, and take you off from the work in hand. These fowls will
   be coming to the sacrifice, therefore we must drive them away. Gen 15:
   2. An archer may take a right aim; but if one stand at his elbow, and
   jog him when he is going to shoot, he will not hit the mark. Christians
   may have good aims in hearing; but take heed of impertinent thoughts
   which will jog and hinder you in God's service. Banish dullness. The
   devil gives many hearers a sleepy sop, so that they cannot keep their
   eyes open at a sermon. They eat so much on the Lord's-day that they are
   more fit for the pillow and couch than the temple. Frequent and
   customary sleeping at a sermon shows high contempt and irreverence of
   the ordinance. It gives a bad example to others; it makes your
   sincerity to be called in question; it is the devil's seedtime. While
   men slept, his enemy came and sowed tares.' Matt 13: 25 O shake off
   drowsiness, as Paul shook off the viper! Be serious and attentive in
   hearing the word. For it is not a vain thing for you, it is your life.'
   Deut 32: 47. When people do not mind what God speaks to them in his
   word, God as little minds what they say to him in prayer.

   (2) If you would have the word preached effectual, come with a holy
   appetite to the word. 1 Pet 2: 2. The thirsting soul is the thriving
   soul. In nature one may have an appetite and no digestion; but it is
   not so in religion. Where there is a great appetite for the word, there
   is for the most part good digestion. Come with hungering of soul after
   the word, and desire it, that it may not only please you but profit
   you. Look not at the garnishing of the dish more than at the meat -- at
   eloquence and rhetoric more than solid matter. It argues both a wanton
   palate and surfeited stomach to feed on salads and dainties rather than
   on wholesome food.

   (3) If you would have the preaching of the word effectual, come to it
   with tenderness upon your heart. Because thy heart was tender.' 1 Chron
   22: 5. If we preach to hard hearts, it is like shooting against a
   brazen wall, the word does not enter. It is like setting a gold seal
   upon marble, which takes no impression. O come to the word preached
   with a melting frame of heart! It is the melting wax that receives the
   stamp of the seal; so, when the heart is in a melting frame, it will
   better receive the stamp of the preached word. When Paul's heart was
   melted and broken for sin, he cried, Lord, what wilt thou have me to
   do?' Acts 9: 6. Come not hither with hard hearts. Who can expect a crop
   when the seed is grown UPON stony ground?

   (4) If you would have the word effectual, receive it with meekness.
   Receive with meekness the ingrafted word.' James 1: 21. Meekness is a
   submissive frame of heart to the word -- a willingness to hear the
   counsels and reproofs of the word. Contrary to this meekness is
   fierceness of spirit, whereby men are ready to rise up in rage against
   the sword. Proud men, and guilty, cannot endure to hear of their
   faults. Proud Herod put John in prison. Mark 6: 17. The guilty Jews,
   being told of their crucifying Christ, stoned Stephen. Acts 7: 59. To
   tell men of sin, is to hold a glass to one that is deformed, who cannot
   endure to see his own face. Contrary to meekness is stubbornness of
   heart, whereby men are resolved to hold fast their sins, let the word
   say what it will. We will burn incense unto the queen of heaven.' Jer
   44: 17. O take heed of this! If you would have the word preached
   effectually, lay aside fierceness and stubbornness, receive the word
   with meekness. By meekness the word preached comes to be ingrafted. As
   a good scion that is grafted in a bad stock changes the nature of the
   fruit and makes it taste sweet, so, when the word is ingrafted into the
   soul, it sanctifies it, and makes it bring forth the sweet fruit of
   righteousness.

   (5) Mingle the word preached with faith. The word preached did not
   profit them, not being mixed with faith.' Heb 4: 2. If you leave out
   the chief ingredient in a medicine, it hinders the operation; do not
   leave out the ingredient of faith. Believe the word, and so believe it
   as to apply it. When you hear Christ preached, apply him to yourselves.
   This is to put on the Lord Jesus. Rom 13: 14. When you hear a promise
   spoken, apply it. This is to suck the flower of the promise, and turn
   it to honey.

   (6) Be not only attentive in hearing, but retentive after hearing. We
   ought to give the more earnest heed to the things which we have heard,
   lest at any time we should let them slip;' lest we should let them run
   out as water out of a sieve. Heb 2: 1. If the ground retain not the
   seed sown into it, there can be no good crop. Some have memories like
   leaking vessels: the sermons they hear are presently gone, and there is
   no good done. If meat does not stay and digest in the stomach, it will
   not nourish. Satan labours to steal the word out of the mind. When they
   have heard, Satan comes immediately, and taketh away the word that was
   sown.' Mark 4: 15. Our memories should be like the chest of the ark,
   where the law was put.

   (7) Reduce your hearing to practice. Live on the sermons you hear. I
   have done thy commandments.' Psa 119: 166. Rachel was not content that
   she was beautiful, but her desire was to be fruitful. What is a knowing
   head without a fruitful heart? Filled with the fruits of
   righteousness.' Phil 1: 11. It is obedience that crowns hearing. That
   hearing will never save the soul which does not reform the life.

   (8) Beg of God that he will accompany his word with his presence and
   blessing. The Spirit must make all effectual. Ministers may prescribe
   physic, but it is God's Spirit must make it work. He has his pulpit in
   heaven that converts souls.' Augustine. While Peter yet spake, the Holy
   Ghost fell on all them which heard.' Acts 10: 44. It is said, the
   alchemist can draw oil out of iron. God's Spirit can produce grace in
   the most obdurate heart.

   (9) If you would have the word work effectually to your salvation, make
   it familiar to you. Discourse of what you have heard when you come
   home. My tongue shall speak of thy word.' Psa 119: 172. One reason why
   some people get no more good by what they hear, is that they never
   speak to one another of what they have heard; as if sermons were such
   secrets that they must not be spoken of again; or as if it were a shame
   to speak of matters of salvation. They that feared the Lord spake often
   one to another... and a book of remembrance was written.' Mal 3: 16.

   Use one. Take heed, as you love your souls, that the word become not
   ineffectual to you. There are some to whom the word preached is
   ineffectual. (1) Such as censure the word; who, instead of judging
   themselves, judge the word. (2) Such as live in contradiction to the
   word. Isa 30: 9. (3) Such as are more hardened by the word. They made
   their hearts as an adamant stone.' Zech 7: 12. And when men harden
   their hearts wilfully, God hardens them judicially. Make their ears
   heavy.' Isa 6: 10. The word to these is ineffectual. Would it not be
   sad, if a man's meat did not nourish him; nay, if it should turn to
   poison? O take heed that the word preached be not ineffectual and to no
   purpose!

   Use two. Consider three things: --

   (1) If the word preached does us no good, there is no other way by
   which we can be saved. This is God's institution, and the main engine
   he uses to convert souls. If they hear not Moses and the prophets,
   neither will they be persuaded though one rose from the dead.' Luke 16:
   31. If an angel should come to you out of heaven, and preach of the
   excellency of the glorified estate, and the joys of heaven, and that in
   the most pathetic manner -- if the word preached does not persuade,
   neither would you be wrought upon by such an oration from heaven. If a
   damned spirit should come from hell, and preach to you in flames, and
   tell you what a place hell is, and roar out the torments of the damned,
   it might make you tremble, but it would not convert, if the preaching
   of the word will not do it.

   (2) To come to the word, and not be savingly wrought upon, is that
   which the devil is pleased with. He cares not though you hear
   frequently, if it be not effectually; he is not an enemy to hearing,
   but profiting. Though the minister holds out the breasts of the
   ordinances to you, he cares not as long as you do not suck the sincere
   milk of the word. The devil cares not how many sermon-pills you take,
   so long as they do not work upon your conscience.

   (3) If the word preached be not effectual to men's conversion, it will
   be effectual to their condemnation. The word will be effectual one way
   or other; if it does not make your hearts better, it will make your
   chains heavier. We pity those who have not the word preached, but it
   will be worse with those who are not sanctified by it. Dreadful is
   their case who go loaded with sermons to hell. But I will conclude with
   the apostle, I am persuaded better things of you, and things that
   accompany salvation.' Heb 6: 9.
     __________________________________________________________________

  4.4 Baptism

   Go ye, therefore, and teach all nations, baptising them in the name of
   the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost; teaching them,' &c.
   Matt 28: 19.

   I. The way whereby Christ communicates to us the benefits of
   redemptions, is, in the use of the sacraments.

   What are the sacraments in general?

   They are visible signs of invisible grace.

   Is not the word of God sufficient to salvation? What need then is there
   of sacraments?

   We must not be wise above what is written. It is God's will that his
   church should have sacraments; and it is God's goodness thus to
   condescend to weak capacities. Except ye see signs, ye will not
   believe.' John 4: 48. To strengthen our faith, God confirms the
   covenant of grace, not only by promises but by sacramental signs.

   What are the sacraments of the New Testament?

   Two: Baptism and the Lord's Supper.

   Are there no more? The Papists tell us of five more, viz.,
   confirmation, penance, matrimony, orders, and the extreme unction.

   (1) There were but two sacraments under the law, therefore there are no
   more now. 1 Cor 10: 2, 3, 4.

   (2) These two sacraments are sufficient; the one signifying our
   entrance into Christ, and the other, our growth and perseverance in
   him.

   II. The first sacrament is baptism. Go ye, therefore, and teach all
   nations, baptising them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and
   of the Holy Ghost; teaching them,' &c. Go, teach all nations;' the
   Greek word is Make disciples of all nations.' If it be asked, how
   should we make them disciples? It follows, Baptising them and teaching
   them.' In a heathen nation, first teach, and then baptise them; but in
   a Christian church, first baptise, and then teach them.

   What is baptism?

   In general, it is a matriculation, or visible admission of children
   into the congregation of Christ's flock. More particularly, Baptism is
   a sacrament, wherein the washing or sprinkling with water, in the name
   of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, does signify and seal our
   ingrafting into Christ, and partaking of the benefits of the covenant
   of grace, and our engagement to be the Lord's.'

   What is meant by the parent when he presents his child to be baptised?

   The parent, in presenting the child to be baptised, (1) Makes a public
   acknowledgement of original sin; that the soul of his child is
   polluted, therefore needs washing from sin by Christ's blood and
   Spirit; both which washings are signified by the sprinkling of water in
   baptism. (2) The parent by bringing his child to be baptised, solemnly
   devotes it to the Lord, and enrols it in God's family; and truly it is
   a great satisfaction to a religious parent to have given up his child
   to the Lord in baptism. How can a parent look with comfort on that
   child who was never dedicated to God?

   What is the benefit of baptism?

   The party baptised has, (1) An entrance into the visible body of the
   church. (2) He has a right sealed to the ordinances, which is a
   privilege full of glory. Rom 9: 4. (3) The child baptised is under a
   more special providential care of Christ, who appoints the tutelage of
   angels to be the infant's life-guard.

   Is this all the benefit?

   No! To such as belong to the election, baptism is a seal of the
   righteousness of faith,' a laver of regeneration, and a badge of
   adoption. Rom 4: 11.

   How does it appear that children have a right to baptism?

   Children are parties in the covenant of grace. The covenant was made
   with them. I will establish my covenant between me and thee, and thy
   seed after thee, for an everlasting covenant, to be a God unto thee,
   and to thy seed after thee.' Gen 17: 7. The promise is to you and to
   your children.' Acts 2: 39. The covenant of grace may be considered
   either, (1) More strictly, as an absolute promise to give saving grace;
   and so none but the elect are in covenant with God. Or, (2) More
   largely, as a covenant containing in it many outward glorious
   privileges, in which respects the children of believers do belong to
   the covenant of grace. The promise is to you and to your seed. The
   infant seed of believers may as well lay a claim to the covenant of
   grace as their parents; and having a right to the covenant, they cannot
   justly be denied baptism, which is its seal. It is certain the children
   of believers were once visibly in covenant with God, and received the
   seal of their admission into the church; where now do we find this
   covenant interest, or church membership of infants, repealed or made
   void? Certainly Jesus Christ did not come to put believers and their
   children into a worse condition than they were in before. If the
   children of believers should not be baptised, they are in worse
   condition now than they were in before Christ's coming.

   [1] Objections. The Scripture is silent herein and does not mention
   infant baptism.

   Though the word infant baptism is not in Scripture, yet the thing is.
   Mention is not made in Scripture of woman's receiving the sacrament;
   but who doubts but the command, Take, eat, this is my body,' concerns
   them? Does not their faith need strengthening as well as others? So the
   word Trinity is not to be found in Scripture, but there is that which
   is equivalent to it. There are Three that bear record in heaven, the
   Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost; and these Three are one.' 1 John
   5: 7. So, though the word infant baptism is not mentioned in Scripture,
   the practice of baptising infants may be drawn from Scripture by
   undeniable consequence.

   How is that proved?

   The Scripture mentions whole families baptised; as the household of
   Lydia, Crispus, and the jailer. He was baptised, he and all his.' Acts
   16: 33. Wherein we must rationally imagine there were some little
   children. If it be said, there is no mention here made of children; I
   answer, neither are servants named; and yet it cannot be supposed but
   that, in so great a family, there were some servants.

   But infants are not capable of the end of baptism; for baptism
   signifies the washing away of sin by the blood of Christ. Infants
   cannot understand this; therefore what benefit can baptism be to them?

   Neither could the child that was to be circumcised understand
   circumcision; yet the ordinance of circumcision was not to be omitted
   or deferred. Though an infant understand not the meaning of baptism it
   may partake of the blessing of baptism. The little children that Christ
   took in his arms, understood not Christ's meaning, but they had
   Christ's blessing. He put his hands upon them and blessed them.' Mark
   10: 16.

   But what benefit can the child have of baptism if it understand not the
   nature of baptism?

   It may have a right to the promise sealed up, which it shall have an
   actual interest in when it comes to have faith. A legacy may be of use
   to the child in the cradle; though it now understand not the legacy,
   yet when it is grown up to years, it is fully possessed of it. But it
   may be further objected: --

   The party to be baptised is to be engaged to God; but how can the child
   enter into such an engagement?

   The parents can engage for it, which God is pleased to accept as
   equivalent to the child's personal engagement.

   If baptism comes in the room of circumcisions, and the males only were
   circumcised, what warrant is there for baptising females? Gen 17: 10.

   Females were included, and were virtually circumcised in the males.
   What is done to the head is done to the body; the man being the head of
   the woman. 1 Cor 11: 3. What was done to the male sex was
   interpretatively done to the female.

   [2] Having answered these objections, I come now to prove by argument,
   infant baptism.

   (1) If children during their infancy are capable of grace, they are
   capable of baptism; but children in their infancy are capable of grace,
   therefore they are capable of baptism. I prove the minor, that they are
   capable of grace, thus: if children in their infancy may be saved, then
   they are capable of grace; but children in their infancy may be saved;
   which is thus proved: that if the kingdom of heaven belongs to them,
   they may be saved; but the kingdom of heaven may belong to them, as it
   is clear from, Of such is the kingdom of God' (Mark 10: 14); who then
   can forbid that the seal of baptism should be applied to them?

   (2) If infants may be among the number of God's servants, there is no
   reason why they should be shut out of God's family; but infants may be
   in the number of God's servants, because God calls them his servants.
   He shall depart from thee, and his children with him, for they are my
   servants.' Lev 25: 41. Therefore children in their infancy, being God's
   servants, why should they not have baptism, which is the tessera, the
   mark or seal which God sets upon his servants?

   (3) But now are they (your children) holy.' 1 Cor 7: 14. Children are
   not called holy, as if they were free from original sin; but in the
   judgement of charity they are to be esteemed holy, and true members of
   the church of God, because their parents are believers. Hence that
   excellent divine, Mr Hildersam, says, that the children of the faithful
   as soon as they are born, have a covenant holiness, and so a right and
   title to baptism, which is the token of the covenant.'

   (4) From the opinion of the fathers and the practice of the church. The
   ancient fathers were strong asserters of infant baptism, as Irenaeus,
   Basil, Lactantius, Cyprian, and Augustine. It was the practice of the
   Greek church to baptise her infants. Erasmus says that infant baptism
   has been used in the church of God for above fourteen hundred years.
   And Augustine, in his book against Pelagius, affirms that it has been
   the custom of the church in all ages to baptise infants. Yea, it was an
   apostolic practice. Paul affirms that he baptised the whole house of
   Stephanus. 1 Cor 1: 16.

   Having seen Scripture arguments for infant baptism, let us consider
   whether the practice of those who delay the baptising of children till
   riper years, be warrantable. For my part, I cannot gather it from
   Scripture. Though we read of adult persons, and grown up to years of
   discretion, in the apostles' times, being baptised, yet they were such
   as were converted from heathenish idolatry to the true orthodox faith;
   but that in a Christian church the children of believers should be kept
   unbaptised for several years, I know neither precept nor example for it
   in Scripture, but it is wholly apocryphal. The baptising of persons,
   grown up to maturity, we may argue against ab effectu, from the ill
   consequence of it. They dip the persons they baptise over head and ears
   in cold water, and naked; which, as it is indecent, so it is dangerous,
   and has often been the occasion of chronic disease, yea, and of death
   itself; and so is a plain breach of the sixth commandment. How far God
   has given up many persons, who are for deferring baptism, to other vile
   opinions and vicious practices, is evident, if we consult history;
   especially if we read the doings of the Anabaptists in Germany.

   Use one. See the riches of God's goodness, who will not only be the God
   of believers, but takes their seed into covenant with them. I will
   establish my covenant between me and thee, and thy seed after thee, to
   be a God unto thee and to thy seed.' Gen 17: 7. A father counts it a
   great privilege, not only to have his own name, but his child's name
   put in a will.

   Use two. Those parents are to be blamed who forbid little children to
   be brought to Christ; and withhold from them this ordinance. By denying
   their infants baptism, they exclude them from membership in the visible
   church, so that their infants are sucking pagans. Such as deny their
   children baptism, make God's institutions under the law more full of
   kindness and grace to children than they are under the gospel; which,
   how strange a paradox it is, I leave you to judge.

   Use three. For exhortation. (1) Let us who are baptised, labour to find
   the blessed fruits of it in our own souls; not only to have the signs
   of the covenant, but the grace of the covenant. Many glory in their
   baptism. The Jews gloried in their circumcision, because of their royal
   privileges; to them belonged the adoption, and the glory, and the
   covenants. Rom 9: 4. But many of them were a shame and reproach to
   their circumcision. For the name of God is blasphemed among the
   Gentiles through you.' Rom 2: 24. The scandalous Jews, though
   circumcised, were, in God's account, as heathens. Are ye not as
   children of the Ethiopians to me? saith the Lord.' Amos 9: 7. Alas!
   what is it to have the name of Christ, and want his image? What is
   baptism of water without the baptism of the Spirit? Many baptised
   Christians are no better than heathens. O let us labour to find the
   fruits of baptism, that Christ is formed in us (Gal 4: 19); that our
   nature is changed; that we are made holy and heavenly. This is to be
   baptised into Jesus. Rom 6: 3. Such as live unsuitable to their
   baptism, may go with baptismal-water on their faces, and sacramental
   bread in their mouths, to hell.

   (2) Let us labour to make a right use of our baptism. Let us use it as
   a shield against temptations. Satan, I have given up myself to God by a
   sacred vow in baptism; I am not my own, I am Christ's; therefore I
   cannot yield to thy temptations, for I should break my oath of
   allegiance which I made to God in baptism. Luther tells us of a pious
   woman, who, when the devil tempted her to sin, answered, Satan,
   baptizata sum, I am baptised;' and so beat back the tempter.

   Let us use it as a spur to holiness. By remembering our baptism, let us
   be stirred up to make good our baptismal engagements; renouncing the
   world, flesh, and devil, let us devote ourselves to God and his
   service. To be baptised into the name of the Father, Son, and Holy
   Ghost, implies a solemn dedication of ourselves to the service of all
   the Three Persons in the Trinity. It is not enough that our parents
   dedicate us to God in baptism, but we must dedicate ourselves to him;
   this is called living to the Lord. Rom 14: 8. Our life should be spent
   in worshipping God, in loving God, in exalting God; we should walk as
   becomes the gospel. Phil 1: 27. We should shine as stars in the world,
   and live as earthly angels.

   Let us use it as an argument to courage. We should be ready to confess
   that Holy Trinity, into whose name we were baptised. With the
   conversion of the heart must go the confession of the tongue. Whosoever
   shall confess me before men, him shall the Son of man also confess
   before the angels of God.' Luke 12: 8. Peter openly confessed Christ
   crucified. Acts 4: 10. Cyprian, a man of a brave spirit, was like a
   rock, whom no waves could shake; like an adamant, whom no sword could
   cut. He confessed Christ before the pro-consul, and suffered himself to
   be proscribed; yea, chose death rather than betray the truths of
   Christ. He that dare not confess the Holy Trinity, shames his baptism,
   and God will be ashamed to own him at the day of judgement.

   Use four. See the fearfulness of the sin of apostasy! It is renouncing
   our baptism. It is damnable perjury to go away from God after a solemn
   vow. Demas has forsaken me.' 2 Tim 4: 10. He turned renegado, and
   afterwards became a priest in an idol-temple, says Dorotheus. Julia the
   apostate, Gregory Nazianzen observes, bathed himself in the blood of
   beasts offered in sacrifice to heathen gods; and so, as much as in him
   lay, washed off his former baptism. The case of such as fall away after
   baptism is dreadful. If any man draw back.' Heb 10: 38. The Greek word
   to draw back, alludes to a soldier that steals away from his colours;
   so, if any man steal away from Christ, and run over to the devil's
   side, my soul shall have no pleasure in him;' that is, I will be
   severely avenged on him; I will make my arrows drunk with his blood. If
   all the plagues in the Bible can make that man miserable, he shall be
   so.
     __________________________________________________________________

  4.5 The Lord's Supper

   And as they did eat, Jesus took bread,' &c. Mark 14: 22.

   Having spoken to the sacrament of baptism, I come now to the sacrament
   of the Lord's Supper. The Lord's Supper is the most spiritual and
   sweetest ordinance that ever was instituted. Here we have to do more
   immediately with the person of Christ. In prayer, we draw nigh to God;
   in the sacrament, we become one with him. In prayer, we look up to
   Christ; in the sacrament, by faith, we touch him. In the word preached,
   we hear Christ's voice; in the sacrament, we feed on him.

   What names and titles in Scripture are given to the sacrament?

   It is called, Mensa Domini, The Lord's table.' 1 Cor 10: 21. The
   Papists call it an altar, not a table. The reason is, because they turn
   the sacrament into a sacrifice, and pretend to offer up Christ
   corporally in the mass. It being the Lord's table, shows with what
   reverence and solemn devotion we should approach these holy mysteries.
   The Lord takes notice of the frame of our hearts when we come to his
   table. The king came in to see the guests.' Matt 22: 11. We dress
   ourselves when we come to the table of some great monarch; so, when we
   are going to the table of the Lord, we should dress ourselves by holy
   meditation and heart consideration. Many think it is enough to come to
   the sacrament, but mind not whether they come in due order.' 1 Chron
   15: 13. Perhaps they had scarce a serious thought before where they
   were going: all their dressing was by the glass, not by the Bible.
   Chrysostom calls it, The dreadful table of the Lord:' and so it is to
   such as come unworthily. The sacrament is called Coena Domini, the
   Lord's supper -- to import, it is a spiritual feast. 1 Cor 11: 20. It
   is a royal feast. God is in this cheer: Christ, in both natures, God
   and man, is the matter of this supper. It is called a communion.' The
   bread which we break, is it not the communion of the body of Christ?' 1
   Cor 10: 16. The sacrament being called a communion, shows: --

   (1) That this ordinance is for believers only, because none else can
   have communion with Christ in these holy mysteries. Communio fundatur
   in unione [Communion is based upon union]. Faith only gives us union
   with Christ, and by virtue of this we have communion with him in his
   body and blood. None but the spouse communicates with her husband; a
   stranger may drink of his cup, but she only has his heart, and
   communicates with him in a conjugal manner; so strangers may drink of
   the cup, but believers only drink of Christ's blood, and have communion
   with him.

   (2) The sacrament being a communion, shows that it is symbolum amoris
   [a symbol of love], a bond of that unity and charity which should be
   among Christians. We being many are one body.' 1 Cor 10: 17. As many
   grains make one bread, so many Christians are one body. A sacrament is
   a love-feast. The primitive Christians, as Justin Martyr notes, had
   their holy salutations at the blessed supper, in token of that dearness
   of affection which they had to each other. It is a communion, therefore
   -- there must be love and union. The Israelites did eat the Passover
   with bitter herbs; so must we eat the sacrament with bitter herbs of
   repentance, but not with bitter hearts of wrath and malice. The hearts
   of the communicants should be knit together with the bond of love. Thou
   braggest of thy faith' says Augustine, but show me thy faith by thy
   love to the saints.' For, as in the sun, light and heat are
   inseparable, so faith and love are twisted together inseparably. Where
   there are divisions, the Lord's supper is not properly a communion but
   a disunion.

   What is the Lord's supper?

   It is a visible sermon, wherein Christ crucified is set before us; or,
   it is a sacrament of the New Testament, wherein by receiving the holy
   elements of bread and wine, our communion with Christ is signified and
   sealed up to us; or it is a sacrament divinely instituted, wherein by
   giving and receiving bread and wine, Christ's death is showed forth,
   and the worthy receivers by faith are made partakers of his body and
   blood, and all the benefits flowing from thence.

   For further explaining the nature of the Lord's supper, I shall refer
   to its institution.

   Jesus took bread.' Here is the master of the feast, or the institutor
   of the sacrament. The Lord Jesus took bread. He only is fit to
   institute a sacrament who is able to give virtue and blessing to it.

   He took bread.' His taking the bread was one part of his consecration
   of the elements, and setting them apart for a holy use. As Christ
   consecrated the elements, so we must labour to have our hearts
   consecrated before we receive these holy mysteries in the Lord's
   supper. How unseemly is it to see any come to these holy elements,
   having hearts leavened with pride, covetousness, or envy? These, with
   Judas, receive the devil in the sop, and are no better than crucifiers
   of the Lord of glory.

   And blessed it.' This is another part of the consecration of the
   element. Christ blessed it. He blesseth and it shall be blessed. He
   looked up to heaven for a benediction upon this newly-founded
   ordinance.

   And brake it.' The bread broken, and the wine poured out, signify to us
   the agony and ignominy of Christ's sufferings, the rending of Christ's
   body on the cross, and the effusion of blood which was distilled from
   his blessed side.

   And gave it to them.' Christ's giving the bread, denotes giving himself
   and all his benefits to us freely. Though he was sold, yet he was
   given. Judas sold Christ, but Christ gave himself to us.

   He gave it to them;' that is, to the disciples. This is children's
   bread. Christ does not cast these pearls before swine. Whether Judas
   was present at the supper is controverted. I incline to think he was
   not, for Christ said to the disciples, This is my blood, which is shed
   for you.' Luke 22: 20. He knew his blood was never shed effectually and
   intentionally for Judas. In eating the passover, he gave Judas a sop,
   which was a bit of unleavened bread dipped in a sauce made with bitter
   herbs; Judas having received the sop, went out immediately. John 13:
   30. Suppose Judas was there, he received the elements, but not the
   blessing.

   Take, eat.' This expression of eating denotes four things; (1) The near
   mystic union between Christ and his saints. As the meat which is eaten
   incorporates with the body, and becomes one with it, so, by eating
   Christ's flesh, and drinking his blood spiritually, we partake of his
   merits and graces, and are mystically one with them.' I in them.' John
   17: 23. (2) Take, eat.' Eating shows the infinite delight the believing
   soul has in Christ. Eating is grateful and pleasing to the palate; so
   feeding on Christ by a lively faith is delicious. Nullus animae suavior
   cibus [The soul knows no sweeter food]. Lactantius. No such sweet
   feeding as on Christ crucified. This is a feast of fat things, and
   wines on the lees well refined.' (3) Take, eat.' Eating denotes
   nourishment. As meat is delicious to the palate, so it is nourishing to
   the body; so eating Christ's flesh and drinking his blood, is nutritive
   to the soul. The new creature is nourished at the table of the Lord to
   everlasting life. Whose eateth my flesh, and drinketh my blood, has
   eternal life.' John 6: 54. (4) Take, eat,' shows the wisdom of God, who
   restores us by the same means by which we fell. We fell by taking and
   eating the forbidden fruit, and we are recovering again by taking and
   eating Christ's flesh. We died by eating the tree of knowledge, and we
   live by eating the tree of life.

   This is my body.' These words, Hoc est corpus meum, have been much
   controverted between us and the Papists. This is my body;' that is, by
   a metonymy; it is a sign and figure of my body. The Papists hold
   transsubstantiation -- that the bread, after consecration, is turned
   into the very substance of Christ's body. We say, we receive Christ's
   body spiritually; they say, they receive Christ's body carnally; which
   is contrary to Scripture. Scripture affirms, that the heavens must
   receive Christ's body until the times of the restitution of all
   things.' Acts 3: 21. Christ's body cannot be at the same time in heaven
   and in the host. Aquinas says, It is not possible by any miracle, that
   a body should be locally in two places at once.' Besides, it is absurd
   to imagine that the bread in the sacrament should be turned into
   Christ's flesh, and that his body which was hung before, should be made
   again of bread. So that, This is my body,' is, as if Christ had said,
   This is a sign and representation of my body.'

   And he took the cup.' The cup is put by a metonymy of the subject for
   the adjunct, for the wine in the cup. It signifies the blood of Christ
   shed for our sins. The taking of the cup denotes the redundancy of
   merit in Christ, and the fulness of our redemption by him. He not only
   took the bread, but the cup.

   And when he had given thanks.' Christ gave thanks that God had given
   these elements of bread and wine to be signs and seals of man's
   redemption by Christ. Christ's giving thanks shows his philanthropy, or
   love to mankind, who did so rejoice and bless God that lost man was now
   in a way of recovery, and that he should be raised higher in Christ
   than ever he was in innocence.

   He gave the cup to them.' Why then dare any withhold the cup? This is
   to pollute and curtail the ordinance, and alter it from its primitive
   institution. Christ and his apostles administered the sacrament in both
   kinds, the bread and the cup. 1 Cor 11: 24, 25. The cup was received in
   the ancient church for the space of 1400 years, as is confessed by two
   Popish councils. Christ says expressly, Drink ye all of this.' He does
   not say, Eat ye all of this;' but Drink ye all;' as foreseeing the
   sacrilegious impiety of the church of Rome, in keeping back the cup
   from the people. The Popish council of Constance speaks plainly but
   impudently, That although Christ instituted and administered the
   sacrament in both kinds, the bread and the wine, yet the authority of
   the holy canons, and the customs of the mother church, think good to
   deny the cup to the laity.' Thus, as the Popish priests make Christ but
   half a Saviour, so they administer to the people but half a sacrament.
   The sacrament is Christ's last will and testament This is my blood of
   the New Testament.' Now, to alter or take away any thing from a man's
   will and testament, is great impiety. What is it to alter and mangle
   Christ's last will and testament? Sure it is a high affront to Christ.

   What are the ends of the Lord's supper?

   (1) It is an ordinance appointed to confirm our faith. Except ye see
   signs ye will not believe.' John 4: 48. Christ sets the elements before
   us, that by these signs our faith may be strengthened. As faith comes
   by hearing, so it is confirmed by seeing Christ crucified. The
   sacrament is not only a sign to represent Christ, but a seal to confirm
   our interest in him.

   But the Spirit confirms faith, therefore not the sacrament.

   This is not good logic. The Spirit confirms faith, therefore not the
   sacrament, is, as if one should say, God feeds our bodies, therefore
   bread does not feed us;' whereas, God feeds us by bread, so the Spirit
   confirms our faith by the use of the sacrament.

   (2) The end of the sacrament is to keep up the memory of Christ's
   death.' This do ye in remembrance of me.' 1 Cor 11: 25. If a friend
   gives us a ring at his death, we wear it to keep up the memory of our
   friend; much more ought we to keep the memorial of Christ's death in
   the sacrament. His death lays a foundation for all the magnificent
   blessings which we receive from him. The covenant of grace was agreed
   on in heaven, but sealed upon the cross. Christ has sealed all the
   articles of peace in his blood. Remission of sin flows from Christ's
   death. This is my blood of the New Testament, which is shed for many,
   for the remission of sins.' Matt 26: 28. Consecration, or making us
   holy, is the fruit of Christ's death. How much more shall the blood of
   Christ purge your conscience?' Heb 9: 14. Christ's intercession is made
   available to us by virtue of his death. He could not have been admitted
   an advocate if he had not been first a sacrifice. Our entering into
   heaven is the fruit of his blood. Heb 10: 19. He could not have
   prepared mansions for us, if he had not first purchased them by his
   death: so that we have great cause to commemorate his death in the
   sacrament.

   In what manner are we to remember the Lord's death in the sacrament?

   It is not only an historical remembrance of Christ's death and passion.
   Judas remembered his death and betrayed him; and Pilate remembered his
   death and crucified him: but our remembering his death in the sacrament
   must be, [1] A mournful remembrance. We should not be able to look on
   Christ crucified with dry eyes. They shall look on him whom they have
   pierced, and mourn over him.' Zech 12: 10. O Christian, when thou
   lookest on Christ in the sacrament, remember how often thou hast
   crucified him! The Jews did it but once, thou often. Every oath is a
   nail with which thou piercest his hands; every unjust sinful action is
   a spear with which thou woundest his heart. Oh, remember Christ with
   sorrow, to think thou shouldst make his wounds bleed afresh! [2] It
   must be a joyful remembrance. Abraham rejoiced to see my day.' John 8:
   56. When a Christian sees a sacrament-day approaching, he should
   rejoice. This ordinance of the supper is an earnest of heaven; it is
   the glass in which we see him whom our souls love, it is the chariot by
   which we are carried up to Christ. When Jacob saw the wagons and the
   chariots which were to carry him to his son Joseph, his spirit revived.
   Gen 45: 27. God has appointed the sacrament on purpose to cheer and
   revive a sad heart. When we look on our sins we have cause to mourn;
   but when we see Christ's blood shed for our sins we rejoice. In the
   sacrament our wants are supplied, our strength is renewed; there we
   meet with Christ, and does not this call for joy? A woman that has been
   long debarred from the society of her husband is glad of his presence.
   At the sacrament the believing spouse meets with Christ; he saith to
   her, All I have is thine; my love is thine, to pity thee; my mercy is
   thine, to save thee.' How can we think in the sacrament on Christ's
   blood shed, and not rejoice? Sanguis Christi clavis paradisi; Christ's
   blood is the key which opens heaven,' else we had been all shut out.

   (3) The end of the sacrament is to work in us an endeared love to
   Christ. When Christ bleeds for us, well may we say, Behold how he loved
   us!' Who can see Christ die and not be sick of love?' That is a heart
   of stone which Christ's love will not melt.

   (4) The end of the sacrament is the mortifying of corruption. To see
   Christ crucified for us is a means to crucify sin in us. His death,
   like the water of jealousy, makes the thigh of sin to rot. Numb 5: 27.
   How can a wife endure to see the spear which killed her husband? How
   can we endure those sins which made Christ veil his glory and lose his
   blood? When the people of Rome saw Caesar's bloody robe, they were
   incensed against them that slew him. Sin has rent the white robe of
   Christ's flesh and dyed it of a crimson colour. The thoughts of this
   should make us seek to be avenged on our sins.

   (5) Another end is the augmentation and increase of all the graces,
   hope, zeal, and patience. The word preached begets grace, the Lord's
   supper nourishes it. The body by feeding increases strength, so the
   soul by feeding on Christ sacramentally. Cum defecerit virtus mea
   calicem salutarem accipiam. Bernard. When my spiritual strength begins
   to fail, I know a remedy,' says Bernard, I will go to the table of the
   Lord; there will I drink and recover my decayed strength.' There is a
   difference between dead stones and living plants. The wicked, who are
   stones, receive no spiritual increase; but the godly, who are plants of
   righteousness, being watered with Christ's blood, grow more fruitful in
   grace.

   Why are we to receive this holy supper?

   (1) Because it is an incumbent duty. Take, eat.' And observe, it is a
   command of love. If Christ had commanded us some great matter, would we
   not have done it? If the prophet had bid thee do some great thing,
   wouldest thou not have done it?' 2 Kings 5: 13. If Christ had enjoined
   us to have given him thousands of rams, or to have parted with the
   fruit of our bodies, would we not have done it? Much more when he only
   says, Take,' and Eat.' Let my broken body feed you, let my blood poured
   out save you. Take,' and Eat.' This is a command of love, and shall we
   not readily obey?

   (2) We are to celebrate the Lord's supper, because it is provoking
   Christ to stay away. Wisdom has furnished her table.' Prov 9: 2. So
   Christ has furnished his table, set bread and wine (representing his
   body and blood) before his guests, and when they wilfully turn their
   backs upon the ordinance, he looks upon it as slighting his love, and
   it makes the fury rise up in his face. For I say unto you, that none of
   those men which were bidden shall taste of my supper.' Luke 14: 24. I
   will shut them out of my kingdom, I will provide them a black banquet,
   where weeping shall be the first course, and gnashing of teeth the
   second.

   Should the Lord's supper be often administered?

   Yes. As often as ye eat this bread.' 1 Cor 11: 26. The ordinance is not
   to be celebrated once in a year, or once only in our lives, but often.
   A Christian's own necessities may make him come often hither. His
   corruptions are strong, therefore he had need come often hither for an
   antidote to expel the poison of sin. His graces are weak. Grace is like
   a lamp, which if it be not often fed with oil is apt to go out. Rev 3:
   2. How then do they sin against God who come but very seldom to this
   ordinance! Can they thrive who for a long time forbear their food?
   Others there are who wholly forbear, which is a great contempt offered
   to Christ's ordinance. They tacitly say, Let Christ keep his feast to
   himself. What a cross-grained piece is a man! He will eat when he
   should not, and he will not eat when he should. When God says, Eat not
   of this forbidden fruit;' then he will be sure to eat: when God says,
   Eat of this bread, and drink of this cup;' then he refuses to eat.

   Are all to come promiscuously to this holy ordinance?

   No; for that were to make the Lord's table an ordinary. Christ forbids
   to cast pearls before swine.' Matt 7: 6. The sacramental bread is
   children's bread, and it is not to be cast to the profane. As, at the
   giving of the law God set bounds about the mount that none might touch
   it, so God's table should be guarded, that the profane should not come
   near. Exod 19: 12. In primitive times, after sermon was done, and the
   Lord's supper was about to be celebrated, an officer stood up and
   cried, Holy things for holy men;' and then several of the congregation
   departed. I would have my hand cut off,' says Chrysostom, rather than I
   would give Christ's body and blood to the profane.' The wicked do not
   eat Christ's flesh, but tear it; they do not drink his blood, but spill
   it. These holy mysteries in the sacraments are tremenda hysteria,
   mysteries that the soul is to tremble at. Sinners defile the holy
   things of God, they poison the sacramental cup. We read that the wicked
   are to be set at Christ's feet, not at his table. Psa 110: 1.

   That we may receive the supper of the Lord worthily, and that it may
   become efficacious: --

   I. We must solemnly prepare ourselves before we come. We must not rush
   upon the ordinance rudely and irreverently, but come in due order.
   There was a great deal of preparation for the passover, and the
   sacrament comes in the room of it. 2 Chron 30: 18, 19. This solemn
   preparation for the ordinance consists: --

   [1] In examining ourselves. [2] In dressing our souls before we come,
   which is by washing in the water of repentance and by exciting the
   habit of grace into exercise. [3] In begging a blessing upon the
   ordinance.

   [1] Solemn preparation for the sacrament consists in self-examination.
   But let a man examine himself, and so let him eat.' 1 Cor 11: 28. It is
   not only a counsel, but a charge: Let him examine himself. As if a king
   should say, Let it be enacted.' These elements in the supper having
   been consecrated by Jesus Christ to a high mystery, represent his body
   and blood; therefore there must be preparation; and if preparation,
   there must be first self-examination. Let us be serious in examining
   ourselves, as our salvation depends upon it. We are curious in
   examining other things; we will not take gold till we examine it by the
   touchstone; we will not take land before we examine the title; and
   shall we not be as exact and curious in examining the state of our
   souls?

   What is required for this self-examination?

   There must be a solemn retirement of the soul. We must set ourselves
   apart, and retire for some time from all secular employment, that we
   may be more serious in the work. There is no casting up accounts in a
   crowd; nor can we examine ourselves when we are in a crowd of worldly
   business. We read, that a man who was in a journey might not come to
   the Passover, because his mind was full of secular cares, and his
   thoughts were taken up about his journey. Num 9: 13. When we are upon
   self-examining work, we had not need to be in a hurry, or have any
   distracting thoughts, but to retire and lock ourselves up in our
   closets, that we may be more intent upon the work.

   What is self-examination?

   It is the setting up a court of conscience and keeping a register there
   that by a strict scrutiny a man may see how matters stand between Got
   and his soul. It is a spiritual inquisition, a heart-anatomy, whereby a
   man takes his heart in pieces, as a watch, and sees what is defective
   therein. It is a dialogue with one's self I commune with my own heart.'
   Psa 77: 6. David called himself to account, and put interrogatories to
   his own heart. Self-examination is a critical enquiry or search. As the
   woman in the parable lighted a candle and searched for her lost groat,
   so conscience is the candle of the Lord. Luke 15: 8. Search with this
   candle what thou can't find wrought by the Spirit in thee.

   What is the rule by which we are to examine ourselves?

   The rule or measure by which we must examine ourselves is the Holy
   Scripture. We must not make fancy, or the good opinion which others
   have of us, a rule to judge of ourselves. As the goldsmith brings his
   gold to the touchstone, so we must bring our hearts to a Scripture
   touchstone. To the law and to the testimony.' Isa 8: 20. What says the
   word? Are we divorced from sin? Are we renewed by the Spirit? Let the
   word decide whether we are fit communicants or not. We judge of colours
   by the sun, so we must judge of the state of our souls by the sunlight
   of Scripture.

   What are the principal reasons for self-examination before we approach
   the Lord's supper?

   (1) It is a duty imposed: Let him examine himself.' The passover was
   not to be eaten raw. Exod 12: 9. To come to such an ordinance slightly,
   without examination, is to come in an undue manner, and is like eating
   the passover raw.

   (2) We must examine ourselves before we come, because it is not only a
   duty imposed, but opposed. There is nothing to which the heart is
   naturally more averse than self-examination. We may know that duty to
   be good which the heart opposes. But why does the heart so oppose it?
   Because it crosses the tide of corrupt nature, and is contrary to flesh
   and blood. The heart is guilty; and does a guilty person love to be
   examined? The heart opposes it; therefore the rather set upon it; for
   that duty is good which the heart opposes.

   (3) Because self-examination is a needful work. Without it, a man can
   never tell how it is with him, whether he has grace or not; and this
   must needs be very uncomfortable. He knows not, if he should die
   presently what will become of him, to what coast he shall sail, whether
   to hell or heaven; as Socrates said, I am about to die, and the gods
   know whether I shall be happy or miserable.' How needful, therefore, is
   self-examination; that a man by search may know the true state of his
   soul, and how it will go with him to eternity!

   Self-examination is needful, with respect to the excellence of the
   sacrament. Let him eat de illo pane, of that bread,' that excellent
   bread, that consecrated bread, that bread which is not only the bread
   of the Lord, but the bread the Lord. 1 Cor 11: 28. Let him drink de
   illo poculo, of that cup;' that precious cup, which is perfumed and
   spiced with Christ's love; that cup which holds the blood of God
   sacramentally. Cleopatra put a jewel in a cup which contained the price
   of a kingdom: this sacred cup we are to drink of, enriched with the
   blood of God, is above the price of a kingdom; it is more worth than
   heaven. Therefore, coming to such a royal feast, having a whole Christ,
   both his divine and human nature to feed on, how should we examine
   ourselves beforehand, that we may be fit guests for such a magnificent
   banquet!

   Self-examination is needful, because God will examine us. That was a
   sad question, Friend, how camest thou in hither, not having a wedding
   garment?' Matt 22: 12. Men are loath to ask themselves the question, O
   my soul! art thou a fit guest for the Lord's table?' Are there not some
   sins thou hast to bewail? Are there not some evidences for heaven that
   thou hast to get?' Now, when persons will not ask themselves the
   question, then God will bring the question to them, How came you in
   hither to my table, not prepared? How came you in hither, with an
   unbelieving or profane heart? Such a question will cause a
   heart-trembling. God will examine a man, as the chief captain would
   Paul, with scourging. Acts 22: 24. It is true that the best saint, if
   God should weigh him in the balance, would be found wanting: but, when
   a Christian has made an impartial search, and has laboured to deal
   uprightly between God and his own soul, Christ's merits will cast in
   some grains of allowance into the scales.

   Self-examination is needful, because of secret corruption in the heart,
   which will not be found out without searching. There are in the heart
   plangendae tenebrae, Augustine, hidden pollutions.' It is with a
   Christian, as with Joseph's brethren, who, when the steward accused
   them of having the cup, were ready to swear they had it not; but upon
   search it was found in one of their sacks. Little does a Christian
   think what pride, atheism, uncleanness is in his heart till he searches
   it. If there be therefore such hidden wickedness, like a spring running
   under ground, we had need examine ourselves, that finding out our
   secret sin, we may be humbled and repent. Hidden sins, if not searched
   out, defile the soul. If corn lie long in the chaff, the chaff defiles
   the corn; so sins long hidden defile our duties. Needful therefore it
   is, before we come to the holy supper, to search out these hidden sins,
   as Israel searched for leaven before they came to the passover.

   Self-examination is needful, because without it we may easily have a
   cheat put upon us. The heart is deceitful above all things.' Jer 17: 9.
   Many a man's heart will tell him he is fit for the Lord's table. As
   when Christ asked the sons of Zebedee, Are ye able to drink of the cup
   that I shall drink of?' Matt 20: 22. Can ye drink such a bloody cup of
   suffering? They say unto him, We are able.' So the heart will suggest
   to a man, he is fit to drink of the sacramental cup, he has on the
   wedding-garment. Grande profundum est homo. Augustine. The heart is a
   grand impostor.' As a cheating tradesmen will put one off with bad
   wares, so the heart will put a man off with seeming grace, instead of
   saving. A tear or two shed is repentance, a few lazy desires are faith,
   just as blue and red flowers growing among corn, look like good
   flowers, but are beautiful weeds only. The foolish virgins' vessels
   looked as if they had oil in them, but they had none. Therefore, to
   prevent a cheat, that we may not take false grace instead of true, we
   had need make a thorough search of our hearts before we come to the
   Lord's table.

   Self-examination is needful, because of the false fears which the godly
   are apt to nourish in their hearts, which make them go sad to the
   sacrament. As they who have no grace, for want of examining, presume,
   so they who have grace, for want of examining, are ready to despair.
   Many of God's children look upon themselves through the black
   spectacles of fear. They fear Christ is not formed in them, they fear
   they have no right to the promise; and these fears in the heart cause
   tears in the eye; whereas, would they but search and examine, they
   might find they had grace. Are not their hearts humbled for sin? What
   is this but the bruised reed? Do not they weep after the Lord? What are
   these tears but seeds of faith? Do they not thirst after Christ in an
   ordinance? What is this but the new creature crying for the breast?
   Here are, you see, seeds of grace; and, would Christians examine their
   hearts, they might see there is something of God in them, and so their
   false fears would be prevented, and they might approach with comfort to
   the holy mysteries in the Eucharist.

   Self-examination is needful with respect to the danger of coming
   unworthily without it. He shall be guilty of the body and blood of the
   Lord.' 1 Cor 11: 27. Par facit quasi Christum trucidaret [It is as if
   he were butchering Christ]. Grotius. God reckons with him as with a
   crucifier of the Lord Jesus. He does not drink Christ's blood, but
   sheds it; and so brings that curse upon him, as when the Jews said, His
   blood be upon us and our children.' Than the virtue of Christ's blood,
   nothing is more comfortable; than the guilt of it, nothing is more
   formidable.

   (4) We must examine ourselves before the sacrament, on account of the
   difficulty of the work. Difficulty raises a noble spirit.
   Self-examination is difficult, because it is an inward work, it lies
   with the heart. External acts of devotion are easy; to lift up the eye,
   to bow the knee, to read over a few prayers, is as easy as for the
   Papists to tell over a few beads; but to examine a man's self, to take
   the heart in pieces, to make a Scripture-trial of our fitness for the
   Lord's supper, is not easy. Reflexive acts are hardest. The eye cannot
   see itself but by a glass; so we must have the glass of the word and
   conscience to see our own hearts. It is easy to spy the faults of
   others; but it is hard to find out our owns. Self-examination is
   difficult, with regard to self-love. As ignorance blinds, so self-love
   flatters. What Solomon says of love, Love covereth all sins,' is most
   true of self-love. Prov 10: 12. A man looking upon himself in the
   flattering glass of self-love, his virtues appear greater than they
   are, and his sins less. Self-love makes a man rather excuse himself,
   than examine himself; self-love makes one think the best of himself;
   and he who has a good opinion of himself, does not suspect himself; and
   not suspecting himself, he is not forward to examine himself. The work,
   therefore, of self-examination being so difficult, requires the more
   impartiality and industry. Difficulty should be a spur to diligence.

   (5) We must examine ourselves before we come, because of the benefit of
   self-examination. The benefit is great whatever way it terminates. If,
   upon examination, we find that we have no grace in truth, the mistake
   is discovered, and the danger prevented; if we find that we have grace,
   we may take the comfort of it. He who, upon search, finds that he has
   the minimum quod sit, the least degree of grace, he is like one that
   has found his box of evidences; he is a happy man; he is a fit guest at
   the Lord's table; he is heir to all the promises; he is as sure to go
   to heaven as if he were in heaven already.

   What must we examine?

   (1) Our sins. Search if any dead fly spoils sweet ointment. When we
   come to the sacrament, as the Jews did before the passover, we should
   search for leaven, and having found it we should burn it. Let us search
   for the leaven of pride. This sours our holy things. Will a humble
   Christ be received into a proud heart? Pride keeps Christ out. Intus
   existens prohibet alienum [Its presence within blocks the entrance of
   any other]. To a proud man Christ's blood has no virtue; it is like a
   cordial put into a dead man's mouth, which loses its virtue. Let us
   search for the leaven of pride, and cast it away. Let us search for the
   leaven of avarice. The Lord's supper is a spiritual mystery, to
   represent Christ's body and blood; what should an earthly heart do
   here? The earth puts out the fire; so earthliness quencheth the fire of
   holy love. The earth is elementum gravissimum [the heaviest of the
   elements], it cannot ascend. A soul belimed with earth cannot ascend to
   heavenly cogitations. Covetousness, which is idolatry.' Col 3: 5. Will
   Christ come into the heart where there is an idol? Search for this
   leaven before you come to this ordinance. How can an earthly heart
   converse with that God which is a spirit? Can a clod of earth kiss the
   sun? Search for the leaven of hypocrisy. Beware ye of the leaven of the
   Pharisees, which is hypocrisy.' Luke 12: 1. Aquinas describes it as
   simulatio virtutis: hypocrisy is the counterfeiting of virtue.' The
   hypocrite is a living pageant, he only makes a show of religion; he
   gives God his knee, but no heart; and God gives him bread and wine in
   the sacrament, but no Christ. Oh, let us search for this leaven of
   hypocrisy and burn it!

   (2) We must examine our graces. I shall instance one only -- our
   knowledge.

   We are to examine whether we have knowledge, or we cannot give God a
   reasonable service. Rom 12: 1. Knowledge is a necessary requisite in a
   communicant; without it there can be no fitness for the sacrament. A
   person cannot be fit to come to the Lord's table who has no goodness;
   but without knowledge the mind is not good. Prov 19: 2. Some say they
   have good hearts, though they want knowledge; as if one should say, his
   eye is good, but it wants sight. Under the law, when the plague of
   leprosy was in a man's head, the priest was to pronounce him unclean.
   The ignorant person has the plague in his head, he is unclean;
   ignorance is the womb of lust. 1 Pet 1: 14. Therefore it is requisite,
   before we come, to examine what knowledge we have in the main
   fundamentals of religion. Let it not be said of us, that unto this day
   the vail is upon their heart.' 2 Cor 3: 15. In this intelligent age, we
   cannot but have some insight into the mysteries of the gospel. I rather
   fear, we are like Rachel, who was fair and well-sighted, but barren:
   therefore,

   Let us examine whether our knowledge be rightly qualified. Is it
   influential. Does our knowledge warm our heart? Claritas intellectu
   parit ardorem in effectu [Clearness in the understanding breeds zeal in
   the doing]. Saving knowledge not only directs but quickens; it is the
   light of life. John 8: 12. Is our knowledge practical? We hear much; do
   we love the truths we know? That is the right knowledge which not only
   adorns the mind, but reforms the life.

   [2] This solemn preparation for the sacrament consists in dressing our
   souls before we come. This soul-dress is in two things:

   (1) Washing in the lever of repenting tears. To come to this ordinance
   with the guilt of any sin unrepented of makes way for further hardening
   of the heart, and gives Satan fuller possession of it. They shall look
   on me whom they have pierced, and they shall mourn for him.' Zech 12:
   10. The cloud of sorrow must drop into tears. We must grieve as for the
   pollution, so for the unkindness in every sin which is against Christ's
   love who died for us. When Peter thought of Christ's love in calling
   him out of his unregeneracy to make him an apostle, and to carry him up
   to the mount of transfiguration, where he saw the glory of heaven in a
   vision, and then of his denying Christ, it broke his heart: he wept
   bitterly.' Matt 26: 75. To think, before we come to a sacrament, of
   sins against the bowel-mercies of God the Father, the bleeding wounds
   of God the Son, the blessed inspirations of God the Holy Ghost, is
   enough to fill our eyes with tears, and put us into a holy agony of
   grief and compunction. We must be distressed for sin, be divorced from
   it. Before the serpent drinks it casts up its poison; in this we must
   be wise as serpents. Before we drink of the sacramental cup we must
   cast up the poison of sin by repentance. Ille vere plangit commissa,
   qui non committit plangenda. Augustine. He truly bewails the sins he
   has committed who does not commit the sins he has bewailed.'

   (2) The soul-dress is the exciting and stirring up the habit of grace
   into a lively exercise. I put thee in remembrance, that thou stir up
   the gift of God which is in thee,' that is, the gifts and graces of the
   Spirit. 2 Tim 1: 6. The Greek word to stir up, signifies to blow up
   grace into a flame. Grace is often like fire in the embers, which needs
   blowing up. It is possible that even a good man may not come so well
   disposed to this ordinance, because he has not before taken pains with
   his heart to come in due order, to stir up grace into vigorous
   exercise; and though he does not eat and drink damnation, yet he does
   not receive consolation in the sacrament.

   [3] A solemn preparation for the sacrament consists in begging a
   blessing upon the ordinance. The efficacy of the sacrament depends upon
   the co-operation of the Spirit, and a word of blessing. In the
   institution, Christ blessed the elements: Jesus took bread and blessed
   it.' The sacrament will do us good no farther than it is blessed to us.
   We ought, before we come, to pray for a blessing, that it may not only
   be a sign to represent, but a seal to conform, and an instrument to
   convey Christ and all his benefits to us. We are to pray that this
   great ordinance may be poison to our sins, and food to our graces. As
   with Jonathan, when he tasted the honeycomb, and his eyes were
   enlightened;' so by receiving this holy Eucharist, our eyes may be
   enlightened to discern the Lord's body.' 1 Sam 14: 27. Thus should we
   implore a blessing upon the ordinance before we come. The sacrament is
   like a tree hung full of fruit, but none of this fruit will fall unless
   shaken by the hand of prayer.

   II. That the sacrament may be effectual to us, there must be a right
   participation of it, which consists in four things.

   [1] When we draw nigh to God's table in a humble sense of our
   unworthiness. We do not deserve one crumb of the bread of life; we are
   poor indigent creatures, who have lost our glory, and are like a vessel
   that is shipwrecked; we smite on our breasts, as the publican, God be
   merciful to us sinners.' This is partaking of the ordinance aright. It
   is part of our worthiness to see our unworthiness.

   [2] We rightly partake when at the Lord's table we are filled with
   breathing of soul and inflamed desires after Christ, which nothing can
   quench but his blood. Blessed are they which thirst.' Matt 5: 6. They
   are blessed not only when they are filled, but while they are
   thirsting.

   [3] A right participation of the supper is, when we receive it in
   faith. Without faith we get no good. What is said of the word preached,
   it did not profit them, not being mixed with faith,' is true of the
   sacrament. Heb 4: 2. Christ turned stones into bread: unbelief turns
   the bread into stones, that do not nourish. We partake aright when we
   come in faith. Faith has a twofold act, an adhering, and an applying.
   By the first we go over to Christ, by the second we bring Christ over
   to us. Gal 2: 20. This is the grace we must set to work. Acts 10: 43.
   Philo calls it, fides oculata [the eye of faith]: it is the eagle-eye
   that discerns the Lord's body; it causes a virtual contact, it touches
   Christ. Christ said to Mary, Touch me not,' &c. John 20: 17. She was
   not to touch him with the hands of her body; but he says to us, Touch
   me,' touch me with the hand of your faith. Faith makes Christ present
   to the soul. The believer has a real presence in the sacrament. The
   body of the sun is in the firmament, but the light of the sun is in the
   eye. Christ's essence is in heaven, but he is in a believer's heart by
   his light and influence. That Christ may dwell in your hearts by
   faith.' Eph 3: 17. Faith is the palate which tastes Christ. 1 Pet 2: 3.
   It causes the bread of life to nourish. Crede et manducasti [Believe
   and thou hast fed]. Augustine. Faith makes us one with Christ. Eph 1:
   23. Other graces make us like Christ, faith makes us members of Christ.

   [4] We partake aright of the sacrament when we receive it in love.

   (1) Love to Christ. Who can see Christ pierced with a crown of thorns,
   sweating in his agony, bleeding on the cross, but his heart must needs
   be endeared in love to him? How can we but love him who has given his
   life a ransom for us? Love is the spiced wine and juice of the
   pomegranate which we must give to Christ. Cant 8: 2. Our love to this
   superior and blessed Jesus must exceed our love to other things; as the
   oil runs above the water. Though we cannot, with Mary, bring our body
   ointment to anoint his body, we do more than this, whence bring him our
   love, which is sweeter to him than all ointments and perfumes.

   (2) Love to the saints. This is a love-feast. Though we must eat it
   with the bitter herbs of repentance, yet not with the bitter herbs of
   malice. Were it not sad if all the meat we eat should turn to bad
   humours? He who comes in malice to the Lord's table turns all he eats
   to his hurt. He eateth and drinketh damnation to himself.' 1 Cor 11:
   29. Come in love.' It is with love as with fire which you keep all the
   day upon the hearth, but upon special occasions make larger. We must
   have love to all; but to the saints, who are our fellow-members here,
   we must draw out the fire of our love larger; and must show the
   largeness of our affections to them, by prizing their persons, by
   choosing their company, by doing all offices of love to them, by
   counselling them in their doubts, comforting them in their fears, and
   supplying them in their wants. Thus one Christian may be an Ebenezer to
   another, and as an angel of God to him. The sacrament cannot be
   effectual to him who does not receive it in love. If a man drinks
   poison and then takes a cordial, the cordial will do him little good,
   so he who has the poison of malice in his soul, the cordial of Christ's
   blood will do him no good; come therefore in love and charity.

   Use one. From the whole doctrine of this sacrament learn how precious
   should a sacrament be to us. It is a sealed deed to make over the
   blessings of the new covenant to us. A small piece of wax put to a
   parchment is made the instrument to confirm a rich conveyance or
   lordship to another; so these elements in the sacrament of bread and
   wine, though in themselves of no great value, yet being consecrated to
   be seals to confirm the covenant of grace to us, are of more value than
   all the riches of the Indies.

   Use two. The sacrament being such a holy mystery, let us come to it
   with holy hearts. There is no receiving a crucified Christ but into a
   consecrated heart. Christ in his conception lay in a pure virgin's
   womb, and, at his death, his body was wrapped in clean linen, and put
   into a new virgin tomb, never yet defiled. If Christ would not lie in
   an unclean grave, surely he will not be received into an unclean heart.
   Be ye clean that bear the vessels of the Lord.' Isa 52: 11. If they who
   carried the vessels of the Lord were to be holy, they who are to be the
   vessels of the Lord, and are to hold Christ's blood and body, ought to
   be holy.

   Use three. Christ's body and blood in the sacrament are a most
   sovereign elixir or comfort to a distressed soul. Having poured out his
   blood, God's justice is fully satisfied. There is in the death of
   Christ enough to answer all doubts. What if sin is the poison, the
   flesh of Christ is an antidote against it! What if sin be red as
   scarlet, is not Christ's blood of a deeper colour, and can wash away
   sin? If Satan strikes us with his darts of temptation, here is a
   precious balm out of Christ's wounds to heal us. Isa 53: 5. What though
   we feed upon the bread of affliction, so long as in the sacrament we
   feed upon the bread of life? Christ received aright sacramentally, is a
   universal medicine for healing, and a universal cordial for cheering
   our distressed souls.
     __________________________________________________________________

  4.6 Prayer

   But I give myself unto prayer.' Psa 109: 4.

   I shall not here expatiate upon prayer, as it will be considered more
   fully in the Lord's prayer. It is one thing to pray, and another thing
   to be given to prayer: he who prays frequently, is said to be given to
   prayer; as he who often distributes alms, is said to be given to
   charity. Prayer is a glorious ordinance, it is the soul's trading with
   heaven. God comes down to us by his Spirit, and we go up to him by
   prayer.

   What is prayer?

   It is an offering up of our desires to God for things agreeable to his
   will, in the name of Christ.

   Prayer is offering up our desires;' and therefore called making known
   our requests. Phil 4: 6. In prayer we come as humble petitioners,
   begging to have our suit granted. It is offering up our desires to
   God.' Prayer is not to be made to any but God. The Papists pray to
   saints and angels, who know not our grievances. Abraham be ignorant of
   us.' Isa 63: 16. All angel-worship is forbidden. Col 2: 18, 19. We must
   not pray to any but whom we may believe in. How shall they call on him
   in whom they have not believed?' Rom 10: 14. We cannot believe in an
   angel, therefore we must not pray to him.

   Why must prayer be made to God only?

   (1) Because he only hears prayer. Oh thou that hearest prayer.' Psa 65:
   2. Hereby God is known to be the true God, in that he hears prayer.
   Hear me, O Lord, hear me, that this people may know that thou art the
   Lord God.' 1 Kings 18: 37.

   (2) Because God only can help. We may look to second causes, and cry,
   as the woman did, Help, my lord, O king.' And he said, If the Lord do
   not help thee, whence shall I help thee?' 2 Kings 6: 26, 27. If we are
   in outward distress, God must send from heaven and save; if we are in
   inward agonies, he only can pour in the oil of joy; therefore prayer is
   to be made to him only.

   We are to pray for things agreeable to his will.' When we pray for
   outward things, for riches or children, perhaps God sees these things
   not to be good for us; and our prayers should comport with his will. We
   may pray absolutely for grace; For this is the will of God, even your
   sanctification.' 1 Thess 4: 3. There must be no strange incense
   offered. Exod 30: 9. When we pray for things which are not agreeable to
   God's will, it is offering strange incense.

   We are to pray in the name of Christ.' To pray in the name of Christ,
   is not only to mention Christ's name in prayer, but to pray in the hope
   and confidence of his merits. Samuel took a sucking lamb and offered
   it,' &c. 1 Sam 7: 9. We must carry the lamb Christ in the arms of our
   faith, and so shall we prevail in prayer. When Uzziah would offer
   incense without a priest, God was angry, and struck him with leprosy. 2
   Chron 26: 16. When we do not pray in Christ's name, in the hope of his
   mediation, we offer up incense without a priest; and what can we expect
   but to meet with rebukes, and to have God answer us by terrible things?

   What are the several parts of prayer?

   (1) There is the confessors part, which is the acknowledgement of sin.
   (2) The supplicatory part, when we either deprecate and pray against
   some evil, or request the obtaining of some good. (3) The
   congratulatory part, when we give thanks for mercies received, which is
   the most excellent part of prayer. In petition, we act like men; in
   giving thanks, we act like angels.

   What are the several sorts of prayer?

   (1) There is mental prayer, in the mind. 1 Sam 1: 13. (2) Vocal. Psa
   77: 1. (3) Ejaculatory, which is a sudden and short elevation of the
   heart to God. So I prayed to the God of heaven.' Neh 2: 4. (4) Inspired
   prayer, when we pray for those things which God puts into our heart.
   The Spirit helps us with sighs and groans. Rom 8: 26. Both the
   expressions of the tongue, and the impressions of the heart, so far as
   they are right, are from the Spirit. (5) Prescribed prayer. Our Saviour
   has set us a pattern of prayer. God prescribed a set form of blessing
   for the priests. Numb 6: 23. (6) Public prayer, when we pray in the
   audience of others. Prayer is more powerful when many join and unite
   their forces. Vis unita fortior [A united force is stronger]. Matt 18:
   19. (7) Private prayer; when we pray by ourselves. Enter into thy
   closet.' Matt 6: 6.

   That prayer is most likely to prevail with God which is rightly
   qualified. That is a good medicine which has the right ingredients; and
   that prayer is good, and most likely to prevail with God, which has
   these seven ingredients in it: --

   [1] It must be mixed with faith. But let him ask in faith.' James 1: 6.
   Believe that God hears, and will in due time grant, believe his love
   and truth; believe that he is love, and therefore will not deny you;
   believe that he is truth, and therefore will not deny himself. Faith
   sets prayer to work. Faith is to prayer what the feather is to the
   arrow; it feathers the arrow of prayer, and makes it fly swifter, and
   pierce the throne of grace. The prayer that is faithless is fruitless.

   [2] It must be a melting prayer. The sacrifices of God are a broken
   spirit.' Psa 51: 17. The incense was to be beaten to typify the
   breaking of the heart in prayer. Oh! says a Christian, I cannot pray
   with such gifts and elocution as others; as Moses said, I am not
   eloquent;' but can't thou weep? Does thy heart melt in prayer? Weeping
   prayer prevails. Tears drop as pearls from the eye. Jacob wept and made
   supplication; and had power over the angel.' Hosea 12: 4.

   [3] Prayer must be fired with zeal and fervency. Effectual fervent
   prayer availeth much.' James 5: 16. Cold prayer, like cold suitors,
   never speed. Prayer without fervency, is like a sacrifice without a
   fire. Prayer is called a pouring out of the soul,' to signify
   vehemence. 1 Sam 1: 15. Formality starves prayer. Prayer is compared to
   incense. Let my prayer be set forth as incense.' Psa 141: 2. Hot coals
   were to be put to the incense, to make it odoriferous and fragrant; so
   fervency of affection is like coals to the incense; it makes prayer
   ascend as a sweet perfume. Christ prayed with strong cries. Heb 5: 7.
   Clamor iste penetrat nubes [Such a cry pierces the clouds]. Luther.
   Fervent prayer, like a powder engine set against heaven's gates, makes
   them fly open. To cause holy fervour and ardour of soul in prayer,
   consider, (1) Prayer without fervency is no prayer; it is speaking, not
   praying. Lifeless prayer is no more prayer than the picture of a man is
   a man. One may say as Pharaoh, I have dreamed a dream.' Gen 41: 15. It
   is dreaming, not praying. Life and fervency baptise a duty, and give it
   a name. (2) Consider in what need we stand of those things which we ask
   in prayer. We come to ask the favour of God; and if we have not his
   love all we enjoy is cursed to us. We pray that our souls may be washed
   in Christ's blood; if he wash us not we have no part in him. John 13:
   8. When will we be in earnest, if not when we are praying for the life
   of our souls? (3) It is only fervent prayer that has the promise of
   mercy affixed to it. Ye shall find me, when ye shall search for me with
   all your heart.' Jer 29: 13. It is dead praying without a promise; and
   the promise is made only to ardency. The a tiles among the Romans, had
   their doors always standing open, that all who had petitions might have
   free access to them; so God's heart is ever open to fervent prayer.

   [4] Prayer must be sincere. Sincerity is the silver thread which must
   run through the whole duties of religion. Sincerity in prayer is when
   we have gracious holy ends; when our prayer is not so much for temporal
   mercies as for spiritual. We send out prayer as our merchant ship, that
   we may have large returns of spiritual blessings. Our aim in it is,
   that our hearts may be more holy, that we may have more communion with
   God and that we may increase our stock of grace. The prayer which wants
   a good aim, wants a good issue.

   [5] The prayer that will prevail with God must have a fixedness of
   mind. My heart is fixed, O God.' Psa 57: 7. Since the fall the mind is
   like quicksilver, which will not fix; it has principium motus, but non
   quietus [a principle of restlessness, not of peace]. The thoughts will
   be roving and dancing up and down in prayer, just as if a man who is
   travelling to a certain place should run out of the road, and wander he
   knows not whither. In prayer we are travelling to the throne of grace,
   but how often do we, by vain cogitations, turn out of the road! This is
   rather wandering than praying.

   How shall we cure these vain impertinent thoughts, which distract us in
   prayer, and, we fear, hinder its acceptance?

   (1) Be very apprehensive in prayer of the infiniteness of God's majesty
   and purity. His eye is upon us in prayer, and we may say as David, Thou
   tellest my wanderings.' Psa 56: 8. The thoughts of this would make us
   hoc agere, mind the duty we are about. If a man were to deliver a
   petition to an earthly prince, would he at the same time be playing
   with a feather? Set yourselves, when you pray, as in God's presence.
   Could you but look through the keyhole of heaven, and see how devout
   and intent the angels are in their worshipping God, surely you would be
   ready to blush at your vain thoughts and vile impertinences in prayer.

   (2) If you would keep your mind fixed in prayer, keep your eye fixed.
   Unto thee lift I up mine eyes, O thou that dwellest in the heavens.'
   Psa 123: 1. Much vanity comes in at the eye. When the eye wanders in
   prayer, the heart wanders. To think to keep the heart fixed in prayer,
   and yet let the eye gaze, is as if one should think to keep his house
   safe, and yet let the windows be open.

   (3) If you would have your thoughts fixed in prayer, get more love to
   God. Love is a great fixer of the thoughts. He who is in love cannot
   keep his thoughts off the object. He who loves the world has his
   thoughts upon the world. Did we love God more, our minds would be more
   intent upon him in prayer. Were there more delight in duty, there would
   be less distraction.

   (4) Implore the help of God's Spirit to fix your minds, and make them
   intent and serious in prayer. The ship without a pilot rather floats
   than sails. That our thoughts do not float up and down in prayer, we
   need the blessed Spirit to be our pilot to steer us. Only God's Spirit
   can bound the thoughts. A shaking hand may as well write a line
   steadily, as we can keep our hearts fixed in prayer without the Spirit
   of God.

   (5) Make holy thoughts familiar to you in your ordinary course of life.
   David was often musing on God. When I am awake, I am still with thee.'
   Psa 139: 18. He who gives himself liberty to have vain thoughts out of
   prayer, will scarcely have other thoughts in prayer.

   (6) If you would keep your mind fixed on God, watch your hearts, not
   only after prayer, but in prayer. The heart will be apt to give you the
   slip, and have a thousand vagaries in prayer. We read of angels
   ascending and descending on Jacob's ladder; so in prayer you shall find
   your hearts ascending to heaven, and in a moment descending upon
   earthly objects. O Christians, watch your hearts in prayer. What a
   shame is it to think, that when we are speaking to God our hearts
   should be in the fields, or in our counting-houses, or one way or
   other, running upon the devil's errand!

   (7) Labour for larger degrees of grace. The more ballast the ship has
   the better it sails; so the more the heart is ballasted with grace, the
   steadier it will sail to heaven in prayer.

   [6] Prayer that is likely to prevail with God must be argumentative.
   God loves to have us plead with him, and use arguments in prayer. See
   how many arguments Jacob used in prayer. Deliver me, I pray thee, from
   the hand of my brother.' Gen 32: 11. The arguments he used are from
   God's command Thou saidst to me, Return to thy country;' ver 9; as if
   he had said, I did not take this journey of my own head, but by thy
   direction; therefore thou canst not but in honour protect me. And he
   uses another argument. Thou saidst, I will surely do thee good;' ver
   12. Lord, wilt thou go back from thy own promise? Thus he was
   argumentative in prayer; and he got not only a new blessing, but a new
   name. Thy name shall be called no more Jacob, but Israel: for as a
   prince hast thou power with God, and hast prevailed;' ver 28. God loves
   to be overcome with strength of argument. Thus, when we come to God in
   prayer for grace, let us be argumentative. Lord, thou callest thyself
   the God of all grace; and whither should we go with our vessel, but to
   the fountain? Lord, thy grace may be imparted, yet not impaired. Has
   not Christ purchased grace for poor indigent creatures? Every drachm of
   grace costs a drop of blood. Shall Christ die to purchase grace for us,
   and shall not we have the fruit of his purchase? Lord, it is thy
   delight to milk out the breast of mercy and grace, and wilt thou
   abridge thyself of thy own delight? Thou hast promised to give thy
   Spirit to implant grace; can truth lie? can faithfulness deceive? God
   loves thus to be overcome with arguments in prayer.

   [7] Prayer that would prevail with God, must be joined with
   reformation. If thou stretch out thy hands toward him; if iniquity be
   in thy hand, put it far away.' Job 11: 13, 14. Sin, lived in, makes the
   heart hard, and God's ear deaf. It is foolish to pray against sin, and
   then sin against prayer. If I regard iniquity in my heart, the Lord
   will not hear me.' Psa 66: 18. The loadstone loses its virtue when
   bespread with garlic; so does prayer when polluted with sin. The
   incense of prayer must be offered upon the altar of a holy heart.

   Thus you see what is the prayer which is most likely to prevail with
   God.

   Use one. It reproves (1) Such as pray not at all. It is made the note
   of a reprobate, that he calls not upon God. Psa 14: 4. Does he think to
   have an alms who never asks it? Do they think to have mercy from Cod
   who never seek it? Then God would befriend them more than he did his
   own Son. Christ offered up prayers with strong cries. Heb 5: 7. None of
   God's children are born dumb. Gal 4: 6.

   (2) It reproves such as have left off prayer, which is a sign that they
   never felt the fruit and comfort of it. He that leaves off prayer
   leaves off to fear God. Thou castest off fear, and restrainest prayer
   before God.' Job 15: 4. A man that has left off prayer, is fit for any
   wickedness. When Saul had given over inquiring after God he went to the
   witch of Endor.

   Use two. Be persons given to prayer. I give myself,' says David, to
   prayer.' Pray for pardon and purity. Prayer is the golden key that
   opens heaven. The tree of the promise will not drop its fruit unless
   shaken by the hand of prayer. All the benefits of Christ's redemption
   are handed over to us by prayer.

   I have prayed a long time for mercy, and have no answer. I am weary of
   crying.' Ps 69: 3.

   (1) God may hear us when we do not hear from him; as soon as prayer is
   made, God hears it, though he does not presently answer. A friend may
   receive our letter, though he does not presently send us an answer. (2)
   God may delay prayer, yet he will not deny it.

   Why does God delay an answer to prayer?

   (1) Because he loves to hear the voice of prayer. The prayer of the
   upright is his delight.' Prov 15: 8. You let the musician play a great
   while ere you throw him down money, because you love to hear his music.
   Cant 2: 14.

   (2) God may delay prayer when he will not deny it, that he may humble
   us. He has spoken to us long in his word to leave our sins, but we
   would not hear him; therefore he lets us speak to him in prayer and
   seems not to hear us.

   (3) He may delay to answer prayer when he will not deny it, because he
   sees we are not yet fit for the mercy we ask. Perhaps we pray for
   deliverance when we are not fit for it; our scum is not yet boiled
   away. We would have God swift to deliver, and we are slow to repent.

   (4) God may delay to answer prayer, that the mercy we pray for may be
   more prized, and may be sweeter when it comes. The longer the
   merchant's ships stay abroad, the more he rejoices when they come home
   laden with spices and jewels; therefore be not discouraged, but follow
   God with prayer. Though God delays, he will not deny. Prayer vincit
   invincibilem [conquers the invincible], it overcomes the Omnipotent.
   Hos 12: 4. The Syrians tied their god Hercules fast with a golden
   chain, that he should not remove. The Lord was held by Moses' prayer as
   with a golden chain. Let me alone;' why, what did Moses? he only
   prayed. Exod 32: 10. Prayer ushers in mercy. Be thy case never so sad,
   if thou canst but pray thou needest not fear. Psa 10: 17. Therefore
   give thyself to prayer.
     __________________________________________________________________

                                    Indexes
     __________________________________________________________________

Index of Scripture References

   Genesis

   [1]2:7   [2]2:15   [3]2:22   [4]3:6   [5]3:19   [6]3:24   [7]4:6
   [8]4:8   [9]4:10   [10]4:11   [11]4:15   [12]5:24   [13]6:5   [14]9:6
   [15]9:6   [16]14:22   [17]15:2   [18]15:2   [19]17:7   [20]17:7
   [21]17:10   [22]18:21   [23]18:21   [24]18:25   [25]20:6   [26]22:5
   [27]24:9   [28]24:12   [29]25:5   [30]27:13   [31]28:1-2   [32]28:21
   [33]31:7   [34]32:9   [35]32:11   [36]32:12   [37]32:28   [38]33:11
   [39]37:3-4   [40]37:20   [41]39:9   [42]39:9   [43]39:12   [44]41:15
   [45]45:27   [46]46:29   [47]47:12   [48]48:15   [49]49:6   [50]50:20
   [51]50:25

   Exodus

   [52]2:23   [53]3:5-6   [54]10:9   [55]12:9   [56]12:29   [57]15:2
   [58]15:20   [59]16:26   [60]16:27-28   [61]19:5   [62]19:5
   [63]19:10   [64]19:10   [65]19:12   [66]19:12   [67]19:22
   [68]20:1-2   [69]20:3   [70]20:3   [71]20:4-6   [72]20:5-6   [73]20:7
   [74]20:8-11   [75]20:12   [76]20:13   [77]20:14   [78]20:15
   [79]20:16   [80]20:17   [81]21:14   [82]21:15   [83]21:28   [84]22:23
   [85]23:4   [86]23:13   [87]25:9   [88]29:10   [89]29:37   [90]30:9
   [91]31:15   [92]31:18   [93]32:7   [94]32:7   [95]32:10   [96]32:27
   [97]33:19   [98]34:6   [99]34:6   [100]34:14   [101]34:14
   [102]34:15

   Leviticus

   [103]3:3   [104]6:13   [105]6:13   [106]7:20   [107]10:1   [108]10:1
   [109]10:2   [110]11:17   [111]13:4   [112]13:45   [113]16:13
   [114]16:14   [115]17:7   [116]18:4   [117]19:3   [118]19:12
   [119]19:13   [120]19:13   [121]19:14   [122]19:18   [123]19:32
   [124]20:8   [125]20:10   [126]24:11   [127]24:14   [128]24:23
   [129]25:14   [130]25:25   [131]25:41   [132]25:43   [133]25:43
   [134]26:1   [135]26:15-16   [136]26:41

   Numbers

   [137]3:13   [138]5:27   [139]5:27   [140]6:23   [141]9:13   [142]14:4
   [143]14:27   [144]15:30   [145]15:30   [146]15:35   [147]17
   [148]21:5   [149]21:8   [150]23:21   [151]27:21   [152]35:33

   Deuteronomy

   [153]4:5-6   [154]4:12   [155]4:15   [156]4:15-16   [157]4:20
   [158]4:39   [159]5:21   [160]6:5   [161]6:5   [162]6:6-7   [163]6:8
   [164]6:13   [165]7:10   [166]8:15-16   [167]10:12-13   [168]10:13
   [169]11:15   [170]11:19   [171]13:6   [172]13:8   [173]13:9
   [174]16:10   [175]16:10   [176]16:22   [177]16:22   [178]18:10-11
   [179]18:11   [180]19:18-19   [181]21:18-19   [182]21:21   [183]22:19
   [184]22:24   [185]23:18   [186]23:25   [187]24:6   [188]27:9-10
   [189]27:15   [190]27:16   [191]27:20   [192]27:24   [193]28:1
   [194]28:3   [195]28:4-5   [196]28:5   [197]28:58   [198]28:58
   [199]28:58   [200]28:58   [201]30:6   [202]30:19   [203]32:17
   [204]32:19   [205]32:47   [206]32:47   [207]32:47   [208]33:2
   [209]34:7

   Joshua

   [210]7:11   [211]7:21   [212]7:25   [213]9:15   [214]14:15
   [215]24:2-3   [216]24:15

   Judges

   [217]2:12   [218]9   [219]9:15   [220]11:7   [221]11:21   [222]11:31
   [223]17:6   [224]18:14   [225]18:24   [226]19:20

   Ruth

   [227]1:20

   1 Samuel

   [228]1:13   [229]1:15   [230]2:8   [231]2:12   [232]2:25   [233]2:31
   [234]3:10   [235]3:13-14   [236]3:18   [237]4:2   [238]7:9
   [239]12:3   [240]14:27   [241]15:22   [242]15:22   [243]17:35
   [244]18:17   [245]19:4-5   [246]20:30   [247]20:31   [248]20:33-34
   [249]20:34   [250]24:5   [251]28:15   [252]28:15   [253]30:13

   2 Samuel

   [254]7:17   [255]11:4   [256]11:15   [257]12:5   [258]12:9
   [259]12:9   [260]12:13   [261]12:13   [262]12:27-28   [263]13
   [264]15:7   [265]15:7   [266]15:10   [267]16:10   [268]16:21
   [269]17:23   [270]17:23   [271]20:10   [272]21:1   [273]22:3
   [274]22:4   [275]22:20   [276]22:32

   1 Kings

   [277]1:6-7   [278]1:9   [279]2:19   [280]2:20   [281]3:10
   [282]8:22-23   [283]8:38   [284]13:5   [285]14:10   [286]17:16
   [287]18:7   [288]18:12   [289]18:37   [290]18:39   [291]20:4
   [292]20:27   [293]20:29   [294]20:39   [295]21:9-10   [296]21:13
   [297]21:13   [298]21:27   [299]22:8

   2 Kings

   [300]1:6   [301]1:10   [302]4:6   [303]4:6   [304]4:7   [305]4:35
   [306]5:13   [307]5:13   [308]5:27   [309]5:27   [310]6:26-27
   [311]9:33   [312]10:7   [313]17:33   [314]18:4   [315]18:21
   [316]19:15   [317]19:22   [318]23:6   [319]23:24   [320]24:4
   [321]25:4

   1 Chronicles

   [322]15:13   [323]22:5   [324]28:9   [325]28:9

   2 Chronicles

   [326]14:11   [327]15:12   [328]16:10   [329]25:2   [330]25:4
   [331]25:9   [332]26:16   [333]26:20   [334]28:22   [335]30:18-19

   Ezra

   [336]4:15

   Nehemiah

   [337]2:4   [338]8:6   [339]9:5   [340]9:13   [341]9:13   [342]10:30
   [343]13:15   [344]13:17

   Esther

   [345]2:12   [346]3:9

   Job

   [347]1:6   [348]1:8   [349]5:13   [350]5:17   [351]5:19   [352]5:21
   [353]6:25   [354]9:4   [355]9:29   [356]11:13-14   [357]14:4
   [358]15:4   [359]15:16   [360]17:9   [361]21:12-13   [362]21:19
   [363]23:12   [364]24:13   [365]26:7   [366]29:2   [367]29:13
   [368]29:16   [369]29:16   [370]29:18   [371]30:28   [372]30:28
   [373]31:1   [374]31:1   [375]31:2   [376]31:24   [377]36:8
   [378]36:10   [379]39:16   [380]40:9   [381]40:23   [382]40:33
   [383]41:15   [384]41:29

   Psalms

   [385]3:3   [386]4:1   [387]4:4   [388]7:14   [389]8:3   [390]9:12
   [391]9:17   [392]10:3   [393]10:13   [394]10:17   [395]12:5
   [396]14:1   [397]14:4   [398]15:1   [399]15:2   [400]15:3   [401]16:4
   [402]16:4   [403]16:5-6   [404]16:8   [405]16:11   [406]16:11
   [407]16:11   [408]17:15   [409]17:15   [410]19:7   [411]19:7
   [412]19:9   [413]19:10   [414]19:10   [415]19:10   [416]19:13
   [417]21:3   [418]22:4   [419]25:6   [420]25:9   [421]25:14
   [422]25:15   [423]25:16   [424]26:1   [425]27:8   [426]27:10
   [427]29:2   [428]29:9   [429]29:11   [430]30:5   [431]30:11-12
   [432]31:3   [433]31:5   [434]31:20   [435]32:5   [436]32:11
   [437]33:6   [438]35:11   [439]35:11   [440]37:3   [441]37:4
   [442]37:6   [443]37:21   [444]37:31   [445]39:3   [446]39:3
   [447]40:3   [448]42:2   [449]42:8   [450]42:11   [451]43:4
   [452]43:5   [453]44:17   [454]48:14   [455]50:1   [456]50:15
   [457]50:20   [458]51:5   [459]51:10   [460]51:14   [461]51:17
   [462]51:17   [463]52:8   [464]53:5   [465]55:22   [466]55:23
   [467]56:3   [468]56:8   [469]56:12   [470]57:7   [471]58:10
   [472]59:17   [473]62:8   [474]63:1   [475]63:8   [476]65:2
   [477]66:10-11   [478]66:11-12   [479]66:13-14   [480]66:18
   [481]66:20   [482]67:6   [483]67:6   [484]68:20   [485]68:21
   [486]69:3   [487]69:33   [488]71:8   [489]73:24   [490]73:25
   [491]75:8   [492]77:1   [493]77:6   [494]78:19   [495]78:38
   [496]78:58   [497]78:58-59   [498]78:59-60   [499]80:5   [500]80:32
   [501]81:11   [502]81:12   [503]81:12   [504]83:18   [505]84:2
   [506]84:11   [507]85:7   [508]86:5   [509]86:5   [510]86:5
   [511]88:15-16   [512]89:6   [513]89:7   [514]89:31-32   [515]90:2
   [516]91:15   [517]91:16   [518]92:12   [519]96:5   [520]97:7
   [521]97:10   [522]100:3   [523]100:3   [524]101:7   [525]103:3
   [526]103:4   [527]103:4   [528]103:8   [529]103:8   [530]103:9
   [531]103:10   [532]103:17   [533]104:1   [534]104:24   [535]104:26
   [536]105:25   [537]106:3   [538]106:3   [539]106:18   [540]106:24
   [541]106:35-36   [542]106:35-36   [543]106:37   [544]107:24
   [545]109:4   [546]109:6   [547]109:7   [548]110:1   [549]111:1
   [550]111:9   [551]114:5   [552]115:6-7   [553]116:1   [554]116:15
   [555]118:22   [556]118:24   [557]118:24   [558]118:28   [559]119:5
   [560]119:5   [561]119:6   [562]119:6   [563]119:11   [564]119:24
   [565]119:32   [566]119:38   [567]119:50   [568]119:50   [569]119:57
   [570]119:68   [571]119:72   [572]119:97   [573]119:97   [574]119:103
   [575]119:103   [576]119:104   [577]119:117   [578]119:128
   [579]119:136   [580]119:159   [581]119:166   [582]119:166
   [583]119:172   [584]119:172   [585]122:4   [586]123:1   [587]124:8
   [588]124:8   [589]126:1   [590]128:6   [591]130:1   [592]132:15
   [593]136   [594]139:7   [595]139:12   [596]139:18   [597]139:18
   [598]141:2   [599]141:3   [600]141:8   [601]143:7   [602]144:15
   [603]144:15   [604]145:8   [605]145:16   [606]145:16   [607]146:2
   [608]146:2   [609]146:2   [610]147:11   [611]147:14   [612]147:18
   [613]147:20   [614]148:5

   Proverbs

   [615]1:8   [616]1:26   [617]1:26   [618]2:19   [619]3:3   [620]3:9
   [621]3:9   [622]3:12   [623]3:17   [624]4:9   [625]4:17   [626]4:23
   [627]5:4   [628]5:8   [629]5:8   [630]5:8   [631]5:11   [632]5:18
   [633]6:6   [634]6:23   [635]6:26   [636]6:28   [637]6:32-33
   [638]6:34   [639]6:34   [640]7:10   [641]7:10   [642]7:13
   [643]7:14-15   [644]7:23   [645]7:23   [646]7:26   [647]7:27
   [648]9:2   [649]9:18   [650]10:12   [651]10:15   [652]11:24
   [653]11:25   [654]12:22   [655]14:30   [656]15:8   [657]15:24
   [658]16:6   [659]17:24   [660]19:2   [661]19:5   [662]19:12
   [663]19:24   [664]19:29   [665]20:7   [666]20:25   [667]21:13
   [668]22:6   [669]22:14   [670]22:26   [671]23:14   [672]23:26
   [673]23:26   [674]23:27   [675]24:31   [676]25:18   [677]27:4
   [678]30:8   [679]30:8-9   [680]30:15   [681]30:17   [682]30:25
   [683]31:10   [684]31:27   [685]31:28

   Ecclesiastes

   [686]2:11   [687]5:1   [688]5:10   [689]5:13   [690]5:17   [691]6:2
   [692]7:4   [693]7:20   [694]7:26   [695]10:8   [696]10:12   [697]11:9
   [698]12:5

   Song of Solomon

   [699]1:4   [700]1:7   [701]2:2   [702]2:3   [703]2:4   [704]2:5
   [705]2:14   [706]2:14   [707]2:16   [708]3:2   [709]3:4   [710]5:11
   [711]8:2   [712]8:2   [713]8:2   [714]8:6   [715]8:7

   Isaiah

   [716]0:6-0   [717]1:2   [718]1:2   [719]1:12   [720]1:12   [721]1:16
   [722]1:16   [723]1:18   [724]1:19   [725]1:19   [726]5:19   [727]5:23
   [728]6:2   [729]6:10   [730]8:20   [731]10:3   [732]10:6   [733]10:17
   [734]11:4   [735]14:21   [736]26:8   [737]26:12   [738]28:9
   [739]28:21   [740]29:13   [741]29:13   [742]30:9   [743]30:10
   [744]30:11   [745]31:5   [746]33:24   [747]33:24   [748]38:9
   [749]38:17   [750]38:21   [751]40:18   [752]42:8   [753]42:8
   [754]42:8   [755]42:13   [756]43:3   [757]44:5   [758]44:6
   [759]44:19   [760]46:2   [761]49:23   [762]51:17   [763]52:11
   [764]53:1   [765]53:5   [766]53:11   [767]53:12   [768]54:5
   [769]54:8   [770]55:3   [771]55:7   [772]56:2   [773]56:6   [774]56:7
   [775]56:7   [776]57:18   [777]57:18   [778]58:10   [779]58:13
   [780]58:13   [781]58:13   [782]58:13   [783]58:14   [784]62:3
   [785]62:4   [786]63:5   [787]63:9   [788]63:15   [789]63:16
   [790]64:6

   Jeremiah

   [791]2:20   [792]2:27   [793]2:28   [794]2:32   [795]2:32   [796]2:34
   [797]3:12   [798]4:2   [799]4:14   [800]5:7   [801]5:8   [802]5:8
   [803]5:9   [804]7:12   [805]7:12   [806]7:15   [807]7:22   [808]7:23
   [809]8:9   [810]9:5   [811]9:23   [812]11:15   [813]12:7   [814]13:23
   [815]13:27   [816]14:22   [817]15:16   [818]15:16   [819]16:12
   [820]17:5   [821]17:9   [822]17:27   [823]17:27   [824]18:12
   [825]18:18   [826]20:10   [827]23:9   [828]23:11   [829]23:24
   [830]29:13   [831]29:23   [832]29:23   [833]31:3   [834]32:27
   [835]35:5   [836]35:14   [837]44:16   [838]44:17   [839]44:17
   [840]45:5

   Lamentations

   [841]3:19-20   [842]3:23   [843]5:16

   Ezekiel

   [844]3:14   [845]8:6   [846]8:8-9   [847]12:19   [848]13:22
   [849]14:17   [850]16:6   [851]16:14   [852]16:47   [853]16:49
   [854]16:49   [855]18:31   [856]20:27   [857]20:31   [858]22:3
   [859]22:14   [860]23:37   [861]24:13   [862]24:16   [863]28:5
   [864]28:20   [865]33:31   [866]33:31   [867]33:31   [868]33:32
   [869]34:2   [870]34:8   [871]35:5   [872]36:25   [873]36:26
   [874]36:26   [875]36:26   [876]36:26   [877]36:27   [878]36:27
   [879]38:18   [880]48:35

   Daniel

   [881]3:7   [882]3:16   [883]3:27   [884]4:27   [885]6:9   [886]7:12
   [887]7:15   [888]9:8   [889]9:21

   Hosea

   [890]1:4   [891]2:2   [892]2:2   [893]2:2   [894]2:19   [895]3:3
   [896]4:2   [897]4:8   [898]4:8   [899]4:11   [900]4:14   [901]7:4
   [902]7:11   [903]11:3   [904]12:4   [905]12:4   [906]12:7
   [907]12:7-8   [908]12:11   [909]14:4   [910]14:8   [911]14:8
   [912]14:8   [913]14:8

   Amos

   [914]4:13   [915]5:12   [916]6:5   [917]8:5   [918]9:7

   Obadiah

   [919]1:17

   Jonah

   [920]2:6   [921]2:10

   Micah

   [922]7:9   [923]7:18   [924]7:18   [925]7:19

   Nahum

   [926]3:12

   Habakkuk

   [927]1:13   [928]2:4   [929]2:11   [930]2:15   [931]2:18   [932]2:18

   Zephaniah

   [933]3:5   [934]3:17   [935]3:17   [936]3:19

   Haggai

   [937]2:9

   Zechariah

   [938]1:14   [939]2:8   [940]2:8   [941]3:1   [942]5:2   [943]5:2-4
   [944]5:3-4   [945]5:4   [946]7:11-12   [947]7:12   [948]7:12
   [949]8:17   [950]12:10   [951]12:10   [952]12:10   [953]13:1
   [954]13:1   [955]13:9

   Malachi

   [956]1:6   [957]1:6   [958]1:14   [959]2:2   [960]2:2   [961]2:7
   [962]3:5   [963]3:6   [964]3:16   [965]3:16   [966]3:16   [967]3:17

   Matthew

   [968]1:21   [969]2:8   [970]2:11   [971]2:13   [972]4:4   [973]4:7
   [974]4:17   [975]5:6   [976]5:19   [977]5:28   [978]5:28   [979]5:28
   [980]5:34   [981]6:2   [982]6:6   [983]6:6   [984]6:20   [985]6:28
   [986]7:1   [987]7:6   [988]7:7   [989]7:13   [990]8:6   [991]8:6
   [992]8:26   [993]8:29   [994]8:32   [995]10:37   [996]11:12
   [997]11:18   [998]12:20   [999]12:31   [1000]12:44   [1001]12:50
   [1002]13:5-6   [1003]13:13   [1004]13:22   [1005]13:22   [1006]13:22
   [1007]13:25   [1008]13:25   [1009]15:19   [1010]15:41   [1011]16:26
   [1012]17:27   [1013]18:19   [1014]19:22   [1015]19:22   [1016]20:22
   [1017]21:19   [1018]22:11   [1019]22:12   [1020]22:20-21
   [1021]22:38   [1022]23:13   [1023]23:14   [1024]23:23   [1025]23:23
   [1026]23:32   [1027]23:33   [1028]24:45   [1029]25:7   [1030]25:26
   [1031]25:26   [1032]25:34   [1033]25:35   [1034]25:41   [1035]25:41
   [1036]26:28   [1037]26:40   [1038]26:73   [1039]26:75   [1040]26:75
   [1041]26:75   [1042]27:18   [1043]27:19   [1044]28:7   [1045]28:19

   Mark

   [1046]2:28   [1047]3:1   [1048]4:15   [1049]4:41   [1050]6:17
   [1051]7:21   [1052]9:24   [1053]9:44   [1054]9:44   [1055]9:48
   [1056]10:14   [1057]10:16   [1058]10:19   [1059]10:21   [1060]12:30
   [1061]14:22   [1062]16:14

   Luke

   [1063]1:50   [1064]1:50   [1065]1:51   [1066]1:70   [1067]2:49
   [1068]2:51   [1069]3:20   [1070]3:20   [1071]5:4   [1072]7:38
   [1073]7:50   [1074]8:12   [1075]8:15   [1076]8:31   [1077]11:17
   [1078]11:24   [1079]12:1   [1080]12:8   [1081]12:15   [1082]12:32
   [1083]12:32   [1084]12:32   [1085]12:47   [1086]12:47   [1087]12:50
   [1088]13:3   [1089]13:11   [1090]13:16   [1091]13:31   [1092]14:24
   [1093]15:7   [1094]15:8   [1095]15:18   [1096]15:20   [1097]15:22
   [1098]15:30   [1099]16:2   [1100]16:14   [1101]16:14   [1102]16:14
   [1103]16:24   [1104]16:31   [1105]17:7   [1106]17:15   [1107]18:11
   [1108]19:5   [1109]19:8   [1110]19:8   [1111]19:14   [1112]19:48
   [1113]19:48   [1114]20:27   [1115]20:47   [1116]22:20   [1117]22:22
   [1118]22:42   [1119]22:44   [1120]23:14   [1121]23:40   [1122]23:56
   [1123]24:19   [1124]24:27   [1125]24:47

   John

   [1126]2:2   [1127]3:15   [1128]3:16   [1129]3:18   [1130]3:31
   [1131]3:36   [1132]3:36   [1133]4:24   [1134]4:48   [1135]4:48
   [1136]5:4   [1137]5:39   [1138]6:37   [1139]6:38   [1140]6:54
   [1141]6:64   [1142]6:64   [1143]7:23   [1144]8:12   [1145]8:18
   [1146]8:29   [1147]8:44   [1148]8:44   [1149]8:44   [1150]8:49
   [1151]8:56   [1152]8:56   [1153]9:36   [1154]10:1   [1155]10:17
   [1156]12:6   [1157]12:42   [1158]12:48   [1159]13:1   [1160]13:8
   [1161]13:27   [1162]13:30   [1163]14:9   [1164]14:15   [1165]14:16
   [1166]14:30   [1167]15:9   [1168]15:16   [1169]15:22   [1170]16:20
   [1171]17:9   [1172]17:17   [1173]17:23   [1174]18:30   [1175]19:11
   [1176]19:26-27   [1177]19:38   [1178]20:13   [1179]20:17
   [1180]20:17   [1181]20:17   [1182]20:19   [1183]20:26   [1184]21:15

   Acts

   [1185]2:1   [1186]2:15   [1187]2:39   [1188]3:19   [1189]3:21
   [1190]4:10   [1191]5:3   [1192]5:3   [1193]5:3   [1194]5:5
   [1195]7:52   [1196]7:54   [1197]7:59   [1198]8:1   [1199]9:4
   [1200]9:4   [1201]9:6   [1202]10:43   [1203]10:44   [1204]10:44
   [1205]11:18   [1206]13:10   [1207]14:17   [1208]15:9   [1209]16:14
   [1210]16:14   [1211]16:31   [1212]16:31   [1213]16:33   [1214]16:33
   [1215]17:11   [1216]17:21   [1217]17:26   [1218]18:24   [1219]19:9
   [1220]20:7   [1221]20:21   [1222]20:33   [1223]20:38   [1224]22:20
   [1225]22:24   [1226]23:12   [1227]24:5   [1228]26:9   [1229]26:18
   [1230]26:18   [1231]26:18   [1232]26:18   [1233]27:44   [1234]27:44
   [1235]28:3   [1236]28:4

   Romans

   [1237]1:17   [1238]1:23   [1239]1:28   [1240]1:30   [1241]1:31
   [1242]2:1   [1243]2:24   [1244]2:24   [1245]3:8   [1246]3:24
   [1247]3:25   [1248]3:31   [1249]4:11   [1250]4:20   [1251]4:20
   [1252]5:1   [1253]5:6   [1254]5:6   [1255]5:10   [1256]6:3
   [1257]6:12   [1258]6:17   [1259]6:23   [1260]7:7   [1261]7:7
   [1262]7:12   [1263]7:14   [1264]7:16   [1265]7:16   [1266]7:18
   [1267]7:19   [1268]7:19   [1269]7:22   [1270]7:23   [1271]7:24
   [1272]7:27   [1273]8:1   [1274]8:21   [1275]8:26   [1276]8:28
   [1277]9:4   [1278]9:4   [1279]10:14   [1280]10:14   [1281]10:14
   [1282]10:21   [1283]11:35   [1284]12:1   [1285]12:2   [1286]12:11
   [1287]12:19   [1288]13:2   [1289]13:14   [1290]14:1   [1291]14:8
   [1292]15:1   [1293]15:3   [1294]16:26   [1295]16:26

   1 Corinthians

   [1296]1:16   [1297]1:26   [1298]2:9   [1299]2:9   [1300]2:10
   [1301]3:16   [1302]4:15   [1303]6:9   [1304]6:9   [1305]6:10
   [1306]6:15   [1307]6:19   [1308]6:19   [1309]6:19   [1310]6:20
   [1311]7:2   [1312]7:2   [1313]7:2   [1314]7:14   [1315]7:35
   [1316]7:39   [1317]8:4   [1318]9:27   [1319]10:2-4   [1320]10:13
   [1321]10:14   [1322]10:16   [1323]10:17   [1324]10:21   [1325]10:22
   [1326]10:22   [1327]10:31   [1328]11:3   [1329]11:20   [1330]11:24-25
   [1331]11:25   [1332]11:26   [1333]11:27   [1334]11:28   [1335]11:28
   [1336]11:29   [1337]13:2   [1338]13:5   [1339]13:7   [1340]13:8
   [1341]15:10   [1342]15:33   [1343]16:2   [1344]16:9

   2 Corinthians

   [1345]1:3   [1346]1:3   [1347]1:3   [1348]1:5   [1349]1:22
   [1350]2:14   [1351]3:1   [1352]3:15   [1353]4:4   [1354]4:4
   [1355]4:17   [1356]5:1   [1357]5:20   [1358]5:21   [1359]5:21
   [1360]6:10   [1361]6:14   [1362]6:14   [1363]6:14   [1364]6:18
   [1365]7:10   [1366]8:12   [1367]11:2   [1368]12:14   [1369]12:14

   Galatians

   [1370]2:20   [1371]3:10   [1372]3:10   [1373]3:13   [1374]3:24
   [1375]4:6   [1376]4:19   [1377]5:4   [1378]5:6   [1379]5:6
   [1380]5:21   [1381]5:22   [1382]5:22   [1383]6:14   [1384]6:17

   Ephesians

   [1385]1:4   [1386]1:6   [1387]1:6   [1388]1:6   [1389]1:17
   [1390]1:23   [1391]2:1   [1392]2:4   [1393]3:17   [1394]3:17
   [1395]3:17   [1396]3:17   [1397]3:19   [1398]3:20   [1399]4:19
   [1400]4:19   [1401]4:19   [1402]4:24   [1403]4:26   [1404]4:28
   [1405]5:5   [1406]5:5   [1407]5:19   [1408]5:22   [1409]5:23
   [1410]5:25   [1411]5:29   [1412]5:32   [1413]6:1   [1414]6:2
   [1415]6:4   [1416]6:9   [1417]6:9   [1418]6:16

   Philippians

   [1419]1:11   [1420]1:27   [1421]2:8   [1422]2:13   [1423]2:13
   [1424]2:15   [1425]3:8   [1426]3:8   [1427]3:8   [1428]3:14
   [1429]3:15   [1430]3:19   [1431]3:19   [1432]3:20   [1433]4:6
   [1434]4:11

   Colossians

   [1435]1:15   [1436]1:19   [1437]2:7   [1438]2:18   [1439]2:18-19
   [1440]3:3   [1441]3:5   [1442]3:5   [1443]3:20   [1444]3:20
   [1445]3:20   [1446]3:21   [1447]3:21   [1448]3:22   [1449]3:24
   [1450]4:15

   1 Thessalonians

   [1451]1:3   [1452]1:4-5   [1453]1:10   [1454]1:10   [1455]2:5
   [1456]2:13   [1457]2:13   [1458]2:16   [1459]2:19   [1460]4:3
   [1461]4:6   [1462]5:12-13   [1463]5:22   [1464]5:23

   2 Thessalonians

   [1465]1:7-8   [1466]1:8   [1467]2:4   [1468]2:8   [1469]2:13
   [1470]3:11   [1471]3:12

   1 Timothy

   [1472]1:11   [1473]1:17   [1474]2:1   [1475]3:9   [1476]3:11
   [1477]5:8   [1478]5:19   [1479]5:23   [1480]6:9   [1481]6:10
   [1482]6:17-18

   2 Timothy

   [1483]1:6   [1484]1:12   [1485]2:12   [1486]2:26   [1487]3:2
   [1488]3:4   [1489]3:15   [1490]3:16   [1491]4:3   [1492]4:6
   [1493]4:10   [1494]4:10   [1495]4:17   [1496]4:17

   Titus

   [1497]1:16   [1498]2:9   [1499]2:10   [1500]3:5   [1501]3:8

   Hebrews

   [1502]2:1   [1503]3:3   [1504]3:12   [1505]4:2   [1506]4:2
   [1507]4:2   [1508]4:2   [1509]5:7   [1510]5:7   [1511]5:8   [1512]5:9
   [1513]5:12   [1514]6:1   [1515]6:6   [1516]6:6   [1517]6:9
   [1518]6:10   [1519]6:16   [1520]7:22   [1521]7:22   [1522]9:14
   [1523]10:10   [1524]10:19   [1525]10:29   [1526]10:31   [1527]10:31
   [1528]10:38   [1529]10:38   [1530]10:39   [1531]11:4   [1532]11:8
   [1533]11:25   [1534]11:26   [1535]12:9   [1536]12:9   [1537]12:10
   [1538]12:10   [1539]12:10   [1540]12:11   [1541]12:14   [1542]12:25
   [1543]13:2   [1544]13:4   [1545]13:4   [1546]13:4   [1547]13:4
   [1548]13:5

   James

   [1549]1:6   [1550]1:12   [1551]1:12   [1552]1:18   [1553]1:21
   [1554]1:21   [1555]1:21   [1556]1:21   [1557]2:13   [1558]2:18
   [1559]3:2   [1560]3:6   [1561]3:8   [1562]5:10   [1563]5:16

   1 Peter

   [1564]1:4   [1565]1:6   [1566]1:8   [1567]1:14   [1568]1:16
   [1569]1:16   [1570]1:19   [1571]2:2   [1572]2:2   [1573]2:3
   [1574]2:5   [1575]2:17   [1576]2:18   [1577]3:6   [1578]4:12
   [1579]4:17   [1580]5:2   [1581]5:4   [1582]5:4   [1583]5:4
   [1584]5:5   [1585]5:5   [1586]5:7   [1587]5:8

   2 Peter

   [1588]1:1   [1589]1:4   [1590]1:4   [1591]1:18-19   [1592]2:1
   [1593]2:4   [1594]2:9   [1595]2:9-10   [1596]2:14   [1597]3:4
   [1598]3:9

   1 John

   [1599]1:3   [1600]2:1   [1601]2:6   [1602]2:20   [1603]3:9
   [1604]3:15   [1605]4:6   [1606]4:18   [1607]4:19   [1608]5:1
   [1609]5:3   [1610]5:4   [1611]5:4   [1612]5:7   [1613]5:10
   [1614]5:19   [1615]5:19   [1616]5:21

   Jude

   [1617]1:6

   Revelation

   [1618]1:5   [1619]1:10   [1620]1:10   [1621]1:10   [1622]2:4
   [1623]2:21   [1624]2:26   [1625]2:28   [1626]3:2   [1627]3:21
   [1628]4:3   [1629]5:13   [1630]8:7   [1631]9:7   [1632]10:2
   [1633]11:16   [1634]12:2   [1635]12:11   [1636]14:2   [1637]16:9
   [1638]18:4   [1639]18:7   [1640]20:12   [1641]20:15   [1642]21:8
   [1643]21:19   [1644]21:21   [1645]21:22-23   [1646]22:2   [1647]22:14
   [1648]22:15   [1649]22:15   [1650]22:15   [1651]22:18   [1652]22:19
     __________________________________________________________________

Index of Latin Words and Phrases

     * Omne divisibile est corruptibile.: [1653]1
     * Quis ad coelum?: [1654]1
     * Quod invisibile est, pingi non potest.: [1655]1
     * Acheronta movere: [1656]1
     * Animam meam in odio haberem.: [1657]1
     * Ardet palea, purgatur aurum.: [1658]1
     * Beatitudo hominis est Deus: [1659]1
     * Beneficium postulat officium: [1660]1
     * Bonum non amatur quod non cognoscitur: [1661]1
     * Clamitat in coelum vox sanguinis: [1662]1
     * Clamor iste penetrat nubes: [1663]1
     * Claritas intellectu parit ardorem in effectu: [1664]1
     * Coena Domini: [1665]1
     * Communio fundatur in unione: [1666]1
     * Complacentia amantis in amato: [1667]1
     * Complacentia amantis in amato.: [1668]1
     * Crede et manducasti: [1669]1
     * Crimen laesae majestatis: [1670]1
     * Cum defecerit virtus mea calicem salutarem accipiam.: [1671]1
     * Cum duplicantur lateres, venit Moses: [1672]1
     * Delectat in momentum, cruciat in aeternum: [1673]1
     * Dicimur infanaticidii incestus rei: [1674]1
     * Ex abundantia cordis: [1675]1
     * Extremos currit mercator ad Indos: [1676]1
     * Fides qua creditur: [1677]1
     * Fides quae creditur: [1678]1
     * Finis specificat actionem: [1679]1
     * Fulgens hoc aurum praestringit oculos: [1680]1
     * Grande profundum est homo.: [1681]1
     * Hoc est corpus meum: [1682]1
     * Idem est motus animi in imaginem et rem: [1683]1
     * Ignoti nulla cupido: [1684]1
     * Ille vere plangit commissa, qui non committit plangenda.: [1685]1
     * In Deo quadam dulcedine delectatur anima, immo rapitur: [1686]1
     * In filium pater obtinet non tyrannicum imperium, set basilicum:
       [1687]1
     * In nomine Dei: [1688]1
     * In relato subintelligitur correlatum.: [1689]1
     * Ingratus vitandus est ut dirum selus, tellus ipsa foedius nihil
       creat: [1690]1
     * Instrumenta luxuriae tripudia: [1691]1
     * Intus existens prohibet alienum: [1692]1
     * Invidus alterius rebus macrescit opimis.: [1693]1
     * Ipse dixit.: [1694]1
     * Jam condemnatus est: [1695]1
     * Juris credit minus: [1696]1
     * Laeta venire Venus, tristis abire solet: [1697]1
     * Lex est copulativa: [1698]1
     * Lex humana ligat manum, lex divina comprimit animam: [1699]1
     * Lex pelargica: [1700]1
     * Luctus in laetitiam vertetur, cineres in corollas: [1701]1
     * Ludi praebent semina nequitiae: [1702]1
     * Magnes amoris amor: [1703]1
     * Majora sunt linguae vulnera quam gladii: [1704]1
     * Malum oritur ex quolibet defectu: [1705]1
     * Mensa Domini: [1706]1
     * Meretricius est amor plus annulum quam sponsum amare: [1707]1
     * Momentaneum est quod delectat, auternum quod cruciat: [1708]1
     * Murus aheneus esto nil conscire sibi: [1709]1
     * Ne imagini quidem Christi in quantum est lignum sculptum, ulla
       debetur reverentia: [1710]1
     * Nec donis corrumpitur, nec blanditiis fallitur.: [1711]1
     * Neque inferos, neque superos esse: [1712]1
     * Nihil carius pupilla oculi: [1713]1
     * Nihil durius servitute.: [1714]1
     * Non potest amor esse, et dulcis non esse: [1715]1
     * Non remittitur peccatum nisi restituatur ablatum.: [1716]1
     * Nullus animae suavior cibus: [1717]1
     * Nullus mihi per otium dies exit: [1718]1
     * Obedientia praest and adest non timore poenae, sed amore Dei:
       [1719]1
     * Odium balneum diaboli: [1720]1
     * Omnia quae praestari jubet Deus, non onerant nos sed ornant.:
       [1721]1
     * Omnia si perdas animam servare memento: [1722]1
     * Omnis motus fit super immobili: [1723]1
     * Optimus maximus.: [1724]1
     * Os homini sublime dedit, coelumque tueri jussit: [1725]1
     * Par facit quasi Christum trucidaret: [1726]1
     * Peccatum clamans: [1727]1
     * Peccatum transit actu, manet reatu: [1728]1
     * Plures periere crapula, quam gladio: [1729]1
     * Plus velle quam sat est: [1730]1
     * Post nubila Phoebus: [1731]1
     * Privatio Divinae visionis omnium suppliciorum summum: [1732]1
     * Probatio delectionis est exhibitio operis: [1733]1
     * Pronior est Deus ad parcendum quam ad puniendum: [1734]1
     * Quae diligit alienum odit sponsum: [1735]1
     * Quae ebullit prae ardore.: [1736]1
     * Qualitas malae vitae initium summit ab infidelitate: [1737]1
     * Qui Curios simulant et bacchanalia vivunt: [1738]1
     * Qui non prohibit cum potest, jubet: [1739]1
     * Qui occidit patrem, plurima committit peccata in uno.: [1740]1
     * Quicquid dixeris jura tum putes: [1741]1
     * Quicquid propter Deum fit aequaliter fit: [1742]1
     * Quid non mortalia pectora cogis, auri sacra fames!: [1743]1
     * Quis credidit?: [1744]1
     * Quis quaesivit haec?: [1745]1
     * Quo plus sunt potae, plus sitiuntur aquae: [1746]1
     * Quod invisibile est, pingi non potest: [1747]1
     * Redde rationem: [1748]1
     * Saltatio adadulteras non ad pudicas pertinet: [1749]1
     * Sanctius habitum fuit: [1750]1
     * Sanguis Christi clavis paradisi: [1751]1
     * Scriptum est: [1752]1
     * Serpunt vitia et in proximum quemque transiliunt: [1753]1
     * Serva depositum: [1754]1
     * Servire Deo est regnare: [1755]1
     * Sic morientur damnati ut semper vivunt: [1756]1
     * Simulata sanctitas duplex iniquitas: [1757]1
     * Sint castae deliciae meae scripturae: [1758]1
     * Ubi male creditur, ibi nec bene vivitur: [1759]1
     * Urbs est jam tota lupanar: [1760]1
     * Utrum onus appellatur quod laetitia fertur: [1761]1
     * Verba sunt speculum mentis.: [1762]1
     * Vir bonus magis aliis prodest quam sibi: [1763]1
     * Virtus laudata crescit: [1764]1
     * Virtus nolentium nulla est: [1765]1
     * Vis unita fortior: [1766]1
     * Vitia in proximum quamque transiliunt: [1767]1
     * Vivitur exemplis: [1768]1
     * Voluntas est regula et mensura actionis: [1769]1
     * ab effectu: [1770]1
     * ab utili: [1771]1
     * abiit tristis: [1772]1
     * aeternitatis gemma: [1773]1
     * amor amicitiae: [1774]1
     * amore perculsa: [1775]1
     * ascendere faciam: [1776]1
     * bene: [1777]1
     * bona scabelli: [1778]1
     * bonum: [1779]1
     * bonum in quo omnia bona: [1780]1
     * bonum sanctificans: [1781]1
     * bonum sufficiens: [1782]1
     * bonum summum: [1783]1
     * columna et corona regni: [1784]1
     * conjugium: [1785]1
     * conjurgium: [1786]1
     * consolari: [1787]1
     * contra proximum: [1788]1
     * crepusculum: [1789]1
     * crimen laesae majestatis: [1790]1
     * cum vera loquuntur: [1791]1
     * de illo pane: [1792]1
     * de illo poculo: [1793]1
     * domus servitutis: [1794]1
     * elementum gravissimum: [1795]1
     * elicere conatum.: [1796]1
     * ex animo: [1797]1
     * facere: [1798]1
     * facere bonum: [1799]1
     * felo de se: [1800]1
     * fides oculata: [1801]1
     * foedus: [1802]1
     * fons et origo: [1803]1
     * furtum: [1804]1
     * hoc agere: [1805]1
     * in articulo mortis: [1806]1
     * in battalia: [1807]1
     * in domo servitutis: [1808]1
     * in licitis et honestis: [1809]1
     * inimica salutis: [1810]1
     * lava, Domine, lacrimas meas: [1811]1
     * locus subterraneus: [1812]1
     * lucrum in arca, damnum in conscientia: [1813]1
     * m selectum: [1814]1
     * mansuetudine: [1815]1
     * manus mendica: [1816]1
     * minimum quod sit: [1817]1
     * motus primo primi: [1818]1
     * nec calor, nec sanguis superesset: [1819]1
     * non quietus: [1820]1
     * norma: [1821]1
     * norma cultus: [1822]1
     * occidat modo imperet: [1823]1
     * opera mortua: [1824]1
     * palaestra pietatis: [1825]1
     * peccata in uno: [1826]1
     * per fas et nefas: [1827]1
     * per porticus diambulo: [1828]1
     * perficere: [1829]1
     * plangendae tenebrae: [1830]1
     * poena damni: [1831]1
     * poena sensus: [1832]1
     * pondus animae: [1833]1
     * ponere obicem: [1834]1
     * principium motus: [1835]1
     * profluere a fide: [1836]1
     * propter Dei gloriam: [1837]1
     * propter se: [1838]1
     * quod posse: [1839]1
     * respectu durationis: [1840]1
     * respectu objecti: [1841]1
     * restringitur ad licita et honesta: [1842]1
     * sacrificare lari: [1843]1
     * sanctissimum humani pectoris bonum: [1844]1
     * simulatio virtutis: [1845]1
     * stabilire animum: [1846]1
     * sub poena: [1847]1
     * summum jus: [1848]1
     * superna anhelare: [1849]1
     * symbolum amoris: [1850]1
     * tanquam arrhabo: [1851]1
     * terminus ad quem: [1852]1
     * tessera: [1853]1
     * totus oculus: [1854]1
     * tremenda hysteria: [1855]1
     * tristitia de bonis alienis: [1856]1
     * uncia aurei vituli: [1857]1 [1858]2
     * unum deest. : [1859]1
     * velle: [1860]1
     * vincit invincibilem: [1861]1
     * virtute unionis: [1862]1
     * vulnus occultum: [1863]1
     __________________________________________________________________

            This document is from the Christian Classics Ethereal
               Library at Calvin College, http://www.ccel.org,
                   generated on demand from ThML source.

References

   1. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=2&scrV=7#iv.vi-p65.4
   2. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=2&scrV=15#iv.iv-p27.3
   3. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=2&scrV=22#iv.vii-p3.3
   4. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=3&scrV=6#iv.vii-p33.2
   5. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=3&scrV=19#iv.iv-p27.6
   6. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=3&scrV=24#v.iii-p19.3
   7. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=4&scrV=6#iv.vi-p8.3
   8. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=4&scrV=8#iv.vi-p8.3
   9. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=4&scrV=10#iv.vi-p25.4
  10. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=4&scrV=11#iv.vi-p27.2
  11. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=4&scrV=15#iv.vi-p27.3
  12. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=5&scrV=24#iv.x-p25.2
  13. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=6&scrV=5#v.i-p4.6
  14. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=9&scrV=6#iv.vi-p6.1
  15. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=9&scrV=6#iv.vi-p24.1
  16. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=14&scrV=22#iv.viii-p34.2
  17. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=15&scrV=2#iv.iv-p65.3
  18. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=15&scrV=2#vi.iii-p20.3
  19. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=17&scrV=7#vi.iv-p24.1
  20. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=17&scrV=7#vi.iv-p43.1
  21. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=17&scrV=10#vi.iv-p35.1
  22. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=18&scrV=21#iv.vi-p25.3
  23. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=18&scrV=21#v.ii-p3.3
  24. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=18&scrV=25#iv.iii-p27.1
  25. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=20&scrV=6#iv.ii-p68.2
  26. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=22&scrV=5#iv.iv-p30.1
  27. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=24&scrV=9#iv.x-p34.1
  28. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=24&scrV=12#iv.v-p17.2
  29. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=25&scrV=5#iii.iii-p57.3
  30. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=27&scrV=13#v.iii-p26.1
  31. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=28&scrV=1#iv.v-p36.3
  32. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=28&scrV=21#iv.i-p7.2
  33. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=31&scrV=7#iv.v-p26.1
  34. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=32&scrV=9#vi.vi-p30.2
  35. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=32&scrV=11#vi.vi-p30.1
  36. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=32&scrV=12#vi.vi-p30.3
  37. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=32&scrV=28#vi.vi-p30.4
  38. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=33&scrV=11#iv.x-p37.2
  39. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=37&scrV=3#iv.v-p63.1
  40. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=37&scrV=20#iv.vi-p8.1
  41. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=39&scrV=9#iv.i-p10.5
  42. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=39&scrV=9#iv.vii-p44.2
  43. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=39&scrV=12#iv.vii-p50.2
  44. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=41&scrV=15#vi.vi-p19.6
  45. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=45&scrV=27#vi.v-p27.3
  46. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=46&scrV=29#iv.v-p34.1
  47. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=47&scrV=12#iv.v-p38.1
  48. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=48&scrV=15#iv.ii-p64.1
  49. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=49&scrV=6#iv.vi-p7.1
  50. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=50&scrV=20#iv.i-p17.6
  51. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=50&scrV=25#iv.ii-p38.1
  52. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=2&scrV=23#iii.iii-p138.1
  53. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=3&scrV=5#iii.iii-p16.1
  54. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=10&scrV=9#iii.iii-p127.4
  55. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=12&scrV=9#vi.v-p49.1
  56. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=12&scrV=29#iii.iii-p64.1
  57. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=15&scrV=2#iv.iv-p39.3
  58. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=15&scrV=20#iv.vii-p39.4
  59. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=16&scrV=26#iv.iv-p30.3
  60. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=16&scrV=27#iv.iv-p30.4
  61. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=19&scrV=5#iii.i-p20.1
  62. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=19&scrV=5#iii.iii-p90.1
  63. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=19&scrV=10#iii.iii-p12.1
  64. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=19&scrV=10#iv.iv-p35.1
  65. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=19&scrV=12#iii.iii-p12.2
  66. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=19&scrV=12#vi.v-p37.2
  67. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=19&scrV=22#iv.vi-p33.4
  68. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=20&scrV=1#iii.iii-p1.1
  69. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=20&scrV=3#iii.iv-p1.1
  70. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=20&scrV=3#iv.i-p1.1
  71. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=20&scrV=4#iv.ii-p1.1
  72. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=20&scrV=5#iv.ii-p58.2
  73. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=20&scrV=7#iv.iii-p1.1
  74. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=20&scrV=8#iv.iv-p1.1
  75. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=20&scrV=12#iv.v-p1.1
  76. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=20&scrV=13#iv.vi-p1.1
  77. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=20&scrV=14#iv.vii-p1.1
  78. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=20&scrV=15#iv.viii-p1.1
  79. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=20&scrV=16#iv.ix-p1.1
  80. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=20&scrV=17#iv.x-p1.1
  81. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=21&scrV=14#iv.vi-p6.2
  82. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=21&scrV=15#iv.vi-p16.2
  83. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=21&scrV=28#iv.vi-p25.7
  84. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=22&scrV=23#iv.viii-p22.2
  85. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=23&scrV=4#iv.vi-p63.1
  86. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=23&scrV=13#iv.i-p26.6
  87. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=25&scrV=9#vi.iii-p12.6
  88. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=29&scrV=10#iv.ii-p118.1
  89. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=29&scrV=37#v.i-p5.4
  90. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=30&scrV=9#vi.vi-p10.2
  91. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=31&scrV=15#iv.iv-p30.7
  92. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=31&scrV=18#iii.iii-p12.3
  93. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=32&scrV=7#iv.i-p26.7
  94. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=32&scrV=7#iii.iii-p71.5
  95. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=32&scrV=10#vi.vi-p42.3
  96. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=32&scrV=27#iii.iii-p73.6
  97. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=33&scrV=19#iv.ii-p54.1
  98. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=34&scrV=6#iv.ii-p54.2
  99. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=34&scrV=6#iv.ii-p58.1
 100. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=34&scrV=14#iv.ii-p33.1
 101. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=34&scrV=14#iv.i-p26.3
 102. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=34&scrV=15#iv.ii-p46.2
 103. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=3&scrV=3#iii.iii-p71.1
 104. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=6&scrV=13#iii.i-p13.2
 105. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=6&scrV=13#iv.ii-p131.2
 106. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=7&scrV=20#iii.iii-p129.1
 107. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=10&scrV=1#iv.ii-p31.1
 108. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=10&scrV=1#iii.iv-p19.1
 109. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=10&scrV=2#iv.iii-p5.1
 110. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=11&scrV=17#iv.viii-p35.1
 111. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=13&scrV=4#iv.vi-p38.1
 112. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=13&scrV=45#iv.iii-p9.1
 113. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=16&scrV=13#iv.ii-p87.2
 114. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=16&scrV=14#iv.ii-p87.1
 115. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=17&scrV=7#iii.iii-p71.8
 116. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=18&scrV=4#iii.i-p4.4
 117. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=19&scrV=3#iv.v-p31.1
 118. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=19&scrV=12#iv.iii-p21.1
 119. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=19&scrV=13#iv.viii-p9.1
 120. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=19&scrV=13#iv.viii-p13.3
 121. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=19&scrV=14#iv.i-p10.6
 122. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=19&scrV=18#iv.ix-p14.2
 123. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=19&scrV=32#iv.v-p8.2
 124. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=20&scrV=8#iv.ii-p74.1
 125. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=20&scrV=10#iv.vii-p24.1
 126. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=24&scrV=11#iv.iii-p30.1
 127. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=24&scrV=14#iv.v-p50.3
 128. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=24&scrV=23#iv.iii-p30.1
 129. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=25&scrV=14#iv.viii-p13.4
 130. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=25&scrV=25#iv.iii-p12.1
 131. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=25&scrV=41#vi.iv-p39.1
 132. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=25&scrV=43#iv.ii-p128.3
 133. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=25&scrV=43#iv.v-p25.2
 134. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=26&scrV=1#iv.ii-p11.1
 135. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=26&scrV=15#iv.ii-p136.2
 136. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=26&scrV=41#vi.ii-p13.1
 137. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=3&scrV=13#iv.v-p11.3
 138. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=5&scrV=27#iv.iv-p83.1
 139. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=5&scrV=27#vi.v-p29.1
 140. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=6&scrV=23#vi.vi-p15.5
 141. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=9&scrV=13#vi.v-p43.1
 142. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=14&scrV=4#iii.iii-p75.2
 143. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=14&scrV=27#iv.iii-p27.2
 144. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=15&scrV=30#v.ii-p5.1
 145. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=15&scrV=30#v.ii-p14.5
 146. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=15&scrV=35#iv.iv-p30.6
 147. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=17&scrV=0#iv.v-p11.5
 148. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=21&scrV=5#iv.iii-p25.1
 149. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=21&scrV=8#iv.ii-p20.1
 150. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=23&scrV=21#iii.iii-p49.2
 151. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=27&scrV=21#iv.v-p11.4
 152. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=35&scrV=33#iv.vi-p20.1
 153. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=4&scrV=5#iv.ii-p129.2
 154. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=4&scrV=12#iii.iii-p74.2
 155. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=4&scrV=15#iv.ii-p8.2
 156. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=4&scrV=15#iv.ii-p6.1
 157. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=4&scrV=20#iii.iii-p79.1
 158. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=4&scrV=39#iv.i-p24.1
 159. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=5&scrV=21#iv.x-p30.1
 160. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=6&scrV=5#iii.ii-p4.1
 161. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=6&scrV=5#iii.iv-p13.1
 162. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=6&scrV=6#iii.iii-p20.1
 163. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=6&scrV=8#iv.iii-p13.1
 164. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=6&scrV=13#iv.iii-p14.2
 165. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=7&scrV=10#iv.ii-p50.1
 166. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=8&scrV=15#iii.iii-p82.1
 167. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=10&scrV=12#iii.i-p26.1
 168. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=10&scrV=13#iv.ii-p128.1
 169. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=11&scrV=15#iv.i-p36.3
 170. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=11&scrV=19#iii.iii-p20.3
 171. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=13&scrV=6#iv.i-p26.9
 172. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=13&scrV=8#iv.i-p26.9
 173. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=13&scrV=9#iv.i-p26.9
 174. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=16&scrV=10#iii.i-p8.2
 175. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=16&scrV=10#iv.ii-p122.2
 176. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=16&scrV=22#iv.ii-p47.1
 177. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=16&scrV=22#iv.ii-p11.2
 178. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=18&scrV=10#iv.vi-p11.7
 179. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=18&scrV=11#iv.i-p38.3
 180. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=19&scrV=18#iv.ix-p9.4
 181. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=21&scrV=18#iv.v-p50.4
 182. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=21&scrV=21#iv.v-p50.4
 183. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=22&scrV=19#iv.ix-p12.6
 184. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=22&scrV=24#iv.vii-p24.2
 185. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=23&scrV=18#iv.x-p17.5
 186. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=23&scrV=25#iv.viii-p30.1
 187. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=24&scrV=6#iv.vi-p11.11
 188. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=27&scrV=9#iii.i-p1.1
 189. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=27&scrV=15#iv.i-p23.1
 190. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=27&scrV=16#iv.v-p34.3
 191. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=27&scrV=20#iv.x-p33.2
 192. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=27&scrV=24#iv.vi-p27.1
 193. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=28&scrV=1#iii.i-p21.1
 194. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=28&scrV=3#iii.i-p21.1
 195. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=28&scrV=4#iv.i-p17.2
 196. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=28&scrV=5#iii.i-p21.1
 197. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=28&scrV=58#iii.iii-p28.1
 198. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=28&scrV=58#iv.i-p10.1
 199. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=28&scrV=58#iii.iv-p16.1
 200. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=28&scrV=58#iv.iii-p3.1
 201. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=30&scrV=6#iii.iv-p29.2
 202. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=30&scrV=19#iv.iv-p70.1
 203. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=32&scrV=17#iii.iii-p71.7
 204. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=32&scrV=19#iv.v-p49.4
 205. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=32&scrV=47#iii.iii-p17.1
 206. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=32&scrV=47#iv.iv-p70.2
 207. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=32&scrV=47#vi.iii-p20.5
 208. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=33&scrV=2#iii.iii-p12.4
 209. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=34&scrV=7#iv.v-p42.4
 210. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Josh&scrCh=7&scrV=11#vi.ii-p21.1
 211. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Josh&scrCh=7&scrV=21#iv.viii-p4.2
 212. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Josh&scrCh=7&scrV=25#iv.viii-p35.4
 213. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Josh&scrCh=9&scrV=15#iv.vi-p14.1
 214. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Josh&scrCh=14&scrV=15#iii.iii-p77.3
 215. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Josh&scrCh=24&scrV=2#iii.iii-p66.1
 216. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Josh&scrCh=24&scrV=15#iv.i-p6.1
 217. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Judg&scrCh=2&scrV=12#iv.i-p26.5
 218. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Judg&scrCh=9&scrV=0#iii.iii-p72.2
 219. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Judg&scrCh=9&scrV=15#iii.iii-p140.11
 220. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Judg&scrCh=11&scrV=7#iv.ii-p48.1
 221. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Judg&scrCh=11&scrV=21#iv.vi-p19.2
 222. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Judg&scrCh=11&scrV=31#iv.iii-p24.2
 223. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Judg&scrCh=17&scrV=6#iv.v-p6.1
 224. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Judg&scrCh=18&scrV=14#iii.iii-p50.4
 225. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Judg&scrCh=18&scrV=24#iii.iii-p60.2
 226. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Judg&scrCh=19&scrV=20#iii.iii-p53.2
 227. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ruth&scrCh=1&scrV=20#iii.iii-p98.2
 228. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=1&scrV=13#vi.vi-p15.1
 229. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=1&scrV=15#vi.vi-p19.2
 230. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=2&scrV=8#iv.ii-p61.1
 231. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=2&scrV=12#iv.v-p36.2
 232. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=2&scrV=25#iv.v-p36.2
 233. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=2&scrV=31#iv.v-p42.5
 234. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=3&scrV=10#iv.iv-p69.4
 235. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=3&scrV=13#iii.iv-p24.2
 236. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=3&scrV=18#iii.iii-p109.3
 237. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=4&scrV=2#iv.v-p50.2
 238. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=7&scrV=9#vi.vi-p11.1
 239. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=12&scrV=3#iv.x-p35.1
 240. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=14&scrV=27#vi.v-p68.1
 241. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=15&scrV=22#iii.i-p4.2
 242. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=15&scrV=22#iv.ii-p115.3
 243. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=17&scrV=35#iii.iii-p140.12
 244. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=18&scrV=17#iv.vi-p11.9
 245. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=19&scrV=4#iv.ix-p17.2
 246. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=20&scrV=30#iv.v-p60.1
 247. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=20&scrV=31#iv.v-p65.1
 248. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=20&scrV=33#iv.v-p61.1
 249. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=20&scrV=34#iv.v-p65.2
 250. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=24&scrV=5#iv.vi-p15.2
 251. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=28&scrV=15#iii.iii-p43.2
 252. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=28&scrV=15#iv.x-p23.4
 253. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=30&scrV=13#iv.v-p27.1
 254. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=7&scrV=17#iii.iii-p87.1
 255. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=11&scrV=4#iv.vii-p42.2
 256. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=11&scrV=15#iv.vi-p11.4
 257. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=12&scrV=5#iv.viii-p23.1
 258. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=12&scrV=9#iii.iv-p23.1
 259. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=12&scrV=9#iv.vi-p11.5
 260. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=12&scrV=13#iv.ii-p71.3
 261. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=12&scrV=13#vi.ii-p23.6
 262. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=12&scrV=27#iv.v-p46.2
 263. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=13&scrV=0#vi.ii-p16.1
 264. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=15&scrV=7#iv.iii-p22.1
 265. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=15&scrV=7#iv.ix-p6.3
 266. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=15&scrV=10#iv.iii-p22.2
 267. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=16&scrV=10#iv.ix-p15.1
 268. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=16&scrV=21#iii.iv-p25.1
 269. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=17&scrV=23#iv.i-p30.3
 270. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=17&scrV=23#iv.vi-p43.1
 271. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=20&scrV=10#iv.vi-p11.1
 272. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=21&scrV=1#iv.vi-p14.2
 273. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=22&scrV=3#iv.i-p11.2
 274. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=22&scrV=4#iv.v-p49.2
 275. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=22&scrV=20#iii.iii-p118.1
 276. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=22&scrV=32#iv.i-p4.1
 277. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=1&scrV=6#iv.v-p54.2
 278. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=1&scrV=9#iv.v-p54.2
 279. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=2&scrV=19#iv.v-p34.2
 280. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=2&scrV=20#iv.v-p33.1
 281. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=3&scrV=10#iii.ii-p34.1
 282. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=8&scrV=22#iv.i-p5.8
 283. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=8&scrV=38#vi.ii-p21.2
 284. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=13&scrV=5#iv.vi-p46.3
 285. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=14&scrV=10#iv.ii-p43.2
 286. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=17&scrV=16#iv.vi-p60.3
 287. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=18&scrV=7#iv.v-p11.2
 288. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=18&scrV=12#iv.v-p53.3
 289. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=18&scrV=37#vi.vi-p8.2
 290. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=18&scrV=39#iv.i-p5.6
 291. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=20&scrV=4#iii.iii-p46.1
 292. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=20&scrV=27#iv.i-p29.2
 293. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=20&scrV=29#iv.i-p29.2
 294. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=20&scrV=39#iii.iii-p77.2
 295. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=21&scrV=9#iv.vi-p11.6
 296. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=21&scrV=13#iv.ix-p9.2
 297. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=21&scrV=13#iv.x-p17.4
 298. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=21&scrV=27#vi.ii-p7.1
 299. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=22&scrV=8#iv.iv-p77.2
 300. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=1&scrV=6#iv.i-p38.4
 301. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=1&scrV=10#iii.i-p9.3
 302. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=4&scrV=6#iv.ii-p62.3
 303. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=4&scrV=6#vi.ii-p22.2
 304. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=4&scrV=7#iv.viii-p16.2
 305. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=4&scrV=35#iv.vi-p60.1
 306. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=5&scrV=13#iv.v-p14.1
 307. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=5&scrV=13#vi.v-p32.1
 308. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=5&scrV=27#iv.ii-p44.1
 309. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=5&scrV=27#iv.v-p17.5
 310. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=6&scrV=26#vi.vi-p9.1
 311. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=9&scrV=33#iv.ix-p13.1
 312. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=10&scrV=7#iv.ii-p43.3
 313. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=17&scrV=33#iv.i-p26.2
 314. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=18&scrV=4#iv.ii-p20.2
 315. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=18&scrV=21#iv.i-p11.3
 316. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=19&scrV=15#iv.i-p5.7
 317. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=19&scrV=22#iv.ii-p34.6
 318. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=23&scrV=6#iv.ii-p12.1
 319. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=23&scrV=24#iv.ii-p12.1
 320. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=24&scrV=4#iv.vi-p28.1
 321. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=25&scrV=4#iv.ii-p40.3
 322. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1Chr&scrCh=15&scrV=13#vi.v-p4.4
 323. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1Chr&scrCh=22&scrV=5#vi.iii-p22.1
 324. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1Chr&scrCh=28&scrV=9#iv.i-p7.1
 325. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1Chr&scrCh=28&scrV=9#iv.ii-p123.1
 326. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=2Chr&scrCh=14&scrV=11#iii.iii-p123.1
 327. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=2Chr&scrCh=15&scrV=12#iv.i-p8.2
 328. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=2Chr&scrCh=16&scrV=10#iv.iv-p86.4
 329. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=2Chr&scrCh=25&scrV=2#iii.i-p11.5
 330. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=2Chr&scrCh=25&scrV=4#iv.ii-p42.1
 331. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=2Chr&scrCh=25&scrV=9#iii.i-p21.4
 332. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=2Chr&scrCh=26&scrV=16#vi.vi-p11.2
 333. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=2Chr&scrCh=26&scrV=20#iii.i-p12.2
 334. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=2Chr&scrCh=28&scrV=22#v.ii-p14.1
 335. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=2Chr&scrCh=30&scrV=18#vi.v-p39.1
 336. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ezra&scrCh=4&scrV=15#iv.ix-p12.3
 337. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Neh&scrCh=2&scrV=4#vi.vi-p15.3
 338. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Neh&scrCh=8&scrV=6#iv.i-p9.4
 339. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Neh&scrCh=9&scrV=5#iv.v-p49.3
 340. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Neh&scrCh=9&scrV=13#iii.iii-p13.2
 341. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Neh&scrCh=9&scrV=13#iii.iii-p19.4
 342. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Neh&scrCh=10&scrV=30#iv.ii-p30.1
 343. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Neh&scrCh=13&scrV=15#iv.iv-p30.2
 344. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Neh&scrCh=13&scrV=17#iv.iv-p30.2
 345. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Esth&scrCh=2&scrV=12#iv.ii-p74.5
 346. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Esth&scrCh=3&scrV=9#iv.vi-p9.2
 347. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=1&scrV=6#iv.iv-p54.1
 348. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=1&scrV=8#v.i-p12.5
 349. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=5&scrV=13#iv.i-p30.2
 350. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=5&scrV=17#iii.iii-p91.1
 351. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=5&scrV=19#iii.iii-p114.2
 352. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=5&scrV=21#iv.ix-p16.1
 353. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=6&scrV=25#iv.iv-p91.3
 354. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=9&scrV=4#iii.iii-p8.1
 355. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=9&scrV=29#iv.iv-p89.1
 356. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=11&scrV=13#vi.vi-p31.1
 357. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=14&scrV=4#iv.ii-p124.6
 358. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=15&scrV=4#vi.vi-p34.1
 359. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=15&scrV=16#v.i-p4.5
 360. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=17&scrV=9#iii.i-p13.3
 361. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=21&scrV=12#iv.i-p35.2
 362. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=21&scrV=19#iv.ii-p43.1
 363. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=23&scrV=12#iv.vii-p45.3
 364. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=24&scrV=13#v.ii-p7.1
 365. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=26&scrV=7#iv.i-p5.10
 366. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=29&scrV=2#v.i-p10.2
 367. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=29&scrV=13#iv.vi-p53.2
 368. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=29&scrV=16#iv.vi-p53.1
 369. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=29&scrV=16#iv.v-p5.1
 370. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=29&scrV=18#iii.iii-p98.1
 371. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=30&scrV=28#iii.ii-p24.2
 372. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=30&scrV=28#iv.ii-p99.2
 373. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=31&scrV=1#iv.iv-p56.2
 374. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=31&scrV=1#iv.vii-p33.3
 375. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=31&scrV=2#iv.vii-p8.2
 376. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=31&scrV=24#iv.i-p28.6
 377. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=36&scrV=8#iii.iii-p94.1
 378. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=36&scrV=10#iii.iii-p94.1
 379. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=39&scrV=16#iv.v-p41.2
 380. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=40&scrV=9#v.iii-p7.2
 381. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=40&scrV=23#iv.x-p6.3
 382. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=40&scrV=33#iv.vi-p43.3
 383. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=41&scrV=15#iv.vi-p59.1
 384. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=41&scrV=29#v.ii-p13.2
 385. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=3&scrV=3#iv.ii-p66.1
 386. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=4&scrV=1#iv.ii-p75.1
 387. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=4&scrV=4#iv.i-p10.4
 388. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=7&scrV=14#iv.ii-p130.2
 389. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=8&scrV=3#iv.iv-p25.4
 390. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=9&scrV=12#iv.vi-p25.6
 391. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=9&scrV=17#iii.iii-p142.1
 392. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=10&scrV=3#iv.x-p19.1
 393. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=10&scrV=13#v.ii-p14.4
 394. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=10&scrV=17#vi.vi-p42.4
 395. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=12&scrV=5#iv.vi-p25.2
 396. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=14&scrV=1#iv.i-p19.1
 397. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=14&scrV=4#vi.vi-p33.1
 398. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=15&scrV=1#iv.ix-p5.6
 399. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=15&scrV=2#iv.ix-p6.9
 400. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=15&scrV=3#iv.ix-p5.8
 401. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=16&scrV=4#iv.i-p26.4
 402. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=16&scrV=4#iii.iii-p73.2
 403. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=16&scrV=5#iv.x-p22.2
 404. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=16&scrV=8#iv.i-p10.2
 405. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=16&scrV=11#iii.iii-p58.3
 406. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=16&scrV=11#iv.iv-p43.3
 407. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=16&scrV=11#v.iii-p5.1
 408. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=17&scrV=15#iv.ii-p76.3
 409. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=17&scrV=15#iv.iv-p43.4
 410. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=19&scrV=7#iii.iii-p10.1
 411. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=19&scrV=7#vi.iii-p12.5
 412. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=19&scrV=9#iv.ix-p14.1
 413. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=19&scrV=10#iv.iv-p36.2
 414. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=19&scrV=10#vi.iii-p11.1
 415. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=19&scrV=10#vi.iii-p18.4
 416. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=19&scrV=13#v.ii-p24.1
 417. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=21&scrV=3#vi.ii-p23.3
 418. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=22&scrV=4#iii.iii-p104.1
 419. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=25&scrV=6#iv.ii-p61.4
 420. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=25&scrV=9#iv.iv-p86.5
 421. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=25&scrV=14#iii.iii-p36.3
 422. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=25&scrV=15#iv.i-p10.3
 423. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=25&scrV=16#iv.ii-p88.2
 424. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=26&scrV=1#iv.i-p33.1
 425. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=27&scrV=8#iii.iii-p40.1
 426. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=27&scrV=10#iv.ii-p37.1
 427. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=29&scrV=2#iv.i-p9.3
 428. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=29&scrV=9#iv.vi-p53.3
 429. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=29&scrV=11#iv.i-p17.3
 430. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=30&scrV=5#iii.iii-p104.4
 431. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=30&scrV=11#iii.iii-p127.1
 432. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=31&scrV=3#iv.ii-p69.3
 433. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=31&scrV=5#iv.i-p11.5
 434. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=31&scrV=20#iv.ix-p16.2
 435. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=32&scrV=5#v.i-p12.2
 436. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=32&scrV=11#iii.iii-p60.3
 437. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=33&scrV=6#iv.iv-p38.1
 438. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=35&scrV=11#iv.vi-p5.1
 439. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=35&scrV=11#iv.ix-p5.1
 440. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=37&scrV=3#iv.i-p12.4
 441. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=37&scrV=4#iii.ii-p10.2
 442. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=37&scrV=6#iv.ix-p15.3
 443. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=37&scrV=21#iv.viii-p16.1
 444. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=37&scrV=31#vi.iii-p17.1
 445. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=39&scrV=3#iv.ii-p113.1
 446. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=39&scrV=3#iv.iv-p42.1
 447. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=40&scrV=3#iv.ii-p61.5
 448. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=42&scrV=2#iii.ii-p19.2
 449. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=42&scrV=8#iv.ii-p60.1
 450. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=42&scrV=11#iii.iii-p59.2
 451. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=43&scrV=4#iv.ii-p98.3
 452. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=43&scrV=5#iii.ii-p20.1
 453. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=44&scrV=17#iii.iii-p82.3
 454. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=48&scrV=14#iii.iii-p50.1
 455. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=50&scrV=1#iv.iii-p3.2
 456. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=50&scrV=15#iii.iii-p114.1
 457. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=50&scrV=20#iv.ix-p12.1
 458. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=51&scrV=5#v.i-p4.4
 459. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=51&scrV=10#iv.vii-p51.6
 460. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=51&scrV=14#iv.vi-p25.5
 461. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=51&scrV=17#vi.ii-p22.1
 462. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=51&scrV=17#vi.vi-p18.1
 463. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=52&scrV=8#iv.ii-p85.1
 464. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=53&scrV=5#iv.viii-p35.2
 465. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=55&scrV=22#iii.iii-p53.1
 466. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=55&scrV=23#iv.vi-p29.1
 467. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=56&scrV=3#iv.i-p12.5
 468. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=56&scrV=8#vi.vi-p23.1
 469. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=56&scrV=12#v.ii-p11.1
 470. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=57&scrV=7#vi.vi-p21.1
 471. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=58&scrV=10#v.iii-p14.2
 472. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=59&scrV=17#iv.ii-p81.1
 473. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=62&scrV=8#iv.i-p12.1
 474. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=63&scrV=1#iv.iv-p34.2
 475. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=63&scrV=8#iv.ii-p100.2
 476. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=65&scrV=2#vi.vi-p8.1
 477. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=66&scrV=10#iii.iii-p82.2
 478. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=66&scrV=11#iii.iii-p104.3
 479. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=66&scrV=13#iv.iii-p24.1
 480. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=66&scrV=18#vi.vi-p31.2
 481. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=66&scrV=20#iv.ii-p75.2
 482. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=67&scrV=6#iii.iii-p43.1
 483. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=67&scrV=6#iv.i-p17.1
 484. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=68&scrV=20#iii.iii-p104.5
 485. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=68&scrV=21#v.ii-p13.1
 486. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=69&scrV=3#vi.vi-p36.1
 487. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=69&scrV=33#iv.ii-p61.2
 488. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=71&scrV=8#iv.v-p47.1
 489. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=73&scrV=24#iv.ii-p69.2
 490. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=73&scrV=25#iv.vi-p66.1
 491. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=75&scrV=8#v.iii-p8.4
 492. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=77&scrV=1#vi.vi-p15.2
 493. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=77&scrV=6#vi.v-p45.1
 494. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=78&scrV=19#iv.viii-p4.1
 495. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=78&scrV=38#v.iii-p8.1
 496. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=78&scrV=58#iii.iii-p73.3
 497. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=78&scrV=58#iv.ii-p36.1
 498. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=78&scrV=59#iii.iii-p73.4
 499. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=80&scrV=5#iv.i-p12.3
 500. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=80&scrV=32#iii.iii-p49.1
 501. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=81&scrV=11#v.i-p11.2
 502. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=81&scrV=12#iv.ii-p68.1
 503. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=81&scrV=12#iv.iv-p104.1
 504. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=83&scrV=18#iv.iii-p3.3
 505. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=84&scrV=2#iv.ii-p96.1
 506. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=84&scrV=11#iii.iii-p55.2
 507. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=85&scrV=7#iv.ii-p88.1
 508. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=86&scrV=5#iv.ii-p58.3
 509. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=86&scrV=5#iv.ii-p77.6
 510. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=86&scrV=5#iv.iii-p8.4
 511. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=88&scrV=15#v.iii-p8.2
 512. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=89&scrV=6#iv.i-p5.9
 513. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=89&scrV=7#iv.i-p9.1
 514. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=89&scrV=31#iv.ii-p39.1
 515. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=90&scrV=2#v.iii-p7.1
 516. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=91&scrV=15#iii.iii-p93.3
 517. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=91&scrV=16#iv.v-p42.6
 518. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=92&scrV=12#iv.x-p25.3
 519. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=96&scrV=5#iv.i-p5.1
 520. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=97&scrV=7#iv.ii-p11.3
 521. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=97&scrV=10#iv.ii-p97.1
 522. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=100&scrV=3#iv.i-p16.1
 523. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=100&scrV=3#iv.v-p43.2
 524. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=101&scrV=7#iv.v-p17.3
 525. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=103&scrV=3#vi.ii-p23.5
 526. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=103&scrV=4#iv.ii-p88.3
 527. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=103&scrV=4#vi.ii-p23.4
 528. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=103&scrV=8#iv.ii-p77.5
 529. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=103&scrV=8#v.iii-p21.1
 530. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=103&scrV=9#iv.ii-p62.2
 531. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=103&scrV=10#v.iii-p21.2
 532. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=103&scrV=17#iv.ii-p62.1
 533. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=104&scrV=1#iv.v-p49.1
 534. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=104&scrV=24#iv.iv-p38.4
 535. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=104&scrV=26#iv.i-p35.3
 536. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=105&scrV=25#iii.iii-p106.4
 537. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=106&scrV=3#iii.i-p13.1
 538. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=106&scrV=3#iv.ii-p131.1
 539. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=106&scrV=18#iv.vii-p37.2
 540. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=106&scrV=24#iv.iv-p85.1
 541. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=106&scrV=35#iv.ii-p27.1
 542. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=106&scrV=35#iii.iii-p76.1
 543. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=106&scrV=37#iv.ii-p31.2
 544. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=107&scrV=24#iv.iv-p38.3
 545. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=109&scrV=4#vi.vi-p1.1
 546. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=109&scrV=6#iii.iii-p140.9
 547. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=109&scrV=7#iv.iv-p62.1
 548. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=110&scrV=1#vi.v-p37.4
 549. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=111&scrV=1#iii.iii-p131.1
 550. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=111&scrV=9#iv.iv-p39.1
 551. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=114&scrV=5#iii.iii-p113.1
 552. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=115&scrV=6#iii.iii-p72.3
 553. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=116&scrV=1#iii.iii-p120.1
 554. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=116&scrV=15#iv.vi-p17.1
 555. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=118&scrV=22#iv.iv-p40.15
 556. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=118&scrV=24#iv.iv-p22.2
 557. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=118&scrV=24#iv.iv-p26.2
 558. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=118&scrV=28#iii.iii-p60.1
 559. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=119&scrV=5#iv.ii-p121.3
 560. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=119&scrV=5#v.i-p20.1
 561. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=119&scrV=6#iii.i-p10.1
 562. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=119&scrV=6#iv.ii-p119.1
 563. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=119&scrV=11#vi.iii-p16.1
 564. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=119&scrV=24#vi.iii-p15.2
 565. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=119&scrV=32#iv.ii-p122.3
 566. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=119&scrV=38#iv.i-p7.3
 567. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=119&scrV=50#vi.iii-p11.3
 568. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=119&scrV=50#vi.iii-p15.4
 569. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=119&scrV=57#iv.ii-p98.2
 570. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=119&scrV=68#iv.vi-p57.1
 571. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=119&scrV=72#iii.iii-p19.3
 572. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=119&scrV=97#iii.iii-p19.1
 573. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=119&scrV=97#v.i-p19.2
 574. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=119&scrV=103#iv.iv-p84.4
 575. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=119&scrV=103#iv.vii-p45.1
 576. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=119&scrV=104#vi.ii-p16.2
 577. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=119&scrV=117#iv.ii-p32.1
 578. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=119&scrV=128#iii.ii-p21.1
 579. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=119&scrV=136#iii.ii-p22.1
 580. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=119&scrV=159#iii.iii-p19.2
 581. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=119&scrV=166#iii.iii-p24.1
 582. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=119&scrV=166#vi.iii-p26.1
 583. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=119&scrV=172#iv.iv-p91.4
 584. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=119&scrV=172#vi.iii-p28.1
 585. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=122&scrV=4#iv.ii-p40.2
 586. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=123&scrV=1#vi.vi-p24.1
 587. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=124&scrV=8#iii.iii-p113.3
 588. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=124&scrV=8#iv.iv-p38.5
 589. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=126&scrV=1#iii.iii-p106.3
 590. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=128&scrV=6#iv.v-p42.3
 591. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=130&scrV=1#iii.iii-p88.1
 592. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=132&scrV=15#iii.iii-p56.2
 593. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=136&scrV=0#iv.ii-p62.4
 594. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=139&scrV=7#iv.iv-p31.2
 595. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=139&scrV=12#iv.iv-p31.2
 596. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=139&scrV=18#iv.x-p8.1
 597. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=139&scrV=18#vi.vi-p27.1
 598. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=141&scrV=2#vi.vi-p19.3
 599. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=141&scrV=3#iv.vii-p34.2
 600. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=141&scrV=8#iv.i-p11.1
 601. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=143&scrV=7#iv.ii-p99.1
 602. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=144&scrV=15#iii.iii-p43.3
 603. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=144&scrV=15#iv.i-p17.7
 604. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=145&scrV=8#iv.v-p25.3
 605. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=145&scrV=16#iii.iii-p47.6
 606. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=145&scrV=16#iv.vi-p56.1
 607. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=146&scrV=2#iii.iii-p60.4
 608. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=146&scrV=2#iii.iii-p132.1
 609. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=146&scrV=2#iii.iii-p132.2
 610. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=147&scrV=11#iv.ii-p78.1
 611. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=147&scrV=14#iv.i-p17.4
 612. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=147&scrV=18#vi.ii-p28.3
 613. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=147&scrV=20#iii.iii-p13.1
 614. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=148&scrV=5#iv.iv-p25.2
 615. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=1&scrV=8#iv.v-p36.1
 616. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=1&scrV=26#iv.iii-p11.1
 617. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=1&scrV=26#v.iii-p14.1
 618. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=2&scrV=19#iv.vii-p46.4
 619. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=3&scrV=3#iv.iv-p61.1
 620. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=3&scrV=9#iii.iii-p121.1
 621. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=3&scrV=9#iv.x-p4.2
 622. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=3&scrV=12#iii.iii-p93.2
 623. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=3&scrV=17#iv.i-p40.3
 624. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=4&scrV=9#iv.ii-p129.3
 625. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=4&scrV=17#iv.iv-p27.10
 626. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=4&scrV=23#iv.vii-p35.1
 627. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=5&scrV=4#iv.vii-p46.9
 628. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=5&scrV=8#iii.iv-p17.1
 629. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=5&scrV=8#iv.vii-p29.2
 630. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=5&scrV=8#iv.vii-p32.1
 631. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=5&scrV=11#iv.vii-p20.1
 632. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=5&scrV=18#iv.vii-p43.2
 633. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=6&scrV=6#iv.iv-p27.4
 634. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=6&scrV=23#iii.iii-p10.2
 635. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=6&scrV=26#iv.vii-p21.1
 636. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=6&scrV=28#iv.ii-p113.3
 637. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=6&scrV=32#iv.vii-p22.1
 638. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=6&scrV=34#iv.ii-p36.2
 639. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=6&scrV=34#iv.vii-p24.3
 640. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=7&scrV=10#iv.vi-p32.1
 641. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=7&scrV=10#iv.vii-p36.1
 642. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=7&scrV=13#iv.vi-p32.1
 643. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=7&scrV=14#v.ii-p19.1
 644. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=7&scrV=23#iv.vii-p20.2
 645. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=7&scrV=23#iv.vii-p46.10
 646. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=7&scrV=26#iv.vii-p25.6
 647. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=7&scrV=27#iv.vii-p29.3
 648. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=9&scrV=2#vi.v-p33.1
 649. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=9&scrV=18#iv.vii-p25.5
 650. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=10&scrV=12#vi.v-p58.1
 651. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=10&scrV=15#iv.i-p28.5
 652. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=11&scrV=24#iv.vi-p62.1
 653. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=11&scrV=25#iv.vi-p60.2
 654. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=12&scrV=22#iv.ix-p6.1
 655. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=14&scrV=30#iv.vi-p40.4
 656. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=15&scrV=8#vi.vi-p39.1
 657. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=15&scrV=24#iii.iii-p142.4
 658. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=16&scrV=6#iv.vii-p44.1
 659. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=17&scrV=24#iv.iv-p65.2
 660. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=19&scrV=2#vi.v-p63.2
 661. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=19&scrV=5#iv.ix-p9.3
 662. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=19&scrV=12#v.iii-p8.5
 663. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=19&scrV=24#iv.ii-p100.5
 664. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=19&scrV=29#iv.iii-p10.2
 665. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=20&scrV=7#iv.ii-p45.1
 666. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=20&scrV=25#iv.viii-p20.1
 667. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=21&scrV=13#iv.vi-p62.2
 668. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=22&scrV=6#iv.v-p53.4
 669. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=22&scrV=14#iv.vii-p27.1
 670. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=22&scrV=26#iv.viii-p29.1
 671. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=23&scrV=14#iv.v-p54.1
 672. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=23&scrV=26#iii.ii-p28.2
 673. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=23&scrV=26#iv.iii-p6.1
 674. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=23&scrV=27#iv.vii-p19.2
 675. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=24&scrV=31#iv.iv-p27.2
 676. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=25&scrV=18#iv.ix-p9.1
 677. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=27&scrV=4#iv.vi-p8.4
 678. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=30&scrV=8#iv.vi-p43.2
 679. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=30&scrV=8#iv.x-p4.1
 680. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=30&scrV=15#iv.x-p6.2
 681. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=30&scrV=17#iv.v-p50.1
 682. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=30&scrV=25#iv.iv-p27.5
 683. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=31&scrV=10#iv.x-p31.1
 684. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=31&scrV=27#iv.iv-p27.9
 685. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=31&scrV=28#iv.v-p33.2
 686. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Eccl&scrCh=2&scrV=11#iv.x-p23.2
 687. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Eccl&scrCh=5&scrV=1#iv.iv-p56.1
 688. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Eccl&scrCh=5&scrV=10#iv.x-p23.1
 689. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Eccl&scrCh=5&scrV=13#iv.i-p28.2
 690. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Eccl&scrCh=5&scrV=17#iii.iii-p87.2
 691. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Eccl&scrCh=6&scrV=2#iv.viii-p26.1
 692. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Eccl&scrCh=7&scrV=4#iv.i-p35.4
 693. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Eccl&scrCh=7&scrV=20#v.i-p5.1
 694. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Eccl&scrCh=7&scrV=26#iv.vii-p46.5
 695. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Eccl&scrCh=10&scrV=8#iv.iv-p103.1
 696. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Eccl&scrCh=10&scrV=12#iv.x-p10.2
 697. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Eccl&scrCh=11&scrV=9#v.iii-p19.2
 698. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Eccl&scrCh=12&scrV=5#iv.v-p8.1
 699. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=1&scrV=4#iii.iii-p39.3
 700. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=1&scrV=7#iii.iii-p39.4
 701. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=2&scrV=2#iii.iii-p89.2
 702. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=2&scrV=3#iv.iv-p98.1
 703. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=2&scrV=4#iv.iv-p26.3
 704. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=2&scrV=5#iv.ii-p94.2
 705. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=2&scrV=14#v.i-p21.2
 706. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=2&scrV=14#vi.vi-p39.2
 707. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=2&scrV=16#iii.iii-p42.1
 708. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=3&scrV=2#iv.ii-p100.4
 709. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=3&scrV=4#iv.iv-p65.1
 710. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=5&scrV=11#iii.ii-p23.1
 711. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=8&scrV=2#iii.ii-p16.2
 712. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=8&scrV=2#iv.iv-p26.4
 713. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=8&scrV=2#vi.v-p74.1
 714. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=8&scrV=6#iv.ii-p36.4
 715. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=8&scrV=7#iii.ii-p17.1
 716. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=0&scrV=6#iii.iii-p35.3
 717. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=1&scrV=2#iv.v-p49.5
 718. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=1&scrV=2#v.ii-p17.1
 719. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=1&scrV=12#iii.i-p6.2
 720. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=1&scrV=12#iv.ii-p15.1
 721. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=1&scrV=16#iv.ii-p124.5
 722. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=1&scrV=16#vi.ii-p25.2
 723. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=1&scrV=18#vi.ii-p25.3
 724. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=1&scrV=19#iii.i-p8.1
 725. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=1&scrV=19#iv.ii-p122.1
 726. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=5&scrV=19#v.ii-p13.3
 727. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=5&scrV=23#iv.ix-p8.1
 728. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=6&scrV=2#iv.i-p9.2
 729. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=6&scrV=10#vi.iii-p29.3
 730. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=8&scrV=20#vi.v-p47.1
 731. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=10&scrV=3#iv.ii-p38.3
 732. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=10&scrV=6#iii.iii-p149.6
 733. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=10&scrV=17#iii.iii-p149.5
 734. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=11&scrV=4#iv.iv-p69.1
 735. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=14&scrV=21#iv.ii-p44.2
 736. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=26&scrV=8#iii.ii-p19.1
 737. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=26&scrV=12#iii.iv-p29.4
 738. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=28&scrV=9#iii.iii-p82.5
 739. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=28&scrV=21#iv.ii-p77.2
 740. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=29&scrV=13#iv.iii-p6.2
 741. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=29&scrV=13#iv.iv-p60.2
 742. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=30&scrV=9#vi.iii-p29.1
 743. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=30&scrV=10#iv.iv-p79.1
 744. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=30&scrV=11#v.ii-p16.1
 745. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=31&scrV=5#iii.iii-p82.6
 746. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=33&scrV=24#iv.ii-p71.2
 747. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=33&scrV=24#vi.ii-p23.2
 748. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=38&scrV=9#iv.ii-p67.2
 749. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=38&scrV=17#iii.iii-p118.2
 750. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=38&scrV=21#iv.vi-p38.2
 751. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=40&scrV=18#iii.iii-p74.4
 752. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=42&scrV=8#iii.iii-p71.2
 753. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=42&scrV=8#iv.i-p9.5
 754. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=42&scrV=8#iv.ii-p13.1
 755. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=42&scrV=13#iv.ii-p34.5
 756. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=43&scrV=3#iii.i-p20.2
 757. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=44&scrV=5#iv.i-p8.3
 758. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=44&scrV=6#iv.i-p25.1
 759. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=44&scrV=19#v.iii-p20.1
 760. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=46&scrV=2#iv.i-p5.3
 761. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=49&scrV=23#iv.v-p5.2
 762. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=51&scrV=17#iii.iii-p104.7
 763. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=52&scrV=11#vi.v-p77.1
 764. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=53&scrV=1#iii.i-p16.2
 765. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=53&scrV=5#vi.v-p78.1
 766. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=53&scrV=11#iv.iv-p40.12
 767. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=53&scrV=12#iv.iv-p40.3
 768. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=54&scrV=5#iii.iii-p36.1
 769. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=54&scrV=8#iv.ii-p61.3
 770. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=55&scrV=3#iv.i-p8.1
 771. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=55&scrV=7#iv.ii-p80.1
 772. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=56&scrV=2#iv.iv-p109.3
 773. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=56&scrV=6#iii.ii-p27.2
 774. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=56&scrV=7#iv.i-p40.2
 775. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=56&scrV=7#iv.ii-p127.2
 776. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=57&scrV=18#iii.iii-p49.3
 777. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=57&scrV=18#vi.ii-p26.3
 778. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=58&scrV=10#iv.vi-p59.3
 779. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=58&scrV=13#iv.iv-p26.1
 780. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=58&scrV=13#iv.iv-p33.2
 781. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=58&scrV=13#iv.iv-p91.1
 782. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=58&scrV=13#iv.iv-p95.1
 783. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=58&scrV=14#iv.iv-p109.1
 784. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=62&scrV=3#iii.iii-p47.5
 785. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=62&scrV=4#iv.ii-p34.2
 786. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=63&scrV=5#iii.iii-p123.2
 787. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=63&scrV=9#iii.iii-p115.2
 788. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=63&scrV=15#iii.iii-p115.1
 789. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=63&scrV=16#vi.vi-p6.2
 790. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=64&scrV=6#iv.i-p32.1
 791. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=2&scrV=20#vi.ii-p9.1
 792. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=2&scrV=27#iv.i-p26.1
 793. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=2&scrV=28#iv.i-p38.1
 794. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=2&scrV=32#iii.iii-p17.2
 795. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=2&scrV=32#iv.iv-p87.3
 796. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=2&scrV=34#iv.vi-p20.2
 797. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=3&scrV=12#vi.ii-p25.1
 798. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=4&scrV=2#iv.iii-p21.2
 799. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=4&scrV=14#vi.ii-p17.1
 800. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=5&scrV=7#iv.i-p28.4
 801. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=5&scrV=8#iv.vii-p18.1
 802. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=5&scrV=8#iv.vii-p41.2
 803. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=5&scrV=9#iv.ii-p38.2
 804. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=7&scrV=12#iv.ii-p40.1
 805. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=7&scrV=12#iii.iii-p73.5
 806. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=7&scrV=15#iii.iii-p68.2
 807. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=7&scrV=22#iii.i-p4.3
 808. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=7&scrV=23#iii.i-p21.2
 809. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=8&scrV=9#iii.iii-p72.1
 810. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=9&scrV=5#iv.ii-p130.1
 811. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=9&scrV=23#iv.i-p30.1
 812. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=11&scrV=15#iii.iii-p138.3
 813. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=12&scrV=7#iii.iii-p47.1
 814. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=13&scrV=23#iv.iv-p58.1
 815. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=13&scrV=27#iv.vii-p46.2
 816. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=14&scrV=22#iv.i-p5.4
 817. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=15&scrV=16#iv.iv-p84.3
 818. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=15&scrV=16#vi.iii-p15.1
 819. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=16&scrV=12#v.ii-p3.4
 820. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=17&scrV=5#iv.i-p29.1
 821. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=17&scrV=9#vi.v-p55.1
 822. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=17&scrV=27#iv.iv-p12.2
 823. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=17&scrV=27#iv.iv-p106.1
 824. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=18&scrV=12#v.ii-p14.3
 825. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=18&scrV=18#iv.ix-p5.4
 826. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=20&scrV=10#iv.ix-p12.2
 827. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=23&scrV=9#vi.ii-p13.2
 828. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=23&scrV=11#iv.iv-p52.3
 829. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=23&scrV=24#iii.iii-p74.5
 830. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=29&scrV=13#vi.vi-p19.8
 831. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=29&scrV=23#iv.vii-p8.3
 832. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=29&scrV=23#iv.vii-p46.3
 833. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=31&scrV=3#iv.iv-p40.22
 834. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=32&scrV=27#iii.iii-p113.2
 835. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=35&scrV=5#iv.vi-p34.2
 836. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=35&scrV=14#iv.v-p37.1
 837. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=44&scrV=16#iii.i-p14.1
 838. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=44&scrV=17#v.i-p4.7
 839. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=44&scrV=17#vi.iii-p23.4
 840. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=45&scrV=5#iv.x-p18.1
 841. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Lam&scrCh=3&scrV=19#iii.iii-p109.1
 842. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Lam&scrCh=3&scrV=23#iv.ii-p60.2
 843. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Lam&scrCh=5&scrV=16#v.i-p10.1
 844. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=3&scrV=14#iii.iii-p39.5
 845. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=8&scrV=6#iv.vii-p15.4
 846. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=8&scrV=8#iv.vii-p15.3
 847. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=12&scrV=19#iv.i-p12.2
 848. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=13&scrV=22#iv.iv-p68.1
 849. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=14&scrV=17#iv.vi-p19.1
 850. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=16&scrV=6#iv.iv-p40.4
 851. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=16&scrV=14#iv.iv-p40.7
 852. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=16&scrV=47#v.ii-p3.5
 853. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=16&scrV=49#iv.vii-p41.1
 854. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=16&scrV=49#iv.vii-p42.1
 855. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=18&scrV=31#iv.ii-p124.3
 856. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=20&scrV=27#iii.iii-p71.6
 857. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=20&scrV=31#iii.iii-p71.6
 858. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=22&scrV=3#iii.iii-p68.1
 859. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=22&scrV=14#v.iii-p8.7
 860. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=23&scrV=37#iii.iii-p71.3
 861. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=24&scrV=13#iv.vii-p15.2
 862. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=24&scrV=16#iv.vii-p43.1
 863. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=28&scrV=5#iv.i-p28.3
 864. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=28&scrV=20#iv.ii-p42.2
 865. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=33&scrV=31#iv.iii-p7.2
 866. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=33&scrV=31#iv.iv-p63.1
 867. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=33&scrV=31#iv.iv-p78.2
 868. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=33&scrV=32#iv.iv-p76.2
 869. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=34&scrV=2#iv.viii-p12.1
 870. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=34&scrV=8#iv.viii-p12.2
 871. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=35&scrV=5#iv.vi-p9.1
 872. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=36&scrV=25#iv.ii-p124.7
 873. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=36&scrV=26#iii.ii-p31.2
 874. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=36&scrV=26#iii.iv-p29.3
 875. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=36&scrV=26#iv.ii-p124.4
 876. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=36&scrV=26#vi.ii-p28.1
 877. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=36&scrV=27#iii.i-p27.1
 878. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=36&scrV=27#iii.iv-p29.1
 879. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=38&scrV=18#iii.iii-p73.1
 880. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=48&scrV=35#iii.iii-p78.2
 881. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=3&scrV=7#iv.ii-p7.1
 882. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=3&scrV=16#iv.i-p10.7
 883. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=3&scrV=27#v.iii-p24.2
 884. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=4&scrV=27#vi.ii-p18.1
 885. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=6&scrV=9#v.ii-p15.2
 886. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=7&scrV=12#iii.iii-p139.2
 887. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=7&scrV=15#iii.iii-p45.1
 888. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=9&scrV=8#v.iii-p16.1
 889. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=9&scrV=21#iii.iii-p106.1
 890. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=1&scrV=4#iii.i-p11.4
 891. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=2&scrV=2#iv.ii-p36.3
 892. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=2&scrV=2#iv.i-p26.8
 893. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=2&scrV=2#iii.iii-p71.4
 894. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=2&scrV=19#iii.ii-p29.2
 895. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=3&scrV=3#iv.ii-p35.1
 896. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=4&scrV=2#iv.vi-p20.3
 897. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=4&scrV=8#iv.iii-p7.1
 898. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=4&scrV=8#v.ii-p18.2
 899. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=4&scrV=11#iv.vii-p23.1
 900. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=4&scrV=14#iii.iii-p90.3
 901. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=7&scrV=4#iv.vii-p15.1
 902. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=7&scrV=11#iv.iv-p60.1
 903. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=11&scrV=3#iv.ii-p124.8
 904. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=12&scrV=4#vi.vi-p18.2
 905. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=12&scrV=4#vi.vi-p42.2
 906. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=12&scrV=7#iv.viii-p13.2
 907. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=12&scrV=7#iv.x-p13.2
 908. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=12&scrV=11#iv.i-p38.2
 909. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=14&scrV=4#iv.ii-p56.1
 910. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=14&scrV=8#iii.iii-p61.1
 911. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=14&scrV=8#iii.iii-p75.3
 912. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=14&scrV=8#iv.iv-p40.8
 913. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=14&scrV=8#vi.ii-p18.2
 914. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Amos&scrCh=4&scrV=13#iv.iv-p59.1
 915. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Amos&scrCh=5&scrV=12#v.ii-p3.2
 916. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Amos&scrCh=6&scrV=5#v.iii-p19.1
 917. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Amos&scrCh=8&scrV=5#iv.viii-p13.1
 918. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Amos&scrCh=9&scrV=7#vi.iv-p45.3
 919. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Obad&scrCh=1&scrV=17#iii.iii-p122.1
 920. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Jonah&scrCh=2&scrV=6#iii.iii-p108.1
 921. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Jonah&scrCh=2&scrV=10#iv.ii-p135.1
 922. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Mic&scrCh=7&scrV=9#iii.iii-p109.2
 923. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Mic&scrCh=7&scrV=18#iv.ii-p71.1
 924. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Mic&scrCh=7&scrV=18#iv.ii-p77.3
 925. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Mic&scrCh=7&scrV=19#iv.ii-p73.1
 926. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Nah&scrCh=3&scrV=12#iv.x-p9.1
 927. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Hab&scrCh=1&scrV=13#iv.iv-p39.2
 928. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Hab&scrCh=2&scrV=4#vi.i-p3.8
 929. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Hab&scrCh=2&scrV=11#iv.ii-p135.3
 930. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Hab&scrCh=2&scrV=15#iii.iv-p25.2
 931. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Hab&scrCh=2&scrV=18#iii.iii-p74.1
 932. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Hab&scrCh=2&scrV=18#iv.ii-p18.1
 933. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Zeph&scrCh=3&scrV=5#v.ii-p14.6
 934. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Zeph&scrCh=3&scrV=17#iii.ii-p29.3
 935. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Zeph&scrCh=3&scrV=17#iii.iii-p47.2
 936. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Zeph&scrCh=3&scrV=19#iv.ii-p34.7
 937. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Hag&scrCh=2&scrV=9#iv.iv-p25.1
 938. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Zech&scrCh=1&scrV=14#iv.ii-p34.1
 939. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Zech&scrCh=2&scrV=8#iv.ii-p34.3
 940. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Zech&scrCh=2&scrV=8#iii.iii-p36.2
 941. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Zech&scrCh=3&scrV=1#iv.iv-p54.2
 942. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Zech&scrCh=5&scrV=2#iv.ix-p10.2
 943. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Zech&scrCh=5&scrV=2#iv.viii-p35.5
 944. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Zech&scrCh=5&scrV=3#iv.ix-p10.3
 945. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Zech&scrCh=5&scrV=4#iv.iii-p21.4
 946. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Zech&scrCh=7&scrV=11#iv.iv-p81.2
 947. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Zech&scrCh=7&scrV=12#iv.vi-p46.2
 948. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Zech&scrCh=7&scrV=12#vi.iii-p29.2
 949. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Zech&scrCh=8&scrV=17#iv.ix-p10.1
 950. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Zech&scrCh=12&scrV=10#vi.ii-p28.2
 951. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Zech&scrCh=12&scrV=10#vi.v-p27.1
 952. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Zech&scrCh=12&scrV=10#vi.v-p66.1
 953. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Zech&scrCh=13&scrV=1#iv.ii-p80.2
 954. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Zech&scrCh=13&scrV=1#iv.vii-p51.5
 955. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Zech&scrCh=13&scrV=9#iii.iii-p47.3
 956. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Mal&scrCh=1&scrV=6#iii.i-p4.1
 957. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Mal&scrCh=1&scrV=6#iv.v-p43.1
 958. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Mal&scrCh=1&scrV=14#iv.iv-p63.2
 959. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Mal&scrCh=2&scrV=2#iv.i-p18.1
 960. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Mal&scrCh=2&scrV=2#iv.iv-p12.3
 961. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Mal&scrCh=2&scrV=7#iv.v-p9.2
 962. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Mal&scrCh=3&scrV=5#iv.vii-p46.7
 963. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Mal&scrCh=3&scrV=6#iii.iii-p27.2
 964. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Mal&scrCh=3&scrV=16#iv.vi-p58.3
 965. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Mal&scrCh=3&scrV=16#iv.iv-p91.2
 966. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Mal&scrCh=3&scrV=16#vi.iii-p28.2
 967. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Mal&scrCh=3&scrV=17#iii.iii-p47.4
 968. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=1&scrV=21#iii.iii-p151.1
 969. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=2&scrV=8#iv.vi-p11.8
 970. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=2&scrV=11#iv.v-p44.3
 971. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=2&scrV=13#iv.vi-p11.8
 972. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=4&scrV=4#vi.iii-p11.2
 973. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=4&scrV=7#vi.iii-p11.2
 974. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=4&scrV=17#vi.ii-p3.1
 975. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=6#vi.v-p71.1
 976. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=19#v.ii-p23.1
 977. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=28#iii.iv-p14.1
 978. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=28#iv.vii-p7.1
 979. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=28#iv.vii-p14.2
 980. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=34#iv.iii-p14.1
 981. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=2#iii.i-p11.3
 982. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=6#iv.iv-p45.1
 983. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=6#vi.vi-p15.8
 984. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=20#iv.iii-p12.2
 985. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=28#iv.iv-p27.7
 986. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=7&scrV=1#iv.iv-p80.1
 987. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=7&scrV=6#vi.v-p37.1
 988. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=7&scrV=7#iv.ii-p128.2
 989. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=7&scrV=13#iii.iii-p149.3
 990. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=8&scrV=6#iv.v-p14.2
 991. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=8&scrV=6#iv.v-p27.2
 992. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=8&scrV=26#iv.iv-p38.2
 993. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=8&scrV=29#iv.ii-p122.7
 994. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=8&scrV=32#iii.iii-p140.7
 995. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=10&scrV=37#iii.ii-p16.1
 996. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=11&scrV=12#iv.viii-p9.3
 997. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=11&scrV=18#iv.ix-p5.3
 998. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=12&scrV=20#vi.i-p25.1
 999. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=12&scrV=31#v.ii-p3.6
1000. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=12&scrV=44#iii.iii-p140.4
1001. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=12&scrV=50#vi.i-p18.1
1002. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=13&scrV=5#vi.i-p18.2
1003. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=13&scrV=13#iv.iv-p71.1
1004. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=13&scrV=22#iv.i-p28.1
1005. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=13&scrV=22#iv.iv-p78.1
1006. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=13&scrV=22#iv.x-p16.1
1007. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=13&scrV=25#iv.x-p33.1
1008. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=13&scrV=25#vi.iii-p20.4
1009. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=15&scrV=19#iv.vii-p35.2
1010. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=15&scrV=41#iv.vi-p62.4
1011. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=16&scrV=26#iv.vi-p65.3
1012. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=17&scrV=27#iv.x-p10.4
1013. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=18&scrV=19#vi.vi-p15.7
1014. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=19&scrV=22#iv.i-p34.1
1015. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=19&scrV=22#iv.x-p11.2
1016. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=20&scrV=22#vi.v-p55.2
1017. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=21&scrV=19#v.iii-p3.3
1018. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=22&scrV=11#vi.v-p4.3
1019. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=22&scrV=12#vi.v-p53.1
1020. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=22&scrV=20#iv.ii-p5.1
1021. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=22&scrV=38#iv.ii-p90.3
1022. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=23&scrV=13#iv.vi-p50.1
1023. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=23&scrV=14#v.ii-p3.7
1024. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=23&scrV=23#iii.i-p10.5
1025. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=23&scrV=23#iii.iv-p20.2
1026. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=23&scrV=32#v.ii-p21.3
1027. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=23&scrV=33#iii.iii-p142.2
1028. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=24&scrV=45#iv.v-p17.1
1029. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=25&scrV=7#iv.vii-p39.2
1030. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=25&scrV=26#iv.iv-p27.11
1031. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=25&scrV=26#iv.v-p16.1
1032. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=25&scrV=34#iv.iv-p43.1
1033. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=25&scrV=35#iv.vi-p58.2
1034. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=25&scrV=41#iii.iii-p146.1
1035. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=25&scrV=41#v.iii-p3.1
1036. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=26&scrV=28#vi.v-p25.2
1037. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=26&scrV=40#iv.iv-p68.2
1038. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=26&scrV=73#iv.x-p10.3
1039. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=26&scrV=75#iv.ii-p103.1
1040. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=26&scrV=75#iv.iv-p41.1
1041. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=26&scrV=75#vi.v-p66.2
1042. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=27&scrV=18#v.ii-p7.2
1043. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=27&scrV=19#v.ii-p7.4
1044. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=28&scrV=7#iii.iii-p18.2
1045. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=28&scrV=19#vi.iv-p1.1
1046. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=2&scrV=28#iv.iv-p22.1
1047. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=3&scrV=1#iv.x-p16.3
1048. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=4&scrV=15#vi.iii-p25.2
1049. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=4&scrV=41#iv.ii-p135.2
1050. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=6&scrV=17#vi.iii-p23.2
1051. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=7&scrV=21#iv.iv-p57.1
1052. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=9&scrV=24#vi.i-p17.1
1053. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=9&scrV=44#iii.iii-p147.2
1054. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=9&scrV=44#iv.vi-p29.4
1055. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=9&scrV=48#iii.iii-p145.2
1056. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=10&scrV=14#vi.iv-p38.1
1057. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=10&scrV=16#vi.iv-p30.1
1058. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=10&scrV=19#iv.viii-p9.2
1059. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=10&scrV=21#iii.i-p10.4
1060. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=12&scrV=30#iv.ii-p93.1
1061. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=14&scrV=22#vi.v-p1.1
1062. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=16&scrV=14#vi.i-p9.2
1063. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=1&scrV=50#iv.ii-p84.1
1064. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=1&scrV=50#iv.ii-p128.4
1065. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=1&scrV=51#iv.iv-p25.5
1066. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=1&scrV=70#iii.iii-p5.1
1067. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=2&scrV=49#v.i-p12.1
1068. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=2&scrV=51#iv.v-p35.2
1069. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=3&scrV=20#iv.vi-p15.1
1070. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=3&scrV=20#v.ii-p21.2
1071. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=5&scrV=4#iv.iii-p13.2
1072. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=7&scrV=38#vi.ii-p22.4
1073. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=7&scrV=50#vi.i-p3.7
1074. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=8&scrV=12#iv.iv-p87.2
1075. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=8&scrV=15#iv.iv-p87.1
1076. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=8&scrV=31#iii.iii-p142.5
1077. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=11&scrV=17#iv.vii-p30.1
1078. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=11&scrV=24#iv.vii-p19.1
1079. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=12&scrV=1#vi.v-p61.4
1080. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=12&scrV=8#vi.iv-p48.1
1081. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=12&scrV=15#iv.x-p14.1
1082. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=12&scrV=32#iii.i-p21.5
1083. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=12&scrV=32#iii.iii-p36.4
1084. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=12&scrV=32#iv.i-p40.4
1085. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=12&scrV=47#iii.i-p23.2
1086. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=12&scrV=47#iv.iv-p90.1
1087. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=12&scrV=50#iv.iv-p40.10
1088. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=13&scrV=3#vi.ii-p3.4
1089. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=13&scrV=11#iv.x-p16.2
1090. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=13&scrV=16#iv.viii-p14.1
1091. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=13&scrV=31#iii.iii-p95.1
1092. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=14&scrV=24#vi.v-p33.2
1093. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=15&scrV=7#vi.ii-p22.3
1094. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=15&scrV=8#vi.v-p45.2
1095. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=15&scrV=18#vi.ii-p19.3
1096. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=15&scrV=20#vi.ii-p25.4
1097. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=15&scrV=22#vi.ii-p25.4
1098. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=15&scrV=30#iv.vii-p21.2
1099. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=16&scrV=2#iv.iv-p73.2
1100. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=16&scrV=14#iv.iv-p40.16
1101. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=16&scrV=14#iv.iv-p78.3
1102. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=16&scrV=14#iv.x-p16.4
1103. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=16&scrV=24#v.iii-p20.2
1104. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=16&scrV=31#vi.iii-p31.1
1105. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=17&scrV=7#iv.v-p21.1
1106. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=17&scrV=15#iii.iii-p127.5
1107. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=18&scrV=11#iv.i-p31.1
1108. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=19&scrV=5#iv.iv-p32.1
1109. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=19&scrV=8#iv.viii-p14.2
1110. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=19&scrV=8#iv.viii-p31.3
1111. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=19&scrV=14#iv.iv-p40.17
1112. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=19&scrV=48#iv.iv-p51.2
1113. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=19&scrV=48#vi.iii-p20.1
1114. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=20&scrV=27#iv.iv-p77.1
1115. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=20&scrV=47#v.ii-p19.2
1116. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=22&scrV=20#vi.v-p15.1
1117. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=22&scrV=22#v.ii-p14.7
1118. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=22&scrV=42#iii.iii-p126.2
1119. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=22&scrV=44#iv.iv-p48.1
1120. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=23&scrV=14#v.ii-p7.3
1121. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=23&scrV=40#vi.i-p25.2
1122. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=23&scrV=56#iv.iv-p30.5
1123. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=24&scrV=19#iv.iii-p3.4
1124. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=24&scrV=27#vi.ii-p23.1
1125. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=24&scrV=47#vi.ii-p3.2
1126. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=2&scrV=2#iv.vii-p3.4
1127. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=15#vi.i-p11.1
1128. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=16#iv.ii-p113.2
1129. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=18#vi.i-p10.2
1130. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=31#iv.x-p10.1
1131. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=36#vi.i-p10.4
1132. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=36#vi.iii-p11.5
1133. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=4&scrV=24#iv.ii-p8.1
1134. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=4&scrV=48#vi.iv-p8.1
1135. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=4&scrV=48#vi.v-p22.1
1136. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=4#iv.v-p24.1
1137. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=39#vi.iii-p12.1
1138. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=37#vi.i-p11.3
1139. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=38#iv.v-p44.1
1140. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=54#vi.v-p16.3
1141. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=64#iv.iv-p40.13
1142. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=64#vi.i-p9.3
1143. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=7&scrV=23#iv.iv-p31.1
1144. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=12#vi.v-p64.2
1145. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=18#iv.v-p9.4
1146. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=29#iv.v-p44.2
1147. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=44#iii.iii-p140.6
1148. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=44#iv.v-p17.4
1149. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=44#iv.vi-p26.1
1150. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=49#iv.v-p44.2
1151. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=56#iv.iv-p33.1
1152. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=56#vi.v-p27.2
1153. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=9&scrV=36#vi.i-p5.2
1154. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=10&scrV=1#iv.iv-p34.1
1155. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=10&scrV=17#iv.iv-p40.9
1156. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=12&scrV=6#iv.viii-p5.1
1157. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=12&scrV=42#iv.v-p45.1
1158. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=12&scrV=48#vi.iii-p13.1
1159. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=13&scrV=1#iv.iv-p40.21
1160. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=13&scrV=8#vi.vi-p19.7
1161. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=13&scrV=27#iv.viii-p5.2
1162. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=13&scrV=30#vi.v-p15.2
1163. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=9#iv.ii-p26.2
1164. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=15#iv.ii-p115.1
1165. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=16#iii.iii-p48.1
1166. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=30#iii.iii-p140.1
1167. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=15&scrV=9#iv.iv-p40.20
1168. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=15&scrV=16#iv.ii-p131.3
1169. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=15&scrV=22#v.ii-p7.5
1170. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=16&scrV=20#vi.ii-p26.2
1171. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=17&scrV=9#iv.iv-p40.14
1172. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=17&scrV=17#iv.iv-p36.1
1173. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=17&scrV=23#vi.v-p16.1
1174. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=18&scrV=30#iv.vi-p11.3
1175. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=19&scrV=11#v.ii-p3.1
1176. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=19&scrV=26#iv.v-p38.3
1177. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=19&scrV=38#vi.i-p21.2
1178. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=20&scrV=13#iii.ii-p24.1
1179. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=20&scrV=17#iii.iii-p59.1
1180. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=20&scrV=17#iii.iii-p59.3
1181. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=20&scrV=17#vi.v-p72.5
1182. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=20&scrV=19#iv.iv-p22.4
1183. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=20&scrV=26#iv.iv-p22.4
1184. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=21&scrV=15#iii.ii-p27.1
1185. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=2&scrV=1#iv.iv-p99.1
1186. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=2&scrV=15#iv.ix-p17.1
1187. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=2&scrV=39#vi.iv-p24.2
1188. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=3&scrV=19#iii.i-p26.2
1189. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=3&scrV=21#vi.v-p17.2
1190. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=4&scrV=10#vi.iv-p48.2
1191. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=5&scrV=3#iii.iii-p140.3
1192. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=5&scrV=3#iii.iii-p140.8
1193. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=5&scrV=3#iv.ix-p6.4
1194. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=5&scrV=5#iv.ix-p6.5
1195. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=7&scrV=52#v.ii-p21.1
1196. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=7&scrV=54#iv.iv-p86.3
1197. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=7&scrV=59#vi.iii-p23.3
1198. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=8&scrV=1#iii.iv-p26.1
1199. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=9&scrV=4#iv.vi-p17.2
1200. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=9&scrV=4#iv.vi-p20.5
1201. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=9&scrV=6#vi.iii-p22.2
1202. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=10&scrV=43#vi.v-p72.3
1203. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=10&scrV=44#iv.iv-p90.2
1204. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=10&scrV=44#vi.iii-p27.1
1205. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=11&scrV=18#vi.ii-p1.1
1206. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=13&scrV=10#iv.vi-p49.2
1207. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=14&scrV=17#iv.ii-p106.1
1208. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=15&scrV=9#vi.i-p19.1
1209. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=16&scrV=14#iv.iv-p51.1
1210. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=16&scrV=14#vi.iii-p20.2
1211. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=16&scrV=31#iii.i-p26.3
1212. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=16&scrV=31#iv.ii-p128.5
1213. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=16&scrV=33#vi.ii-p17.2
1214. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=16&scrV=33#vi.iv-p28.1
1215. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=17&scrV=11#vi.iii-p12.2
1216. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=17&scrV=21#iv.iv-p76.3
1217. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=17&scrV=26#iv.ii-p69.1
1218. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=18&scrV=24#vi.iii-p12.3
1219. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=19&scrV=9#iv.iv-p85.2
1220. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=20&scrV=7#iv.iv-p23.1
1221. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=20&scrV=21#vi.ii-p19.2
1222. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=20&scrV=33#iv.x-p35.2
1223. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=20&scrV=38#iii.iii-p50.3
1224. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=22&scrV=20#iv.vi-p11.10
1225. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=22&scrV=24#vi.v-p53.2
1226. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=23&scrV=12#iv.iii-p20.1
1227. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=24&scrV=5#iv.ix-p12.4
1228. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=26&scrV=9#vi.ii-p15.1
1229. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=26&scrV=18#iii.iii-p140.13
1230. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=26&scrV=18#iv.iv-p84.1
1231. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=26&scrV=18#iv.v-p10.1
1232. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=26&scrV=18#vi.iii-p6.1
1233. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=27&scrV=44#iii.iii-p106.5
1234. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=27&scrV=44#iv.ii-p70.2
1235. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=28&scrV=3#iv.vi-p40.5
1236. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=28&scrV=4#iii.iii-p90.2
1237. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=1&scrV=17#vi.i-p21.1
1238. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=1&scrV=23#iii.iii-p65.1
1239. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=1&scrV=28#iv.vii-p29.1
1240. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=1&scrV=30#v.ii-p15.1
1241. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=1&scrV=31#iv.vi-p59.2
1242. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=2&scrV=1#v.ii-p10.1
1243. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=2&scrV=24#iv.iii-p4.3
1244. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=2&scrV=24#vi.iv-p45.2
1245. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=3&scrV=8#iv.ix-p5.2
1246. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=3&scrV=24#iv.ii-p56.3
1247. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=3&scrV=25#vi.i-p3.1
1248. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=3&scrV=31#iii.iv-p11.4
1249. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=4&scrV=11#vi.iv-p22.1
1250. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=4&scrV=20#iv.iii-p8.1
1251. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=4&scrV=20#vi.i-p12.1
1252. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=5&scrV=1#vi.i-p3.11
1253. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=5&scrV=6#v.i-p4.3
1254. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=5&scrV=6#v.i-p11.1
1255. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=5&scrV=10#iv.iv-p40.5
1256. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=6&scrV=3#vi.iv-p45.5
1257. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=6&scrV=12#iii.iii-p134.3
1258. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=6&scrV=17#iii.iii-p134.4
1259. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=6&scrV=23#vi.ii-p21.5
1260. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=7&scrV=7#iii.iv-p14.2
1261. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=7&scrV=7#iv.x-p28.2
1262. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=7&scrV=12#v.i-p17.1
1263. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=7&scrV=14#iii.iii-p14.1
1264. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=7&scrV=16#iv.ii-p126.1
1265. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=7&scrV=16#v.i-p17.2
1266. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=7&scrV=18#v.i-p5.2
1267. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=7&scrV=19#v.i-p5.3
1268. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=7&scrV=19#v.ii-p18.1
1269. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=7&scrV=22#v.i-p19.1
1270. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=7&scrV=23#iii.iii-p134.2
1271. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=7&scrV=24#iv.ii-p121.4
1272. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=7&scrV=27#v.i-p12.3
1273. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=1#iii.iii-p152.1
1274. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=21#iii.iii-p139.1
1275. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=26#vi.vi-p15.4
1276. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=28#iv.i-p17.5
1277. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=9&scrV=4#vi.iv-p20.1
1278. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=9&scrV=4#vi.iv-p45.1
1279. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=10&scrV=14#iv.iii-p8.3
1280. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=10&scrV=14#iv.v-p11.6
1281. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=10&scrV=14#vi.vi-p6.4
1282. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=10&scrV=21#iv.iv-p81.1
1283. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=11&scrV=35#iv.iv-p40.6
1284. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=12&scrV=1#vi.v-p63.1
1285. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=12&scrV=2#vi.ii-p14.1
1286. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=12&scrV=11#iii.i-p9.1
1287. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=12&scrV=19#iv.vi-p23.1
1288. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=13&scrV=2#iv.v-p15.3
1289. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=13&scrV=14#vi.iii-p24.2
1290. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=14&scrV=1#vi.i-p25.3
1291. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=14&scrV=8#vi.iv-p47.1
1292. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=15&scrV=1#iv.vi-p49.1
1293. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=15&scrV=3#iv.vi-p49.1
1294. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=16&scrV=26#iv.ii-p116.2
1295. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=16&scrV=26#vi.i-p20.1
1296. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=16#vi.iv-p41.1
1297. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=26#iv.iv-p40.18
1298. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=9#iii.ii-p29.1
1299. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=9#iv.ii-p108.1
1300. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=10#vi.iii-p18.2
1301. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=16#iii.iii-p127.2
1302. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=15#iv.v-p9.1
1303. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=6&scrV=9#iii.iii-p73.9
1304. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=6&scrV=9#iv.vii-p25.1
1305. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=6&scrV=10#iv.x-p17.6
1306. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=6&scrV=15#iv.vii-p11.2
1307. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=6&scrV=19#iv.vi-p24.2
1308. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=6&scrV=19#iv.vi-p70.2
1309. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=6&scrV=19#iv.vii-p11.3
1310. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=6&scrV=20#iv.vii-p11.1
1311. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=7&scrV=2#iv.vii-p3.1
1312. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=7&scrV=2#iv.vii-p13.1
1313. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=7&scrV=2#iv.vii-p16.1
1314. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=7&scrV=14#vi.iv-p40.1
1315. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=7&scrV=35#iv.iv-p52.1
1316. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=7&scrV=39#iv.v-p36.4
1317. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=8&scrV=4#iv.i-p5.2
1318. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=9&scrV=27#iv.vii-p41.3
1319. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=10&scrV=2#vi.iv-p12.1
1320. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=10&scrV=13#iii.iii-p114.3
1321. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=10&scrV=14#iii.iii-p75.1
1322. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=10&scrV=16#vi.v-p4.7
1323. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=10&scrV=17#vi.v-p6.2
1324. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=10&scrV=21#vi.v-p4.2
1325. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=10&scrV=22#iii.i-p22.1
1326. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=10&scrV=22#iv.ii-p133.1
1327. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=10&scrV=31#iii.i-p11.2
1328. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=11&scrV=3#vi.iv-p36.1
1329. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=11&scrV=20#vi.v-p4.6
1330. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=11&scrV=24#vi.v-p20.1
1331. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=11&scrV=25#vi.v-p25.1
1332. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=11&scrV=26#vi.v-p35.1
1333. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=11&scrV=27#vi.v-p57.1
1334. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=11&scrV=28#vi.v-p41.1
1335. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=11&scrV=28#vi.v-p52.2
1336. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=11&scrV=29#vi.v-p75.1
1337. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=13&scrV=2#iv.ii-p90.2
1338. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=13&scrV=5#iv.ix-p14.3
1339. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=13&scrV=7#iii.ii-p25.1
1340. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=13&scrV=8#iii.ii-p30.1
1341. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=10#iv.v-p46.1
1342. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=33#iv.vii-p34.1
1343. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=16&scrV=2#iv.iv-p23.2
1344. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=16&scrV=9#iv.ii-p65.1
1345. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=3#iii.iii-p35.2
1346. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=3#iv.ii-p54.3
1347. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=3#iii.iii-p58.7
1348. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=5#iii.iii-p97.1
1349. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=22#iii.iii-p39.1
1350. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=14#vi.iii-p18.3
1351. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=1#iv.v-p13.2
1352. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=15#vi.v-p63.4
1353. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=4#iii.iii-p140.2
1354. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=4#iii.iii-p140.5
1355. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=17#iii.iii-p84.1
1356. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=1#iii.iii-p84.3
1357. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=20#iv.v-p9.3
1358. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=21#iv.iv-p40.2
1359. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=21#vi.i-p14.1
1360. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=6&scrV=10#iii.iii-p54.2
1361. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=6&scrV=14#iv.ii-p30.2
1362. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=6&scrV=14#iii.iii-p77.1
1363. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=6&scrV=14#iv.vii-p51.4
1364. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=6&scrV=18#iii.iii-p35.1
1365. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=7&scrV=10#iv.vi-p38.3
1366. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=8&scrV=12#v.i-p21.1
1367. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=11&scrV=2#iv.vi-p67.1
1368. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=14#iv.v-p41.1
1369. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=14#iv.v-p55.1
1370. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=2&scrV=20#vi.v-p72.2
1371. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=3&scrV=10#v.iii-p3.2
1372. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=3&scrV=10#vi.ii-p3.3
1373. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=3&scrV=13#iii.iv-p9.1
1374. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=3&scrV=24#iii.iv-p7.1
1375. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=4&scrV=6#vi.vi-p33.3
1376. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=4&scrV=19#vi.iv-p45.4
1377. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=5&scrV=4#v.i-p11.4
1378. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=5&scrV=6#iv.ii-p90.4
1379. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=5&scrV=6#vi.i-p3.9
1380. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=5&scrV=21#iv.vi-p8.2
1381. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=5&scrV=22#iv.ii-p113.4
1382. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=5&scrV=22#vi.i-p3.4
1383. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=6&scrV=14#iv.ii-p98.1
1384. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=6&scrV=17#iv.v-p48.1
1385. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=4#iv.ii-p56.2
1386. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=6#iii.i-p12.1
1387. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=6#iii.iv-p31.1
1388. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=6#iv.ii-p118.2
1389. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=17#vi.iii-p18.1
1390. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=23#vi.v-p72.9
1391. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=2&scrV=1#v.i-p4.1
1392. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=2&scrV=4#iv.ii-p58.4
1393. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=3&scrV=17#iii.ii-p17.2
1394. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=3&scrV=17#iv.vi-p70.1
1395. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=3&scrV=17#iv.vii-p48.3
1396. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=3&scrV=17#vi.v-p72.6
1397. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=3&scrV=19#iv.iv-p40.19
1398. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=3&scrV=20#iii.iii-p106.2
1399. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=19#iv.vi-p47.1
1400. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=19#iv.vi-p46.1
1401. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=19#v.i-p4.2
1402. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=24#iv.vii-p48.2
1403. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=26#iv.iii-p12.3
1404. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=28#iv.viii-p37.1
1405. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=5&scrV=5#iv.i-p34.3
1406. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=5&scrV=5#iv.x-p20.1
1407. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=5&scrV=19#iv.vi-p69.2
1408. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=5&scrV=22#iv.vii-p4.2
1409. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=5&scrV=23#iv.vii-p4.1
1410. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=5&scrV=25#iv.vii-p5.1
1411. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=5&scrV=29#iv.v-p55.2
1412. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=5&scrV=32#iv.vii-p3.5
1413. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=6&scrV=1#iv.v-p37.4
1414. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=6&scrV=2#iv.v-p42.2
1415. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=6&scrV=4#iv.v-p53.1
1416. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=6&scrV=9#iv.v-p20.1
1417. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=6&scrV=9#iv.v-p25.1
1418. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=6&scrV=16#vi.i-p11.2
1419. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=1&scrV=11#vi.iii-p26.2
1420. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=1&scrV=27#vi.iv-p47.2
1421. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=8#iii.i-p13.4
1422. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=13#iv.ii-p138.1
1423. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=13#v.i-p11.3
1424. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=15#iv.vii-p51.1
1425. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=3&scrV=8#iv.ii-p101.1
1426. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=3&scrV=8#vi.i-p16.1
1427. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=3&scrV=8#vi.ii-p15.2
1428. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=3&scrV=14#iv.ii-p121.6
1429. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=3&scrV=15#v.i-p12.4
1430. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=3&scrV=19#iii.iii-p138.2
1431. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=3&scrV=19#iv.i-p36.1
1432. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=3&scrV=20#iv.x-p25.1
1433. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=4&scrV=6#vi.vi-p6.1
1434. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=4&scrV=11#iv.x-p37.1
1435. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=1&scrV=15#iv.ii-p26.1
1436. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=1&scrV=19#iii.iii-p58.5
1437. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=2&scrV=7#vi.i-p22.1
1438. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=2&scrV=18#iii.i-p6.3
1439. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=2&scrV=18#vi.vi-p6.3
1440. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=3&scrV=3#iv.iv-p25.6
1441. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=3&scrV=5#iv.x-p17.3
1442. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=3&scrV=5#vi.v-p61.3
1443. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=3&scrV=20#iv.v-p35.1
1444. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=3&scrV=20#iv.v-p37.2
1445. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=3&scrV=20#iv.v-p42.1
1446. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=3&scrV=21#iv.v-p58.1
1447. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=3&scrV=21#iv.v-p65.3
1448. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=3&scrV=22#iv.v-p18.2
1449. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=3&scrV=24#iv.v-p18.2
1450. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=4&scrV=15#iii.iii-p77.5
1451. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=1&scrV=3#iii.ii-p15.1
1452. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=1&scrV=4#vi.iii-p15.3
1453. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=1&scrV=10#iii.iii-p149.2
1454. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=1&scrV=10#v.iii-p24.1
1455. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=2&scrV=5#iv.x-p15.1
1456. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=2&scrV=13#iv.iv-p69.3
1457. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=2&scrV=13#vi.iii-p3.1
1458. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=2&scrV=16#v.iii-p6.1
1459. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=2&scrV=19#iv.v-p13.1
1460. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=4&scrV=3#vi.vi-p10.1
1461. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=4&scrV=6#iv.viii-p13.5
1462. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=5&scrV=12#iv.v-p11.1
1463. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=5&scrV=22#iv.vii-p50.1
1464. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=5&scrV=23#iv.ii-p74.3
1465. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=2Thess&scrCh=1&scrV=7#iii.i-p23.1
1466. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=2Thess&scrCh=1&scrV=8#iv.ii-p136.3
1467. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=2Thess&scrCh=2&scrV=4#iii.iii-p29.1
1468. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=2Thess&scrCh=2&scrV=8#iii.iii-p29.2
1469. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=2Thess&scrCh=2&scrV=13#iv.ii-p74.4
1470. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=2Thess&scrCh=3&scrV=11#iv.iv-p27.1
1471. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=2Thess&scrCh=3&scrV=12#iv.viii-p31.1
1472. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=1&scrV=11#iv.iv-p108.2
1473. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=1&scrV=17#iii.iii-p8.2
1474. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=2&scrV=1#iv.v-p7.2
1475. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=3&scrV=9#vi.i-p19.2
1476. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=3&scrV=11#iv.ix-p12.5
1477. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=5&scrV=8#iv.vi-p65.2
1478. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=5&scrV=19#iv.v-p12.1
1479. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=5&scrV=23#iv.vi-p64.1
1480. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=6&scrV=9#iv.x-p20.2
1481. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=6&scrV=10#iv.x-p17.1
1482. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=6&scrV=17#iv.vi-p55.1
1483. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=1&scrV=6#vi.v-p67.1
1484. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=1&scrV=12#iii.iii-p54.1
1485. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=2&scrV=12#iii.iii-p89.3
1486. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=2&scrV=26#iii.iii-p140.10
1487. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=3&scrV=2#iv.ii-p136.1
1488. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=3&scrV=4#iv.i-p35.1
1489. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=3&scrV=15#iv.v-p53.2
1490. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=3&scrV=16#vi.iii-p14.1
1491. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=4&scrV=3#iv.iv-p76.1
1492. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=4&scrV=6#iii.ii-p25.2
1493. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=4&scrV=10#v.ii-p20.1
1494. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=4&scrV=10#vi.iv-p49.1
1495. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=4&scrV=17#iii.iii-p104.2
1496. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=4&scrV=17#iv.ii-p67.1
1497. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Titus&scrCh=1&scrV=16#iv.iii-p4.1
1498. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Titus&scrCh=2&scrV=9#iv.v-p18.1
1499. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Titus&scrCh=2&scrV=10#iv.v-p17.6
1500. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Titus&scrCh=3&scrV=5#iv.ii-p76.1
1501. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Titus&scrCh=3&scrV=8#iv.vi-p59.4
1502. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=2&scrV=1#vi.iii-p25.1
1503. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=3&scrV=3#iv.ii-p10.1
1504. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=3&scrV=12#vi.i-p6.1
1505. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=4&scrV=2#iii.iii-p18.3
1506. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=4&scrV=2#iv.iv-p85.4
1507. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=4&scrV=2#vi.iii-p24.1
1508. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=4&scrV=2#vi.v-p72.1
1509. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=5&scrV=7#vi.vi-p19.4
1510. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=5&scrV=7#vi.vi-p33.2
1511. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=5&scrV=8#iii.iii-p126.1
1512. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=5&scrV=9#iii.i-p21.3
1513. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=5&scrV=12#iv.vi-p33.2
1514. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=6&scrV=1#iv.ii-p116.5
1515. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=6&scrV=6#iv.vi-p20.4
1516. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=6&scrV=6#v.ii-p20.2
1517. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=6&scrV=9#vi.iii-p33.1
1518. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=6&scrV=10#iv.vi-p58.1
1519. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=6&scrV=16#iv.iii-p14.3
1520. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=7&scrV=22#iii.iv-p11.1
1521. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=7&scrV=22#iv.ii-p124.2
1522. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=9&scrV=14#vi.v-p25.3
1523. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=10&scrV=10#iv.iv-p40.11
1524. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=10&scrV=19#vi.v-p25.4
1525. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=10&scrV=29#v.ii-p22.1
1526. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=10&scrV=31#iv.i-p19.3
1527. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=10&scrV=31#iv.iii-p31.1
1528. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=10&scrV=38#iv.i-p40.6
1529. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=10&scrV=38#vi.iv-p49.2
1530. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=10&scrV=39#iv.iv-p85.5
1531. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=11&scrV=4#iv.ii-p116.3
1532. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=11&scrV=8#vi.i-p20.2
1533. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=11&scrV=25#iii.iii-p50.2
1534. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=11&scrV=26#iv.ii-p92.2
1535. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=12&scrV=9#iv.v-p28.1
1536. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=12&scrV=9#iv.v-p30.1
1537. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=12&scrV=10#iii.iii-p93.1
1538. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=12&scrV=10#iii.iii-p110.1
1539. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=12&scrV=10#iv.ii-p70.1
1540. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=12&scrV=11#iii.iii-p94.2
1541. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=12&scrV=14#iv.vii-p51.3
1542. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=12&scrV=25#iv.iv-p69.2
1543. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=13&scrV=2#iv.viii-p10.1
1544. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=13&scrV=4#iv.vii-p3.2
1545. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=13&scrV=4#iv.vii-p25.2
1546. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=13&scrV=4#iv.vii-p46.8
1547. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=13&scrV=4#v.iii-p25.2
1548. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=13&scrV=5#iv.viii-p38.1
1549. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=6#vi.vi-p17.1
1550. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=12#iii.ii-p29.4
1551. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=12#iv.ii-p108.2
1552. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=18#iv.iv-p84.2
1553. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=21#iv.iv-p46.1
1554. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=21#iv.iv-p86.1
1555. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=21#iv.iv-p86.6
1556. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=21#vi.iii-p23.1
1557. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=2&scrV=13#iv.vi-p62.3
1558. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=2&scrV=18#iv.vi-p54.1
1559. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=3&scrV=2#v.i-p3.1
1560. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=3&scrV=6#v.iii-p25.1
1561. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=3&scrV=8#iv.iii-p2.1
1562. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=5&scrV=10#iii.iii-p100.1
1563. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=5&scrV=16#vi.vi-p19.1
1564. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=4#iv.vi-p71.1
1565. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=6#iii.iii-p80.2
1566. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=8#iv.ii-p76.2
1567. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=14#vi.v-p63.3
1568. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=16#iv.vi-p69.1
1569. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=16#iv.vii-p48.1
1570. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=19#iv.iv-p25.3
1571. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=2#iv.iv-p82.1
1572. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=2#vi.iii-p21.1
1573. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=3#vi.v-p72.7
1574. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=5#iii.iii-p84.2
1575. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=17#iv.v-p7.1
1576. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=18#iv.v-p15.2
1577. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=6#iv.vii-p4.3
1578. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=4&scrV=12#iii.iii-p89.1
1579. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=4&scrV=17#iii.iii-p95.2
1580. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=5&scrV=2#iv.vi-p33.1
1581. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=5&scrV=4#iii.iii-p48.2
1582. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=5&scrV=4#iv.i-p40.5
1583. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=5&scrV=4#iv.ii-p108.3
1584. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=5&scrV=5#vi.iii-p11.4
1585. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=5&scrV=5#vi.iii-p17.2
1586. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=5&scrV=7#iii.iii-p53.3
1587. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=5&scrV=8#iv.vi-p67.2
1588. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=1#vi.i-p3.6
1589. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=4#iv.ii-p74.2
1590. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=4#vi.iii-p17.3
1591. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=18#vi.iii-p14.2
1592. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=1#iv.vi-p33.3
1593. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=4#iii.iii-p145.1
1594. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=9#iii.iii-p117.1
1595. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=9#iv.vii-p25.3
1596. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=14#iv.vii-p33.1
1597. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=4#iv.iii-p10.1
1598. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=9#v.iii-p21.4
1599. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=1&scrV=3#iv.iv-p26.6
1600. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=2&scrV=1#v.iii-p15.1
1601. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=2&scrV=6#iv.vii-p51.2
1602. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=2&scrV=20#iii.iii-p39.2
1603. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=3&scrV=9#iv.x-p26.1
1604. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=3&scrV=15#iv.vi-p11.2
1605. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=4&scrV=6#iv.ix-p6.2
1606. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=4&scrV=18#iv.viii-p35.3
1607. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=4&scrV=19#iii.ii-p31.1
1608. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=5&scrV=1#iv.ii-p102.1
1609. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=5&scrV=3#iii.i-p25.1
1610. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=5&scrV=4#iv.x-p22.1
1611. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=5&scrV=4#vi.i-p3.10
1612. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=5&scrV=7#vi.iv-p26.1
1613. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=5&scrV=10#iv.iii-p8.2
1614. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=5&scrV=19#iii.iii-p149.4
1615. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=5&scrV=19#iv.ii-p109.1
1616. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=5&scrV=21#iv.ii-p51.1
1617. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Jude&scrCh=1&scrV=6#iv.ii-p136.4
1618. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=1&scrV=5#iv.iv-p40.1
1619. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=1&scrV=10#iv.iv-p22.3
1620. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=1&scrV=10#iv.iv-p26.5
1621. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=1&scrV=10#iv.iv-p44.1
1622. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=2&scrV=4#iii.ii-p35.1
1623. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=2&scrV=21#v.iii-p21.3
1624. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=2&scrV=26#iii.i-p13.5
1625. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=2&scrV=28#iii.i-p13.5
1626. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=3&scrV=2#vi.v-p35.2
1627. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=3&scrV=21#iv.v-p18.3
1628. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=4&scrV=3#iv.ii-p77.1
1629. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=5&scrV=13#iv.v-p47.2
1630. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=8&scrV=7#iv.vi-p29.3
1631. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=9&scrV=7#vi.ii-p21.4
1632. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=10&scrV=2#iv.x-p26.2
1633. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=11&scrV=16#iii.iii-p130.1
1634. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=12&scrV=2#iv.ii-p101.2
1635. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=12&scrV=11#iii.ii-p25.3
1636. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=14&scrV=2#iii.iii-p147.1
1637. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=16&scrV=9#iii.iii-p88.2
1638. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=18&scrV=4#iii.iii-p73.8
1639. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=18&scrV=7#iv.i-p35.5
1640. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=20&scrV=12#vi.iii-p13.2
1641. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=20&scrV=15#iii.iii-p145.3
1642. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=21&scrV=8#iv.vi-p29.2
1643. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=21&scrV=19#iv.iv-p43.2
1644. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=21&scrV=21#iv.iv-p43.2
1645. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=21&scrV=22#iv.iv-p26.7
1646. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=22&scrV=2#vi.iii-p11.6
1647. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=22&scrV=14#iv.iv-p88.1
1648. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=22&scrV=15#iv.ii-p31.4
1649. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=22&scrV=15#iv.ix-p6.6
1650. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=22&scrV=15#v.ii-p18.3
1651. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=22&scrV=18#iii.iii-p14.2
1652. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=22&scrV=19#iii.iii-p22.1
1653. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#iv.vii-p30.2
1654. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#iv.ix-p5.7
1655. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#iii.iii-p74.3
1656. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#iv.viii-p34.1
1657. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#iv.ii-p104.1
1658. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#iii.iii-p82.4
1659. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#iii.iii-p43.4
1660. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#iii.iii-p127.3
1661. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#iv.ii-p111.1
1662. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#iv.vi-p25.1
1663. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#vi.vi-p19.5
1664. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#vi.v-p64.1
1665. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#vi.v-p4.5
1666. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#vi.v-p5.1
1667. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#iv.ii-p90.1
1668. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#iii.ii-p10.1
1669. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#vi.v-p72.8
1670. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#v.iii-p13.1
1671. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#vi.v-p30.1
1672. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#iii.iii-p108.2
1673. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#iv.vii-p46.11
1674. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#iv.vi-p5.2
1675. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#iv.x-p10.6
1676. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#iv.ii-p100.1
1677. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#vi.i-p3.3
1678. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#vi.i-p3.2
1679. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#iii.i-p11.1
1680. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#iv.i-p34.2
1681. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#vi.v-p55.3
1682. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#vi.v-p17.1
1683. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#iv.ii-p102.2
1684. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#iii.ii-p8.1
1685. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#vi.v-p66.3
1686. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#iii.iii-p58.2
1687. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#iv.v-p61.2
1688. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#iv.iii-p22.3
1689. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#iii.iv-p18.1
1690. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#vi.i-p8.1
1691. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#iv.vii-p39.1
1692. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#vi.v-p61.1
1693. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#iv.vi-p40.2
1694. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#iii.iii-p18.1
1695. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#vi.i-p10.3
1696. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#iv.iii-p18.1
1697. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#iv.vii-p24.4
1698. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#iii.iv-p20.1
1699. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#iii.iv-p14.3
1700. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#iv.v-p38.2
1701. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#iii.iii-p110.2
1702. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#iv.vii-p38.1
1703. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#iv.ii-p106.2
1704. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#iv.ix-p5.5
1705. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#v.i-p11.5
1706. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#vi.v-p4.1
1707. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#iii.ii-p13.2
1708. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#iv.vii-p25.4
1709. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#iv.ix-p15.2
1710. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#iv.ii-p14.1
1711. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#iv.iv-p73.3
1712. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#iv.i-p19.2
1713. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#iv.ii-p34.4
1714. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#iii.iii-p134.1
1715. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#iii.ii-p28.1
1716. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#iv.viii-p31.2
1717. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#vi.v-p16.2
1718. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#iv.iv-p27.8
1719. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#iv.ii-p122.8
1720. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#iv.v-p56.1
1721. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#iv.ii-p129.1
1722. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#iv.vi-p65.1
1723. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#iv.i-p11.4
1724. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#iv.ii-p111.2
1725. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#iv.x-p24.1
1726. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#vi.v-p57.2
1727. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#iv.viii-p22.1
1728. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#vi.ii-p21.3
1729. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#iv.vi-p38.4
1730. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#iv.x-p6.1
1731. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#iii.iii-p104.6
1732. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#v.iii-p5.2
1733. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#iv.ii-p115.2
1734. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#iv.ii-p77.4
1735. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#iv.ii-p46.1
1736. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#iii.i-p9.2
1737. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#vi.i-p9.1
1738. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#iv.vi-p33.5
1739. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#iii.iv-p24.1
1740. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#iv.vi-p16.1
1741. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#iv.ix-p6.7
1742. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#iii.i-p10.2
1743. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#iv.x-p17.2
1744. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#iii.i-p16.1
1745. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#iii.i-p6.1
1746. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#iv.x-p23.3
1747. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#iv.ii-p8.3
1748. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#iv.iv-p73.1
1749. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#iv.vii-p39.3
1750. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#iii.iii-p27.1
1751. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#vi.v-p27.4
1752. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#iv.ii-p15.2
1753. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#iv.vii-p37.1
1754. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#iv.iv-p108.1
1755. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#iv.i-p40.1
1756. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#v.iii-p11.1
1757. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#iv.iii-p4.2
1758. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#iv.vii-p45.2
1759. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#iv.iv-p85.3
1760. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#iv.vii-p14.1
1761. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#iv.ii-p127.1
1762. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#iv.x-p10.5
1763. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#iii.iii-p20.2
1764. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#iv.v-p67.1
1765. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#iv.ii-p122.6
1766. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#vi.vi-p15.6
1767. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#iv.vi-p34.1
1768. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#iii.iv-p27.1
1769. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#v.ii-p14.2
1770. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#vi.iv-p42.1
1771. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#iv.iv-p12.1
1772. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#iv.x-p11.1
1773. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#iv.vi-p66.2
1774. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#iv.ii-p92.1
1775. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#iv.ii-p94.1
1776. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#iv.iv-p109.2
1777. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#iv.ii-p122.5
1778. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#iii.iii-p57.2
1779. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#iv.ii-p122.4
1780. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#iii.iii-p58.6
1781. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#iii.iii-p56.1
1782. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#iii.iii-p55.1
1783. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#iii.iii-p58.1
1784. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#iii.iii-p78.1
1785. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#iv.vii-p5.2
1786. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#iv.vii-p5.3
1787. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#vi.ii-p26.1
1788. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#iv.ix-p5.9
1789. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#iv.iv-p99.2
1790. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#iii.iii-p149.1
1791. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#iv.ix-p6.8
1792. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#vi.v-p52.1
1793. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#vi.v-p52.3
1794. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#iii.iii-p141.1
1795. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#vi.v-p61.2
1796. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#iv.ii-p121.5
1797. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#iv.i-p5.5
1798. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#iv.ii-p121.1
1799. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#iii.i-p8.3
1800. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#iv.vi-p41.1
1801. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#vi.v-p72.4
1802. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#iii.iv-p11.2
1803. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#iii.iii-p58.4
1804. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#iv.viii-p2.1
1805. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#vi.vi-p23.2
1806. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#iii.iii-p127.6
1807. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#v.iii-p8.6
1808. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#iii.iii-p80.1
1809. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#iv.v-p15.1
1810. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#vi.i-p10.1
1811. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#vi.ii-p26.4
1812. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#iii.iii-p142.3
1813. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#iv.viii-p34.3
1814. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#iii.iii-p57.1
1815. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#iv.iv-p86.2
1816. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#vi.i-p5.3
1817. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#vi.v-p59.1
1818. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#iv.x-p28.1
1819. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#v.iii-p8.3
1820. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#vi.vi-p21.3
1821. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#iii.iv-p11.3
1822. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#vi.iii-p12.4
1823. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#iv.vi-p47.2
1824. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#iv.ii-p116.4
1825. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#iii.iii-p77.4
1826. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#iv.iii-p21.3
1827. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#iv.x-p13.1
1828. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#iv.iv-p52.2
1829. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#iv.ii-p121.2
1830. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#vi.v-p54.1
1831. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#iii.iii-p144.1
1832. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#iii.iii-p144.2
1833. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#iv.ii-p100.3
1834. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#iv.vii-p46.6
1835. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#vi.vi-p21.2
1836. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#iv.ii-p116.1
1837. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#iv.ix-p11.1
1838. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#iii.ii-p13.1
1839. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#iii.iv-p28.1
1840. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#iv.ii-p90.6
1841. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#vi.i-p5.1
1842. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#iv.v-p37.3
1843. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#iv.i-p36.2
1844. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#vi.i-p3.5
1845. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#vi.v-p61.5
1846. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#vi.i-p22.2
1847. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#iv.vii-p8.1
1848. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#iv.ii-p124.1
1849. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#iii.iii-p39.6
1850. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#vi.v-p6.1
1851. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#iii.iii-p56.3
1852. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#vi.ii-p19.1
1853. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#vi.iv-p39.2
1854. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#iv.vii-p46.1
1855. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#vi.v-p37.3
1856. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#iv.vi-p40.1
1857. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#iii.iii-p73.7
1858. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#iv.ii-p31.3
1859. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#iii.i-p10.3
1860. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#iii.i-p8.4
1861. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#vi.vi-p42.1
1862. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#iv.ii-p90.5
1863. file:///ccel/w/watson/commandments/cache/commandments.html3#iv.vi-p40.3
