     __________________________________________________________________

           Title: Christian Workers' Commentary on the Old and New Testaments
      Creator(s): Gray, James (1851-1935)
     Print Basis: Fleming H. Revell Company, 1915
          Rights: Public Domain
   CCEL Subjects: All; Bibles;
      LC Call no: BS491.G78
     LC Subjects:

                  The Bible

                  Works about the Bible
     __________________________________________________________________

Christian Workers'

Commentary

  ON THE

Old and New Testaments

   Arranged in Sections with Questions for Use in Family Altars and in
   Adult Bible Classes. Containing Homiletic and Expository Suggestions
   for Young Preachers.

   By

JAMES M. GRAY, D.D.

   Minister in the Reformed Episcopal Church; Dean of the Moody Bible
   Institue of Chicago; Consulting editor of the Scofield Reference Bible;
   Author of "Synthetic Bible Studies," "Great Epochs of Sacred History,"
   "How to Master the English Bible," "Primers of the Faith," etc.

  Fleming H. Revell Company
     __________________________________________________________________

THE AUTHOR'S EXPLANATION

   "Whoever attempts it will find it far easier to write a long commentary
   than a brief one," says Jamieson, Faussett and Brown. This we believe.
   The Christian Workers' Commentary represents the labor of eight years
   in the use of such spare hours as could be found in an otherwise
   well-filled life, but had the plan permitted its expansion into a
   series of volumes instead of one, it might have been completed earlier.

HOW TO UNDERSTAND THE BIBLE.

   Fundamental to any first-hand knowledge of the Bible is the reading of
   the Holy Book itself, and all the commentaries in the world can not be
   substituted for it. Moreover this Commentary is planned on the
   supposition that such reading will be done in connection with it.

   And it should be done in an orderly and scientific way. One of the
   greatest marvels and most convincing evidences of the Divinity of the
   Bible is its unity. Although composed of sixty-six different books, and
   written by different authors at widely different times, yet it has a
   single plan and purpose in all its history, prophecy and doctrine both
   in the Old Testament and the New, and it is vital to its understanding
   that this be recognized in our approach to it.

   In other words the serious student should not "start in anywhere" to
   read the Bible, unless it be as a member of a class whose teacher is
   capable of filling in the gaps. The Divine Author should be treated at
   least with the respect of a human author, and given an opportunity to
   interpret and explain Himself in the practical and orderly unveiling of
   his thought. No one would begin a volume on science, history or
   philosophy in the middle of it or towards the close, and still hope to
   be deeply interested in or clearly understand it, and why act on a
   different principle in coming to the Word of God?

THE PLAN OF THE COMMENTARY.

   Begin where the Holy Spirit has indicated to begin, at Genesis, and
   follow the order of the books. As tallying with this, the reader or
   student of this Commentary will find that it does not usually refer a
   second time to subjects which it has already touched upon, and that the
   comments do not repeat themselves to any appreciable extent. One should
   examine the marginal references in his Bible as he proceeds, and then
   turn back to the first instance where the subject or event is treated
   to find the comment on it. For example in the case of the Psalms, when
   one has become acquainted with their general character and the method
   of arriving at their contents as illustrated in the treatment of a few
   at the beginning, he may be expected to be capable of analyzing most of
   the remainder for himself. After that the more difficult, some of the
   more familiar and popular, and those distinctively Messianic or
   Millennial are treated more at length, but others are omitted.

   Moreover as the reading of the Bible should be done in an orderly and
   scientific way, so it should be done not in small detachments, but in
   large and generous portions. For example, in the Commentary, where the
   character of the contents will permit, its sections or divisions cover
   not merely a single chapter, but several chapters, and are designed to
   interest the reader in the broad outlines of revelation. In some
   instances where their outstanding importance calls for it, special
   attention is given to chapters, verses or even single words, but these
   are in the nature of great principles whose understanding carries one a
   long ways. Nor should beginners in the study of the Bible, and of these
   we are thinking, spend much time on isolated texts or be too curious
   about the difficulties and perplexities it presents, but rather seek a
   general and comprehensive knowledge of its contents as a whole, assured
   that in the light of such knowledge the difficulties and perplexities
   will be reduced to a minimum.

THE WAY TO USE IT.

   The average layman has been kept in mind in the preparation of the
   Commentary, hoping that by its aid he might be interested not only to
   read but really study the Bible. He is advised to begin at the
   beginning and follow the wake of the Divine Author in the unveiling of
   His mind to men. First let him read the text in the Bible thoughtfully
   and prayerfully, and then the Commentary upon it. In the text of the
   latter are occasional questions, which he is advised to try to answer
   on the spot; while at the close of each section or division are other
   questions in the nature of a general review. The theme of the first
   section is "Creation of the World," and the Bible text is Genesis 1.
   Let him read Genesis 1, then the Commentary upon it, giving attention
   to the questions if any, in its text, and finally review the whole with
   the questions at the close. This process if pursued, will soon awaken
   enthusiasm in the study of the Bible, and ere long the sense of joy and
   strength in the mastery of its inspired contents.

AT THE FAMILY ALTAR.

   It is hoped the Commentary may be welcomed at the family altar whose
   decay is so seriously to be deplored. To make the family altar
   interesting the element of instruction should be added to it -- not too
   much at a time however, and not too deep. The head of the family after
   reading the Bible portion might read the Commentary upon it when
   necessary or desirable to do so, and then put the questions. Or if
   scarcity of time prevented in the morning, the Bible and the Commentary
   might be read then, and the questions passed around the family circle
   in the evening, or for that matter on the following morning. In such
   cases the prayer to follow will be saved from uniformity and formality.

ADULT BIBLE CLASSES.

   But the author has especially considered the Adult Bible Class
   movement, and the desire so earnestly felt for a method of studying the
   Bible by "wholes" as some Sunday school leaders have expressed it,
   whole books and whole themes in their sequence being in mind. The Bible
   is a single revelation as we have said, with a beginning, continuation
   and end, and in our Adult Bible classes at least it should be studied
   in this way. The different books of the Bible, and the different parts
   of those books, fit into one another with such exactness that it can
   not properly be understood, much less thoroughly enjoyed, except as one
   thus approaches it, and patiently and systematically pursues the golden
   thread to its glorious end.

   It is not essential, but very desirable that every member of such a
   class possess a copy of the Commentary, and the intent is to publish it
   at a price making that permissive when compared with the cost of other
   "Lesson Helps" covering the whole Bible and extending over as long a
   period of study.

   Beginning with Genesis 1, let the teacher a week in advance, assign the
   lesson, which commonly should be a single section or division of the
   Commentary as indicated by the "Questions" at the close. Let him insist
   that the class read the Bible text as often as possible during the week
   and the Commentary afterward, and let him do the same. In many
   instances the explanation, questions and suggestions in the Commentary
   will be all the preparation he requires, and particularly as the class
   advances in the book, and the self-interpretative character of the
   Bible discloses itself. In the case of a wise and prayerful teacher
   such a preparation of himself and his class will make for a social
   conversational hour on the Lord's day, and one of the greatest pleasure
   and profit.

EXPOSITORY PREACHING.

   Finally, although this is a layman's commentary, the pastor, and
   especially the younger men in the ministry and in the mission fields
   have not been forgotten in its preparation. The author believes in
   expository preaching as the staple of any pulpit, and in these pages
   the inexperienced will find such material, and it is hoped a stimulus
   to employ it.

A PERSONAL WORD.

   Naturally in a work of this kind, many books have been consulted and
   many authors quoted, but except where they are mentioned in the text it
   has been thought unnecessary to particularly allude to them. Occasional
   references have been made to the author's "Synthetic Bible Studies,"
   which has been drawn upon especially in the treatment of some of the
   Minor Prophets, and the Pastoral and General Epistles.

   We have tried to avoid too great uniformity in the treatment of the
   different parts of the Bible by employing the narrative style in some
   cases and the more didactic in others as circumstances indicated, and
   we trust the whole will be found readable and useful to all the classes
   of persons for whom it is intended.

   Prayer has accompanied the study and explanation here given of every
   book of the inspired record, and with confidence it may be added that
   the Holy Spirit Who has helped in the compilation, will help in the
   study of it in the case of all who call upon Him for His aid.

   We praise Him for the completion of the work, for the joy found in it
   all the way, for the new light it has brought to our own soul again and
   again, and for the assurance He has given that the labor will not be in
   vain.

   James M. Gray.
     __________________________________________________________________

Old Testament
     __________________________________________________________________

GENESIS

   CREATION OF THE WORLD

   Chapter 1

   1. Creation of Heaven and Earth, v. 1.

   Here are three facts. What was done? Who did it? When did it occur?

   There are two words that require explanation, "created" and
   "beginning." Does the former mean that heaven and earth were created
   out of nothing? The word ("bara," in Hebrew) does not necessarily mean
   that, but its peculiar use in this chapter suggests that it means that
   here. It occurs three times, here in v. 1, at the introduction of life
   on the fifth day, and at the creation of man on the sixth day.
   Elsewhere, where only transformations are meant, another word ("asah"
   in Hebrew) is used, translated "made." "Bara" (created) is thus
   reserved for marking the introduction of each of the three great
   spheres of existence -- the world of matter, of animal life and of
   spirit, all three of which, though intimately associated, are distinct
   in essence, and constitute all the universe known to us. Professor
   Guyot adds that whenever the simple form of "bara" is used in the Bible
   it always refers to a work made by God and never by man. These
   considerations, with others, justify the statement that "created" here
   means created out of nothing.

   But when was the "beginning"? The margin indicates a period about 4,000
   years before Christ, but these marginal notes are not part of the
   divine text, but the work of uninspired minds and therefore open to
   debate. Should science ultimately determine on millions of years ago as
   the period of the creation there is nothing in this verse of the Bible
   it would contradict.

   2. Making Day, vv. 2-5.

   What was the condition of inert matter as represented in verse 2? The
   first verb "was" has sometimes been translated "became." Read it thus
   and you get the idea that originally the earth was otherwise than void
   and waste, but that some catastrophe took place resulting in that
   state. This means, if true, that a period elapsed between verses 1 and
   2, long enough to account for the geological formations of which some
   scientists speak, and a race of pre-Adamite men of which others
   speculate. It suggests too that the earth as we now know it may not be
   much older than tradition places it. The word "earth" in this verse,
   however, must not be understood to mean our globe with its land and
   seas, which was not made till the third day, but simply matter in
   general, that is, the cosmic material out of which the Holy Spirit
   organized the whole universe, including the earth of today.

   "And the Spirit of God moved upon the face of the waters." "Moved upon"
   means brooded over as a bird on its nest. "Waters" means not the oceans
   and seas as we know them, but the gaseous condition of the matter
   before spoken of. The Spirit of God moved "upon" the waters, and not
   "inside of" them, showing that God is a personal Being separate from
   His work. As the result of this brooding, what appeared? We need not
   suppose that God spake just as a human being speaks, but the coming
   forth of light out of thick darkness would have seemed to a spectator
   as the effect of a divine command (Ps. 33:6-9). On the natural plane of
   things vibration is light or produces light, which illustrates the
   relation between the moving of the Spirit upon inert matter and the
   effect it produced.

   "And God called the light day." The Hebrew word "yom," translated
   "day," is used in five different senses in the first two chapters of
   Genesis. Here it means light without reference to time. Later in the
   same verse it means the period covered by "the evening and the morning"
   mentioned, the exact duration of which we do not know. At verse 14 it
   stands for what we know as 24 hours, at verse 16 it means the light
   part of the day of 24 hours, and at 2:4 the whole period during which
   the heaven and the earth were created. All this bears on the question
   whether creation was wrought in 6 days of 24 hours or 6 day-periods of
   unknown length; and it will be seen that one does not necessarily
   contradict the Bible if he believes the latter. When we recall that
   days of 12 and 24 hours were altogether excluded before the appearance
   of the sun on the fourth day, the latter hypothesis receives the
   stronger confirmation.

   3. Making Heaven, vv. 6-8.

   What does God call forth in verse 6? "Firmament" might be translated by
   "expanse." What was it to divide? Notice that according to our
   definition of "waters" this means a separation of the gaseous matter
   into which light had now come. What did God call this expanse? "Heaven"
   here means not simply the atmosphere around the earth but the greater
   chamber of immensity where the sun, moon and stars are located. In
   connection with this read Psalm 148, and notice that there are
   "waters," that is, gaseous matter above the heaven of which this verse
   speaks, and that the "waters" below it include the clouds of our
   atmosphere as well as the oceans and seas we navigate.

   4. Making Earth and Seas, vv. 9-13.

   What command goes forth from God on the third day (v. 9)? What did He
   call the result (v. 10)? Heaven, or the firmament, had divided the
   cosmic or gaseous matter on the second day. Motion was now everywhere,
   and gravitation and chemical forces tended to concentrate this matter
   under the firmament around particular centres, one of which became our
   globe. A cooling process set in, shrinking and folding its surface into
   great wrinkles, the shrinking of some parts furnishing basins for
   oceans or seas and the projection of other parts bringing continents
   into view. Thus would astronomers and geologists comment on these
   verses.

   But another work than the formation of the globe was accomplished on
   this day (vv. 11, 12). A principle superior to matter begins to govern
   its particles, and they assume new forms. What does the earth put
   forth? Which came first, the plant or the seed? "The plant is not yet
   life," says Guyot, "but the bridge between matter and life."

   5. Making Lights, vv. 14-19.

   What command went forth on the fourth day? For what six purposes were
   these lights made (v. 14, 15)? What discrimination is made between the
   two greater lights (v. 16)? Where were the lights placed (v. 17)? What
   special purpose of their making is emphasized in verses 17 and 18? It
   is well to keep in mind that light itself was made on the first day,
   and that these "lights" of the fourth day were (so to speak)
   light-holders. It is of course unnecessary to state how they divide the
   day from the night, and in what sense they are for signs and seasons,
   as every one knows the first result is secured by the daily rotation of
   the earth among them on its own axis, and the second by its annual
   revolution around the sun. It is presumable that originally their light
   was merged in that of the earth's own outer covering of light, and that
   as her luminous envelope disappeared they became visible, and she came
   to depend on them for both light and heat.

   6. Creating Animal Life, vv. 20-25.

   What is the command of verse 20? The "waters" here referred to are our
   oceans and seas. The Revised Version corrects the misapprehension that
   "fowl" came forth from the water. What word in verse 21 indicates that
   we have now entered on a new sphere of existence? What was the nature
   of the blessing on the fish and fowl (v. 22)? What was the further work
   of creation on this day (v. 24, 25)? It is interesting to note: (a)
   that this peopling of the water, the air and the land is in the precise
   order indicated by the science of geology; (b) that the plant life of
   the third day was the preparation for the animal life of the fifth day;
   (c) that the plant is now in the animal shaped into new forms, and
   subservient to higher functions than it could ever perform by itself;
   (d) that two powers which place the animal on a higher platform than
   the lower grades of existence are sensation, by which it perceives the
   world around it, and will, by which it reacts upon it. This is life,
   and is not the result of chemical elements left to themselves, but the
   effect of previously existing life. In other words, the Bible and
   science agree in declaring that "spontaneous generation is an untenable
   hypothesis," and life only begets life.

   7. Creating Man, vv. 26-31.

   What word in verse 26 suggests more than one person in the Godhead?
   What dignity is given to man above every other work of creation? What
   dignity in his position? What word in verse 27 shows that in his
   creation we have entered another new sphere of existence? What blessing
   is bestowed on man in verse 28? How does it differ from that bestowed
   on the lower animals? What provision has God made for the sustenance of
   man and beast? Note: (a) that the consultation in the Godhead regarding
   man's creation foreshadows the New Testament doctrine of the Trinity;
   (b) that the "image of God" may mean the trinity in man represented by
   body, soul and spirit (2:7; 1 Thess. 5:23), but especially that moral
   image suggested in Colossians 3:10; (c) that the dominion of man over
   the lower creation has in some measure been lost through sin, but will
   be restored again in Christ (Psalm 8); (d) that the creation of matter,
   of life and of man are three distinct creations out of nothing, and
   that God's action in them is direct, hence evolution from one into the
   other is impossible. There may be evolution within any one of these
   systems of existence considered by itself, but this is different from
   that other evolution which would make man the descendant of an ape and
   rule God out of the universe which He made.

   Questions.

   1. What does "create" probably mean in this chapter, and why do you
   think so?

   2. When may "the beginning" have been?

   3. What does "earth" mean in verse 2?

   4. What word in verse 2 opposes pantheism by showing God to be a
   Person?

   5. If the creation days were not limited to 24 hours, why do you think
   so?

   6. What does "heaven" of the second day stand for?

   7. What two works were accomplished on the third day?

   8. What two powers in the animal define life?

   9. Quote Colossians 3:10.

   10. How would you distinguish between a rationalistic and a possibly
   Biblical evolution?

   THE GARDEN OF EDEN

   Chapter 2

   1. God's Sabbath, vv. 1-3.

   The first three verses of this chapter belong to the preceding as a
   summing up of its contents. Of what day do they treat? What did God do
   on that day? How did He regard it? These verses, in the light of the
   fourth commandment, seem to countenance the thought of creative days of
   24 hours each, that is, God's Sabbath seems to be set over against
   man's Sabbath, but the two should not be confounded. The latter was
   made for man and fitted to his measure (Mark 2:27), and therefore while
   the proportion of time may in some sense be the same, yet the actual
   time may be different.

   2. Man's Nature, vv. 4-7.

   "The generations of" in verse 4, frequently repeated in this book,
   forms the dividing line between the various sections of it, or, as Dr.
   Urquhart puts it, "the heading of the various natural chapters into
   which the whole book was divided by its author. It refers not to what
   goes before but what comes after." In this case it is not the story of
   the heaven and the earth which we are to have repeated, but an account
   of the transactions of which they were to be the scene, the things
   which followed their creation.

   Notice the new name of God used here, "LORD God." The first of these
   words printed in capitals translates the Hebrew "Jehovah," while the
   second translates "Elohim." Elohim is the far-off name, that which
   distinguishes God as creator, hence its uniform employment until now.
   But Jehovah is the nearby name which distinguishes God in relation with
   man, the covenant-making and covenant-keeping God, hence its employment
   here where man is to be especially considered. Later on when both
   Jehovah and Elohim are used in connection with human affairs, the
   former seems to be generally reserved for God's dealing with His own
   people as distinguished from the unbelieving nations.

   Verse 5 should be read in the Revised Version, where a certain
   condition is described and the reason is given. What were the condition
   and the reason? What interesting fact of natural history is stated in
   verse 6? Especially interesting will it be to recall this when we reach
   the first mention of rain at the flood. Of what was the body of man
   formed? What did the LORD God do with the formation He had made? And
   what was the production of these two elements according to the last
   clause? Here is the starting-point of the psychology of the Bible,
   which seems to speak of man as a trichotomic being -- having body, soul
   and spirit (compare 1 Thess. 5:23; Heb. 4:12). Tertullian, one of the
   early church fathers, used to call the flesh the body of the soul and
   the soul the body of the spirit, an opinion which has maintained among
   psychologists to the present. Others have called the body the seat of
   our sense-consciousness, the soul the seat of our self-consciousness,
   and the spirit the seat of our God-consciousness.

   Before leaving this verse note:(a) that the word "formed" in Hebrew is
   practically the same as "potter" in Job 10:9; Jer. 18:1-6; Ro. 9:20,
   21; (b) that the word for "ground" is "adaniah," which means red
   earth,, and that from it the proper name Adam is derived; (c) that the
   reference to the spiritual life which man received by God's inbreathing
   is that which is the common property of all men, and which should be
   distinguished from the new life in Christ Jesus which becomes the
   possession of those who, as fallen creatures, receive the Holy Spirit
   to dwell in them through faith in His name. For the common spiritual
   life see Job 32:8; Prov. 20:27; 1 Cor. 2:11; and for the life of the
   Holy Spirit in the believer see Ezek. 36:26, 27; Ps. 53; John 14:16,
   17; 1 Cor. 6:19, etc.

   3. The Garden Located, vv. 8-14.

   What name is given to the locality of the garden? In which section of
   that locality was it planted? What~ expression in verse 9 shows God's
   consideration for beauty as well as utility? What two trees are
   particularly named? Where was the tree of life planted? What
   geographical feature of verse 10 accentuates the historical character
   of this narrative? Observe how this is further impressed by the facts
   which follow, viz: the names of the rivers, the countries through which
   they flow, and even the mineral deposits of the latter. Note:(a) the
   use of the present tense in this description, showing that the readers
   of Moses' period knew the location; (b) it must have been an elevated
   district, as the source of mighty rivers; (c) it could not have been a
   very luxuriant or fruitful locality, else why the need of planting a
   garden, and where could there have been any serious hardship in the
   subsequent expulsion of Adam and Eve? It used to be thought that "Eden"
   was a Hebrew word meaning pleasure, but recent explorations in Assyria
   indicate that it may have been of Accadian origin meaning a plain, not
   a fertile plain as in a valley, but an elevated and sterile plain as a
   steppe or mountain desert. Putting these things together, the place
   that would come before the mind of an Oriental was the region of
   Armenia where the Euphrates and the Tigris (or Hiddekel) take their
   rise. There are two other rivers taking their rise in that region, the
   Kur and the Araxes, thence uniting and flowing into the Caspian Sea,
   but whether these are identical with the Pison and Gihon of the lesson
   can not yet be determined. Science now corroborates this location of
   Eden in so far as it teaches (a) that the human race has sprung from a
   common centre, and (b) that this centre is the table-land of central
   Asia.

   4. The Moral Test, vv. 15-17.

   For what practical purpose was man placed in the garden (v. 15)? What
   privilege was accorded him (v. 16)? And what prohibition was laid upon
   him (v. 17)? With what penalty? Some test must be given a free moral
   agent by which his determination either to obey or disobey God may be
   shown, and it pleased God, for reasons He has not been pleased to
   entirely reveal, to select this test. It was an easy one in the light
   of Adam's condition of sinlessness and the bountiful privileges
   otherwise bestowed upon him. "The forbidden tree was doubtless called
   the tree of the knowledge of good and evil because through the eating
   of it mankind came to the experience of the value of goodness and of
   the infinite evil of sin." The phrase "Thou shalt surely die" is
   translated a little differently in the margin. The nature of this death
   was two-fold. It was a spiritual death, for "in the day" Adam ate
   thereof he was cast out from the garden and cut off from the communion
   with God theretofore enjoyed. It was physical death, for in the end
   Adam returned unto the dust whence he was formed. It would seem from
   the ensuing record that it was his exclusion from "the tree of life in
   the midst of the garden' which ultimately resulted in death. "It seems
   to have existed to confer the gift of immortality, perhaps to
   counteract sickness, repel bodily ills of every kind, and keep the
   springs of activity and enjoyment preserved in abounding fulness."

   5. Man's Helpmate, vv. 18-25.

   What further evidence of God's consideration is in verse 18? What
   occurred as a preliminary to its expression (v. 19)? How does verse 20
   illustrate the intelligence of Adam and in so far disprove the theory
   of man's ascent from a lower level than the present? Note the five
   steps on God's part before the helpmate is introduced to Adam (vv. 21,
   22). How does Adam express his recognition of the helpmate? What name
   is given to her, by whom is it given, and why? Do you suppose verse 24
   is the record of an expression of Adam, or a later one of Moses, the
   human author of this book? Of course, in either case, it is God
   speaking through the human agent, but which agent is it? (Compare also
   Ephesians 5:22-33, but especially verses 30, 31.) Speaking of the
   formation of Eve from Adam, one of the older commentators has remarked
   that "she was not made out of his head to surpass him, nor from his
   feet to be trampled on, but from his side to be equal to him, and near
   his heart to be dear to him."

   The last verse of the chapter indicates that "in their state of
   innocence modesty did not require clothing as a. covering for shame,
   and that the climate of the garden did not require it for protection."
   Of God it is said (Ps. 104:2); "Thou coverest Thyself with light as
   with a garment," and some have thought that in man's state of innocency
   a similar shining may have served him in the same way, an outer light
   which he lost when sin robbed him of the inner one.

   Questions.

   1. What relation do the first three verses of chapter 2 bear to the
   preceding chapter?

   2. What significance attaches to the phrase "the generations of"?

   3. How would you distinguish the names of God in this lesson?

   4. What is the nature of man, threefold or two-fold?

   5. Give some evidences of the historicity of Eden.

   6. Where may it have been located, and what reasons are there for so
   thinking?

   7. What made Adam's moral test an easy one?

   8. Why was "the tree of the knowledge of good and evil" probably called
   by that name?

   9. In what two ways was the penalty executed on Adam?

   10. What shows that Adam was not a savage but rather the noblest type
   of the race?

   INTRODUCTION OF SIN

   Chapter 3

   1. The Temptation, vv. 1-5.

   That more than the serpent was present is suggested by the speech and
   reasoning powers displayed, but is rendered certain by a comparison of
   Rev. 12:9 and 20:2, where the serpent is identified with Satan. Some
   think the serpent originally stood upright and was very beautiful to
   look upon, which, if true, would contribute to its power over the woman
   and further explain why Satan employed it as his instrument.
   Nevertheless, that Satan was the real tempter is additionally assured
   by John 8:44; 2 Cor. 11:3; 1 John 3:8 and 1 Tim. 2:14.

   Read Satan's inquiry of the woman in the Revised Version, and perceive
   how it differs from the words of the prohibition (2:16). How does it
   prove Satan "a liar from the beginning," and how does it impugn God's
   wisdom and love? Do you think the woman made a mistake in parleying
   with Satan? And how does her language (v. 3) deflect from the truth?
   Does she also make God a harder master than He is, and thus has sin
   already entered her soul?

   Notice that "gods" (v. 5) is translated "God" in the Revised Version.
   It was in seeking to be as God that Satan fell (1 Tim. 3:6), and he
   tries to drag man down by the same means. Compare the history of the
   Anti-Christ, 2 Thess. 2:4.

   2. The Fall, vv. 6, 7.

   What three steps led to the open act of sin? How does 1 John 2:16
   characterize these steps? Compare the temptation of Jesus for the use
   of the same method (Luke 4:1-13). How does the further conduct of the
   woman illustrate the progress and propagation of sin? Did any part of
   Satan's promise come true? What part failed? Our first parents came
   into the knowledge of good and evil by coming to know evil to which
   they had been strangers before, the moral effect on them being shame
   (compare 2:25). To quote another: "What the man and woman immediately
   acquired was the now predominant trait of self-consciousness.
   God-consciousness has been lost, and henceforth self-contemplation is
   to be the characteristic and bane of mankind, laying the foundation for
   those inner feelings or mental states comprehended under the term
   'unhappiness,' and for all the external strivings whereby effort is
   made to attain a better condition." What was the first of these efforts
   they made (v. 7, last clause)? And (to quote the same author again) "is
   not this act the germ of all subsequent human activities? Conscious of
   self and feeling the pressure of need, and no longer having a God to
   supply that need, man begins to invent and contrive" (Eccl. 7:29). Nor
   are these inventions of a material kind merely, but chiefly a spiritual
   kind, since their effort to cover themselves illustrates the futile
   attempts of the race to save itself from the eternal effects of sin by
   works of morality, penance and the like. What is the only covering that
   avails for the sinner (Ro. 3:22; 2 Cor. 5:21)?

   3. The Trial, vv. 8-13.

   "Voice" might be rendered by sound, and "cool" by wind. How does verse
   8 indicate the character and degree of their shame? Do God's words (v.
   9) express judgment only, or may they have expressed grace? If the
   latter, in what sense? Does Adam tell the exact truth (v. 10)? Was it
   merely shame or the sense of sin that drove him away? How does God's
   question (v. 11) suggest the kind of knowledge that had now come to
   Adam? Does verse 12 show a spirit of repentance or self-justification
   on his part? In the last analysis does he cast the blame on the woman
   or God?

   4. The Sentence on the Serpent, vv. 14, 15

   On which of the guilty does God first pass sentence? Has the curse of
   verse 14 been fulfilled? Compare Isaiah 65:25, and notice that even in
   the millennium when the curse is removed from all other cattle it will
   still remain on the serpent. But how does this curse suggest that
   previously the serpent did not crawl? (Naturalists describe the
   organism of the serpent as one of extreme degradation, and say that
   although it belongs to the latest creations of the animal kingdom, yet
   it represents a decided retrogression in the scale of being, thus
   corroborating the Biblical explanation of its condition.) Has the curse
   of verse 15 been fulfilled?

   But we must not suppose the curse of verse 15 to be limited to the
   serpent, or else Satan were exempt. See by the marginal references that
   the seed of the serpent is placed by metonomy for that of Satan, and is
   identified as the wicked and unbelieving people of all the ages (Matt.
   3:7; 13:38; 23:33; John 8:44; Acts 13:10; 1 John 3:8). In the same way
   the seed of the woman might be supposed to stand for the righteous and
   believing people in all the ages, and so it does in a certain sense,
   but very especially it stands for our Lord Jesus Christ, the Head and
   Representative of that people, the One through whom they believe and by
   whom they become righteous. He Himself is the seed of the woman, and
   they in Him (Is. 7:14; Matt, 1:18-25; Luke 1:31-35; Gal. 4:4, 5).

   Observe how much this means to us. It is really a promise of a Redeemer
   and redemption, and being the first promise, it is that out of which
   all subsequent promises flow. The Bible refers to it again and again in
   one way and another, and we need to become well acquainted with it.
   Indeed the rest of the Bible is just a history of the fulfilment of
   this promise. The Bible is not a history of the world or even of man,
   but a history of the redemption of man from the sin into which he fell
   in the garden of Eden. This explains why the whole story of creation is
   summed up in one chapter of the Bible, and why so little is said about
   the history of the nations of the earth except Israel.

   But in what sense is this a promise of redemption? On the supposition
   that Christ is the Seed of the woman, what will He do to Satan (v. 15)?
   When the serpent's head is bruised is not its power destroyed? (For the
   parallel see Heb. 2:14, 15; Rev. 20:1-3, 7-10.) But what win Satan do
   to Christ? How may Satan be said to have bruised Christ's heel? (For
   answer see Isaiah 50 and 53, Psalms 22 and 69, and the chapters of the
   Gospels which speak of Christ's sufferings and crucifixion.)

   5. The Sentence on Adam and Eve, vv. 16-21.

   What is the first feature of the sentence on the woman (v. 16, first
   clause)? With what chiefly will her sorrow be connected (second
   clause)? What second feature of her sentence is contained in the last
   clause?

   For what is the man condemned? Does this show him less or more guilty
   than his wife? What curse precedes that on the man himself? And yet how
   is it shown that this too is a curse on the man? "Sorrow" is rendered
   toil in the Revised Version, and hence the curse on the ground entails
   the toil on the man. How does this curse on the ground express itself
   from the ground (v. 18)? (The necessaries of life must now be forced
   out of the earth which before might have spontaneously yielded them.)
   What will this condition of things force out of man (v. 19)? For how
   long must this normally continue? What part of man returns to the dust
   (Eccl. 12:7)? Naturalists corroborate the Bible testimony to the curse
   by explaining that thorns and thistles are an abortion in the vegetable
   world, the result of arrested development and imperfect growth. They
   disappear by cultivation and are transformed into branches, thus
   showing what their character may have been before the curse, and what
   it may be when through Christ the curse will have been removed (Rev.
   22:1-5). How deeply significant the crown of thorns, the sign of the
   curse which Jesus bore for us!

   6. The Penalty, vv. 22-24.

   To whom do you suppose the Lord God said this? Who is meant by "us"?
   Did you notice the same plural pronoun in 1:26? The use of this is one
   of the earliest intimations of the Trinity more fully revealed in the
   New Testament. Indeed the earliest intimation is in the first verse of
   Scripture in the name God or (Hebrew) Elohim. This is a plural noun but
   associated with a singular verb, thus suggesting the idea of plurality
   in unity.

   What reason is given for thrusting Adam and Eve out of Eden (v. 22)?
   Has it occurred to you that there was mercy in this act? Having
   obtained the knowledge of evil without the power of resisting it, would
   it not have added to their calamity if, by eating of the tree of life,
   they had rendered that condition everlasting?

   What is the name of the mysterious beings placed on guard at the east
   of the garden? (v. 24) They seem to be the special guardians of God's
   majesty. the vindicators of God's broken law, a thought emphasized by
   their symbolical position over the mercy-seat in the tabernacle at a
   later period. "The flaming sword" has been translated by "shekinah,"
   the name of the visible glory of God which rested on the mercy seat.
   May it be that we have here a representation of the mode of worship now
   established at Eden to show God's anger at sin, and to teach the
   mediation of a promised Saviour as the way of access to God? As later,
   so now God seems to say: "I will commune with thee from between the
   cherubim" (Ex. 25:10-22).

   Questions.

   1. How would you prove that Satan and not the serpent was the real
   tempter in Eden?

   2. In what way does the temptation of the second Adam (Christ)
   harmonize with this of the first Adam?

   3. What does the making of the aprons of fig leaves illustrate?

   4. How does natural history throw light on the curse pronounced on the
   serpent?

   5. Who especially is meant by "the Seed of the woman"?

   6. What is the Bible?

   7. What do naturalists say as to the nature of thorns and thistles?

   8. With what two or three suggestions of the Trinity have we met thus
   far in our lessons?

   9. Of what do the cherubim seem to be the vindicators, and what
   suggestions does this fact bring to mind?

   10. How many questions in the text of our lesson have you been able
   satisfactorily to answer?

   THE STREAM OF HUMANITY DIVIDED

   Chapters 4-5

   1. Two Kinds of Worshippers, 4:1-8.

   What were the occupations of these brothers? What does the name of God
   in verse 3 bring to mind from our second lesson? We are not told how
   God showed respect for Abel's offering and disrespect for Cain's, but
   possibly, as on later occasions, fire may have come out from before the
   Lord (i. e., in this case from between the cherubim) to consume the one
   in token of its acceptance. A more important question is why God showed
   respect for it? Reading Hebrews 11:4 we see that "by faith" Abel
   offered his sacrifice. This means faith in some previous revelation or
   promise of God touching the way a guilty sinner might approach Him.
   Such a revelation was doubtless given in Genesis 3:21, which has been
   reserved for consideration until now.

   Where did God obtain the "coats of skins" mentioned there except as
   some innocent animal (a lamb?) was slain for the purpose? In this
   circumstance doubtless is set before us in type the truth afterwards
   revealed that there is such a thing as a sinner's placing the life of
   another between his guilty soul and God (Heb. 9:22). Abel grasped this
   truth by faith, and submitted his will to God's testimony regarding it.
   Just what teaching he had concerning it we do not know, but the result
   shows that it was sufficient. He approached God in the revealed way,
   while Cain refused to do so. It is not that Cain's offering was not
   good of its kind, but before a man's offering is received the man
   himself must be received, and this is only possible on the ground of
   the atoning sacrifice and the shed blood of Jesus Christ to which
   Abel's offering pointed. See Matt. 20:28; John 14:6; Acts 4:12; Ro.
   3:21, 25; Heb. 11:11-14; 1 Peter 1:18-21; 1 John 1:7; Rev. 1:5, 6.

   What was the effect on Cain (v. 5)? Notice that the question put to
   him: "If thou doest well, shalt thou not be accepted?" might be
   rendered: "If thou doest well, shall it (thy countenance) not be lifted
   up?" When a man does ill he can not look God in the face. But the
   following sentence is equally interesting: "If thou doest not well, sin
   lieth (croucheth) at the door." The idea is that sin, like a hungry
   beast, is waiting to spring upon Cain if he be not wary. But another
   idea is possible. The word for "sin" being the same as for
   "sin-offering," it may be that God is calling Cain's attention to the
   fact that hope of acceptance remains if he will avail himself of the
   opportunity before him. The lamb, the sin-offering, is at hand, it
   lieth at the door, -- why not humbly lay hold of it and present it as
   Abel did? What a beautiful illustration of the accessibility of Christ
   for every sinner? Does Cain accept or reject the invitation? What was
   the final outcome? (Read here 1 John 3:12.)

   2. The First City Built, 4:9-18.

   What sin did Cain add to murder (v. 9)? What additional curse is now
   laid upon the earth and upon Cain on account of his sin (vv. 11, 12)?
   How does the Revised Version translate "vagabond"? The explanation of
   the "mark" is unknown, but it may have been set upon Cain lest by his
   death the populating of the world would have have been arrested at a
   time when it was almost uninhabited.

   Verse 16 is significant -- "Cain went out from the presence of the
   Lord." His parents were thrust out of the garden but were still in the
   presence of the Lord (see the last lesson concerning the cherubim and
   the flaming sword), but he is excluded further. This is the sinner's
   fate in time and eternity. He now lives in the world without God and
   without hope (Eph. 2:12), but even this will be exceeded in the day
   mentioned in 2 Thessalonians 1:7-10, which please read. In what land
   did Cain dwell, and what geographical relation to Eden did it bear? The
   meaning of "Nod" is wandering, and it is affecting to think of Cain,
   and every sinner unreconciled to God through Jesus Christ, as a
   wanderer in the land of wandering.

   The next verse brings up a question often asked: Where did Cain get his
   wife? The answer is: From among his sisters; for although such are not
   named, there can be no doubt that daughters were born to Adam and Eve.
   Marriages of this character are repugnant now and unlawful (Lev. 18:9),
   but it was not so at the beginning, since otherwise the race could not
   have been propagated.

   When it is now said that Cain "builded a city," we should not think of
   a modern metropolis but only a stockade perhaps, and yet it represents
   an aggregation of individuals for the promotion of mutual comfort and
   protection. During Cain's long lifetime it may have attained a
   prodigious size.

   3. Products of Civilization, 4:19-24.

   The posterity of Cain is now given till we reach the seventh from Adam,
   Lamech, whose history is narrated at length. Of what sin was he guilty
   in the light of revelation (Mal. 2:15)? "Adah" means ornament, and
   "Zillah" shade, and it is not unlikely that the sensuous charms of
   women now began to be unduly prominent. The suggestion of wealth and
   possessions is presented in verse 20, art comes into view with Jubal
   (see especially the Revised Version), and the mechanical sciences with
   Tubal-cain. The cutting instruments speak of husbandry and agriculture,
   but also alas! of war and murder, preparing us for what follows in
   Lamech's history. The latter's words to his wives are in poetry, and
   breathe a spirit of boasting and revenge, showing how man's inventions
   in science and art were abused then as now.

   These antediluvians, in the line of Cain at least, seem to have done
   everything to make their life in sin as comfortable as possible in
   contrast to any desire to be delivered from it in God's way.

   4. Men of Faith, 4:25 to 5:24.

   What is the name of the third son of Adam? While contemporaneous with
   Cain what indicates that he was younger? What is immediately predicated
   of his line (4:26)? Notice the capital letters in the name of God, and
   recall the Hebrew word for which it stands and the truth it
   illustrates. If now men began to call on the name of Jehovah, the God
   of promise and redemption, may it indicate that they had not been
   calling on Him for some time before? Does it then speak of a revival,
   and single out the Sethites from the line of Cain? In the same
   connection, notice that nothing is said of their building cities, or
   owning possessions, or developing the arts and sciences. Nor is mention
   made of polygamy among them, nor murder, nor revenge. Not that they may
   have been wholly free from these things, but that the absence of any
   record of them shows a testimony to their character as compared with
   the descendants of Cain. They were the men of faith as distinguished
   from the men of the world. Thus early was the stream of humanity
   divided.

   Notice again the phrase "the generations of" and refer to what was said
   about it in an earlier lesson. Here it introduces the line of Seth as
   distinguished from Cain and for the purpose of leading up to the story
   of Noah, with whose history the next great event in the story of
   redemption is identified.

   But first fasten attention on Noah's ancestor Enoch (5:18-24). This is
   not the same Enoch as in 4:17, but a descendant of Seth. What mark of
   faith is attached to his life-story (v. 22)? And what reward came to
   him thereby (v. 24)? How does Hebrews 11:5 explain this? The
   translation of Enoch into the next world is a type of the translation
   of the church at the second coming of Christ (1 Thess. 4:16, 17). Enoch
   was a prophet and spoke of that day (Jude 14). And notice finally that
   he was the seventh from Adam in the line of Seth, as Lamech was in the
   line of Cain. What a contrast between the two, between the people of
   the world and the people of God, the men of reason and the men of
   faith! What a contrast in their lives and in the end of their lives!

   This lesson had better not close without some reference to the
   longevity of men in those days. It is singular that it is not spoken of
   in the line of Cain. May it be attributed to the godliness in that of
   Seth? Examine Psalm 91, especially the last verse, and consider also
   what Isaiah says (65:20) on the longevity of men in the millennium.
   Observe too, that this longevity was a means of preserving the
   knowledge of God in the earth, since tradition could thus be handed
   down for centuries from father to son.

   Questions.

   1. Can you recite Hebrews 11:4?

   2. With what previous event may Abel's act of faith be connected?

   3. If Abel walked by faith, by what did Cain walk?

   4. What two constructions might be placed on the phrase - "Sin lieth at
   the door"?

   5. What was the name of the oldest city in the world?

   6. Who was the first polygamist?

   7. Was primeval civilization based on holiness or sin?

   8. What did men begin to do in the days of Seth?

   9. Whose history shows death to be not inevitable?

   10. What evidential value is found in the longevity of antediluvian
   man?

   THE FIRST CLIMAX OF SIN

   Chapters 6-9

   1. Degeneration, 6:1-8.

   The results of civilization were morally downward instead of upward,
   even the Sethites becoming corrupted in time as seen in the fact that
   after Enoch's translation only Noah and his family were found faithful.
   Just as the translation of Enoch was a type of that of the church when
   Jesus comes, so the moral condition of the world after his translation
   is a type of that which shall prevail after the translation of the
   Church. See Luke 18:8; 2 Thess. 2; 2 Tim. 3; 2 Peter 3.

   To return to Genesis 5:28 note that the Lamech there spoken of is not
   the descendant of Cain previously mentioned, but the son of Methuselah
   in the line of Seth. "Noah" means comfort, but how do Lamech's words
   testify of the sad experiences of men in those days on account of sin?
   What feature of sin is mentioned at the opening of chapter 6? Some
   think the Sethites are meant by "the sons of God," but others regard it
   as a reference to fallen angels who Kept not their own principality,
   but left their proper habitation (Jude 6) and consorted with human
   beings. Pember's work, "Earth's Earliest Ages," presents arguments for
   this view which are corroborated by such scientific facts as are given
   by Sir J. William Dawson in The Meeting Place of Geology and History.
   In consequence of this awful sin, to what determination does Jehovah
   come (v. 3)? But what respite, nevertheless, is He still willing to
   bestow?

   Verse 4 is sadly interesting. The Hebrew for "giants" is nephilim (R.
   V.), which means fallen ones, and in the judgment of some refers to the
   "sons of God" or fallen angels of the preceding verses. A slightly
   different punctuation makes the verse read thus: "There were nephilim
   (fallen ones) in the earth in those days, and also after that." The
   "after that" seems to refer to Numbers 13:31-33, where in the report of
   the spies to Moses they speak of the men of Canaan as of "great
   stature," adding: "And there we saw the nephilim, the sons of Anak
   which come of the nephilim." This suggests that the culminating sin of
   the Canaanites was not different from that of the antediluvians.
   Observe further that the offspring of these sinful unions became the
   "mighty men which were of old, the men of renown," from which possibly
   the ancients obtained their ideas of the gods and demi-gods of which
   the classics treat.

   How does verse 5 define the extent of the wickedness of these days? Of
   course, when Jehovah is spoken of as repenting (v. 6), the language is
   used in an accommodated sense. Jehovah never repents or changes His
   mind, but His dealings with men as governed by their conduct appear to
   them as if He did so. What now becomes His purpose? Who alone is
   excepted? What shows that even in this case it is not of merit?

   2. The Ark and Its Contents, 6:9 to 7:10.

   Notice the phrase "the generations of," and recall the instruction
   about it in lesson 2. When Noah is spoken of as "just and perfect,"
   that relative sense is used in which any man is just and perfect before
   God who believes His testimony and conforms his life to it. It is in
   this sense that every true believer on Jesus Christ is just and
   perfect. What two charges does God make against the earth (vv. 12 and
   13)? What is Noah commanded (v. 14)? The measurement of the cubit is
   uncertain, the ordinary length being 18 inches, the sacred cubit twice
   that length, and the geometric, which some think may be meant, six
   times the common cubit. At the lowest calculation the ark was as large
   as some of our ocean liners. Notice "covenant" (v. 18), and connect it
   with the original promise of 3:15. Why was Noah to take two of every
   living thing into the ark (vv. 19, 20)? What else was he to take (v.
   21)? Mention is made of the sevens of clean beasts (7:2), doubtless for
   the purpose of sacrifice in the ark and after departing from it. If
   inquiry be raised as to how so many animals could be accommodated in
   such a space, it is to be remembered (1) that the ark in all its three
   stories contained probably 100,000 square feet of space; (2) perhaps
   the animals were not the totality of all the animals known in all the
   world, but those known to Noah; (3) that the distinct species of beasts
   and birds even in our own day have been calculated as not more than
   300.

   3. Duration and Extent of the Flood, 7:11 to 8:14.

   When did the flood begin (v. 11)? What shows an uprising of the oceans
   and seas, occasioned perhaps by a subsiding of the land? How long did
   the rain continue? What suggests a rising of the water even after the
   rain ceased (vv. 17-19)? How long did it continue to rise (v. 24)? What
   circumstance mentioned in 2:5 may have given "a terrifying
   accompaniment" to the rain? When and where did the ark rest (8:4)?
   "Ararat" is rendered Armenia in 2 Kings 19:37 and Is. 37:38. (See
   Pratt's Genesis for an interesting dissertation on this subject.) What
   is the story of Noah's messengers (vv. 6-12)? How long did the flood
   last (v. 14)? A beautiful parallel is found in considering the ark as a
   type of Christ. All the waves of divine judgment passed over Him, and
   He put Himself judicially under the weight of all His peoples' sins.
   But He rose triumphantly from the grave to which that penalty had
   consigned Him. Nor did He thus rise for Himself only, but for all
   believers who are in Him by faith as was Noah and his family in the
   ark.

   But did the flood actually occur? and did it cover the whole earth? are
   questions frequently asked. As to the first, the Word of God is
   all-sufficient to the man of faith, but it is pertinent to add that the
   event is corroborated by tradition and geology. As to the second, there
   may be a division of opinion even among those who accept the authority
   of Scripture. Chapter 7:19-23 seems to teach its universality, but
   whether this means universal according to the geography of Noah or
   Moses or the geography of the present, is a question as to which
   Christians are divided.

   4. God's Covenant with Noah, 8:20 to 9:19.

   What did Noah do on leaving the ark (v. 20)? How does this verse bear
   on 7:2? What indicates the acceptance of his offering, and by its
   acceptance that of himself (v. 21)? What divine promise was associated
   with this acceptance? Of course, this does not mean that no further
   judgment is to be visited on the earth, as may be seen by 2 Thess.
   1:7-10; 2 Peter 3:10-13, and Rev. 14 to 22.

   Where, earlier, have we met the blessing now bestowed on Noah and his
   family (9:1)? What new power over the brute creation is new put into
   man's hands (v. 2)? If his dominion previously was that of love, of
   what was its nature to be henceforth? If his food previously was
   limited to herbs, to what is it now extended (v. 3)? But what
   limitation is put upon it, and why (v. 4)? To quote Pratt at this
   point: "We see here that from the times of the deluge the blood was
   constituted a most sacred thing, devoted exclusively to God, to make
   expiation on the altar of sacrifice for the sins of men (see Lev.
   17:11-14). When the blood of the Lamb of God who taketh away the sin of
   the world had been shed, this prohibition ceased naturally, together
   with the reason for it. The apostles, nevertheless, as a concession to
   the scruples of the Jewish Christians, ordained its continuance (Acts
   15:1-29), a concession which likewise of itself fell into disuse with
   the cessation of the occasion for it -- the disappearance of Judaic
   Christianity."

   To speak further of eating meat, some regard it as a lightening of the
   curse in that flesh was more easily obtained than the products of the
   soil, but others consider it as bearing on the intercourse with the
   spiritual beings previously spoken of. In this connection it is in
   point to remark that the votaries of spiritualism, theosophy and other
   occultisms are denied a meat diet on the ground that it interferes with
   their mysterious (and sinful) affinities.

   What magisterial functions are now conferred on man, not previously
   exercised (vv. 5, 6)? Another remark of Pratt is pertinent here: "The
   death penalty has been abused in almost all the countries of the world,
   but this does not justify its abolition in cases of premeditated
   homicide; and unwillingness to apply to the criminal the pain of death
   ordained by God Himself, the Author of life, always tends to the
   increase of crime and gives loose rein to personal vengeance. The
   inviolability of human life means that the life of a human being is a
   thing so sacred that he who takes it without just cause must pay for it
   with his own in amends to outraged justice, both human and divine."
   Compare Numbers 35:33.

   What are the terms of the covenant now made with Noah (vv. 8-11)? And
   what token or seal does God set to it (vv. 12-17)? The rainbow may have
   been seen before, but God now employs it for a new purpose. And the
   token is not only for us, but also for every living thing, and for
   perpetual generations. And then, too, God looks upon it and remembers
   the covenant whether we do or not, our deliverance depending not on our
   seeing it. This calls to mind the promise of Exodus 12:13: "When I see
   the blood, I will pass over you."

   Questions.

   1. What was the result of the earliest civilization, morally
   considered?

   2. What two applications have been given to the "sons of God" in
   Genesis 6?

   3. What is the Hebrew for "giants," and its meaning?

   4. How might be explained the large number of animals in the ark?

   5. In what way may the ark be used as a type of Christ?

   6. In what two ways is the story of the flood corroborated?

   7. What two reasons have been given for the privilege of eating meat?

   8. What element will be employed in the next destruction of the earth?

   9. Have we Biblical authority and mandate for capital punishment?

   10. What circumstances of special interest do you recall in connection
   with the rainbow?

   THE ORIGIN OF THE NATIONS

   Chapters 9:18-11

   1. Noah's Prophecy, 9:18-29.

   To which of the sons of Noah is attention called at the beginning of
   this section, and why (v. 18)? To what occupation did Noah apply
   himself after the flood (v. 38)? Of what sin was he guilty (v. 21)? Of
   what grosser sin was his son guilty (v. 22)? What curse did Noah
   pronounce on the line of Ham (v. 25)? Which particular line? Just why
   Canaan is selected one can not say. We only know that his father is not
   once mentioned in this chapter without him, for which God must have had
   a reason even if it is not revealed. One reason may be to emphasize
   that the curse rested upon Asiatics rather than Africans. Because
   certain of these latter are descendants of Ham, and are black, and have
   served as slaves, men have associated the curse with them, but the
   facts of the next chapter (10:15-19) are against that idea. The Hebrews
   or Israelites, the descendants of Shem, who were themselves slaves in
   Egypt for a while, afterwards enslaved the Canaanites (Joshua 9:23-27;
   1 Kings 9:20-21), and this in part is a fulfillment of this prophecy.
   It is pertinent further that the Canaanites, like others in the line of
   Ham, the Babylonians, Egyptians and Africans, inherited the sensuous
   characteristics of their progenitor for which the judgments of God fell
   upon them later.

   Passing over the blessing upon Shem, or rather the God of Shem, mention
   the three things prophesied of Japheth (v. 27). He is "enlarged" in the
   sense that the peoples of Europe sprung out of his loins, to say
   nothing of the Hindus and doubtless the Mongolians. He "dwells in the
   tents of Shem" in the sense at least that he partakes of the blessing
   of their religion, that of the Bible. Canaan is his "servant" in the
   sense doubtless in which the nations and tribes descendant from him are
   subject to the control of Europe.

   2. The Nations, 10.

   This chapter is more than a list of names of individuals. Several are
   names of families or nations, and make it the most important historical
   document in the world. You will see that the stream of the race divides
   according to the three sons of Noah. Whose division is first traced (v.
   2)? What part of the world was settled by his offspring (v. 5)? This
   might read: "By these were the coast lands of the nations divided," and
   research indicates that the names of these sons and grandsons are
   identical with the ancient names of the countries bordering on the seas
   of northern and northwestern Europe. (Examine map number 1 in the back
   of your Bible). Whose offspring are next traced (v. 6)? A similar
   examination will show that these settled towards the south and
   southwest in the lands known to us as Palestine, Arabia, Egypt,
   Abyssinia, etc. Whose offspring are last named (v. 21)? What
   distinction is given to Shem in that verse? "Eber" is another form of
   the name Hebrew, and the distinction of Shem is that he was the
   ancestor of the Hebrews or the Israelites. His descendants settled
   rather in the south and southeast, Assyria, Persia, etc.

   3. The First World-Monarchy, 10:8-12.

   The verses relating to Nimrod call for attention. What describes the
   energy of his character? How does verse 9 show his fame to have
   descended even to Moses' time, the human author of Genesis? What
   political term is met with for the first time in verse 10? Attention to
   the map will show "the land of Shinar" identical with the region of
   Babylon in Asia, affording the interesting fact that this kingdom was
   thus founded by an Ethiopian. Verse 11 might read: "but of that land
   (i. e., Shinar) he went forth into Assyria," etc., indicating Nimrod to
   have been the inspiration of the first world-monarchy in the sense that
   he united under one head the beginnings both of Babylon and Assyria,
   proving him a mighty hunter of men as well as wild beasts. Rawlinson's
   Origin of the Nations will be found instructive in this connection. He
   says, in a word: "The Christian may with confidence defy his
   adversaries to point out any erroneous or impossible statements in the
   entire (10th) chapter, from its commencement to its close."

   4. The Tower of Babel, 11.

   The contents of this chapter seem to precede in time those of chapter
   10. There we have the story of how the nations were divided, and here
   why they were divided. What was true of the race linguistically until
   this time (v. 1)? To what locality had they been chiefly attracted (v.
   2)? What new mechanical science is now named (v. 3)? What two-fold
   purpose was the outcome of this invention (v. 4)? What was the object
   in view? Is there a suggestion of opposition to the divine will in the
   last phrase of that verse? (Compare 9:1 and 1:28.) If we take verse 5
   literally it suggests a theophany like that in chapter 18, but perhaps
   the writer is speaking in an accommodated sense. He means that God's
   mind was now fastened on this act of human disobedience and rebellion,
   for such it seems to be. Notice the divine soliloquizing in verse 6,
   and the reasoning it represents: (1) this people are united by the fact
   that they have but one language; (2) this union and sense of strength
   have led to their present undertaking; (3) success here will generate
   other schemes in opposition to My purposes and to their disadvantage;
   therefore this must be frustrated. What was the divine plan of
   frustration (v. 7)? What was the result (v. 8)? What name was given
   this locality, and why (v. 9)? (Observe that Babylon and Babel are the
   same.)

   "With this blow of the avenging rod of God came to an end the third
   experiment God was making with the apostate race. They had again turned
   their backs on God, making haste to caste into oblivion the terrible
   lesson of the flood; and so with the confusion of their speech God
   delivered them up to the lusts of their own hearts" (Pratt). (Read here
   Romans 1:28.)

   Questions.

   1. From which of Noah's sons did the Hebrews descend?

   2. What peoples are the descendants of Japheth?

   3. Who seemed to aspire after the first world monarchy?

   4. What distinction in the account of the origin of the nations is seen
   as between chapters 10 and 11?

   5. What came to an end at this period?

   THE ORIGIN OF ISRAEL

   Chapters 11:10 - 12:9

   1. The Divine Purpose.

   We have reached a fourth experiment in God's dealings with the apostate
   race, only this shall not ultimately be the failure the others proved.
   It should be understood, however, that in speaking of failure the
   reference is to man's part and not God's. Before the flood the sin of
   the race was atheism, outright denial of divine authority with the
   indulgence of sinful lusts it produced and the dissolution of moral and
   social bonds. But after the flood idolatry took its place -- just how,
   or why, it is difficult to say -- and long before Abram's time
   polytheism prevailed both in Chaldea and Egypt.

   But God's purpose from the beginning was the redemption of the race
   according to the promise of Genesis 3:15, and as incident thereto He
   will now call out a single individual from the corrupt mass, and make
   of him a nation. Special training and care shall be given to this
   individual and this nation that there may be in the earth (1) a
   repository for His truth to keep alive His name; (2) a channel through
   which "the Seed of the woman," the world's Redeemer, may come among
   men; and (3) a pedestal on which He Himself may be displayed in His
   character before the other nations of the world to the sanctifying of
   His name among them and their ultimate return to His sovereignty.
   Steady contemplation of this three-fold purpose in the call of Abram
   and the origin of Israel will prevent any charge of partiality against
   God for dealing with them differently from other peoples, and will help
   us to see that all His blessing of them has been for our sake, thus
   quickening our interest in all that is revealed concerning them.

   Israel has thus far fulfilled only part of her original mission. She
   has retained the name and truth of God in the earth, and given birth to
   the Redeemer (though she crucified Him), but she has not sanctified God
   among the peoples by her behavior. For this she has been punished in
   the past, and is now scattered among the peoples in whose sight she
   denied Him; but the prophets are a unit that some day she shall be
   restored to her land again in a national capacity, and after passing
   through great tribulation, be found penitent and believing, clothed in
   her right mind and sitting at the feet of Jesus. Then she will take up
   the broken threads again, and begin anew to carry out the original plan
   of sanctifying God among the nations. She will witness for Jesus as her
   Messiah in the millennial age for the conversion of those nations and
   their obedience to His law. All this will be brought out gradually but
   plainly as we proceed through the prophets.

   2. The Generations of Shem and Terah, 11:10-32.

   "The generations of Shem and Terah" are the children who sprang from
   them, and furnished the descent of Abram and the Israelites. Which one
   of the sons of Shem was divinely chosen for this honor? (Compare v. 10
   with 10:21.) What seven facts are stated of Haran (vv. 27-29)? Iscah,
   one of his daughters, not otherwise mentioned, is thought by some
   identical with her whom Abram married and whose name was changed to
   Sarai (my princess) after that event. Others, however, base on Abram's
   words (20:13) that Sarai was a daughter of Terah by a second wife, and
   thus his half-sister. Still others conjecture that of the supposed two
   wives of Terah, one was Haran's mother and the other Abram's, so that
   in marrying his niece, he was at liberty to speak of her as his sister,
   as in Egypt (12:19), in the same sense in which he could call Lot his
   brother though he was also his nephew (14:14).

   "Haran," which is the name of a locality, called "Charran," in Acts
   7:2-4, must not be confounded with the other word which is the name of
   Terah's son, since they are quite distinct. Notice the location of
   these places on the map, and observe that because of the desert of
   Arabia they had to travel first towards the northwest (about 650 miles)
   to the fords of the Euphrates, and then southwest (say 500 miles) to
   Hebron or Beersheba, which later on became Abram's favorite abode.

   Ur must have been a city of great wealth and influence, so that Abram
   was brought up under circumstances of the highest civilization.
   Documents written in his day have recently been brought to light, in
   which his name is mentioned as borne by men of that land. And as a
   further mark of historicity, the name of the city itself, Ur of the
   Chaldees, or Ur-Kasdim, as the Hebrew puts it, was the peculiar form of
   its name in Abram's time, though subsequently it had another form. One
   more feature of interest is that it was the ancient seat of the worship
   of the Moon, and that Abram and all his family were undoubtedly
   idolaters, so that this call of God to him, like His call to us in
   Christ, was entirely of grace. In examining this point consult chapter
   31:53; Joshua 24:2, 3, 14, 15.

   3. Abram's Call and His Response, 12:1-9.

   How does the King James Version indicate an earlier date for the call
   of Abram than that which chapter 12 narrates? How is this corroborated
   by Acts 7:2? Stephen, speaking of this call, indicates that God "was
   seen to Abraham," as if some visible manifestation was vouchsafed to
   him at the beginning. In what form this may have been we do not know,
   but sufficiently clear to have shown the patriarch the distinction
   between gods of wood and stone and the only true God.

   What seven promises are given Abram to encourage his faith (vv. 2, 3)?
   God's authority could find fit expression only in a nation bound
   together under institutions of His own appointment, since many
   scattered family altars could not bear an adequate witness for His
   unity. Notice again that for Abram to become great and his offspring to
   develop into a great nation co-operation would be required on the part
   of his and their neighbors, hence to secure this God lays this curse
   and blessing upon their enemies and friends.

   Have you located Shechem? How is Abram comforted at this place (v. 7)?
   What additional promise is now given him? This gift to his seed of the
   land should be strongly emphasized. It was, and is, Jehovah's land.
   Ezekiel speaks of it as "the middle, or navel, of the earth" (38:12, R.
   V.), and it is peculiarly situated geographically, commercially and
   politically, but especially historically and prophetically. It has been
   given to Israel as her possession forever, but not her ownership, as we
   shall learn by and by (Lev. 25:23). Moreover, so closely is Jehovah's
   purpose of redemption associated with the land as well as the people of
   Israel that when they are separated from it, as we shall see, they are
   separated from Him, and the lapse of time in their history is not
   considered until they are returned to their land again. In a word, they
   can never dwell elsewhere and be His people or fulfill their calling.

   Questions.

   1. How would you identify the three previous experiments with the race?

   2. How would you distinguish between the sin of men before and
   following the flood?

   3. What was the threefold purpose in the call of Abram and the nation
   of Israel?

   4. How should the knowledge of this influence us?

   5. How far has this purpose yet been realized?

   6. Will it be entirely realized, and if so, when and how?

   7. How might Abram's conduct in 12:19 be explained?

   8. What outside proof have we of the historicity of these chapters?

   9. What is God's peculiar relation to the land as well as the people of
   Israel? ,

   10. Draw an outline map of Abram s journey from Ur to Haran and
   Shechem.

   THE PROMISE RENEWED TO ABRAM

   Chapters 12:10-13

   1. Abram in Egypt, 12:10-20.

   It is felt that Abram acted unadvisedly in taking this journey to
   Egypt, for which three reasons are assigned: (1) God could have
   provided for him in Canaan, notwithstanding the famine; (2) there was
   no command for him to leave Canaan, to which place God had definitely
   called him; (3) he fell into difficulty by going, and was obliged to
   employ subterfuge to escape it. Still these arguments are not
   convincing, and in the absence of direct rebuke from God we should
   withhold judgment.

   Concerning the trial which Abram encountered, how did the last lesson
   justify in part, his subterfuge? What shows the unwisdom of it even on
   the natural plane of things (vv. 18-19)? How does his character suffer
   in comparison with that of Pharaoh? Who interposed on his behalf, and
   how (v. 17)? How does this circumstance demonstrate that the true God
   has ways of making Himself known even to heathen peoples? How does it
   further demonstrate that the record itself is true?

   2. Separation from Lot, 13:1-13.

   If Abram has been out of fellowship with God during his Egyptian
   sojourn, how is that fellowship now restored (vv. 3, 4)? Have we any
   lesson here concerning our own backsliding? (Compare 1 John 1:9.) What
   shows the unselfishness and breadth of Abram's character in dealing
   with Lot (vv. 8, 9)? How does this show that Canaan at this time must
   have been largely depopulated? What principle governed Lot in his
   choice (vv. 10, 11)? How does the Revised Version render verse 12? Have
   you identified these localities on the map? What shows the unwisdom of
   Lot's choice (v. 13)? Read on this point 2 Corinthians 6:14 to 7:1.

   3. The Promise Renewed to Abram, 13:14-18.

   Does Abram suffer for his unselfishness? What advance does this renewal
   of the promise record so far as the land is concerned (v. 15)? So far
   as Abram's posterity is concerned? What two references to Abram's seed
   do verses 15 and 16 record? In what way may he be said to have taken
   possession of the land in advance (v. 17)? Have you identified Hebron?
   Abram by the Egyptian episode may have well felt he had forfeited the
   promise, if it had rested on his faithfulness, but instead it rested
   upon the faithfulness of God. How kind, therefore, for God to have
   reassured His servant, unworthy as he was, and even to have given him a
   larger vision of what the promise meant!

   Questions.

   are rendered unnecessary in this case because of the number and nature
   of those in the text itself. Hereafter when omitted at the close of the
   lesson, it will be for this reason.

   THE ABRAHAMIC COVENANT

   Chapters 14, 15

   1. The Confederated Kings, 14:1-12.

   How does the Revised Version translate "nations" in verse 1? In what
   valley was the battle joined (3)? How is that valley now identified?
   Against what six peoples did Chedorlaomer and his confederates campaign
   in the fourteenth year (5-7)? You will find these peoples located on
   the east and south of the Dead Sea.

   Who were victors in this case (10)? How did they reward themselves
   (11)? What gives us a special interest in this story (12)? Objectors
   have denied the historicity of it, but the monuments of Assyria,
   Babylonia and Egypt, with their inscriptions and paintings, confirm it.
   The names of some of these kings are given, and it would appear that
   Chedorlaomer was the general name of a line of Elamite kings
   corresponding to the several Pharaohs and Caesars of later times.

   2. Abram's Exploit of Arms, 14:13-24.

   By what name was Abram distinguished among these heathen peoples (13)?
   What hint have we of his princely power (14)? What was the manner of
   his attack (15)? The motive for it (16)?

   We are not surprised at Abram's meeting with the king of Sodom on his
   return, but what other king is named (18)? What office did he hold
   beside that of king? Was he a heathen like the others (19)? Who gave
   the tithes, Abram or he? (Compare Heb. 7:6.)

   Melchizedek seems to have been a king of Salem, later called Jerusalem,
   who like Job had not only retained the knowledge of the true God but
   also like him was in his own person a prince and a priest. (Compare Job
   1:5-8; 29; 25.) Recent discoveries of correspondence of the Egyptian
   kings written at about the time of the Exodus refute the theory once
   held that Melchizedek was an imaginary character and that this incident
   never occurred. This correspondence includes letters of the king of
   Jerusalem, Ebed-Tob by name, which means "the servant of the Good One,"
   who speaks of himself in the very phrases used by his predecessor
   Melchizedek (Heb. 7). The probability is that Melchizedek, like
   Chedorlaomer, was the common name of a race or dynasty of priest-kings
   ruling over that city. He is employed as a type of Christ in the 110th
   Psalm and in Hebrews 7.

   How does the king of Sodom probably the successor to him who had been
   slain (10), express his gratitude to Abram (21)? What is Abram's
   response (22-24)? How does this response show that Melchizedek
   worshipped the same God? What elements of character does it show in
   Abram?

   3. The Second Test and Reward of Faith, 15:1-6.

   "After these things" Abram might have feared that the defeated warriors
   would return in force and overwhelm him, nor is it improbable that
   misgivings arose as to relinquishing the spoil he was entitled to as
   the conqueror. But God could deliver him from fear in the one case and
   make up to him the loss in the other. How does He express both ideas in
   verse 1?

   But what burdens Abram heavier than either of these things (2)? God
   promised him a seed to inherit Canaan, which should be multiplied as
   the dust of the earth, yet he was going hence childless. He who should
   be possessor of his house under these circumstances would be Dammesek
   Eliezer (R. V.). Just how to explain this is difficult, but Eliezer was
   his steward, and oriental custom may have entailed the possessions of
   his master on such an one where no natural heir existed. We cannot
   explain this but would call attention to the reply of Jehovah, that it
   is not an adopted son he shall have but a supernatural one (4). And now
   what does Jehovah do to Abram (5)? And what does He ask Abram to do?
   And what does He then promise him? Was Abram's faith able to measure up
   to this stupendous declaration (6)? And in what did this faith of Abram
   result to him (v. 6, last clause)? These words, "counted it to him for
   righteousness," reveal a fact more important to Abram personally than
   the promise of a seed, except that the seed, considered as the
   forerunner and type of Christ, was the only ground at length on which
   Abram might be counted righteous. To understand these words is vital to
   an understanding of our own redemption, and an apprehension of the
   Gospel.

   Abram was a sinner, born into a state of wrongness, but God now puts
   him by an act of grace into a state of Tightness, not because of
   Abram's righteous character but on the ground of his belief in God's
   word. Nor does this righteous state into which he is brought make it
   true that thereafter he is without a flaw in his character, for he is
   guilty of much. But he has a right standing before God, and because of
   it God can deal with him in time and eternity as He cannot deal with
   other men who do not have this standing. The significance of this to us
   is seen in Romans 4:23-25, which you are urged to read prayerfully.

   The question is sometimes asked whether Abram - and for that matter,
   any Old Testament saint - was justified or made righteous just as we
   are in these days. The answer is yes, and no. They were made righteous
   just as we are in that Christ took away their guilt on the cross and
   wrought out a righteousness for them, but they were not made righteous
   just as we are in that they knew Christ as we do. Christ indeed said
   that Abram rejoiced to see His day, and he saw it and was glad (John
   8:56), but this does not mean that he saw and understood what we now do
   of the Person and finished work of Christ.

   The fact is this: God set a certain promise before Abram. He believed
   God's testimony concerning it and was counted righteous in consequence.
   God sets a certain promise before us, and if we believe God's testimony
   concerning it we are counted righteous in consequence. The promise to
   Abram was that of a natural seed; the promise to us in that of
   salvation through Jesus Christ, the anti-type of that seed. We have but
   to believe His testimony concerning Jesus Christ, as Abram believed it
   concerning the seed, to obtain the same standing before God forever. It
   is not our character that gives it to us, nor does our change of
   standing immediately produce a change of character, but this does not
   affect the standing, which is the important thing because the character
   grows out of it. The reward of the first test of faith brought Abram a
   country (Gen. 12), but that of the second brought him a better country,
   that is, a heavenly (Heb. 11:8-16).

   4. The Covenant of God, 15:7-12, 17-21.

   In what words does God now identify Himself and renew the promise of
   the land (7)? Is Abram altogether satisfied about the land (8)? What
   does God tell him to do (9)? What now happens to Abram (12)? What next
   takes place with reference to the sacrifice (17)? And in connection
   with this what does God do with Abram? How does He define the
   boundaries of His gift? We ought to say that "the river of Egypt," can
   hardly mean the Nile, although some so regard it. Others think it is
   that wady or brook of Egypt lying at the southern limit of the land of
   Israel, referred to in Num. 34:5; Josh. 15:4, and Isaiah 27:12.

   The strange incident recorded here is of symbolic importance. Men
   entered into covenant with one another in this way, that is, they would
   slay an animal, divide it into parts, walk up and down between them and
   thus solemnly seal the bond they had made. Afterward part of the victim
   would be offered in sacrifice to their gods, while the remainder would
   be eaten by the parties to the covenant. It was the highest form of an
   oath. God thus condescended to assure Abram, since the smoking furnace
   and burning lamp, passing between the pieces and doubtless consuming
   them, typified His presence and acceptance of the bond. Among men it
   takes two to make a covenant, but not so here. God is alone in this
   case, and asks of Abram nothing in return but the repose of confidence
   in His faithfulness. It is thus that God covenants with us in Christ.
   He gives, and we take. He promises, and we believe.

   But dwelling on what Abram saw we passed over what he heard, and this
   is an essential part of God's covenant with him (13-16). What did He
   say would be true of Abram's seed for a while? It is a matter of
   dispute how these four hundred years are computed, but Anstey's Romance
   of Chronology says that Abraham's seed here means Isaac and his
   descendants from the time of the weaning of the former when he became
   his father's heir, to the date of the Exodus, which was precisely 400
   years. What two-fold promise is given Abram personally (15)? What
   particular reason does God give for the delay in possessing Canaan
   (16)? "The Amorite" here is the name used doubtless for all the
   inhabitants of Canaan, of which they were a chief nation and a very
   wicked one. The long-suffering of God will wait while they go on
   filling up the measure of their iniquity, but at last the sword of
   divine justice must fall. The same thing happens with sinners in
   general, and as another says, it ought to embitter the cup of their
   pleasures.

   Questions.

   1. What corroborative evidence of the historicity of Chapter 14 can you
   name?

   2. Recall in detail what has been taught or suggested about
   Melchizedek.

   3. How would you explain Genesis 15:6?

   4. Can you repeat from memory Romans 4:23-25?

   5. In a word, what is the significance of the transaction in 15:7-21?

   THE TOKEN OF THE COVENANT

   Chapters 16, 17

   Our lessons are grouping themselves around the great facts of Scripture
   as we proceed, and while we are omitting nothing essential, emphasis is
   laid on the strategic points. In this lesson the point is the token of
   the covenant God made with Abram, but there are other thoughts leading
   up to and giving occasion for it.

   1. Sarah and Hagar, 16:1-6.

   The incident we now approach is not creditable to Abram or his wife,
   but there is an explanation of it. At least ten years had elapsed since
   God promised a seed to Abram (compare 12:12 with 16:16), and yet the
   promise had not been realized. Abram had been a monogamist until now,
   but concubinage was the custom, and the idea impressed Sarai that the
   delay in the promise might mean a fulfillment of it in another way.
   Might it be that they should help God to fulfill it? A wise teacher has
   said that human expediency to give effect to divine promises continues
   still one of the most dangerous reefs on which the lives of God's
   people are wrecked. The result might have been foreseen so far as
   Hagar's treatment of Sarai is concerned (4), but the latter's
   unfairness towards her husband does nothing to redeem her previous
   improper conduct. Abram's action (6) will be differently judged by
   different people, but seems consistent with the original purpose to
   accept of Hagar not as on equality of wifehood with Sarai, or even as
   his concubine, but as Lange puts it, "a supplementary concubine of his
   wife."

   2. The Angel of the Lord, 16:7-14.

   It is not "an angel" of the Lord here brought before us, but "The
   Angel," an expression always referring to the second Person of the
   Trinity. He assumes the divine prerogative at verse 10, and is
   identified as God at verse 13. It is no objection to say that it is
   only Hagar who thus identifies Him, not only because she must have had
   evidence of His identity, but because the inspired record in no way
   contradicts her. While this Angel is Jehovah, it is remarkable that in
   the name "Angel," which means "messenger" or "one sent," there is
   implied a distinction in the Godhead. There must be one who sends if
   there is one sent, and since the Father is never sent but always sends,
   the conclusion is that "The Angel of the Lord" must be God the Son.

   Identify on the map "the way to Shur" (7), and observe that Hagar was
   departing in the direction of her own land. Ishmael means "God
   heareth." Why was he to be thus called (11)? What character and
   experience are prophesied of him (see R. V.)? Where was he to dwell?
   "In the presence of his brethren" seems to mean "over against" or "to
   the east of" his brethren.

   3. The Covenant Renewed, 17:1-8.

   Abram's disobedience or unbelief as illustrated in the matter of Hagar
   kept him out of fellowship with God for fourteen years or more.
   (Compare first verse of this chapter with the last of the preceding
   one.) What takes place after so long a time? With what new name does
   God introduce Himself?

   The Hebrew here is "El Shaddai." "El" means might or power, and
   "Shaddai" means a shedder forth of bounty. The name represents God as
   the all-bountiful One, and comes as His revelation of Himself to Abram
   just when the latter needed to learn that the strength of God is made
   perfect in human weakness. Abram sought to obtain by his own energy
   what God only could give him, and having learned his lesson and being
   ready to give himself to God, God is ready to give Himself to Abram and
   make him fruitful. To quote Jukes here: "He puts something into Abram
   which at once changes him from Abram to Abraham - something of His own
   nature."

   But what is required of Abram, however, before this (1)? He must be
   "perfect," not in the sense of sinlessness, impossible to mortal, but
   in that of doing the whole will of God as it is known to him. And on
   that condition what promise is renewed (2)? It is not as though the
   covenant of chapter 15 had been abrogated for "the gifts and calling of
   God are without repentance" (Ro. 11:29), but that now the first step is
   to be taken in its fulfillment. What new attitude, physically
   considered, is now assumed by Abram in his intercourse with God (3)?
   What new name is given him, and its meaning (5)? How does the promise
   of verse 5 read in the Revised Version?

   Compare the promise as more fully outlined in verses 6 to 8 for
   features additional to those previously revealed. What does God say He
   will make of him? And what shall come out of him? Have either of these
   things been said before? What did God say He would establish, and with
   whom, and for how long? What is new here? A father of many nations
   indeed has God made Abraham, if we consider his offspring not only in
   the line of Isaac, but of Ishmael, to say nothing of the children born
   to him by Keturah, subsequently to come before us.

   These nations include the Jews, Arabians, Turks, Egyptians, Afghans,
   Moroccans, Algerians, and we know not how many more. But we are not to
   understand the covenant as established with all of these but only with
   the Jews of Israel, as descendants of Isaac. Isaac is the seed of
   Abraham in mind here, and of course his anti-type, Jesus Christ, is the
   seed ultimately in mind. Keeping this latter point in view, therefore,
   the seed includes more than Israel after the flesh, since it takes in
   all who believe on Jesus Christ, whether Jews or Gentiles (Gal. 3:29).
   Peculiar privileges belong to each, but their origin is the same.

   4. The Covenant Token, 17:9-14.

   It is in dispute whether circumcision was original with Abraham and his
   descendants, or had been a custom in other nations, though of course
   for other reasons in their case. Nevertheless, as Murphy reminds us,
   "the rainbow was chosen to be the sign of the covenant with Noah though
   it may have existed before, so the prior existence of circumcision does
   not render it less fit to be the sign of the covenant with Abraham, or
   less significant." And he adds: "It was the fit symbol of that removal
   of the old man and that renewal of nature which qualified Abraham to be
   the parent of the holy seed." To what extent was it to be carried out
   among the males? What was the penalty for its omission (14)? This
   cutting off of the people from the covenant did not mean physical
   death, but exclusion from all their blessings and salvation, an even
   more serious judgment, since in the end it denoted the endless
   destruction and total ruin of the man who despised God's covenant. To
   despise or reject the sign was to despise and reject the covenant
   itself (see verse 5, last clause). A serious thought for the professing
   Christian who neglects to observe both parts of the obligation in
   Romans 10:9, 10.

   5. The Promise Concerning Sarah, 17:15-27.

   How is the name of Sarai changed at this point (15)? God had never
   promised she should be a mother, and Ishmael, now thirteen years old,
   had doubtless been recognized through the whole encampment as his
   father's heir. But now what distinct promise does God give concerning
   her (16)? How is it received by Abraham (17)? This laughter of Abraham
   was the exultation of joy and not the smile of unbelief. In this
   connection note that Isaac means "laughter," and also that it is with
   him, and not Ishmael, that the covenant is to be established
   everlastingly.

   Are you not pleased that Abraham should have thought of Ishmael as he
   did (18)? "Ishmael as an Arab of the desert, with his descendants, does
   not make much of a figure among the nations of the earth until we
   consider him as the ancestor of Mohammed. It is estimated that he holds
   one hundred and fifty millions of the inhabitants of the world subject
   to his spiritual sway, which indicates that Ishmael still lifts his
   head aloft among the great founders of empires, and in the moral sphere
   greater than them all."

   Questions.

   1. How do God's people sometimes wreck their lives, as illustrated in
   this lesson?

   2. How does this lesson afford another foreshadowing of the doctrine of
   the Trinity?

   3. Give the meaning of the name "Almighty God."

   4. Name some of the nations proceeding from Abraham.

   5. Whom does "the seed" of Abraham include?

   6. How does this lesson impress us with the importance of confessing
   Christ?

   7. Where in this lesson have we a kind of parallel to Luke 24:41?

   8. What distinguished descendant of Ishmael can you name?

   LOT'S AFTERMATH

   Chapters 18, 19

   We have almost forgotten Lot, but he is not having a happy time in the
   land of his choice. The Sodomites have learned nothing by experience,
   and are increasing in iniquity and ripening for judgment. The facts in
   chapter 18 introduce the story of the climax in their case.

   1. A Second Theophany, 18:1-15.

   The word "Lord" in verse 1 is in capitals, another manifestation of the
   second Person of the Godhead as in the case of "the Angel of the Lord"
   in the last lesson. Compare also 13:18, and notice that Abraham is
   still at Hebron, about twenty miles south of Jerusalem, where he had
   settled perhaps twenty-five years prior to this time. We may judge this
   by the fact that when he had become separated from Lot the latter was
   unmarried, but now, as chapter 19 indicates, had a family including
   married daughters. Keep giving attention to the map in these historical
   studies, as it will be found increasingly beneficial as we proceed.

   In what form does Jehovah seem to have appeared to Abraham (2)? How are
   the other two "men" identified? (19:1, R. V.) Abraham's action in
   running to meet and show hospitality to these travelers shows that he
   did not know their true nature, but yet there was something about them
   which he recognized as unusual. Notice, for example, his address in
   verse 3.

   How does the speaker in verse 10 identify himself with Jehovah? What do
   you think of Sarah's laughter in verse 13 as compared with that of
   Abraham in the last lesson? In the light of the context does it express
   confidence or doubt (13-15)?

   2. A Great Prayer, 18:16-33.

   Abraham's prayer is the first prolonged supplication recorded in the
   Bible, and suggests several thoughts upon the subject. (1) The duty and
   privilege of intercessory prayer, for Abraham was now asking for
   others, not himself. (2) The source and inspiration of prayer, which in
   this case is the revealed purpose of God concerning Sodom. He who knows
   God's purposes prays in harmony with them and thus finds abundant food
   for prayer; but to learn His purpose one must listen to His voice in
   His Word. (3) The value of argument in prayer. See how Abraham pleads
   the holy and just dealings of God! But to be possessed of arguments one
   needs to be familiar with what God is and what He says - another reason
   for searching His revealed Word. (4) The right of importunity in
   prayer. God is not displeased to have us press our cause, but expects
   us to do so, and frequently answers according to our earnestness. (5)
   The efficacy of prayer, for Abraham received his real desire, the
   deliverance of Lot, even though Sodom itself was not saved.

   How is Jehovah discriminated from the two "men" at verses 16 and 17?
   What reason is given for His readiness to reveal His purpose to Abraham
   (18)? Read verse 19 in the Revised Version and observe that Abraham's
   faithfulness to God, resulting in the fulfillment of God's promise to
   him, was itself of grace. Jehovah says: "I have known him to that end,"
   which is the same as saying: "The purpose I have in calling and
   blessing Abraham is to keep him faithful that I may bring upon him that
   which I have promised." Here is food for prayer surely, that God might
   know us as He knew Abraham; and perhaps one reason He revealed this
   dealing of His with Abraham is to stimulate us thus to plead.

   How strangely verse 21 sounds, bringing to mind Genesis 11:5, the note
   on which please again read. Perhaps in this case the words were spoken
   by Jehovah in Abraham's hearing. They suggest His fairness in dealing
   with the wicked, for (speaking after the manner of men) He will not act
   on hearsay evidence, but learn the facts for Himself. He will send
   special messengers to report to Him, who, alas! obtain all the evidence
   they need. Does Jehovah Himself visit Sodom? What, in a sense,
   prevented Him?

   3. The Sodom Mob, 19:1-11.

   What leads to the belief that Lot did not recognize the nature of his
   visitors (2, 3)? (Compare Hebrews 13:2.) The following verses show that
   the Sodomites sought acquaintance with these supposed men for those
   vile purposes which have ever been associated with the name of their
   city. It was for this that Lot, at the risk of his life, came to their
   defense, for the duty of protecting a guest has always been accounted
   among orientals as the most sacred obligation. Lot's offer concerning
   his daughters is inexplicable, and yet it shows what Sodom had done for
   him. How does verse 9 show Lot's unpopularity with his neighbors? What
   suggests that he had testified against them? (Read here 2 Peter 2:6-9.)
   Who rescued Lot, and how (10)? What physical judgment was visited upon
   his antagonists (11)?

   4. Lot's Escape, 19:12-26.

   How does verse 12 illustrate our responsibility for the salvation of
   our relatives? And verse 14 the indifference with which they often hear
   our testimony? How does verse 16 illustrate the preventing grace of God
   to lost sinners? What elements of Lot's character are illustrated in
   verses 18-20? How does verse 30 show his folly a second time in
   selecting an abiding place? How do verses 21 and 22 show God's regard
   for the people of His choice, notwithstanding their unworthiness? The
   prophets of the Old and New Testaments speak of tribulation coming upon
   the earth at the close of this age such as was never seen before, but
   they speak also of the deliverance of the saints out of it and a
   removal of them by translation (1 Thess. 4:13-18) before the judgments
   fall (Rev. 3:10 to 7:14, etc.), and this dealing with Lot illustrates
   it in certain ways. By what means were Sodom and Gomorrah destroyed?
   "Overthrew," verse 25, indicating upheavals and submersions of the
   ground, perhaps the result of natural causes, but under divine control.
   The explosion of gas might account for it when the soil, soaked with
   bitumen, would easily convey the fire until all the cities were
   destroyed. It used to be thought that the Dead Sea covered the site of
   these cities, but this opinion is now contradicted.

   What judgment befell Lot's wife, and why? Her motives for looking back
   are not hard to conceive and we need not dwell upon them now, but
   observe how Jesus applies this circumstance to the end of the age (Luke
   17:31-33), and note that He thus not only warns us concerning that
   period but guarantees the authenticity of this whole story.

   5. Origin of the Moabites and the Ammonites, 19:30-38.

   It must not be supposed that the conduct of Lot's daughters recorded
   here is endorsed by God because of that fact. Its record is an
   incidental evidence of the truth of the Bible, for an imposter palming
   off a so-called revelation would have omitted such a circumstance
   reflecting upon them whom God in His mercy had separated unto Himself.
   The purpose of the record is doubtless to give us the origin of the
   Moabites and the Ammonites, who figure so largely at a later time as
   the implacable enemies of Israel, whose vile character is here
   foreshadowed. They ultimately met the fate at God's hands which their
   history deserved.

   ABRAHAM AT GERAR

   Chapters 20, 21

   Why Abraham took the journey in verse 1 is not stated, but perhaps to
   better his pasturage, for he remained in the vicinity for some time
   (21:34). Why he employed the same subterfuge about Sarah as before also
   is not stated except in a general way (12), but it resulted as it did
   then (2). The chapter illustrates certain principles of God's dealings
   with different men:

   (1) Imputed righteousness, while instantaneously giving man a right
   standing before God, does not make that man instantaneously righteous
   in his own character. If it did, Abraham would not have been guilty of
   this falsehood, if it were such.

   (2) God can reveal Himself to the heathen as clearly as to one of His
   own people. Abimelech had no doubt that he had received a revelation
   from the God of Abraham.

   (3) The sin of a heathen is against God, no matter what religion he
   professes or what gods he worships - "I withheld thee from sinning
   against Me."

   (4) God is the conservator of His own truth, and man cannot be trusted
   with it. Twice has He interposed against Abraham himself for the
   protection of his wife, in whom were deposited the hopes of the whole
   human race. These hopes would have been disappointed if Abraham had
   controlled them (Psalm 105:13-15).

   (5) Natural graces of disposition are not a ground of acceptance with
   God. Abimelech commends himself to us by his expostulation with Abraham
   (9-10), his restoration of Sarah and his generous treatment of both
   (14-16), and yet it is Abraham (whose conduct suffers by comparison)
   and not Abimelech who has the privilege and power of intercession --
   "He is a prophet, and he shall pray for thee, and thou shalt live" (7).

   (6) God deals with His own people, those to whom His righteousness is
   imputed, on a different principle from that on which He deals with
   others. Abraham suffers no punishment for this repeated offense,
   although in the course of his life he had his share of chastisements
   and corrections, but God is dealing with him not as a criminal before a
   judge, but as a child before a loving father.

   Abraham and Abimelech in Covenant, 21:22-34.

   The circumstance in this section belongs to that of the previous one,
   although it seems to have taken place at a later time and subsequent to
   the birth of Isaac. Notice how God blessed Abraham in such a way as to
   glorify Himself (22), and recall the teaching in an earlier lesson that
   this was His purpose in the whole history of Israel, which their
   disobedience at the present time has defeated. Abraham must have had
   much influence and power for Abimelech to have found it worth while to
   make a covenant with him (23), but his "kingdom" was very likely
   limited to the city of Gerar and the surrounding territory. Abraham
   takes advantage of the occasion to present a claim for damages, as we
   would say (25), and serious damages, too, when we reflect on the value
   of wells in an oriental country to the possessor of sheep and cattle.
   In verses 27-30 we have a repetition of the transaction in chapter 15.
   "Beer-sheba" means "the well of the oath." This now becomes the
   dwelling place of Abraham for some time (34). What new name is ascribed
   to God in this verse?

   Questions.

   1. How does this lesson teach that the ground of our righteousness is
   objective rather than subjective?

   2. What encouragement does it afford in preaching the Gospel to the
   unsaved?

   3. How does it illustrate God's faithfulness to His promises?

   4. How does it exhibit the difference between the natural and the
   spiritual man?

   5. Can you find here an illustration of Matthew 5:16?

   FROM THE BIRTH OF ISAAC TO THE DEATH OF SARAH

   Chapters 21-23

   1. The Bondwoman and Her Son, 21.

   There is little requiring explanation in this chapter, but verses 9-13
   should not be passed without a look at Gal. 4:21-31. Christians are the
   spiritual seed of Abraham, and those who would supplement faith in
   Christ by the works of the law are the children of the bondwoman, who
   have no place with the children of the promise.

   God, however, is not unmindful of Hagar and Ishmael, nor of His promise
   to Abraham concerning the latter. Although the blessing on the nation
   is not to flow down through them, yet they are not precluded from
   partaking of it when it comes. Abraham, there can be little doubt,
   followed the steps of Ishmael with deep interest, although at the
   moment appearances are not that way. He was probably included in the
   gifts spoken of at 25:6, while his presence at his father's obsequies
   (25:9) shows that the bond of affection between them was not broken.

   We know little of Ishmael's subsequent life except that gathered from
   25:12-18, but the presumption is that he afterward abandoned the
   religion of his father, since his descendants preserved no trace of it
   except the rite of circumcision.

   2. Abraham's Hardest Test, 22.

   The shock communicated to Abraham by this command may have been
   qualified by the fact that the sacrifice of human beings, and even
   one's own children, was not unknown to heathenism; but this could not
   have explained his patient obedience had it not been for that faith
   mentioned in Hebrews 11:17-19. He knew that God's honor and
   faithfulness were involved in the preservation or renewal of the life
   of Isaac, and reposed confidently in that fact. Indeed, there is reason
   to believe from verse 8 that he foresaw the very means by which God
   would interpose for his son.

   That verse is a beautiful foreshadowing of the substitutionary work of
   Christ. Transpose the emphasis, and we learn (1) that God is the source
   or originator of our salvation through Christ -- "God will Himself
   provide a lamb"; (2) that God had as much necessity for Christ as we,
   on the supposition that He purposed to redeem us -- "God will provide
   Himself a lamb"; (3) that God is the provision as well as the provider
   -- "God will provide Himself," i. e., He is the lamb!

   Note two or three other interesting things: (1) that Solomon built the
   temple to Jehovah on Mt. Moriah (2 Chron. 3:1), and that the eternal
   Father afterward sacrificed His only begotten Son in the same place;
   (2) this circumstance of the sacrifice of the Son of God for the sins
   of men silences the charge of infidelity that it was barbarous for God
   to command Abraham to sacrifice Isaac. If it was not barbarous for God
   to sacrifice Christ, neither was it barbarous that it should have been
   prefigured in the history of Abraham; (3) Isaac himself becomes a
   notable type of Christ, especially in the meek and submissive spirit
   shown throughout, and when we remember that although called a "lad" he
   was presumably 25 years old at this time (compare here John 10:18).

   What new name of God is suggested by this event (14)? This means
   "Jehovah will see" or "Jehovah will provide." How does God now further
   confirm His promise and covenant (16)? Note the marginal references to
   Ps. 105:9, Luke 1:73, Heb. 6:13, 14. What additional promise or
   prediction is now added to the original one (17)? The "gate" of ancient
   cities being the strongest part of the wall and the most stoutly
   defended, to possess it was to possess the city itself.

   Do not pass this lesson without observing how Abraham showed his faith
   by his works (James 2:21-24). "All our righteousnesses are as filthy
   rags (Is. 64:6) as a ground of merit before God, but as the fruit of
   our faith obedience is of great price. Abraham's faith without the
   works of obedience would have been a lie, while his work without faith
   would, in this case, have been a sin. The virtue of this act consisted
   in the fact that he obeyed God."

   3. The Cave of Machpelah, 23.

   That Sarah should have died not in Beersheba but in Hebron, and that
   Abraham should have "come" to mourn for her, are facts which the record
   nowhere explains; but the chapter affords an insight into the customs
   of the orientals of this period. For "the children of Heth" compare
   10:15, etc. It will be seen by verse 10 that these people were the
   Hittites whom Joshua

   (1:4) mentions as occupying a great territory in that day, of whom the
   Egyptian and Assyrian monuments speak as a cultured and powerful nation
   of antiquity, although until recently critics were disposed to say that
   they never existed because secular history had lost sight of them.

   Let it not be supposed, however, that the courteous formality of this
   occasion meant that Ephron intended to give Abraham the field for
   nothing. It was the oriental way of raising the price, so that in the
   end Abraham paid many times its value. Four hundred shekels of silver
   were equal to about $240 of our money, the value of which at that time
   would be five or ten times as much.

   Questions.

   1. Give book and chapter of the New Testament which refer allegorically
   to Sarah and Hagar.

   2. Give book and chapter which show Abraham's faith in the
   resurrection.

   3. In what three ways does verse 8 of chapter 22 foreshadow the work of
   Christ?

   4. What three events are associated with Mt. Moriah?

   5. Give chapter and verse which speak of Abraham's fruit of faith.

   FROM THE MARRIAGE OF ISAAC TO THE DEATH OF ABRAHAM

   Chapters 24-25

   Traveling facilities were limited in Abraham's time, so that
   communications between families separated by long distances were few
   and far between. But he seems to have gotten news from his brother's
   home sometime after the birth of Isaac, as recorded at the close of c.
   22, a circumstance linking that chapter to the one we are now
   considering.

   1. Selecting the Bride, 24:1-52.

   Notice the preparation made by Abraham for Isaac's marriage (1-9), the
   oath he administers to his servant, the condition he exacts, the
   prohibition he places upon him, the assurances he gives him, the
   exemption he grants. It may not at first appear why Abraham is so
   solicitous that Isaac's wife shall be taken from his own people rather
   than the Canaanites, since both were idolaters. But the evil traits of
   the Canaanites, which afterwards caused them to be driven out of the
   land, must have been apparent to Abraham even then; moreover there may
   have been something in his people on the other side of the Euphrates
   making them more amenable to the purposes of God with reference to the
   coming Seed, in whom all the families of the earth should be blessed.
   But it is always to be kept in mind that Abraham was under the guidance
   of God, and that there was more than man's wisdom or foresight in this
   transaction.

   Notice the preparation made by the servant for his journey (10-14), and
   observe that the gifts were a dowry for the expected bride, to be paid,
   however, in accordance with oriental custom, not to her but to her
   father. How does the servant show his knowledge of the true God? How
   does his prayer illustrate Prov. 3:5, 6? And yet there is another side
   to the matter, for it is ill-advised to leave the decisions of life to
   the arbitrament of signs, and grievous errors have arisen from
   accrediting God with the outcome of them. "When we have the Word of
   God, the Spirit of God and the providences of God for our guides, and
   the throne of grace open to our appeals, it is expected and doubtless
   salutary that we bear the responsibility of our own decisions in
   difficult places." Indeed, we are likely to show more reverence for and
   confidence in God's guidance in this way than in the other.

   Notice the facts about Rebekah in vv, 15-28.

   Notice the servant's faithfulness in vv. 29-52. Do we get a touch of
   Laban's character in vv. 30, 31? How does it impress you? How does the
   servant testify to Abraham and his son in vv. 35, 36? What is the
   result of the embassy so far as the father and brother of Rebekah are
   concerned? Which of the two seems to assume the more importance?

   2. Accepting the Husband, 24:53-61.

   Notice the additional gifts now presented to Rebekah. But who else are
   also remembered? What objection is interposed, by whom, and why? Who
   settles the question, and how? What blessing is pronounced upon her? Do
   you think it has been, or will be, fulfilled?

   3. The Marriage Rite, 24:62-67.

   Notice how Isaac is represented in v. 63. Was he thinking about his
   bride? Notice the action of Rebekah, which was an indication of the
   inferiority to men with which women were then regarded. It would have
   been improper for Rebekah to have approached her future husband either
   unveiled or riding, instead of walking. What title did the servant give
   to Isaac, and what report did he make to him? In what did the wedding
   ceremony consist? What must have been the significance to the whole
   camp in this act of Isaac in bringing Rebekah "into his mother Sarah's
   tent"? Did it not show that she had now come into that place of
   importance and authority theretofore occupied by Sarah, and belonging
   by right to her, who was the recognized wife of the head of the clan?

   4. The Symbolism of the Transaction.

   We have, in this beautiful story, a striking type of the union between
   Christ and His bride, the Church;

   (1) Abraham arranged the marriage for Isaac, and so the Father has made
   the marriage for Christ (Matt. 22:1, 2);

   (2) The servant selected the bride, and so the Holy Spirit calls out
   the Church (1 Cor. 6:11; 12:3, 13);

   (3) The plan of the servant was simply to tell who his master was, and
   how he had honored his son, and so the Holy Spirit takes the things of
   Christ and shows them unto us (John 15:26; 16:13-15).

   See further the free agency of the bride in accepting Isaac, and the
   expression of her purpose in the words "I will go"; also, the
   separation from loved ones, but the compensation for all in
   anticipation.

   Observe, as well, Isaac's coming out to meet her in the eventide, with
   its suggestion of Christ's return for His Church at the close of the
   present age (John 14:1-3); and even his leading Rebekah into his
   mother's tent, how it foreshadows the place of authority and glory the
   Church shall have when she reigns with Christ over the millennial
   earth. (Matt. 19:28; 1 Cor. 6:2; Col. 3:4; Rev. 20:4-6.)

   5. The Death of Abraham, 25:1-10.

   It is presumable that Abraham's relationship to Keturah was entered
   into sometime before the marriage of Isaac, and indeed it may have been
   before his birth. This seems probable, since v. 6, as well as 1 Chron.
   1:32, speaks of her as his concubine, and not his wife. The occasion
   for the allusion to the matter is suggested by the servant's remark in
   the preceding chapter concerning the possessions of Isaac (compare
   24:36 with 25:5). In other words, the gifts to the offspring of Keturah
   and the settlement of the latter in the east were matters that had been
   attended to before the marriage of Isaac and Rebekah.

   Note the age of Abraham (7), and the way in which his departure from
   this life is designated (8). affording an intimation of the conscious
   and sentient condition of the dead while awaiting the resurrection of
   their bodies.

   Questions.

   1. What connection do you see between chapters 22 and 24?

   2. Can you give any reasons for Abraham's solicitude about the wife of
   Isaac?

   3. Can you quote from memory Proverbs 3:5, 6?

   4. Can you name four or five features in which the marriage of Isaac
   and Rebekah symbolizes the union of Christ and His Church?

   5. Recall three or four features in which Abraham's life-story
   illustrates Romans 4:20, last clause.

   JACOB AND ESAU

   Chapters 25-27

   1. The Defrauded Birthright, 25:19-34.

   As we read the introductory part of this chapter, we are impressed that
   many of the mothers of the notable men of the Bible were for a long
   while childless: Sarah, Rebekah, Rachel, and the mothers of Samson,
   Samuel and John the Baptist. Was this that their faith might be proved?
   We wonder, too, what is meant by the statement that Rebekah "went to
   inquire of Jehovah." There seems to have been some way, even in that
   early time, by which individuals could communicate with God. As Abraham
   was a prophet, and living not far from her, it has been suggested that
   she may have gone to inquire of the Lord through him.

   In considering v. 23, be careful not to charge God with partiality in
   the choice of Jacob, and it will save us from so doing if we remember
   that (1) on the natural plane of things, if there be two nations one is
   likely to be stronger than the other; (2) God not only foresees this
   but has the right to pre-determine it, especially when the blessing of
   all the nations is involved therein; (3) this determination in the
   present case brought no hardship upon the weaker nation as such, nor
   did it prevent any of its individuals from receiving all the blessings
   of the life to come.

   And yet this by no means justifies the meanness of Jacob, any more than
   the recklessness of Esau. Neither brother distinguishes himself in the
   transaction, while Jacob's conduct is only another illustration of an
   attempt to assist God in the fulfillment of His promises. Patience
   would have gotten him the birthright with honor to himself as well as
   glory to God.

   2. History Repeating Itself, 26:1-33.

   How much of this chapter reminds us of the previous one in the life of
   Abraham! There is little to be explained, but the facts should be
   noted.

   The well called Rehoboth still remains strengthened with masonry of
   immense proportions and great antiquity. It is believed that it is the
   well which Isaac dug, although the country is now a desert in contrast
   to its fruitfulness in his time. We may add that at present there are
   two old wells in Beersheba, three hundred yards apart, and Dr. Edward
   Robinson, in Biblical Researches, gives his opinion that the larger may
   be the famous well of Abraham, while possibly the second may be that
   which Isaac dug when the former was stopped up by the Philistines. The
   locality still bears the same name, only in Arabic form.

   3. The Defrauded Blessing, 27:1-40.

   The closing verse of c. 26 gave us a further insight into Esau's
   character, qualifying our sympathy for him. His purpose in marrying the
   daughters of the Canaanite princes was doubtless to increase his
   worldly importance, a circumstance opposed to the divine purpose in the
   separation of Abraham and his seed from the other nations. "If the
   descendants of Abraham were the daughters of the heathen Canaanites,
   they would soon lose the traditions of their family and every trace of
   their heavenly calling. As a matter of fact, this became true in the
   case of the descendants of Esau, who were always the enemies of Israel
   and figure in the prophets as the type of the enemies of God."

   We can hardly believe, however, that Isaac was entirely without blame
   in this case. But who can justify Rebekah, to say nothing of Jacob?
   Surely the goodness of God is of grace, and these things show that He
   has a plan to carry out in which He is simply using men as He finds
   them, and subsequently conforming them to Himself as His sovereign will
   may determine.

   Notice that the blessings of Isaac on Jacob were a formal transmission
   of the original promise of God to Abraham (28:29), which when once
   transmitted could not be recalled (34-38). Esau is blessed, but it is
   not the blessing which he receives. Notice the differences between his
   blessing and that of Jacob. There is an intimation that Esau- that is,
   the nation that should spring from him - would at some time break from
   his brother's yoke, but later prophecies show that this freedom would
   be only for a season. In connection with Esau's conduct compare Hebrews
   12:15-17.

   Note in passing that Herod the Great, the last king of Judah, was a
   descendant of Esau, an Idumean on the side of both father and mother, a
   circumstance, which was the foundation for that irreconcilable hatred
   with which the Jews regarded him during his long reign.

   4. Jacob's Flight, 26:41 to 28:22.

   What was the cause of Jacob's flight (27:41-45)? The excuse for it
   (27:46 to 28:5)? At what place is he next found (10)? What did he see
   in his dream? Whom did he see, and why? How did the speaker introduce
   Himself? Do you recognize the promise given him? What particular
   addendum of a personal character is attached (15)? What effect had this
   on Jacob? How did he express his feelings? What did he name the place?
   (Bethel means "The House of God.") Compare John 1:51; Heb. 1:14; Luke
   15:10, and recall that the beautiful hymn, "Nearer, My God, to Thee,"
   is based upon this impressive incident in Jacob's life. "For the pious
   servants of God this dream threw a flood of light upon the certainty of
   heaven, of which they had known little or nothing until that time, as
   well as the facile communication there might be between heaven and
   earth, and the profound interest which God and the holy angels felt in
   the affairs of men." What vow did Jacob offer? In the consideration of
   this vow, which was entirely voluntary on his part, observe that "if"
   does not necessarily express a doubt in his mind, since it might be
   translated "since," or "so then." It may be regarded as his acceptance
   of the divine promise, so that from that moment Jehovah did in some
   sense become his God, as well as He had been the God of Abraham and
   Isaac.

   We are accustomed to speak of the selfish proposition of Jacob in v.
   22, last clause. But before casting the mote out of his eye, should we
   not cast the beam out of our own? With all the knowledge of God we
   possess does our character shine brighter? Do we not still use the "if"
   in the face of the promises? And do we give even as much as a tenth of
   our possessions to Him, notwithstanding the richer blessings we enjoy?
   Is it not still true that He is dealing with us on the principle of
   grace, and not merit? God sometimes consents to call Himself by the
   name of "the God of Jacob." What unutterable comfort it should bring to
   us!

   Questions.

   1. On what grounds is God released from the charge of partiality in the
   choice of Jacob?

   2. In what ways does Isaac's life and character differ from that of
   Abraham?

   3. What name is sometimes given to Esau's descendants?

   4. What is the meaning of Bethel?

   5. How would you explain God's patience with Jacob?

   JACOB AND LABAN

   Chapters 29-31

   1. Their First Meeting, 29:1-14.

   Jacob's journey to Haran, his mother's country, was first to the north
   and then the east, re-traversing the original course of his grandfather
   Abraham. As he nears its termination, his attention is attracted by the
   shepherds with their flocks around a well, whose mouth is covered with
   a stone. Inquiry reveals that they belong to Haran, and are acquainted
   with his uncle Laban. Rachel, his daughter and the keeper of his sheep,
   will be there presently, for her they are waiting, since their custom
   is not to remove the stone or water the flocks till all are gathered.
   Rachel appears, and it is a case of love at first sight on Jacob's
   part, if one may judge by his action in rolling the stone from the well
   and watering her sheep, to say nothing of the kiss he bestows upon her.
   As another observes, the morals of these simple folk were good, and the
   estimation in which they held the honor of women was high, for a young
   and beautiful girl like Rachel might expose herself to the hazards of
   pastoral life without risk. But among the ancient Greeks it was the
   custom for daughters of princes to perform this office, and even to-day
   among the Arabs unmarried women expose themselves without harm to the
   same class of dangers. The personal habits of people make a great
   difference in their national customs. (Pratt.)

   Anstey shows that Jacob was 77 years of age at this time.

   Rachel's enthusiasm in carrying the news to her father reminds us of
   her aunt, Rebekah, at an earlier time. Though Jacob calls himself her
   father's brother, we know after the oriental fashion he means his
   nephew. What a talk they had around the family hearth as he rehearsed
   the story of the mother he loved so truly since she left her home long
   before! A month has passed before they settle down again to prosaic
   things (14).

   2. Their First Contract, 29:15 to 30:24.

   The seven years Jacob serves for Rachel are a heavy burden in one
   sense, but a light one in another. But how he is deceived at the end of
   it, when he begins to reap what he had sown! All this is part of God's
   plan for his conviction, conversion, sanctification, and preparation
   for His great purpose on behalf of Israel and the whole world later on.
   Happily Jacob is not obliged to wait another seven years before
   marrying Rachel, but receives that part of his compensation in advance
   (27-28).

   One cannot read this story without being impressed with the use God
   made of the envy of these sisters for the purpose of building up the
   house of Jacob and of Israel. We meet with some indelicate things here,
   but we should remember that these histories were written not from our
   point of view but in the style of the simple people of the past. It is
   desirable to familiarize ourselves with the names of the twelve sons of
   Jacob, since they become so prominent in the history of Israel and of
   the world. Notice who was the mother of Levi and of Judah, and also of
   Joseph (29:24-35; 30:24). The polygamy and concubinage spoken of are
   not only contrary to the Gospel, but not to be regarded as approved of
   God at any time (Mal. 2:14-15; Matt. 19:3-9), but in accordance with
   the customs of those times. In this connection it is notable that Isaac
   seems to have remained a monogamist.

   3. Their Second Contract, 30:25 to 31:16.

   As one reads the story of this section he feels little sympathy for
   Laban, who deserved the punishment he received, but wonders at Jacob's
   smartness until he reads his explanation (31:4-13), and learns that God
   interposed on his behalf, and prompted him in what he did. This is in
   fulfillment of the original promise of blessing and cursing, which was
   carried out in the later history of Israel, and will be very markedly
   fulfilled at the end of this age and throughout the millennium. There
   is a divine reason why the Jew of today holds the money bags of the
   world, and why he is such a factor in our commercial centers.

   O, thou treacherous and crafty Laban, type of the Gentile oppressor of
   Israel in all time, dost thou think thou canst circumvent Jehovah by
   removing all the speckled goats and black sheep from thy flocks that
   Jacob may have none (vv. 34-36)? Place three day's journey between
   thyself and Jacob, but leave to Jacob God, and he will ask no more
   (31:5)!

   It is interesting that Jacob has the sympathy of his wives in the issue
   between him and their father, and that they support him in his purpose
   to return to his own land. What was the inspiration and the
   encouragement of this purpose (13)?

   4. Their Separation, 31:17-55.

   What advantage of Laban did Jacob take at this juncture (19, 20)? What
   shows Jacob's wives to have been idolators at this time? How does this
   further indicate the divine patience and longsuffering? How does it
   indicate that God has a purpose of grace He is seeking in the earth
   independent of the conscious and willing co-operation of His creatures?

   Look on the map and determine what river it was that Jacob crossed in
   going from Haran into Gilead (a distance of probably 350 miles). How
   does God interpose for Jacob (24)? Where have we seen a similar
   revelation of Himself to a heathen? Do you think Laban was sincere in
   v. 27? What teaching do we obtain of the responsibilities and hardships
   of the shepherd's life in vv. 38-40? Notice Jacob's testimony to God's
   great favor to him (42), and the distinction of faith in Jacob's oath
   as compared with that of Laban.

   It is desirable to add that the names which Laban and Jacob gave to the
   locality of their covenant means the same thing in the Aramaic and
   Hebrew tongues, "The heap of witness," while Mizpah means "The watch
   tower."

   How does the conclusion of this story illustrate Proverbs 16:7?

   Questions.

   1. Rehearse the story of Jacob from the time of leaving home until he
   met Laban.

   2. Try to recall the story he would have to tell Laban.

   3. Give the substance of the references to Malachi and Matthew.

   4. Of what is Laban a type in all the generations?

   5. Memorize the last Scripture reference, with chapter and verse.

   JACOB BECOMES ISRAEL

   Chapters 32, 33

   1. Meeting With the Angels, 32:1-2.

   Filled with wonders is this lesson! The appearance of the angels, the
   divine wrestling, the transformation of Esau -- how much we need the
   Holy Spirit to understand the meaning of these things!

   Be sure to identify these places. Galeed or Mizpah of the preceding
   chapter, and Mahanaim, Peniel and the river Jabbok named in this, are
   all on the east of the Jordan, not far from what was known later as
   Ramoth-Gilead.

   How condescending of God to send His angels to encourage Jacob at this
   crisis -- such a man as Jacob! In the margin you will find that
   Mahanaim means "two heaps" or "two camps," with reference perhaps to
   the angels as one camp and the household of Jacob as the other.

   2. Meeting With God, 32:3-32.

   Where was Esau dwelling at this time (3)? What shows Jacob's fear of
   him (4-8)? What reason had he for the increase of this fear (6)? To
   whom did he appeal, and how (9-12)?

   Study this prayer, the first of its kind in the Bible -- that of
   Abraham was intercessory and of the nature of a dialogue, but this is a
   personal supplication. Its elements are adoration, confession,
   thanksgiving, petition and pleading. Discover these divisions for
   yourself and locate them in the verses.

   How does Jacob plan to propitiate Esau (13)? What kind of present does
   he prepare for him (14-15)? How many droves in all do you think there
   were (16-20)? Can you picture these five droves separated and appearing
   before Esau's astonished eyes at intervals? Was not the plan well
   adapted from a human point of view to have the desired effect?

   But the incident following shows that something must be done in Jacob's
   soul and then the propitiation of his brother will be brought about in
   another way. In this incident we have another theophany such as we have
   seen before, but in some respects more remarkable still. To think that
   Jehovah should not only appear in human form but wrestle as a man with
   a man! What is the meaning of it all?

   For one, thing it shows Jacob's dogged determination to have his own
   way - a kind of symbolic action illustrative of his whole career. What
   a schemer and planner he was from the time he defrauded Esau of his
   birthright until now! While wrestling with God he was in spirit
   wrestling with Esau probably, seeking in his own strength and by his
   own schemes to make peace with him, but he is to learn that his
   strength is made perfect in weakness. In God's plan and purpose he
   cannot prevail with men until he first prevails with God, and with God
   he cannot prevail until he ceases his own efforts and simply clings to
   Him for support and blessing. But this he will not do until God
   afflicts and makes it impossible for him to do otherwise. What a lesson
   for us! May God help us to translate it into our experience!

   3. Meeting With Esau, 33.

   The action of Esau, especially v. 4, seems to indicate a supernatural
   work on him, changing his mind toward Jacob. It is not the result of
   Jacob's plan so much as God's grace, whether Jacob realizes it as yet
   or not.

   His caution (12-15) still shows a certain fear of Esau, and this is
   shown further by the fact that he does not follow him to Seir (14), but
   turns sharply to the east, locating in Succoth, and then in Shechem.
   Notice the altar he erects and the recognition of his own new name
   "God, the God of Israel."

   Questions.

   1. Have you identified the localities?

   2. Have you analyzed Jacob's prayer?

   3. Have you pictured in your mind his plan of propitiation of Esau?

   4. Have you compared yourself with Jacob as a planner?

   5. Have you learned his secret of prevailing with God?

   JACOB AT THE HOMESTEAD -- MEMOIRS OF ESAU

   Chapters 34-36

   1. The Wickedness of Jacob's Sons, 34.

   In the last lesson Jacob's altar at Shechem proclaims God to be his
   God, but (as another says) it is evident he has not gotten the power of
   this name for he is walking in his own ways still, as his house at
   Succoth and his purchase at Shechem testify. So new sorrow and
   discipline must come.

   Dinah represents the young women of today who want to see the world and
   have their fling. Her conduct was indiscreet, to say the least, and
   dearly did all concerned pay the consequences. One can feel only utter
   condemnation for the beastliness of Shechem, and yet the reparation he
   and his father offered to make was honorable (3-12), and dignifies them
   in comparison with Jacob's sons and many modern offenders of high
   repute.

   No justification can be found for the criminality of Jacob's sons
   (18-29). That Jacob appreciated its enormity, not only his fear (30)
   but also his later loathing of it and his curse upon its instigators
   (49:5-7), show.

   In our indignation we ask why did not God destroy these sons of Jacob
   instead of continuing His interest in them and even prospering them? In
   reply, remember that He did this not for their sake but for the world's
   sake, our sake. His plan of redemption for the world involved the
   preservation of Israel, and to have destroyed them would have been to
   destroy the root of the tree whose leaves ultimately would be for the
   healing of the nation. It is this that explains God's patience in later
   periods of Israel's history, and indeed His dealings with us; for His
   own name's sake He does many things, or refrains from doing them.

   2. The Later Journeys of Jacob, 35.

   God comes to Jacob's relief in directing him to what place? What marks
   this as a time of religious crisis in his family (2-4)? If he had
   forgotten God's house in building his own, God now leads him to a
   higher plane where he sees his obligation to build God's house first.
   What was done with all their emblems of idolatry? In what way does God
   put Jacob's fear upon his enemies (5)?

   How further is God's goodness shown to Jacob (9)? What assurance is
   renewed to him (10)? What are the Hebrew words for "God Almighty," and
   their meaning (see Lesson 10)? What relation do you perceive between
   this name and the promise which follows? In what way does God transfer
   the original blessing to Jacob (11)? how does the language (v. 13) show
   that we have here another theophany?

   Jacob seems to be gradually approaching the old homestead. What place
   is now reached, and what later name is given it (16-19)? What domestic
   events occurred here? It is interesting to note that the pillar erected
   to Rachel was in existence at the time of Moses, three hundred years
   later, according to the testimony of v. 20. It is mentioned again four
   hundred years afterward in 1 Samuel 10:2. "The Mohammedans still mark
   the site with a monument of solid masonry."

   What interesting circumstance is mentioned in v. 27? How does v. 29
   testify to the reconciliation of Jacob and Esau? In coming to the end
   of Isaac's life it is worth while to note that his blessing, unlike
   Jacob's, was uniform and unbroken, doubtless the recompense of the
   obedience with which his life began. Note also how God preserved him in
   life so that he did not give up his place as a witness of God's truth
   in the earth until Jacob, the son of promise, had returned and was made
   ready to fill that place. Attention had better be called as well to the
   phrase, "was gathered unto his people" (29), which was used of Abraham
   (25:7), and points to a belief even in those early days of a continued
   existence of men after death.

   3. The Memoirs of Esau, 36.

   We can spare but a paragraph or two for this chapter, which is inserted
   doubtless because of the natural relations between Jacob and Esau, and
   the subsequent relations of their respective descendants.

   It is noticeable that the author takes pains to identify Esau with
   Edom, mentioning the fact a number of times. In the second place, we
   see from the origin of Esau's wives that "Canaanites" includes the
   Hittites, Hivites and Horites. In the third place, we should not be
   misled by the word "dukes." which simply means "chiefs," or heads of
   families or clans. In the fourth place, the reference to Esau's
   dwelling in Mount Seir (6-8) seems to refer to a second departure into
   that country after the return of Jacob and the death of Isaac. Finally,
   the reference in v. 31 to the "kings that reigned in the land of Edom
   before there reigned any king over the children of Israel" seems to
   point to a later author than Moses, since there were no kings in Israel
   until hundreds of years after his death. The entire paragraph with a
   few variations is found again in 1 Chronicles 1:43-50, and some have
   thought that it was taken from thence and added to this chapter.

   Questions.

   1. Has Jacob yet become perfected?

   2. Should we palliate wrong in those who stand in close relationship to
   God?

   3. Can we give a reason for God's forbearance in the case of Jacob's
   sons?

   4. Describe the religious crisis in Jacob's household at this time.

   5. What corroborative evidence of the historicity of this lesson is
   found in modern times?

   DISPENSATIONAL ASPECT OF JACOB 'S HISTORY

   Following F. W. Grant, in the Numerical Bible, the life of Jacob gives
   as its lesson the story of that discipline by which the Spirit of God
   brings us from weakness to power, from nature's strength to that
   wholesome weakness in which alone is strength. But for this, natural
   strength must be crippled, which is provided for in two ways: (1) in
   allowing us to realize the power of another nature (Esau), and (2) in
   the direct dealing of God with our souls.

   To this also correspond the two names which distinguish the two parts
   of Jacob's life, before and after these experiences have done their
   work. He is Jacob in his methods, however, long after his heart is set
   upon divine things, and is only Israel when, his human strength broken
   down, he halts upon his thigh. These two names -- Jacob and Israel --
   are applied all through the Scriptures in a very beautiful manner to
   the nation which sprang from him, and of which he is the representative
   throughout. But of course the effect of God's discipline upon them
   cannot be read in their history hitherto, and awaits the fulfillment of
   prophecy concerning them. Their past history has been that of Jacob,
   but it will yet be said of "Jacob and of Israel: What hath God
   wrought!" (Numbers 23:23).

   Jacob's history divides itself into three parts - his early life in
   Canaan, his stay in Padan-aram, and his life again as restored to
   Canaan; just as the history of the nation dispensationally divides
   itself into their first occupation of the land, their present
   dispersion, and their future and perpetual enjoyment of it when God
   brings them back again.

   We find a kind of parallel between the first part of Jacob's life and
   that of the nation in his dream at Bethel when he is just about to
   leave the land, as we compare that dream with the application which
   Christ makes of it to Himself (John 1:51). Christ, as the Son of man,
   secures to Israel the care and ministrations of Jehovah while the
   nation is outcast from their inheritance, and when they shall with
   Nathanael's faith confess Christ as Son of God and King of Israel, they
   shall have in a more blessed way than ever their "house of God" on
   earth.

   In the same way Jacob's history at Padan-aram suggests a parallel with
   the nation as they are now scattered from their land, for during the
   twenty years of Jacob's exile he enjoyed no such revelations of God's
   presence as he did before. During that time God deals with him as He is
   now dealing with the nation, as one for whom He has a purpose of
   blessing only to be reached through disciplinary sorrow. Like his
   descendants he is multiplied as the dust, while trampled into it. The
   nation to-day is enslaved, persecuted, and yet preserved in order to
   merge in the end of the age into that place of wealth and power of
   which all the prophets speak.

   Jacob's return to his own land, in its application to the nation,
   brings us into the field of prophecy. For the nation, as well as for
   him, Peniel must prepare the way to Bethel. That the nation may not
   fall into the hands of their enemies, God, whose name is yet unknown to
   them, must take them into His own hand, crippling the human strength
   with which they contend with Him that in weakness they may hold Him
   fast for blessing. Thus, broken down in repentance and purged from
   idolatry, the nation will have their second Bethel when God will reveal
   to them His name so long hidden, and confirm to them the promise to
   their father Abraham.

   Questions.

   1. What is the great lesson of Jacob's life?

   2. Divide his history in three parts, and apply it dispensationally.

   3. Quote from memory John 1:51.

   4. In what way does the Padan-aram experience foreshadow Israel's
   history to-day?

   5. What event in Jacob's life foreshadows a similar one yet to follow
   in the history of Israel?

   JOSEPH'S HISTORY

   Chapters 37-47

   The general familiarity with these chapters warrants the grouping of
   them in one lesson, especially as there is little requiring explanation
   within our present scope.

   1. Loved and Hated, 37.

   It may seem foolish for Joseph to have made known his dreams to his
   brethren, and thus increase their enmity against him, but we should
   consider God's purpose in the matter, whether Joseph understood it or
   not. In the outcome it was important that they should know these
   dreams, which were really prophecies, in advance of their fulfillment
   for the sake of the moral effect upon them.

   In this chapter it will be seen that the merchantmen are called both
   Ishmaelites and Midianites, both being in the company, perhaps, as
   their territories were contiguous in Arabia.

   2. Sold Into Slavery, 39.

   Note the faith and piety of Joseph as indicated in v. 9, in language
   unlike anything hitherto recorded of the patriarchs. Note too that
   according to v. 20 Potiphar must have doubted the truth of his wife's
   charge, or else he would probably have executed Joseph.

   3. Falsely Imprisoned, 40.

   This chapter is chiefly notable for the further evidence it gives of
   Joseph's intimate acquaintance with and faith in God, and the close
   dealings of God with him in the revelation of these things.

   4. Exalted to the Throne, 41.

   Note Pharaoh's testimony to Joseph's power with God (38), not that he
   himself knew the true God, but that he witnessed to the power Joseph
   had with the God he (Joseph) served. How does this incident in Joseph's
   life illustrate 1 Tim. 4:8, last clause?

   The name given Joseph by Pharaoh merits attention notwithstanding the
   difficulty in its interpretation. The Revised Version spells it
   "Zaphenathpaneah," but it is not determined whether it is of Hebrew,
   Egyptian or Coptic derivation. If the first it may mean "Revealer of
   secrets"; if the second, "Bread of Life"; if the third, "Saviour of the
   world"; all bearing on the same thought and any of them both
   significant and appropriate.

   5. Dealing with His Brethren, 42 to 44.

   The details of these chapters show the purpose of Joseph to "multiply
   unlooked for events and complicate the situation for his brethren, both
   to awaken their conviction of wrongdoing in the past and an expectation
   of something still more mysterious, whether good or bad, in the future"
   - thus preparing them for the great revelation soon to be made.

   In chapter 44:17, 18 the reference to the three days is important for
   its bearing on the death and resurrection of Christ. It will be well to
   note, for example, the vague way of the Hebrews in using the words.
   According to our usage, had Joseph's brethren been imprisoned three
   days it would not have been until the fourth day that he changed his
   plan, but instead of that they were shut up but two nights and the
   intermediate day, with parts of the first and third days. This was the
   time Jesus was in the grave, so that there is no more reason to accuse
   the Bible of inaccuracy or contradiction in the one case than in the
   other. (Studies in Genesis, in loco.)

   6. Revealing Himself to His Brethren, 45.

   Why was Pharaoh so pleased to have Jacob and his family settle in
   Egypt? To show appreciation of Joseph? Yes, and for other reasons. It
   was not merely three-score and six souls that constituted the whole
   encampment of Jacob, but between three and four thousand souls, if we
   count all their dependents, which was a valuable accession to any
   nation when we consider the character of the people.

   And there may have been another reason still, if it be true that the
   reigning dynasty at this time was the Hyksos or Shepherd kings, i. e.,
   Syrians or Asiatics who centuries before had invaded and seized upon
   the kingdom, and so were unpopular with the native races. It would be a
   great advantage to them to have so powerful an accession of Asiatics as
   Jacob's tribe represented, not only to increase their riches but to
   "give additional firmness to the throne against the discontent and
   disturbance of the native races."

   7. Settling the Family in Goshen, 46 to 48.

   Note the suitableness of Goshen as a place of settlement for the
   Israelites. In the first place, it afforded good pasturage and they
   were shepherds, but in some parts of it there was excellent tillage as
   well. In the next place, its location near the Isthmus of Suez, - made
   it easy to depart from later on when the necessity was so great. And
   last, but not least, it was a location where the least offense would be
   given to the native races, and there was reason for such offense
   because shepherds were held in abomination by them. Their subjugation
   by a shepherd race explains this in part, but there was another reason
   in that the Egyptians for religious reasons did not eat flesh. They
   worshipped the beasts which the Israelites ate and offered in sacrifice
   to God.

   How long did Jacob live in Egypt (47:28)? What solemn promise did he
   extract from Joseph just prior to his death (29-31)? Do you think this
   expressed only the natural desire to be buried with his own people, or
   did it express faith in the divine promise that his seed should
   ultimately inherit Canaan?

   Questions.

   1. What name did Pharaoh give Joseph, and what are its possible
   meanings?

   2. How does this lesson throw light on the period that Christ remained
   in the grave?

   3. What probable dynasty of Pharaoh's is before us in this lesson?

   4. Give some reasons for Pharaoh's satisfaction in welcoming the
   Israelites to Egypt.

   5. What made Goshen a desirable locality for them?

   TYPICAL AND DISPENSATIONAL ASPECTS OF JOSEPH'S HISTORY

   The life of Joseph more than any other patriarch suggests that of
   Christ and shadows forth the history of Israel as a nation.

   1. The first view we have of him he is loved of his father and hated by
   his brethren, and there are three things for which his brethren hated
   him, namely: the love of his father for him, his separation from them
   in a moral sense, and his dreams in which his future supremacy is
   announced. J. here were the same things for which Christ was hated by
   his brethren after the flesh: (1) His Father's love; (2) His separation
   from them (John 15:17-25); and (3) the announcement of His future glory
   (Matt. 27:57-68).

   2. Joseph is conspired against and sold, and it is his love-mission to
   his brethren, as sent by his father, that gives occasion for this. How
   like the history of our Saviour in His coming unto Israel! Joseph is
   cast into a pit at first, but instead of putting him to death his
   brethren sell him to the Ishmaelites. So the Jews, knowing it was not
   lawful for them to put any man to death, transferred Jesus to the
   Gentiles.

   3. Joseph is a slave in the house of the Egyptian, but that house is
   greatly blessed of God because he is in it: a type of Christ's ministry
   to the world while He abode therein. And yet Joseph's goodness to the
   Egyptian did not avail in the face of false accusation, nor did that of
   Christ to the world. The former is cast into prison where again all
   things come under his hand, and so Christ descends into a darker
   prison-house where He manifests Himself as master of all there

   (Col. 2:15; 1 Peter 3:18-22).

   4. Joseph's humiliation issues in exaltation; the parallel to which in
   Christ's case is as we see Him raised from the grave to the throne of
   glory. "God sent me before you to preserve life," said Joseph to his
   brethren, and Jesus at the right hand of God is ministering in the
   spiritual sense, to His brethren of Israel to whom He is as yet
   unknown.

   5. But in connection with Joseph's exaltation he enters on a new
   relationship - that of marriage with a Gentile woman, suggestive of the
   unique relationship of Christ to His church, composed chiefly of
   Gentile believers.

   6. Now comes the time of famine which speaks of the period at the end
   of this age, a literal seven years as indicated by Daniel 9, when the
   church shall have been translated to meet her Lord in the air, and
   Israel will be preparing through trial to recognize and receive her
   rejected Lord.

   Benjamin Blended with Joseph.

   7. At this point Benjamin comes into view as blended with Joseph in the
   prototypal relation. To quote another: 'We see how all at last is made
   to depend upon Benjamin. No one person could be a full type of Christ,
   and Benjamin is brought in to supplement what is lacking in Joseph.
   Benjamin means 'the son of my right hand,' and he represents the
   Messiah of power for whom the Jews have always been looking. But
   Benjamin, before he was called by his father the name which means 'the
   son of my right hand,' was named by his mother 'Benoni,' which means
   'the son of my sorrow.' It was necessary for Christ to be the sufferer
   before He could be the conqueror. Christ, known to us as the rejected
   One, is now exalted and seated at the right hand of God, and He is the
   One whom Israel does not know. A Christ triumphant and reigning over
   the earth is the One for whom they have always looked; the Sufferer for
   whom they did not look but who must precede the Conqueror they have
   refused.

   "But power does not lie with Benjamin for whom his brethren are
   looking, but with Joseph whom they have refused. As a conquering
   Messiah Christ has been prophesied to them, and as such He longs to
   display Himself in their behalf. This He cannot do without atonement
   for the sin that led them to their refusal of Him. For this they must
   be brought to repentance, and God sends them into an agony for their
   ideal Messiah that makes them ready to receive the true one. In the
   last great sorrow that shall overtake Israel as a nation this shall be
   accomplished. Before Him whom they do not know they shall plead for the
   Benjamin who has been lost to them, and in the agony of that hour,
   while they are still pleading for the ideal conquering Messiah, the
   heavens shall suddenly open and they shall be overwhelmed by a
   revelation of the Christ they refused (Zech. 12:10).

   "The Conqueror and the Sufferer are one and the same blessed Person.
   The 'Lion' that prevails to open the book is the 'Lamb' that was
   slain." - The Numerical Bible, by F. W. Grant; The Unfolding of the
   Ages, by Ford C. Ottman.

   CLOSE OF THE PATRIARCHAL AGE

   Chapters 48-50

   With the history of Joseph, Genesis concludes what is called the
   patriarchal age. Yet there are two or three facts for consideration
   before passing to the next book.

   1. The Life of Judah.

   For example, Joseph's history was interrupted almost at the beginning
   by that of his brother Judah (c. 38). A shameful history is that of
   Judah, but recorded because of its bearing upon the genealogy of Jesus,
   since Tamar, prostitute though she were, became an ancestress of our
   blessed Lord (Matt. 1:3).

   2. Jacob Blessing Joseph's Sons, 48.

   Note the past and the future of Jacob's faith as enunciated in vv. 3
   and 4: his adoption of the two sons of Joseph, and how in some sense
   they were to receive the blessing forfeited by Reuben and Simeon (see
   the following chapter, and compare 1 Chron. 5:1, 2). By the adoption of
   these two sons the tribes of Israel were enlarged to thirteen, but by a
   special divine arrangement, as we shall see subsequently, that of Levi
   had no part in the division of the land of Canaan, and the nation was
   thus able to always preserve the original number, twelve.

   Of the two sons of Joseph Jacob gave the pre-eminence to one contrary
   to the law of primogeniture and evidently by divine guidance, though
   for reasons we do not know. By and by we shall see a fulfillment of
   this predictive blessing in the pre-eminence of the tribe of Ephraim.
   Notice the form of blessing on these sons, a kind of credal expression
   of Jacob (vv. 15, 16). This is the earliest creed of the true faith on
   record, and suggests an example to us in these days when all sorts of
   people say they believe in God, meaning so many different things
   thereby. We should be careful that it be known in what God we believe,
   namely, "the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ," with all that
   the term implies. When in this blessing Jacob speaks of "the Angel" who
   redeemed him, he means Jehovah Himself, since (as we have learned) He
   is identical with the second Person of the Trinity. "Angel" means "the
   sent One," in which connection read Gal. 4:4, 5.

   Note the triumphant faith of Jacob through this closing transaction of
   his career. His assurance of the fulfillment of God's promises to His
   people takes away the fear of death from him and leads him to regard
   those promises greater than all the worldly glories enjoyed by Joseph
   and his sons as princes of Egypt. Observe also that he disposes of that
   which God has promised him for his descendants with as much confidence,
   as he would dispose of an earthly estate.

   3. Jacob's Prophecy of the Twelve Tribes, 49.

   In accordance with the curse on Reuben (3, 4), his tribe never attained
   distinction in Israel. Simeon and Levi for the same reason were both
   divided and scattered in the later allotment of the land (5-7): see for
   the former, Joshua 19:9; 2 Chron. 15:9 and 34:6, and for the latter
   Num. 35:7, 8 and Joshua 21:1-42, Levi's curse was turned into a
   blessing, doubtless because of their righteous conduct, as will be seen
   later. Compare Ex. 32:25 and Deut. 33:8-11.

   The reason Judah obtained the preeminence (8-12) was not for his
   superior moral character (as we have seen) but for reasons known only
   to God. "Judah" means "praise," and as Grant says, it is striking to
   see in the history of Israel how when Judah came to power in the time
   of David, the worship of Jehovah revived. David who came to Judah was
   himself the sweet psalmist of Israel who has given to the saints of
   every generation songs of praise that never grow old.

   It is in connection with Judah (10) that we have the clearest prophecy
   of the Redeemer since that of Eden (Gen. 3:15). His was to be the royal
   tribe, and the scepter should not depart from him nor the lawgiver (or
   the rulers' staff) from between his feet until Shiloh should come. Both
   Jews and Christians agree that Shiloh, "peace-maker," applies to
   Christ, in which regard it is noticeable that the tribe of Judah
   maintained at least the semblance of government in Israel until after
   the crucifixion, while since that time she has had no national
   existence. All agree in regarding this one of the strong evidences of
   the Messiahship of Jesus.

   Zebulon, in fulfillment of the prediction in v. 13, dwelt on the Sea of
   Galilee, his border running back on the west and north to Sidon.
   Naphtali being contiguous. Their occupations and dangers as seamen made
   them courageous, and "they jeoparded their lives" in the battles of the
   Kingdom

   (1 Chron. 12:33-34). The territory of Issachar was one of the most
   fertile in Canaan, explaining their pacific and industrious life as
   predicted in vv. 14, 15. The language concerning Dan is difficult to
   understand (v. 16, 17), but Asher's territory like that of the two
   other tribes mentioned was one of the best in Israel and corresponded
   with the meaning of his name, "happy" or

   "fortunate." Of Naphtali we have spoken in connection with Zebulon. The
   tribe of Benjamin seems to have been always warlike and cruel in
   character.

   The death of Jacob calls attention to the fact that his last days were
   not only his most tranquil but those in which we see the work of his
   conversion and sanctification carried to its culminating point.

   4. The Burial of Jacob and the Death of Joseph, 50.

   What period of time was devoted to the ceremonial worship for the
   grandees of Egypt (v. 3)? During this period Joseph was isolated from
   the court of Pharaoh, which accounts for his request of others (v. 4,
   5).

   How did Joseph's brethren exhibit needless fear on their return (15,
   16)? Do you think they spoke the truth in alluding to their father, or
   was it a ruse on their part? How does the circumstance illustrate the
   power of a guilty conscience? How does Joseph's reply illustrate the
   kindness of God to us in Christ (21)? In what way does the circumstance
   suggest the ground of assurance for them who put their trust in Christ?

   In what way did Joseph exhibit his faith in God's promise concerning
   Israel (24, 25)? Compare Heb. 11:22.

   Questions.

   1. Which of Joseph's sons received the pre-eminence in Jacob's
   blessing?

   2. What important lesson is suggested by 48:15, 16?

   3. In what way has the meaning of Judah's name been fulfilled in
   history?

   4. Quote the prophecy of 49:10, and show its application to Christ.

   5. State the typical and dispensational aspects of Joseph's history as
   given in the last lesson.
     __________________________________________________________________

EXODUS

   FROM THE DEATH OF JOSEPH TO THE CALL OF MOSES

   Chapters 1-2:22

   In Exodus we have the deliverance of Israel out of Egypt and the
   establishment of their relationship with Jehovah their Deliverer.

   It opens by rehearsing the names of Jacob's sons and the passing away
   of Joseph and his generation (1:1-6) -- matters considered in Genesis.
   Then follows a statement of the numerical development of Israel. Count
   the adverbs, adjectives and nouns descriptive of it, and see how God
   has fulfilled already one part of His prediction to Abraham, Gen.
   15:13, 14.

   1. Analysis of Chapter 1.

   What circumstance is mentioned in v. 8? What course does the king
   pursue towards Israel, and why (9-11)? What effect had this on the
   development of the people (12)? How further did the Egyptians oppress
   Israel (13, 14)? How was the execution of the last-named method of
   oppression subsequently extended (22)?

   2. Definition, Explanation and Application.

   (1) Exodus begins with "Now" which might be translated "And,"
   suggesting that the book was not originally divided from Genesis as at
   present, but constituted a part of it. This is true of all the first
   five books of the Bible, which were originally one unbroken volume and
   known as "The Law" or "The Law of Moses" (Luke 16:31; 24:44).

   (2) "The new king * * * which knew not Joseph" means a new dynasty
   altogether, the result of some internal revolution or foreign conquest.
   If that of Joseph's day was a dynasty of shepherd kings from the East
   or the neighborhood of Canaan, we can understand their friendship for
   Joseph and his family outside of any special debt of gratitude they
   owed him; and for the same reason we can understand how the new regime
   might have been jealous and fearful of his clan in the event of a war
   with the people of that region (10). Perhaps, "more and mightier than
   we," is not to be taken in a literal but comparative sense.

   (3) Notice concerning "the Hebrew midwives" that while the names of but
   two are given these may have been heads of schools of the obstetric
   art. "Stools" (16) might be translated "stones," and suggests a vessel
   of stone for holding water like a trough, the application being to the
   children rather than to the mothers. When a newborn child was laid in
   the trough for bathing may have been the time for the destruction of
   the male issue.

   Verse 21 will be better understood if we know that "them" is masculine
   and refers not to the midwives but Israel. "The midwives feared God,"
   and because of this they did not execute Pharaoh's orders, and those
   orders remaining unexecuted, God built up Israel. "He made them houses"
   refers doubtless to the way in which the Israelites begat children and
   their families grew. It was for this reason that the king now gave
   commandment to his people generally to engage in the destructive work.

   3. Analysis of Chapter 2.

   The story now descends from the general to the particular and the
   history of one family and one child is given. To which tribe did this
   family belong (1)? For the names of the father and mother, see 6:20.
   What measures were taken to preserve the child (3)? Compare Heb. 11:23
   for evidence of a divine impulse in this action. What is the meaning of
   "Moses" (Hebrew -- Mosheh, 10)? While Moses was to have the advantage
   of all the wisdom and learning of the Egyptian court (Acts t:22), what
   arrangement is made for his instruction in the traditions of his
   fathers (7-9)?

   Do you see any relation between this training of Moses and his action
   in vv. 11 and 12? May it have been that Moses was fired by a carnal
   desire to free his people at this time and in his own way? What led to
   his flight from Egypt (13, 14)? Were his fears well grounded (15)?

   Identify Midian on the map, and from your studies in Genesis recall
   what Abrahamic stock had settled in that neighborhood. Is there
   anything in v. 15 and the following verses to recall an ancestor of
   Moses, and if so, which one?

   4. Definition, Explanation and Application.

   (1) It is probable the marriage of Moses' parents had taken place
   previous to the order for the destruction of the male children, for
   Aaron, the brother of Moses, was older than he and there is no
   intimation that his infancy was exposed to peril.

   (2) Speaking of the wisdom and learning of the Egyptians, Dr. Murphy
   has an paragraph explaining it as follows:

   "The annual overflow of the Nile, imparting a constant fertility to the
   soil, rendered Egypt pre-eminently an agricultural country. The
   necessity of marking the time of its rise led to the study of astronomy
   and chronology. To determine the right to which it rose in successive
   years and the boundaries of landed property liable to be obliterated by
   these waters, they were constrained to turn their attention to
   geometry. For the preservation of mathematical science and the
   recording of the observation needful for its practical application, the
   art of writing was essential; and the papyrus reed afforded the
   material for such records. In these circumstances the heavenly bodies,
   the Nile and the animals of their country became absorbing objects of
   attention and eventually of worship."

   (3) This part of Moses' history should be studied in connection with
   Acts 7:20-29 and Heb. 11:23-27, where we have an inspired commentary on
   his actions and motives.

   It would appear that he declined all the honor and preferment included
   in his relation by adoption to Pharaoh's daughter, and for all we know
   the throne of Egypt itself, in order to throw in his lot with the
   Hebrews, and this before the incident recorded in this lesson. And if
   this be so, no man except Jesus Christ ever made a choice more trying
   or redounding more to His credit; for it is to be remembered that the
   step was taken not in youth or old age, but at the grand climacteric of
   his life when he was forty years of age.

   (4) The Midianites being descended from Abraham by Keturah, had
   doubtless to some degree preserved the worship of Jehovah so that Reuel
   (elsewhere called Jethro) may, like Melchisedec, have been a priest of
   the Most High God, and Moses in marrying his daughter was not entering
   into alliance with an idolator.

   Questions.

   1. What are the two main subjects of Exodus?

   2. What is suggested as to the original form of the first five books of
   Moses?

   3. How would you explain the opposition of the Egyptians?

   4. Can you give the history of their learning and wisdom?

   5. How do the events of this lesson exalt Moses?

   THE CALL OF MOSES

   Chapters 2:23-4:28

   The Egyptian records refer to Moses. To quote Prof. Kyle: "Rameses,
   said by many to be the Pharaoh of the Exodus, built a great monument on
   which he made an inscription naming the nobility who were present when
   it was erected. Toward the end of the list he mentions 'The ra-Moses,
   Child of the Lady and Priestess of the Sun God Ra.'" Note the
   peculiarity of the description. "The ra-Moses" means some distinguished
   ra-Moses, while the "Child of the Lady" describes a situation and
   relation not unlike that of Moses and Pharaoh's daughter. There are
   other corroborative data for which we have no space, and these are
   mentioned as a further hint concerning what archaeology has to reveal
   on the historicity of the Old Testament

   1. The Burning Bush, 2:23-3:10.

   Observe the prelude to the oratorio of power and grace the next chapter
   reveals, which is found in the language of the closing verses of the
   present chapter: "God heard," "God remembered," "God looked," "God had
   respect unto," or took knowledge of them. His spiritual apprehension is
   limited who finds nothing for his soul to feed upon in this.

   Observe in the burning bush a type of Israel -- afflicted but not
   consumed, because God was in the midst of her. Observe in Moses' action
   (3) an illustration of the purpose God has in a certain kind of miracle
   which He performs. This purpose is simply to arrest the attention of
   men to listen to His voice, that they may be convinced. Observe the
   name by which God reveals Himself (6), and the identity it establishes
   with Israel's past, awakening hope and confidence in Him as the God of
   promise.

   What does God now propose to do for Israel (8)? Why (9)? How (10)? To
   what extent is Moses to be used, that is, shall he bring Israel out and
   in, or only out (10)?

   2. The Great Name, 3:11-22.

   It is not surprising that when Moses hesitates to accept His command
   (11), God should encourage him with a token (12), but is it not
   singular that the token shall not be realized upon until after the
   command has been fulfilled (same verse, last clause)? Did God mean that
   the burning bush was the token, or are we to suppose that the token was
   the event itself? In the latter case, it were as though God said: "Go,
   and try, and you shall find in the trial and its result that I have
   sent you." The former view accords better with the Hebrew accents in
   the case and with our ordinary idea of a sign, but the latter is
   corroborated by later Scriptures, such as Isaiah 7:14.

   Have we ever met with this name of God before (14)? It is the
   expression of what God is, the sum of His being and the greatest of all
   His names. A commentator paraphrases the verse thus: "If Israel shall
   ask: What are the nature and attributes of Him who hath sent thee to
   bring us out of Egypt? tell them it is the eternal, self-existent,
   immutable Being who only can say that He always will be what He always
   has been."

   Compare Christ's words concerning Himself in John 8:58, and observe the
   identity of expression as well as the application of it made by the
   Jews, who understood Christ to appropriate this name to Himself.

   Are you troubled about the ethics of vv. 21 and 22? If so, you will
   wish to know that "borrow" does not imply a promise of return but
   signifies simply to ask or demand (compare Ps. 2:8). The Israelites
   were but receiving at last the fair wages for their toil which their
   oppressors had denied them. They shall not be ashamed who wait for God.

   3. Moses' Hesitancy and Distrust, 4:1-17.

   Moses' long tutelage in Midian has developed caution. He is a different
   man from the one who slew the Egyptian in haste forty years before (1)!
   What is the first sign now given him (2-5)? The second (6-8)? Were
   these simply for his own assurance or that of Israel? What power was
   bestowed upon him with reference to a third sign? Doubtless there was
   an adaptedness of these signs to the purpose for which they were to be
   used in Egypt, but space will hardly permit a discussion of that
   feature.

   In what does the backwardness of Moses approach the danger point of
   unbelief (10-13)? Light is thrown on the answer to this question if we
   reflect that v. 13 amounts to this: "Choose another, a better man to
   send." No wonder God was angered, and yet how does He express His
   patience (14-16)? Nevertheless, Moses may have forfeited a certain
   privilege because of his waywardness. Bush suggests as a rendering of
   v. 14: "'Is not Aaron thy brother the Levite?' By which we may
   understand that in consequence of Moses' act the honor of the
   priesthood and of being the official head of the house of Levi was
   denied him and conferred on Aaron." If this be true, it teaches that
   "those who decline the labor and hazard connected with the call of God
   to a special service may lose a blessing of which they little dream."

   4. The Start for Egypt, 4:18-28.

   How is Moses encouraged (19)? What peculiar designation is given Israel
   {22)? You will recall the harmony between this and what we have learned
   as God's purpose in calling Israel for her great mission. She was
   favored beyond other nations not for her own sake but that of those
   nations to which she was to minister.

   What mysterious incident occurred on this journey (24-26)? We do not
   know the meaning of this, but following we give the views of James G.
   Murphy in his commentary on Exodus:

   "The Lord had charged Moses with a menace of the gravest kind to
   Pharaoh and it was well that Moses himself should feel acutely the pang
   of death in order to comprehend the meaning of this threat. It appears
   that his youngest son had not been circumcised through some fault of
   his; the neglect of which was a serious delinquency in one who was to
   be the leader and lawgiver of the holy people. It was therefore meet
   that the perfection of the divine holiness should be made known to him
   and that he should learn at this stage of his experience that God is in
   earnest when He speaks, and will perform what He has threatened. Hence
   the Lord sought to kill him probably by some disease or sudden stroke.
   It is also probable from her promptitude in the matter that Zipporah
   was in some way the cause of the delay in circumcising the child. Her
   womanly tenderness shrunk from the painful operation, and her words
   seem to imply that it was her connection with Moses that had
   necessitated the bloody rite. It was doubtless a salutary and
   seasonable lesson to her as well as to Moses. The Lord, who sought to
   put the latter to death, remitted the penalty when the neglected duty
   had been performed."

   Questions.

   1. How does archeology testify to Moses in Egypt?

   2. What is a purpose of God in certain miracles?

   3. How would you define "I AM THAT I AM"?

   4. Give an argument from John 8:58 for Christ's deity.

   5. How would you explain the word "borrow" (3:21, 22)?

   6. How does Murphy explain 4:24-26?

   MOSES AND AARON IN EGYPT

   Chapters 4:29-6

   1. Before Israel, 4:29-31.

   What is the first step taken by Moses and Aaron on their return (29)?
   What "signs" are referred to in v. 30? (For answer compare 4:1-9.) How
   did the people receive their message (31)? What effect was produced on
   the people by God's compassion?

   2. Before Pharaoh, 5:1-23.

   How does Moses limit his demand (v. 1 compared with 3:18)? Do you think
   it was necessary to tell Pharaoh the complete purpose of God with
   reference to His people? In replying to this question, however, it is
   well to know that "a three days journey" would take them clear out of
   Egypt, and that therefore there was no deceit in what Moses said. And
   by making this smallest demand upon Pharaoh did it not give him the
   least possible occasion to harden his heart?

   How does he express his contempt of the demand (2)? What charge does he
   lay against God's messages (4)? What new hardships are imposed on
   Israel (5-14)?

   By whom are the messengers now reproached (19-21)? These "officers"
   seem to have been Israelites placed over their brethren in
   subordination to the Egyptian "taskmasters." Their Hebrew name,
   "shoterim," is defined as referring to managers who kept account of
   matters under their charge. What is the effect of this reproach on
   Moses, and how is his dejection expressed (22-23)?

   3. Before the Lord, 6:1-13.

   We receive a stirring impression of the encouragement this interview
   must have brought to Moses if we consider the several declarations of
   God about Himself and His purposes thus (vv. 1-8):

   I am the Lord.

   I appeared unto Abraham, unto Isaac and unto Jacob.

   I have established My covenant with them to give them the land of
   Canaan.

   I have heard the groaning of the children of Israel.

   I have remembered My covenant.

   I will bring you out from under the burden of the Egyptians.

   I will redeem you with a stretched out arm.

   I will take you to Me for a people.

   I will be to you a God.

   I will bring you in unto the land.

   I will give it you for an heritage.

   I am the Lord.

   What do you suppose God means in v. 3? Of course the literal name
   "Jehovah" was known to the fathers, but its complete import was
   unknown. The name denotes not only the eternal existence of God but
   that unchangeable truth and omnipotent power which give fulfillment to
   His promises. The fathers had received the promises but had not yet
   enjoyed them. Now, however, God was about to do what He had decreed,
   and the following verses which speak of this are explanatory of the
   name. It were as though He said:

   "I am Jehovah, for I am now to do what I have declared to be My
   purpose." Compare, for further illustration of this name, Ex. 7:5,
   Ezek. 28:22.

   How is the renewal of Moses' message received by the people, and why
   (9)?

   4. Genealogical Record, 6:14-27.

   The design of this record just here is to establish the lineage of
   Moses and Aaron because of their prominence and importance in the
   coming history of the nation (26-27).

   THE PLAGUES OF EGYPT: AN INTRODUCTORY STUDY

   Chapters 7:1-13

   1. Import of the Event.

   Murphy, reminds us that "to understand the import of this conflict we
   need to recall that for the first time since the dispersion of the
   nations (Genesis 11) the opposition between God and Satan in the
   history of mankind is coming out into broad daylight. "This nation for
   the time being represents all heathendom, which is the kingdom of the
   prince of darkness, and the battle to be fought is the model and type
   of all future warfare between the Seed of the woman and the seed of the
   serpent. Hence it rises to a transcendent importance in the ways of God
   with man, and holds a place even in the preface to the Ten Commandments
   (20:2)."

   2. The Rod and the Serpent.

   There are at least three ways to account for what these sorcerers are
   said to have done, and the suggestions apply similarly to their later
   performances with the water and the frogs.

   (1) One may deny that they did it, for the Hebrew will admit of this
   rendering in v. 12: "They cast down every man his rod that they might
   become serpents, but Aaron's rod swallowed up their rods." In other
   words, their rods were not changed at all, and were lost into the
   bargain.

   (2) One may say that by some feat of juggling an optical delusion was
   affected by which it appeared that their rods were changed.

   (3) One may accept the text on its face and say that they actually did
   the things by the power of Satan. This is the simplest view,
   harmonizing with the deep import to Satan of the whole transaction and
   with what we subsequently learn of his interference in the affairs of
   men and nations and the "lying wonders" he enables the former to
   perform (2 Thess. 2:9).

   In this last case, the superiority of God's power over Satan is seen in
   that Moses' rod swallowed up those of the magicians, and hence Pharaoh
   was in so far inexcusable in not acknowledging his omnipotence.

   3. Hardening of Pharaoh's Heart.

   In the story the "hardening" of Pharaoh's heart is spoken of nineteen
   times, in eleven of which God is said to have done the hardening, in
   three Pharaoh is said to have done it, and in five it is simply
   announced as being done.

   From this it is plain that no inscrutable omnipotence bore down on
   Pharaoh to make him go against his will, but that without such
   constraint he freely resisted God's command.

   In Bates' Alleged Discrepancies, from which the above paragraph is
   taken, it is explained that Pharaoh by his conduct put himself under
   the operation of that law according to which a man's heart becomes
   harder the longer he resists divine mercy. Inasmuch as Pharaoh himself
   resisted he hardened his own heart, but inasmuch as God ordained the
   law it may be said that God hardened it.

   But while thus seeking to explain this awful circumstance, let us not
   try to eliminate divine sovereignty from it, nor neutralize the
   inspired interpretation of Romans 9:14-22.

   God did not say: "Go to now, I will by a personal impact on Pharaoh's
   mind and subjugating control of his faculties, harden him."
   Nevertheless, Pharaoh did not hold out against God because God could
   not subdue him, but because He "had great ends to accomplish in
   permitting him to prolong his obstinacy."

   The story, and especially Paul's inspired comment on it, should have a
   strong effect in bringing any sober-minded sinner to his knees before
   God.

   4. The Order and Progress of the Plagues.

   There were ten plagues in all, and it will be found that there was a
   kind of order and progress in their arrangement, going from the
   external to the internal and from the mediate to the immediate hand of
   God.

   Divided first into nine and one, the one standing out from the others
   in the awful loss of the first born, the nine again are arranged in
   threes. This arrangement is marked by the way, the place and the time
   in which they are announced to the king, or the abruptness of their
   coming without announcement; by their effect on him, and on the
   magicians, and in other ways, leading to the conclusion that there was
   "a deeper order of nature and reason out of which they sprung."

   Speaking of their effect, it will be seen that at the third the
   magicians acknowledge the finger of God, at the sixth they can no
   longer stand before Moses, and at the ninth Pharaoh refuses to see his
   face further.

   Finally, the first three fall alike on the Hebrews and the Egyptians,
   but the last seven are reserved for the latter alone.

   Examine 2 Tim. 3:8-9, and observe that the two names mentioned there
   may be those of the leaders of the magicians, traditional names
   probably, and preserved in documents since lost. They represented Satan
   much as Moses represented God, and their defeat was an impressive
   demonstration of the supremacy of the God of the Hebrews.

   5. The Miraculous in the Plagues.

   There are two kinds of miracles, absolute and providential, the latter
   those which are not so miraculous in themselves as in the circumstances
   of their performance. Such were these plagues, for in their character
   they were the natural phenomena of the land, only that in these
   instances they came at an unusual season, in an unusual degree, and in
   immediate response to Moses' command.

   Also they were particularly humiliating to the Egyptians because they
   reflected on the power and dignity of their gods. The Nile was their
   patron god, and to have its waters turned into blood and become a
   torment to them was dishonoring to that divinity. Another of their gods
   was represented by a frog's head. They also worshiped flies, reared
   temples in honor of the ox and the cow, and idolized the sun which was
   turned into darkness to them. How strange that they should not have
   been awakened by these things!

   Questions.

   1. What gives great significance to the events of this lesson and those
   immediately following?

   2. In what three ways may we account for the acts of the sorcerers?

   3. How would you explain the hardening of Pharaoh's heart?

   4. Discriminate between the two classes of miracles.

   5. Why were the plagues peculiarly humiliating to Egypt?

   THE PLAGUES IN DETAIL

   Chapters 7:14-10:29

   1. First Group, 7:4 to 8:19.

   (1) The river turned into blood (7:14-25). How far did this plague
   extend over the waters of Egypt (19)? If this were literally so, it may
   be asked, where did the magicians find material on which to work with
   their enchantments {22)? Is the answer suggested in v. 24? May they
   have dug up water from the ground for this purpose? If so, we can
   imagine the limited scale of their performance in contrast with that of
   Moses.

   In connection with this miracle it should be known that commonly the
   Nile begins to rise about the end of June and attains its highest point
   at the end of September. It assumes a greenish hue at first, and
   becomes disagreeable to the taste and unwholesome. Then it becomes red
   and turbid for two or three weeks, although fit for use when red. The
   miraculous is seen here: (a) because it occurred in the winter, as we
   have not now time to prove; (b) the water was not merely reddened but
   turned into blood; (c) the fish died, which was not the case under the
   other circumstances; (d) the river stank and became offensive, while in
   the other case it was fit for use when red; (e) the stroke was arrested
   at the end of seven days, but ordinarily the redness lasted three
   weeks; (f) the change was brought on instantly at the command of Moses
   before the eyes of Pharaoh (Murphy).

   {2) The frogs, 8:1-15. Frogs abound in Egypt, but "miracles are not the
   less supernatural because their products are natural objects,
   previously well known." That this visitation was miraculous is seen in
   that the frogs came at the word of command, and at an unusual time, and
   in an unusual degree and magnified form. "Frogs are not usually
   spawned, transformed into tadpoles, and then into frogs and spread over
   a country in a few moments."

   What different effect on Pharaoh has this plague from the previous one
   (8)? It is difficult to understand the meaning of Moses' words: "Glory
   over me" (9), unless we take them in the sense of "appoint unto me a
   time, etc." As one of the older commentators suggests: "Moses
   experiences so much joy at Pharaoh's apparent relenting that he
   willingly gives him the honor of appointing the time when he should
   entreat the Lord for the removal of the plagues."

   (3) The lice, 8:16-19. In other cases the water produced the cause of
   torture, whence does this arise (16)? What made this plague more
   aggravating than the former ones (17)? To what conclusion do the
   magicians come in this case (19)? Do you think they meant it was a
   judgment from Jehovah, or only a providential event? With which of
   these two possible opinions does Pharaoh's action seem to agree?

   2. Second Group, 8:29 to 9:12.

   (1) The flies, 8:20-32. What preliminary is omitted here that was
   observed in the other cases (compare v. 16, first part, for example)?
   How does this teach that the true wonder-worker is not tied to any
   particular mode of introducing his wonders? What distinction is now put
   between the Egyptians and the Hebrews? Why were the first three plagues
   permitted to fall upon the latter? Was it to help detach them from that
   land of their birth? How did this division between the two people
   emphasize the fact that the judgments were coming from the God of the
   Hebrews?

   What further effect has this plague on the king (25)? Which is he
   willing to concede, the time or the place for sacrifice? Why will not
   Moses conform to his plan (26)? The Egyptians worshipped animals, like
   the cow and the sheep, and should the Hebrews offer them in sacrifice
   it would be an abomination in their eyes and bring serious consequence
   upon the offerers. Moreover, to do so in Egypt would, in some way, be
   an abomination to the Lord as well, and hence could not be considered.

   What permission is now given the Hebrews (28)? What admonition to
   Pharaoh (29)? Was the latter heeded (32)?

   (2) The Murrain, 7:1-7. Note that "cattle in the field" are specified.
   Some cattle among the Egyptians were stall-fed, and these seem to have
   been exempt (compare v. 19). What interesting investigation is the king
   led to make at this time, and with what confirmatory result (7)?

   (3) The boils, 9:8-12. It is to be noted that the uncleanness resulting
   from such an attack would be particularly severe on a people who, like
   the Egyptians, made personal cleanliness a part of their religion.

   3. Third Group, 9:13 to 10:29.

   (1) The hail, 9:13-35. Read carefully vv. 14-17 of the section and
   observe the insight which God gives into the theory of His
   administration (Murphy). It is instructive, corrective and punitive,
   but never destructive of moral agents. He might have smitten Pharaoh
   and his people as easily as their cattle, annihilating them and thus
   removing all opposition to His demands, but such is not His way in
   dealing with His rational creatures. He approaches them with love,
   reason and justice, and only when they fail will He have recourse to
   correction, and finally punishment. Pharaoh will be an example of these
   things to all succeeding generations. It was for this God "raised him
   up" instead of striking him down.

   How even yet does God remember mercy and leave an opening for faith
   (19-21)?

   (2) The locusts, 10:1-20. What effect are the plagues beginning to have
   on the Egyptian generally (7)? What expression in the verse indicates
   the terrible devastation that must have already taken place? To what
   further extent is the king now prepared to yield (8-11)? What in the
   last verse shows his spirit in the premises? How does this plague
   finally effect him (16-17)? But does he yet surrender?

   (3) The darkness, 10:21-29. What an object lesson is in v. 22. Not only
   for Pharaoh and Egypt is this so, but for us in a spiritual sense. The
   world is in darkness even until now, but Christ is the light of the
   world, and where He dwells is no darkness at all. What a text for a
   sermon, especially if treated in the light of its awful context!

   How much further is Pharaoh willing to assent to Moses' demand (24)?
   But on what does the latter still insist (25, 26)? What "reckless
   madness" takes possession of the king? What is there ominous in the
   reply of Moses to him (29)? Is it not strange in this connection that
   Pharaoh never attempted to destroy the lives of Moses and Aaron? What
   better evidence could we have of the divine protection that accompanied
   them than this? And how it proves also the limitations of Satan's power
   (compare Job 1 and 2).

   There is an awful significance in the plague of darkness, since the sun
   was a leading object of adoration with the Egyptians (under the name of
   Osiris), of which the king himself was the representative, entitling
   him in some sense to divine honors. Thus all the forms of Egyptian
   will-worship have been covered with shame and confusion in these nine
   plagues (Murphy).

   Questions.

   1. What should the sorcerers have done to demonstrate superiority to
   Moses?

   2. Prove the supernatural character of what Moses did.

   3. What spiritual lessons are suggested in this lesson?

   4. What light is here thrown on God's administration of the universe?

   5. In what particular was there divine restraint on Pharaoh?

   THE PASSOVER

   Chapters 11-12:36

   At the close of the 10th chapter Moses declares Pharaoh shall see his
   face no more, while in the nth he is present with him again. Therefore
   with the exception of the first three verses of c. 11 the remainder
   must be a continuation of c. 10.

   Let us consider it thus, taking up the questions in vv. 1-3 in
   connection with c. 12.

   1. The Last Plague Announced, 11:4-10.

   Hitherto God plagued Egypt mediately, but how was this plague to be
   distinguished (4)? Why was this plague harder to be borne than if the
   whole nation had been consumed? By what proverbial expression is the
   security of the Hebrews assured (7)?

   How does v. 8 indicate that Moses has ceased to speak in God's name and
   is now speaking in his own name? Is he not, nevertheless, speaking
   representatively? How do the last two verses show that Pharaoh's
   disobedience is not a divine defeat?

   2. The Passover Instituted, 12:1-13.

   What new appointment of time distinguishes this event (2)? The year
   formerly began in the month of Tisri, corresponding to our September 15
   to October 15, but what had formerly been the seventh month new becomes
   the first. This month was known as Nisan. The original order of the
   months continued so far as ordinary affairs were concerned, but the
   solemnities observed in honor of God began henceforth with Nisan.

   What were the Hebrews to do (3)? When? According to what measurement or
   proportion? Israel was divided into twelve tribes, these again into
   families and the families into "houses," the last named being composed
   of particular individuals. According to Josephus, the Jewish historian,
   a paschal company consisted of not less than ten members, although
   sometimes there were as many as twenty. In this company they were free
   to include everyone capable of eating as much as the size of an olive.

   In what two ways was the lamb to be distinguished (5)? What liberty was
   there in its selection? A male was accounted more excellent than a
   female (Malachi 1:14), and during its first year not only would its
   flesh be more tender and grateful but in that period it would best
   represent the idea of harmlessness and simplicity (1 Peter 1:19).

   How long should the Iamb be kept before slaying (6)? At what time
   should all the lambs be killed simultaneously? The "evening" here means
   sometime between the time of the sun's beginning to decline and that of
   its setting, say about 3:00 p. m. For the typical application to
   Christ, compare John 19:19 and Matthew 26:46.

   What should be done with the blood (7)? How was the flesh to be cooked
   and eaten (8)? "As the sacrificing of the lamb is a symbol of the
   redemption by which the death penalty due by one is paid by another, so
   the eating of it is a figure of the participation in pardon, acceptance
   and full blessedness consequent on the atonement being made and the law
   being satisfied."

   Both the roasting and eating of it with unleavened bread was for
   greater expedition in leaving the land that night. They would have time
   neither to boil the one nor wait for the yeast to rise in the other.
   And yet doubtless there is a moral or typical side to this matter as
   well, for since the paschal lamb and all pertaining to it foreshadow
   the person and work of our Redeemer, the roasting of the flesh may
   suggest the extremity of His sufferings under the fire of God's wrath,
   while the absence of leaven from the bread finds a spiritual
   application in such a passage as 1 Cor. 5:7-8. Leaven is a mass of sour
   dough in which decomposition has set in, and is therefore a symbol of
   corruption. Hence, unleavened bread is the emblem of purity and life
   becoming those who have exercised faith in God, the blessed fruit of a
   new nature (Murphy).

   What other regulations accompanied this institution (9, 10)? It would
   appear from this that the lamb was to be roasted whole and entire,
   excepting doubtless the intestinal canal. There was to be no breaking
   of its bones (John 19:33). This "was strikingly expressive of the unity
   of the sacrifice, of the salvation it pre-figured, and the people who
   partook of it (Ps. 34:20; 1 Cor. 10:17). Nothing should remain of the
   lamb lest it should be put to a superstitious use, and also to prevent
   putrefaction, for it was not meet that anything offered to God should
   see corruption (Ps. 16:10)."

   In what attitude were the people to be (11)? And why?

   What did God say He would do (12)? Note the reference to "the gods of
   Egypt" in this verse. There is a Jewish tradition that the idols were
   actually demolished on that night, but from a figurative point of view,
   "what could be a more signal infliction upon these gods than the
   complete exposure of their importance to aid their worshippers in a
   time of need?"

   By what means should the Hebrews experience immunity from this
   destruction (13)? Note the words: When I see the blood I will pass over
   you. It was not their character that saved them, neither the mercy of
   God in the abstract, nor their faith and obedience considered as a
   meritorious act, but the actual sprinkling of the blood upon the door
   posts. Without this they would not have been in the will of God, and
   His mercy could not have been operative towards them. No matter the
   degree or intelligence of their faith which led to the sprinkling of
   the blood, it was the latter divinely-ordained token which was the
   means of their deliverance.

   The bearing of this on our redemption through the atonement of Christ
   should be prayerfully considered. The Hebrews were sinners in the
   general sense as well as the Egyptians, and God might justly have
   punished them by taking away the life of the first-born, but He was
   pleased to show them mercy for reasons considered in earlier lessons
   and to accept the life of a lamb as a substitute for their life. This
   blood was a signal of this, and all who acted on the command of God and
   relied on His protection were secure from the stroke of the avenger.

   Nothing could more strikingly set before us the truth about the
   application of Christ's blood to our guilty conscience as a means of
   deliverance from the wrath to come (Rom. 3:24-25; Eph. 1:7). It is not
   our character, neither the mercy of God towards us in the abstract nor
   the strength or intelligence of our faith, but the application of the
   blood to our souls that saves. Do not pass this lesson without
   satisfying yourself that this has become true of you, and that you have
   by faith displayed the token (Acts 4:27).

   As the paschal lamb is the type of our Redeemer, so the Passover itself
   is a type of our redemption through Him: for an outline of which see
   the author's Synthetic Bible Studies.

   3. The Passover Commemorated, 12:14-20.

   (1) The feast of unleavened bread (15) was a distinct ordinance from
   the Passover, commencing on the day after the killing and eating of the
   lamb, the 15th of Nisan. Of course in the first instance it could not
   have been observed until they left Egypt.

   (2) The "cutting off" from Israel meant not necessarily physical death
   but excommunication from the society and privileges of the chosen
   people.

   (3) Note the "holy convocation" for the public worship of God in
   connection with this feast (16). Doubtless the people of a neighborhood
   thus came together for praise and prayer, and some think that even from
   an early period portions of the written Word may have been read and
   expounded. This convocation, it is thought, was the origin of the
   synagogue, a term which originally denoted the assembly, and was
   doubtless at first held in the open air.

   (4) The word "stranger" here doubtless means the Gentile proselyte in
   contrast with a native Israelite.

   4. The Stroke Falls, 12:29-36.

   We need not dwell on the awful horror of this night, but should not
   fail to recognize God's righteous retribution in it. The Egyptians who
   had slain the Hebrew children now see their own die. Four score years
   had passed since the persecution began, but God visits the iniquity of
   the fathers upon the children unto the third and fourth generation
   (Bush).

   A further word on vv. 35 and 36. When the Orientals attend their sacred
   festivals they put on their best jewels, thinking it a disgrace to
   appear otherwise before their gods. It is said nothing is more common
   than to see poor people adorned on such occasions with borrowed
   ornaments.

   It is notable that the Egyptians lent their jewels to the Hebrews
   because the Lord gave them favor in their sight. The rank and file of
   the Egyptians may in the end have sympathized with the afflicted
   Hebrews, or else for their own safety they were so anxious to have them
   go as to offer them an inducement. In this connection read again 11:3,
   and see the reverence and awe inspired among the Egyptians by Moses'
   miracles.

   Nor should we conclude this lesson without consulting Ezekiel 39:10,
   where we see that the Jews will spoil the Gentiles a second time, in
   that day when God with a high hand shall restore them to their own land
   at the end of the present age.

   Questions.

   1. Name the first month of the Jewish religious year.

   2. State what the slaying and eating of the paschal lamb prefigure.

   3. What does leaven symbolize?

   4. Show the parallel between the cause of the Hebrews' deliverance and
   that of our eternal redemption.

   5. What reasons may have influenced the Egyptians to give their jewels
   to the Hebrews?

   THE PILLAR OF CLOUD

   Chapters 12:37-13:17

   1. The First Stage of the Journey, 12:37-51.

   How did the Hebrews get from Goshen to Rameses? Perhaps Rameses was in
   the land of Goshen or it was a name used here in the sense of the
   general locality rather than the specific city which the Hebrews helped
   to build (1:11). Compare Genesis 47:11. "Succoth" is not capable of
   identification, but since the word means "tents" or "places for tents"
   some think it specifies a camping spot en route.

   Note the number of the men, which, multiplied by four to allow for
   families, gives an aggregate of 2,400,000 souls in all, without
   counting "the mixed multitude" of the next verse. Some of these latter
   may have been the poorer Egyptians and some foreign slaves of both
   Egyptians and Hebrews.

   Note the time named in v. 40 and the exactitude of the fulfillment of
   prophecy mentioned in v. 41, a date which is to be reckoned from the
   time Abraham received the promise (Gen. 15:13), which makes just 430
   years.

   2. The First-born Set Apart, 13:1-16.

   We can see a reason for the command in v. 1 when we recall the
   preservation of their first-born in Egypt. Doubtless it was to keep
   alive the memory of that event as well as to express their gratitude
   for it. "All things belong to God by right of creation: the Israelites
   by right of redemption; the first-born of Israel by right of passing
   over them in the judgment upon Egypt."

   Moses immediately communicates this command to the people. Note that
   the month "Abib" (4) is the Hebrew for the Chaldaic "Nisan" previously
   mentioned.

   By what figurative language does he impress the people with the duty of
   remembering all God's goodness to them (8, 9)? We thus see the duty of
   parental instruction enjoined, and are impressed by the fact that "the
   history of the ways of God with men is a trust to be conveyed
   faithfully from father to son."

   By what two words in v. 12 is "sanctify" of v. 2 explained? Note that
   the "firstlings" of the clean beasts as subsequently explained, calves,
   lambs and kids, were dedicated to God and used in sacrifice, but those
   of the unclean were redeemed. How (13)? And if not redeemed, then what?
   What about the first-born of man? The law concerning this will be met
   with later (Numbers 18:16). Of course this regulation was to come into
   force when Israel should reach Canaan (11). As Murphy remarks, "the
   residence of Israel for forty years in the wilderness was in
   consequence of their unbelief and is not here contemplated. Here it is
   presumed they were to pass immediately through the wilderness into the
   Promised Land, with the exception of a year in the peninsula of Sinai
   for which special provision is made later on (Numbers 3)."

   3. The Second Stage of the Journey, 13:17-22.

   Do not neglect the map in this study, since it is at least
   approximately correct. Why were not the Hebrews permitted to go the
   near way (17)? Could not God have delivered them from the Philistines
   as well as from the Egyptians? How then does this illustrate the
   principle that God makes no unnecessary displays of miraculous power?

   By what route were they led (18)? At its northern extremity the Red Sea
   separates into two minor gulfs which enclose the peninsula of Sinai.
   The western gulf is called Suez, which is the one they crossed. Its
   varied width is about thirty miles, narrowing very much at its northern
   extremity, and its varied depth about twelve fathoms, with a sandy
   bottom.

   The word "harnessed" in this verse is unusual. According to its
   derivation it means "by five in a rank," but we can only explain it on
   the supposition that in some way the men went up marshalled in orderly
   array, the better to protect the women and children of the company as
   well as their cattle and other possessions.

   What special command does Moses execute (19)? Compare Acts 7:16.

   What is the name of their next camping place (20)? In what supernatural
   way were they guided (21)?

   We have not now the pillar of fire and cloud, but we have the Word of
   God, which is a lamp to our feet and a light to our path.

   Excursus on the Pillar of Cloud.

   Dr. Bush has an interesting excursus on the pillar of cloud, from which
   a few paragraphs are taken:

   The Hebrew root "amad" signifies "to stand," and imports an upright,
   standing mass of cloud resembling a column in a building. It appears
   from Ps. 105:39 that it was spread at the base so as to cover as with a
   canopy the whole host of Israel, shading them from the heat. The
   height, if it bore any proportion to its base, must have been immense,
   as the encampment covered a space (say) of twelve square miles. It is
   evident from Deut. 31:15 that it was the habitation of the divine
   presence from which oracles were proclaimed to the people.

   For further allusion to its use as a guiding signal see Ps. 78:14; Neh.
   9:12; and observe also its re-appearance in the millennial age (Is.
   4:5; Rev. 7:15, 16).

   Some think the whole mass was opaque by day and luminous by night,
   while others believe there was a rending at night of the outer, dark
   body of the cloud and consequent disclosure of an interior splendor
   enveloped from view during the day.

   This unwrapped splendor appearing at night was presumably "the glory of
   the Lord" which occasionally appeared by day when God would express
   displeasure towards His people or impress them with His majesty, as at
   Sinai (Ex. 16:10; Num. 16:40). In other words, taken as a whole, this
   pillar was intended to serve as the shekinah or visible representative
   of Jehovah dwelling in the midst of His people.

   Compare now Ex. 14:19 and observe that the pillar of cloud is called in
   the same verse "the angel of God." The term "Angel" is used in
   Scripture to denote various kinds of agency, personal and impersonal,
   but "the Angel of God" (as we have learned) is a phrase descriptive of
   the second Person of the Trinity, Jehovah-Jesus. There is reason to
   believe, therefore, that this cloud was in some sense a manifestation
   of His presence to Israel. See further, Ex. 23:20-23; Is. 63:8, 9. As
   Bush says: "To all practical purposes it was the Angel of Jehovah, and
   they were to look up to that sublime and awful column as a visible
   embodiment of their covenant with God, as an ever-present witness, and
   feel as if a thousand eyes were looking out of the midst of it upon
   them, from which not even their slightest word or deed could be hidden.
   Through the whole tenor of the Mosaic narrative this is to be
   understood as associated with the title 'Lord' or 'the Angel of the
   Lord.'"

   It was this visible symbol, too, which was their oracle or means of
   communication with Jehovah, the word of the ancient economy, both in
   the course of their wilderness journey and when afterwards it was
   removed into the Most Holy Place of the Tabernacle and Temple. See Ex.
   33:9-11; Ps. 99:6, 7. Compare also John 1:1-14, where the glory of the
   word incarnate is referred to, "not that intrinsic moral glory that
   distinguished His character always, but rather that special and
   overwhelming display of glory of which Peter, James and John were
   eye-witnesses on the Mount of Transfiguration, when there was a
   temporary laying aside of the veil of His flesh and disclosure of the
   indwelling shekinah, the glory of His Godhead." A preintimation indeed
   of that glory in which He shall appear when He comes "a second time,
   without sin, unto salvation."

   What a wonderful theme of study we have in this pillar of cloud!

   Questions.

   1. In what two ways may the location Rameses be understood?

   2. How does this lesson illustrate God's conservation of the
   miraculous?

   3. Of what was the pillar of cloud a symbol?

   4. Show its fitness for this purpose.

   5. What takes its place for God's people to-day?

   THE HORSE AND ITS RIDER OVERTHROWN

   Chapters 14-15:21

   1. Through the Red Sea, 14.

   What was the command now given to Moses (2)? From Etham, their present
   stopping place, the next step was of great importance. That town was
   near the head of the Red Sea at the border of the wilderness of Arabia
   and the limit of the three days' journey for which they had applied to
   Pharaoh. Would they remain there and offer their sacrifices as
   proposed, or continue their journey and endeavor to leave the country
   of the Egyptians altogether? The latter people were watching them with
   keen eyes, doubtless. What must have been the surprise of all when this
   command began to be obeyed. The natural way to leave the country was by
   the north and around the head of the Red Sea, but Pi-hahiroth was in a
   southeasterly direction and would "entangle" them in the land.

   A study of the map will add to the interest of the lesson, even though
   all the localities are not absolutely identified. It is clear, that in
   their new station the Israelites had the mountains on the west and
   south and the sea on the east. As Pharaoh would follow them from the
   northwest it would seem at first as though they must become his easy
   prey, being in a snare from which it was impossible to escape.

   What, however, is the divine purpose in this movement (3, 4)?

   How did the Hebrews behave in face of the new peril that now seemed to
   confront them (10-12)? Point out their fear, unbelief, injustice,
   selfishness, cowardice and ingratitude. How does Moses' character shine
   in comparison (13, 14)? Point out his meekness, forbearance, composure,
   faith.

   How does v. 15 indicate that there is a time for all things, even
   prayer? How does v. 16 attest the authority of Moses before the people
   as an instrument of God? In what way do the next two verses illustrate
   that the providences of God have a two-fold aspect as between sinners
   and saints? By what method were the waters of the sea divided (21)?
   Compare here Ps. 77:16-20. "A strong northeast wind has always had much
   influence on the ebb of the tide in the Red Sea, but such an annual
   occurrence only drives out the old body of water further from the
   shore. It does not divide the waters, or make them 'a wall' on each
   side of the dry ground, or leave space for the passage of a large
   multitude, or happen precisely at the moment when escape from a foe
   makes it convenient for the leader of a people to wave over the water a
   rod of power." In other words, this was a supernatural event, a miracle
   of divine power.

   Do you suppose the Egyptians really knew they were walking into the bed
   of the sea {23)?. May not the supernatural darkness of the pillar of
   cloud have kept them in ignorance of this? If so, what a fearful
   discovery they made subsequently!

   No wonder that in view of the present and the past the Egyptians
   declared that the Lord fought for Israel.

   Notice the closing phrase of v. 30: "Israel saw the Egyptians dead upon
   the sea shore," and compare Ezekiel 32:4 which speaks of the latter
   judgment on the same people, and Rev. 19:17, 18, referring to that
   which shall fall upon the ungodly nations at the close of this age.

   What effect had this awful judgment upon Israel?

   2. The Song of Victory, 15:1-21.

   Compare the circumstances of this chapter with Rev. 15:2, 3 and see the
   likeness of the two events.

   This is the most ancient of songs, whose poetical merits are of the
   first order, which we might suppose to be the case since it was given
   by divine inspiration.

   A remarkable feature of the song is that almost all its verbs are in
   the future tense, carrying the implication "that what happened on this
   occasion to God's enemies would happen in like manner in all future
   time so far as utter discomfiture and signal perdition were concerned."

   What is the prediction of vv. 14-18? Compare Joshua 2:9-11 for an
   illustration of its fulfillment.

   Who is once more introduced into the history at v. 20? Observe that the
   dancing mentioned was that of women alone, the method being to follow
   the leader, imitating her steps and if she sings to make up the chorus.
   The song was probably sung alternately by the men and women ranged in
   two bands, Moses leading the one and Miriam the other; or possibly the
   men sung the song and the women joined in the chorus of v. 21 after
   every period of five verses and at the end of the whole:

   "Sing ye to the Lord, For He hath triumphed gloriously. The horse and
   his rider hath He thrown into the sea."

   Observe the new name of God found in this song (2), and note that it
   occurs for the first time after the signs and wonders in the land of
   Egypt, just as the other name occurred before these events. This leads
   to the supposition that Jehovah is the name of God on His prophetic
   side and Jah His name on His historic side. As the first denotes Him
   who is about to manifest His being, so the second denotes Him who has
   manifested His being.

   Questions.

   1. Have you sought to identify Etham and Pi-hahiroth on the map?

   2. Prove the miraculous nature of the event at the Red Sea.

   3. How does it and its attendant circumstances bear on the literalness
   of later earthly judgments?

   4. Has the song of victory prophetic value, and how?

   5. What is the meaning of the name "Jah"?

   THE TYPICAL ASPECT OF ISRAEL'S VICTORY

   Paul speaking of the early history of Israel says (1 Cor. 10:11): "Now
   these things happened unto them by way of example (or, as types), and
   they were written for our admonition, upon whom the ends of the ages
   are come."

   We have already spoken of the value of Grant's Numerical Bible as
   bearing on the symbolic application to be made of these things, and
   from him we quote the substance of this lesson.

   At the Red Sea the question is no longer one between the Israelites and
   God. That was the status represented in the Passover, but the question
   now is between Israel and her enemy. The question with God had been
   settled in the Passover, and forever settled. They had been redeemed
   from bondage and had come into a new relationship to God in which He
   was pledged to certain things on their behalf.

   The question now raised was the old question of servitude to Pharaoh or
   of liberty. This question God Himself now takes up on their behalf, and
   they find Him with them in a more manifest way than they had ever found
   Him as yet. From the very moment of the Passover God was with them, but
   it is the experience at the Red Sea that makes them understand how
   truly He is with them.

   Epistle to the Romans Compared.

   The situation suggests the doctrinal part of Romans, in the first eight
   chapters of the epistle. If we consider the first half of this part,
   that is, down to the middle of the 5th chapter, it sets before us the
   teaching concerning our redemption through the blood of Christ and what
   it effects for us. We see that through the righteousness of God which
   this redemption declares, there has been provided for us in Christ a
   place of assured shelter. We are justified by His blood, and this
   justification reaches on in its effects to the final judgment of the
   world. Judgment for us is rolled away forever! Our standing before God
   is now of grace, our hope is now of glory, and we are enabled to glory,
   even in tribulations because all things are working together for our
   good.

   All this may be called the Passover truth, for like the Israelites we
   are now sheltered from judgment, feeding upon the Lamb, and equipped
   for our journey.

   But at this point the truth set before us in Romans 5:12 becomes
   operative. That is the question of the experience of the new life. It
   suggests itself in the words: "What then, shall we continue in sin that
   grace may abound? Shall we sin because we are not under the law but
   under grace?" And finally, when the discovery of the hopeless evil and
   weakness of our old nature is made, we cry: "O wretched man that I am,
   who shall deliver me from this body of death!"

   Israel's Bondage and the Christian's Sin.

   Who can but think of Israel's bond-age in Egypt here, and of the divine
   method of deliverance? Did Israel's bondage to Pharaoh cease on the
   night of the Passover? In one sense it did. There was a breaking of
   chains and a real start. God was now with them and could never allow
   His claim to them to be cancelled, for He had redeemed them to Himself.
   The enemy never could regain possession of His people. But when we pass
   from God's point of view to that of the people themselves we find them
   losing their confidence and trembling again before their old tyrant in
   such fear that even the actual presence of God with them in the pillar
   of cloud could not remove. Shut up between the desert and the sea with
   Pharaoh in full pursuit, their cry is that of unbelieving despair. The
   controversy between them and their old enemy had to be taken up afresh
   by God in their behalf, and now to be ended forever. God interferes and
   fights for them, and they do nothing but stand still and see the
   salvation of the Lord.

   It is so with the soul who has found shelter under the blood of Christ
   and seen the judgment of God removed from him. The question of
   deliverance from "the law of sin" is settled for him, but he does not
   always come at once into the realization of it. In other words the
   first teaching of holiness is this, that in me as a believer in Christ,
   that is, in my old nature, there is no good thing. In order to have
   strength, in other words, we must learn the lesson of thorough and
   continual weakness.

   What the Red Sea Means.

   At first, when salvation is new and one has seen death turned into life
   through faith in a risen Saviour, it may seem as if sin could no more
   put shackles on the soul. But as yet there is little knowledge of the
   old self, and full deliverance from it is not known until this has been
   realized, that is, until the Red Sea is reached and Egypt is left
   behind forever. How many have begun to follow God in the way of
   holiness until He has led them where they had to cry and cry again that
   they cannot do the things that they would! Progress seems impossible,
   and hence they would stop here and imagine they must after all serve
   Pharaoh with the best grace they can. They are at peace with God
   through the blood of Christ, yet so far as the sin which is within them
   is concerned they expect no special deliverance. "With the mind they
   serve the law of God, but with the flesh the law of sin."

   Such as these do not see that after all it is only the border of Egypt
   they have reached, and that where all progress seems to have stopped
   God is at hand to give them so great a deliverance from their enemy
   that their hearts shall sing aloud forever.

   God Our Deliverer.

   Now look at the type again. Observe that God does not lead Israel up
   against Pharaoh. In other words, He does not strengthen their arm by
   His own to bring salvation to them, but rather they had to "stand
   still" and see His salvation. God does not call us to fight against the
   flesh and subdue it, nor does He point or lead in that direction at
   all. The sea divides, and a channel is made for His people to pass
   through. In other words, Christ's precious death is for us so that we
   are dead in Him and are no longer "in the flesh." His death has ended
   our history before God. In Him we have passed through death untouched,
   dry-shod, and are now beyond it.

   There is a sense, of course, in which this is not a matter of
   attainment on our part, and yet there is another sense in which it is.
   It is ours already the moment we receive Christ, and yet we are to
   apprehend it as ours. All this was true of Israel on the night of the
   Passover, and yet it was some little time after the Passover before
   they really came to know and enjoy its blessedness.

   Faith is thus the principle of sanctification as it is of justification
   or the new nature. Faith is turning from myself to God and His Son
   Jesus Christ. By faith I pass through the sea to take my new position
   outside of my old nature altogether, and when I look back I find that
   my enemies are buried in the waters. Privileged to turn away from self,
   the conflict and the distress are over. In Christ is my place, in Him I
   find a satisfying object lifting me out of the old sphere of things in
   which the lust of the flesh finds what it seeks. In Him the new nature
   expands and develops and bears fruit. The fruit of the Spirit needs to
   be ripened in the Son. The least degree of occupation with Christ is
   glory. No wonder that they who know it should, like the Israelites,
   sing a song of victory!

   PROVISION IN THE WILDERNESS

   Chapters 15:22-16

   As we have entered upon a new sphere of Israel's history it may be well
   again to briefly call attention to the way in which archaeological data
   corroborate it. These data are already so numerous, and every decade is
   bringing so many more to the front, that one hardly knows what to
   quote.

   The flight of the Hebrews is not mentioned on any of the monuments of
   Egypt but there is a reason for that, since this escape of slaves meant
   a defeat of Pharaoh's purposes, and monarchs are not in the habit of
   recording their defeats. And again, such migrations are not infrequent
   in lands of shepherds and nomads. The route of the Exodus, however, is
   now known beyond all reasonable doubt. The Pharaoh of the Exodus is
   thought to be Menephtah II, whose mummy has been discovered with those
   of Rameses II and Seti I, all of whom were connected with the history
   of the Hebrews in Egypt.

   The real character of the Wilderness is now known as never before, and
   is described as a rolling plain dotted with ridges, low terraces and
   knolls, and containing sufficient shrubs and herbs to give pasturage to
   the camels of the Bedouin. Water courses, dry in summer, and called by
   the Arabs wadys, cross the plain and in some cases are as much as a
   mile wide. The traveler occasionally discovers charming spots like the
   Elim of this lesson. All these things help us to understand how the
   Israelites found sustenance through the Wilderness during wandering.

   1. Healing and Refreshing in the Wilderness of Shur, 15:22-27.

   By what general name was the section of the country known which is now
   entered (22)? What is their first stopping-place (23)? How was the
   people's instability displayed at this crisis (24)? How was the
   difficulty remedied (25)? Some one may ask the difference between a
   "statute" and an "ordinance" as named in v. 25. The first is a fixed
   decree, and the second an injunction accompanied with an intimation of
   the good and evil consequences of obedience and disobedience. When it
   is said that God "proved them" it means that this experience tested the
   qualities of their hearts and whether they had faith and patience or
   not.

   The Lord Our Healer.

   What comforting words are these: "I am the Lord that healeth thee" I
   How shall they be taken? Do they mean that as He had healed the waters
   of Marah so would He heal them? Or have they a significance in the past
   tense, that is, had the bitter waters sickened them, and in healing the
   waters does the Lord mean that He had really healed them? There cannot
   be any doubt, in either case that physical healing is referred to, and
   that God declares Himself the healer.

   But observe that the waters being the illustration, God uses means in
   healing. This is not to say that He never heals otherwise, but only
   that it is going too far to say that the use of means necessarily
   excludes the thought of God as the healer.

   Nor should we omit another lesson, namely, the relation of sin and
   disease. If they hearkened unto God and did right. He would put none of
   these diseases on them. The converse therefore would be true, that
   either directly or indirectly God puts diseases upon men who disobey
   Him.

   What location is next reached, and what distinguishes it (27)? Elim is
   identified with a place now called Wady Ghurendel, a few miles from
   Marah, a place fringed with trees and shrubbery, forming a charming
   oasis. Here the people seem to have remained, judging by the next
   chapter, for the space of three weeks, resting and preparing themselves
   for the journey to follow.

   2. Bread From Heaven in the Wilderness of Sin, 16.

   Where did they now come, and how long after leaving Egypt (1)? The word
   "Sin" here is supposed to mean "clay," although some give it the
   meaning of "bush" or "thorn."

   What new ground of complaint arises (2, 3)? How does the Lord propose
   to meet it (4, 5)? Where did we find the word "prove" in this same
   connection before?

   What warning is given the people in v. 7? What further intimation of
   God's provision for their immediate need in v. 8? How is the warning
   realized in v. 10?

   What was the provision in v. 13? It was natural for quails to be found
   in the region of Arabia at certain seasons of the year, but the miracle
   consisted in bringing them there at this particular time and in
   sufficient numbers for the supply of so many people, and also in
   announcing their arrival beforehand. How is the deposit of the dew
   described (14)? Did the people clearly know its nature? It would appear
   then that they simply gave it the first name which suggested itself,
   for there is a certain scanty product of nature called "manna" to which
   this seemed to bear a resemblance. Does Moses reject the name? How does
   he explain the nature and origin of the substance, however? "The
   natural manna is gathered early in June, a month later than the present
   time, and in small quantities, but this supernatural manna was gathered
   every day, Sabbaths excepted, throughout the whole year, and in
   quantities sufficient for the main support of a nation and during a
   period of forty years."

   How were the people to gather it (16)? How was their covetousness in
   the matter curtailed (18)? How was their pride leveled (19)?

   Had Moses revealed all the details to them at first (22)? What
   provision is made for the Sabbath (23-26)? What rebuke is necessary
   concerning this (27-30)? What further description of the manna is given
   (31)? What arrangement is made for a memorial of this miracle (32-36)?
   How does Hebrews 9:4 interpret the character of the vessel in which the
   omerful of manna was laid up? The phrase "before the Lord" is how
   explained in v. 34? And how is this in turn explained in the verse just
   referred to in Hebrews? Must not then the act of Aaron in v. 35 have
   been performed at a later time, although recorded here?

   The Sabbath God's Gift to Man.

   The Sabbath, according to v. 29, was a gift of God to man; how precious
   the thought! And think of Jesus' comment upon it. "The Sabbath was made
   for man, not man for the Sabbath." Man is doomed to labor in his fallen
   state, but how could his weariness have been endured without a
   periodical recurrence of relief from it? How much he needs this leisure
   for himself, and for fellowship with God and with his fellowmen!

   It is interesting to know that the Israelite was at liberty to go
   abroad for any purpose accordant with the Sabbath (Lev. 23:3; Acts
   15:21), and that works of necessity or mercy that could not be put off
   until the next day were not regarded as a breach thereof (Matt.
   12:1-13; Mark 2:23-28). There seems to have been no limit to the
   distance to be walked on the Sabbath beyond that of convenience, the
   Rabbinical rule of later times being an addition of man rather than a
   command of God (Murphy).

   What a happy world this would be if men would only obey God, and the
   land be permitted to keep her Sabbaths!

   Questions.

   1. How does archaeology contribute to the interest of this lesson?

   2. What three things about physical healing are here taught?

   3. State the miraculous feature in the incident of the quails.

   4. Do the same concerning the manna.

   5. What have we learned about the Sabbath?

   EVENTS AT REPHIDIM

   Chapters 17-18

   1. Water Out of the Rock, 17:1-7.

   What is the next stopping place (1)? What do you suppose is meant by
   "the commandment of the Lord" in this verse?

   Rephidim is a wide-spreading plain at the northern base of the cluster
   of mountains to which the general name of Horeb was given. What made it
   unfit for an encampment? How does this show that God sometimes guides
   His people into trouble? Are distress and difficulty an indication that
   believers are not in the will of God?

   How did the people express impatience and lack of faith (2, 3)? How
   does Moses act in comparison (4)? What does God command him to do (5,
   6)? Were the elders to go with him as witnesses? Did the Lord stand on
   the rock in the pillar of cloud? How must the people have felt when the
   water came rushing down the valley towards them? Which prevailed,
   gratitude or shame? What names were given this place, and why (7)? Bush
   remarks that the people may not have uttered the very words here
   ascribed to them, but that such was the language of their conduct, and
   he applies the circumstance to Matthew 12:37, saying that Christ will
   judge men by the actions which have the force of words.

   2. Amalek Conquered and Cursed, 17:8-16.

   The Amalekites were a nomadic people living in the north of this
   peninsula, and to the south of the Philistine country (Gen. 14:7), who
   came out of their way to attack Israel, approaching them in the rear
   where they were the more defenseless. (Compare Deut. 25:18.)

   As the Amalekites were descendants of Esau, hereditary hate may have
   prompted this attack. Then also the thought of loot is to be
   considered, for they probably knew the wealth Israel brought out of
   Egypt. But their strongest hostility was aroused by the fact that
   Israel was to take possession of Canaan, into which their territory
   penetrated (Judges 5:14; 12:15). At all events, it is with them that
   Gentile antagonism to God's peculiar nation is seen to begin as soon as
   the latter's political independence is established. Their action
   therefore was a virtual defiance of Him who had so lately destroyed the
   Egyptians, a fact which explains His resentment as shown in the sequel.

   Who now comes into the forefront, and what is he directed of Moses to
   do (9)? The word "Joshua" means "saviour," the Greek of which is
   "Jesus."

   What new personage is before us in v. 10? For a little of his genealogy
   see 1 Chronicles 2:9-20. What was the significance of the transaction
   in v. 11? Do you suppose Moses held the rod of God in his hand? And if
   he did, was it not merely as an indication and accompaniment of prayer?
   Where in the incident do we find an emblem of the value of united and
   common prayer? What lesson is taught by the combination of the rod in
   the hand of Moses and the sword in the hand of Joshua? Which, however,
   assumes the more importance, Moses' prayer or Joshua's sword?

   How does God emphasize the significance of this battle (14)? We have
   not met with the word "write" before, but where with the word "book"
   (Gen. 5:1)? There is the definite article before "book" in the original
   indicating that a book, and doubtless this particular book, was well
   known. Can you imagine a reason for this matter being rehearsed to
   Joshua? For the subsequent fate of Amalek read Deut. 25:19; 1 Samuel
   15:30; 2 Samuel 1:1; 8:12.

   How is this victory commemorated on the spot (15)? Have we met with any
   other "altar" since we ended the history of Jacob? Does not this then
   mark a new epoch in the affairs of Israel? "Jehovah-nissi" means
   "Jehovah my banner" (compare Ps. 20:5-7), and expresses thanks to God
   for the past and confidence in Him for the future. Perhaps it was
   suggested by the lifting up the rod of God as a banner or standard in
   this action.

   The last verse of the chapter is obscure.

   3. A Visit from Jethro, 18.

   It is felt that the visit here recorded, with the events growing out of
   it, took place at a later time, and after Israel had arrived at Sinai,
   but is related here either not to interfere with the main narrative, or
   for some other unexplained cause.

   It is a story of mutual affection and esteem, but one is not more
   impressed by it than by the importance God attaches to such chapters in
   our lives by causing it to be recorded for our learning and example.

   Note that Jethro was one of those outside of Israel by whom the
   tradition of the true God was retained, and who gave glory to Him for
   His mighty works.

   The incident (13-26) needs little comment, but there are a few things
   worth noticing. One is the practical wisdom in it (18); another, the
   qualification for the choice of these sub-rulers, ability, godly fear,
   truthfulness, incorruptness (21); a third, the circumstance that this
   advice is given in submission to God (23); and a fourth, that the
   selection was by the people and the appointment by Moses (Deut. 1:9,
   13); a fifth, that God did not disdain to permit Moses to be taught
   through another man, and he one not of the commonwealth of Israel. It
   is remarkable, as another says, that the rudiments of the Jewish polity
   were thus suggested by a stranger and a Midianite. There is food for
   reflection here in the ways of God in teaching His own people wisdom.

   PREPARATION FOR RECEIVING THE LAW

   Chapter 19

   The Exodus includes two concurring elements in the moral history of the
   people -- their redemption and their renovation. It is worthy of
   notice, that God did not give Israel the law first and then say: "I
   will redeem you if you will obey it," but that He redeemed them first
   and gave them the law afterwards.

   1. The Arrival at Sinai, 19:1, 2.

   "In the third month -- the same day." These words lead to the belief
   that the first day of the third (lunar) month is meant, just 45 days
   (as we can easily recall) from their departure out of Egypt. To these,
   quoting Bush, let us add the day on which Moses went up to God (3), the
   day after when he returned the answer of the people to God (7, 8), and
   the three days more named (10, 11), and we have just fifty days from
   the passover to the giving of the law. Hence the feast kept in later
   times to celebrate this event was called Pentecost, which means
   fiftieth day. And it is interesting that it was at this very feast the
   Holy Spirit was given to the disciples of Christ (Acts 2:1-4) to enable
   them to communicate to all men the new covenant of the Gospel.

   The text of v. 2 in the King James version makes a distinction between
   the "desert" and the "wilderness" of Sinai, but there seems to be no
   good reason for this. "Sinai" denotes a particular mountain of that
   name, while "Horeb" denotes the range of which Sinai is a part. The
   wilderness of Sinai would seem to be the plains and wadys in its
   immediate neighborhood, including the mountain itself, and perhaps
   coextensive with the term Horeb.

   2. The Divine Exordium, 19:3-9.

   When it is said "Moses went up unto God," remember the pillar of cloud
   in which in a sense the divine Presence abode, and which now rested
   doubtless on the summit of the mountain. Evidently Moses did not ascend
   the mountain at this time, but simply approached it.

   By what two names are the people designated in v. 3? Which points to
   their natural and which their spiritual derivation (Gen. 32:23-33)?

   With what three words in v. 4 does God call them as witnesses to the
   fidelity of His promises? What beautiful figure of speech does He use
   expressive of His care for them? (Compare v. 4 with Deut. 32:11, 12.)
   Also examine Rev. 12:14, where His care for them in their coming
   tribulation at the end of this age is spoken of in similar terms. The
   parent eagle in teaching its nestlings to fly "sweeps gently past them
   perched on the ledge of a rock, and when one, venturing to follow,
   begins to sink with dropping wing, she glides underneath it and bears
   it aloft again."

   But what is expected of them as the result of this grace? And what
   promise is bestowed upon them in this contingency (5)? And how will
   their preciousness to God find expression in their service (6)?

   Note (1) that while all the inhabitants of the earth belong to God by
   right of creation and general benefaction, Israel belonged to Him by
   special grace and covenant; (2) that while they themselves were to be
   objects of priestly intercession and kingly protection they were also
   to be elevated into the dignity and authority of performing priestly
   functions and dispensing royal favors to others; (3) that as a
   qualification for all this they were to be a holy nation.

   3. The People's Pledge, 19:7-9.

   By "the elders of the people" (v. 7) is meant the leaders and principal
   men of the different tribes. How is the Lord's command received by them
   (8)? While this is commendable, yet in the sequel how much better if
   they had asked God's help to enable them to obey and to appreciate His
   goodness! How little they knew themselves, and how well they represent
   us in the earlier stages of our new experiences in Christ!

   What does God now promise to Moses personally (9)? To what end? And why
   was it necessary? Had not God given evidence of His divine commission
   in the sign of the rod and the serpent? Yes, but this was only before
   the elders of the people. And had He not given evidence in the miracles
   of judgment upon Egypt? Yes, but many of these were not before all the
   people. So now they are to have a general and personal attestation
   which should last forever. Observe our Saviour's recognition of this
   authority of Moses in Luke 16:31, and compare a similar recognition of
   His own authority in 2 Peter 1:16-18.

   4. The People's Purification, 19:10-14.

   We can see the propriety of this command, but should remember that
   there is no virtue in external washings and other abstinences, except
   as they symbolize and impress us with the obligation of inner holiness
   and separation on the part of those who are to hold intercourse with
   God.

   What was the Lord now about to do (11)? And with reference thereto what
   warning is promulgated (12)? What should happen to the man or beast
   overstepping these bounds (13)? The word "it" in the first clause of
   the verse refers to the man or beast. That is, no one should cross the
   bounds, even to go after it (the man or beast) to drag it back or
   punish it, but from a distance it should be stoned or shot. What a
   commentary on presumptuous sin!

   By the "trumpet" is meant a supernatural one to be heard from the
   mountain. The people were to "come up to the mount" in that they were
   to draw nigh to it, but no nearer than the bounds already prescribed.

   5. The Phenomena on the Mount, 19:16-25.

   Describe the impressive phenomena of vv. 16 and 18, and their effects
   on the people. Never until the close of this age and the coming of our
   Lord will anything like this be seen or heard again. Compare 2 Thess.
   1:6-10, and the language of the Apocalypse, for example, cc. 4 and 5.

   How did God speak to Moses (19)? Doubtless this means by "an audible
   and articulate form of word." What seems to have been impending on the
   part of the people, judging by v. 21? How is God's attention to details
   (if one may so say), and how is His mercy manifested here?

   Who can be meant by "priests" in v. 22. since the Aaronic priesthood
   was not yet instituted? The common answer is the first-born or eldest
   son in every household. This seems to be suggested by the patriarchal
   history as one of the privileges connected with the birthright. Compare
   also 24:5.

   Who was to come up into the mountain with Moses when the latter
   returned 24)? We shall see the reason for this later when Aaron is
   invested with the priesthood, for it was fitting that there should be
   put upon him that distinction which would inspire respect for him on
   the part of the people.

   Questions.

   1. What have we learned about the day, or feast, of Pentecost?

   2. What have we learned of the priestly character of Israel?

   3. Can you quote Luke 16:31?

   4. Name one or two illustrations here of God's grace to us in Christ.

   5. Have you examined the Scripture references in this lesson?

   THE FIRST TABLE OF THE LAW

   Chapter 20:1-11

   We have now reached the most remarkable event in the history of Israel
   until this time, and one of the most remarkable in the history of the
   world.

   While it has primary reference to Israel, still it affects the whole
   race for time and eternity, since the moral law is "the expression of
   God's will, the reflection of His nature, and the immutable standard of
   right for His accountable creatures" everywhere and always.

   These remarks apply particularly to the ten commandments, but the
   special enactments which follow them pertain for the most part only to
   Israel.

   1. The Division of the Commandments.

   The commandments have generally been divided into two "tables": the
   first including the first four commandments embracing our duty to God,
   and the second the last six embracing our duty to man (Matt. 22:37-40).

   The Roman Catholic Church has a different arrangement from the
   Protestant, making but one commandment of the first two, and in order
   to maintain the number ten dividing the last into two. The result is
   that some of their devotional books omit altogether the last half of
   the first commandment, or what we call the second, which forbids
   idolatry. Their motive for doing this, to any who are familiar with the
   worship of that Church, is easily discerned.

   2. The Preface, vv. 1, 2.

   What is meant by "God spake"? Compare Deut. 5:12, 13, 32, 33, and the
   conclusion seems irresistible that, as was stated in a preceding
   lesson, they refer to an articulate voice.

   Notice the authority by which He speaks: "I am the Lord" (Jehovah), the
   self-existent, independent, eternal fountain of all being, who has the
   right to give law to all the creatures He has made. Notice the
   restriction to the Israelites: "thy God," not only by creation but by
   covenant relationship and by the great redemption He has wrought in
   their behalf: "Which have brought thee out, etc."

   How inexcusable their disobedience under these new circumstances ! And
   ours also, who as Christians have been redeemed by Christ from a
   bondage infinitely worse, and at a cost unspeakable!

   3. First Commandment, v. 3.

   "None other gods before Me" means as antagonists in My eyes, "as
   casting a shade over My eternal being and incommunicable glory in the
   eye of the worshipper."

   The primary reference is to the idols the heathen worshipped, not that
   they really worshipped the idols, but the gods supposedly represented
   by them. Nor yet are we to imagine these were real gods, for there is
   none other God save One, but rather demons (Lev. 17:7; Deut. 32:17;
   Psalm 106:37; 1 Cor. 10:19, 20).

   How awful to think that even now, professing Christians worship demons
   through spiritism, clairvoyance, palmistry and related occultisms
   (Deut. 18:9-22)!

   Moreover, in the application of this and all the commandments, we
   should remember that they lay their prohibitions not on the outer
   conduct merely but the inner actings of the spirit. See Christ's Sermon
   on the Mount (Matt. 5:20-48) and Paul in Romans 7:7-11. Hence there may
   be idolatry without idols in the vulgar sense, and also without
   worshipping demons in any form. "Whosoever seeks happiness in the
   creature instead of the Creator, violates this commandment."

   4. Second Commandment, vv. 4-6.

   A "graven image" is made of wood, stone or metal; a "likeness" is a
   picture of any kind as distinguished therefrom. The "water under the
   earth" means "lower in level" than the earth.

   Was any manifestation of God seen at Sinai (Deut. 4:12, 15)? The
   Israelites were not to make these things. What command was laid upon
   them when others made them?

   What warning is contained in this commandment? Is God "jealous" in the
   sense of passion, or as expressing the feeling of a holy Being against
   evil (Deut. 32:21, etc.)?

   How does this commandment show the responsibility of parents? Do you
   suppose this responsibility is limited to this sin? Did not Israel at
   this time have a striking illustration of it in Egypt? Had not their
   persecution by that people begun just four generations before, and was
   not the nation now reaping what had been then sown?

   "Unto the third and fourth generations of them that hate Me." Here two
   thoughts suggest themselves: (1) there is no difference between
   forsaking God and hating Him; (2) it is only them that hate Him, i. e.,
   follow in the footsteps of their fathers, who will be visited with the
   punishment (Ezek. 18:20). Perhaps also a third thought is pertinent,
   viz: that this warning only applies to the temporal effects of sin and
   not its eternal consequences, hence a son who turns to God, although he
   may through the working of divinely-ordained laws of nature suffer
   physical consequences here, will be spared eternal consequences
   hereafter.

   "Mercy unto thousands of generations" the Revised Version reads. See
   also Deut. 7:9. Of this also Israel had an illustration before their
   eyes, as they were now gathering the mercy destined for them in the
   faithfulness of their father Abraham who lived a thousand years before.

   "Of them that love Me and keep My commandments." Behold what is meant
   by loving God, viz: keeping His commandments; a declaration which
   "gives a new character to the whole decalogue, which thus becomes not a
   mere negative law of righteousness, but a positive law of love"!

   Let us not conclude these reflections without remarking how far the
   Greek, Roman, and even some of the Protestant churches have fallen in
   this regard.

   From the use of crosses and relics as aiding their bodily senses and
   quickening devotion, it has been easy to advance to altars, images and
   pictures not only of the Holy Ghost and Christ but of the Virgin, and
   the saints and martyrs without number, until at last these objects have
   themselves become, at least to the ignorant, actual objects of worship.
   And what superstition, profanation and mockery have grown out of it
   all! And shall not a jealous God visit for these things?

   5. Third Commandment, v. 7.

   The "name" of God is that by which He makes Himself known, the
   expression of His Godhead: hence to take that name "in vain" is to
   violate His essence.

   The word for "vain" signifies what is false as well as vain, so that
   all false swearing or perjury which would make God a witness to a lie,
   as well as all light or frivolous uses of His name or attributes in
   conversation, are here prohibited.

   This does not mean judicial oaths, however, which, as we see by Christ
   and His apostles, may be acts of worship in which we solemnly call God
   to witness to the truth (Jer. 4:2).

   But what of blasphemy and profanity by which some interlard their
   speech, using such expressions as "God," "Lord," "Christ," "the Lord
   knows," "O heavens!" "My goodness!" and the like (Matt. 5:33-37)?

   God "will not hold him guiltless" that does these things. Look at Psalm
   139:20, and see who they are that take His name in vain, and then read
   Mal. 3:5.

   The third commandment, is of the same gravity as the two preceding,
   guarding the deity of God as those do His unity and spirituality
   (Murphy).

   6. Fourth Commandment, vv. 8-11.

   How does the first word here indicate an earlier origin than Sinai for
   the institution of the Sabbath? How early was that origin? How does
   this show that the Sabbath is an obligation for all men. Christians as
   well as Jews?

   But "remember" points not simply to an act of memory but a
   commemoration of the event. Lev. 23:3 and Num. 28:9, 10 confirms this.

   But it is the "Sabbath" day and not necessarily the seventh day that is
   to be remembered. This means one day of rest after every six, but not
   according to any particular method of computing the septenary cycle.
   Though the Jewish Sabbath was kept on Saturday, Christians are in
   accord with the spirit of the commandment in keeping Sunday enriching
   the original idea of the day of rest by including that of the new
   creation when our Redeemer rose from the dead.

   How does God provide for our hallowing of this day, and what is His
   definition of such hallowing? When He says: "Six days shalt thou labor
   and do all thy work," is it an injunction merely, or may it be
   considered as a permission? Some think there is a difference between
   "labor" and "work," the latter term being the more inclusive as
   involving the management of affairs and correspondence to the word
   "business."

   How is the equality of husband and wife recognized in the wording of
   this commandment (10? The responsibility of parents and employers? The
   rights and privileges of employees; The proper treatment of the lower
   animals? To what further extent did the obligation of the Israelite
   extend? Has this any bearing on the present obligation of our nation to
   compel an observance of the Sabbath on the part of our alien
   population?

   Is anything more than secular or servile work intended in this
   prohibition? Did not Jesus both by precept and example give liberty for
   works of love, piety and necessity? (Mark 2; 23-28; John 5:16, 17).

   What historical reason is assigned for this commandment (11)? And what
   traditional in Deut. 5:15? We thus see that God's authority over and
   His loving care for us combine to press upon us the obligation of the
   Sabbath day, to say nothing of its advantage to us along physical and
   other material lines. And thus its observance becomes the
   characteristic of those who believe in a historical revelation, and
   worship God as Creator and Redeemer.

   Questions.

   1. Can you recite Matthew 22:37-40?

   2. To what demonolatry are some professing Christians addicted?

   3. Can you recite Ezekiel 18:20?

   4. How do we show love to God?

   5. Are you breaking the third commandment in ordinary conversation?

   6. What two meanings should be attached to "Remember" in the fourth
   commandment?

   7. Are the Sabbath and the seventh days necessarily identical?

   8. To what do we bear testimony in observing the Sabbath?

   SECOND TABLE OF THE LAW

   Chapter 20:12-26

   1. Fifth Commandment, v. 12.

   To "honor" means to regard with respect and loving fear. What reasons
   there are for it on the part of children toward their parents, who are
   under God the author of their existence, and their teachers,
   benefactors and rulers!

   What promise is attached to this commandment? For a comment see Deut.
   5:16. Although this promise applies primarily to Israel in Canaan, as
   we see from Ezek. 22:7-15, yet its principle is true in God's moral
   government everywhere.

   The child who honors its parents -- of course wise and true parents are
   assumed -- gains the experience of the latter which makes for a good,
   and with necessary exceptions, a long life.

   2. Sixth Commandment, v. 13.

   The reference here is to the unlawful taking of life by suicide or
   homicide, but not to capital punishment for capital crimes (see Gen.
   9:6), nor the taking of life in self-defense or lawful war. It forbids
   all violence, passion, lust, intemperance in eating or drinking, and
   any other habit which tends to shorten life. So far as the more
   spiritual import is concerned it interdicts envy, revenge, hatred,
   malice or sinful anger, all that provokes to wrath or murder. See
   Matthew 5:21-26, 38-48; 1 John 3:15-17.

   3. Seventh Commandment, v. 14.

   The Hebrew word for "adultery" refers to the unlawful act taking place
   between man and woman where either or both are married, thus differing
   from another word commonly translated "fornication" and where the same
   act is referred to between unmarried persons.

   Nevertheless, as the sanctity of the marriage relation is the object
   aimed at it prohibits everything contrary to the spirit of that
   institution in thought, word or deed. See Matt. 5:27-32. We may
   therefore include not only lustful looks, motions and verbal
   insinuations, but modes of dress, pictures, statutes, books, theatrical
   displays, etc., which provoke the passions and incite to the unlawful
   act.

   Sins of this character are more frequently forbidden in Scripture and
   more fearfully threatened than any other, and they are the cause of
   more shame, crime, misery and death. Moreover, they have one striking
   characteristic, viz: that "you cannot think or talk about them without
   being more or less excited and led into temptation." How continually
   need we be praying the prayer of the Psalmist -- 19:12.

   4. Eighth Commandment, v. 15.

   As the sixth commandment secures the right of our neighbor's life, and
   the seventh the right of his family, so this secures the right of his
   property. The essence of dishonesty is the possessing ourselves of that
   which rightfully belongs to another, for which there is a variety of
   ways besides putting our hands into his money-drawer -- fraudulent
   bargains, contraction of debts which we know we shall be unable to pay,
   cornering the market, graft, usury, evading taxes, false weights and
   measures, etc.

   And as in the previous cases, so here also, the command reaches beyond
   outward acts to the spirit of them, and includes inordinate love for
   the world and the things that are in the world, living beyond our
   means, idleness, and everything that leads up to theft. This
   commandment may be regarded as the most comprehensive of all.

   5. Ninth Commandment, v. 16.

   This has primary reference, to testimony in courts of law (see Deut.
   19:16-19), and differs from the three preceding in that it deals with
   words rather than deeds.

   But, as in those cases, it has a larger import and prohibits everything
   in our dealings with one another not according to truth. Compare Lev.
   19:16; Prov. 19:9; Psalm 15:2; Col. 3:9.

   Among some of these things might be named exaggeration in speech,
   polite equivocations, flattering compliments, and of course all classes
   of slander, backbiting, and imputations of evil where no evil is.

   It is usually felt, however, that there is a distinction between
   telling a lie and concealing the truth or a part of the truth from
   those who have no right to demand it. The one is always wrong, the
   other sometimes may be right.

   6. Tenth Commandment, v. 17.

   "Covet" means to earnestly desire or long after, a feeling not sinful
   in itself, but which becomes so under particular circumstances. Its
   sinfulness appears in longing for anything unlawful, or longing for
   that which is lawful to an inordinate degree. A passing wish to have
   anything our neighbor possesses may be innocent, but to long for it
   excessively is prohibited.

   The reason for the prohibition is that such longing begets a grudging,
   discontented and envious spirit, which leads often to injustice and
   violence. The case of David who coveted Uriah's wife and finally caused
   him to be slain is in point.

   From deeds and words the decalogue has thus come to deal with the
   thoughts and intents of the heart, the fountain head of sin; and that
   it reaches deep into the interior of human life, read Paul's words in
   Romans 7:7-14.

   These words are worthy of careful consideration. On one occasion he
   said that "touching the righteousness which is in the law he was
   blameless (Phil. 3:6). A wonderful thing for a man of his honesty and
   introspection to say! How then may we explain the fact that near the
   end of his life he testifies that he is the chief of sinners (1 Tim.
   1:15)? The explanation is found in these words in Romans. Meditating
   upon the tenth commandment he observed that it had to do not with the
   body but the mind, and from this he argued that the other commandments
   were regnant in the same mental area. Thus taught by the Spirit he
   perceived that so far from being blameless he had daily transgressed
   the principles of the decalogue even though he had never done outwardly
   the things condemned, the law did for him what God intends it to do for
   all of us. It killed him, slaying his self-righteousness and taking the
   life out of his self-confidence. As he thus lay hopeless in the dust of
   his earthliness it led him to Christ the Saviour of the lost (Gal.
   3:24). -- Dean Hart.

   Questions.

   1. What does "honor" mean in the fifth commandment?

   2. What sins are most frequently forbidden and threatened in Scripture?

   3. How may "covet" be qualified?

   4. Which commandment has most to do with the mind?

   5. Can you quote Galations 3:24?

   THE CIVIL CODE

   Chapters 21-24

   The ten commandments constitute the moral law, a perfect rule of duty
   for all men and everywhere. But the "judgments" (v. 1) that follow are
   an application of those commandments to Israel in the peculiar
   circumstances of their history at that time and when they should
   inhabit Canaan. The ten commandments, let us say, represent the
   constitution of the United States, and the "judgments" the legislative
   enactments based thereon by Congress.

   The three chapters now entered upon have certain natural divisions,
   corresponding, though not in exact order, with the last seven
   commandments of the decalogue:

   1. Laws of Servitude, 21:1-11.

   This division refers to the duties of masters and servants, and is a
   natural expansion of the 5th commandment, the master being substituted
   for the parent.

   It is slavery of a certain kind that is here dealt with, for it was
   common in those days when for centuries the rights of man had been
   beclouded by sin, and in the absence of a divine revelation. Heavenly
   reforms sometimes move slowly, and it was not God's purpose to
   immediately do away with this feature of social life, but to regulate,
   elevate in any other way. Compare Lev. 25:93 and Deut. 15:12.

   Vv. 4-6. We can see the advantage of the wife and children remaining
   with the master in this case, since he doubtless was best able to
   support them. Moreover, he had rights in the case which should not be
   violated. But what provision is made for a happy solution of the
   problem? Behold in this servant whose ear is bored an affecting type of
   the willing obedience of the Lord Jesus Christ (Ps. 40:6-8)!

   Vv. 7-1 1. If the maid-servant should not please her master in the
   sense that he espouse her, in what two ways are her rights guarded (8)?
   What acknowledged position would she have did she become the espoused
   of his son (9)? And how are the rights of this poor maiden guarded in
   this case as well (10, 11)? We are not to suppose that this law
   instituted either polygamy or concubinage, but finding it in existence
   it was permitted until the period was ripe for its extermination (Matt.
   19:1-9).

   2. Laws of Personal Security, 21:12-32.

   This section is an expansion of the 6th commandment.

   Vv. 11-14. What distinction is made between premeditated and
   unpremeditated murder? See Numbers 35:9-32.

   Vv. 23-25. This law of retaliation has been misunderstood as though it
   encouraged revenge, but it refers to the administration of justice at
   the hand of the magistrate (6).

   3. Laws of Property, 21:33 to 22:15.

   This section is an expansion of the 8th commandment.

   "Breaking up" (22:2) should read as in the Revised Version "breaking
   in," which makes the sense plain

   "Judge" all through these chapters is translated "God" in the Revised
   Version. Israel is a theocracy. Its supreme ruler is God. The
   magistrates represent and speak directly for Him. Thus will it be again
   in the millennium.

   4. Laws of Conjugal Fidelity, 22:16-31.

   This is an expansion of the 7th commandment, and yet its subject matter
   is miscellaneous. Murphy gives a unity to the verses by supposing the
   relation between God and His people to be symbolized by that of husband
   and wife, God being the avowed guardian and representative of the
   stranger, the widow and the orphan.

   V. 28. The word "gods" should be "God," and it will be seen from the
   context that reviling rulers is regarded as reviling God (compare Ro.
   13:1-7).

   V. 29. "Liquors" has been rendered "the trickling juice of the vine."

   Some things in this section are more fully explained in later
   Scriptures.

   5. Laws of Veracity, 23:1-9.

   This corresponds to the 9th commandment.

   V. 3 means that one is not to countenance or favor a poor man in his
   cause just because he is poor, if the cause be unrighteous. Compare
   Lev. 19:15.

   6. Laws of Set Times, 23:10-19.

   This corresponds to the 4th commandment.

   What was the law for the land in the seventh year (11)? For what
   purpose was the spontaneous growth of that year to be used? How did the
   divine Legislator provide against an emergency of famine (Lev.
   25:20-22)?

   Note the moral advantages resulting from the observance of this law:
   (1) a check on avarice, (2) a stimulant to brotherly kindness and
   compassion, (3) a demonstration of human equality, (4) a cultivation of
   prudence and economy, (5) a sense of constant dependence upon God.

   What are the three annual feasts (14-16)? Murphy compares them with the
   three elements of salvation: the passover with the atonement, pentecost
   with the new birth, the ingathering with pardon and its accompanying
   plentitude of blessing. What obligation is attached to these festivals?

   V. 19, last sentence, is difficult, although the command itself is
   plain. It is in connection with sacrifice (18) -- has it therefore a
   symbolic meaning? Or was it to prevent the slaying and eating of the
   kid at too early a period? Or does the application bear simply on a
   barbarous and cruel action?

   7. Laws of Pity, 23:20-33.

   This is allied to the 10th commandment because of its reference to the
   service of Jehovah alone, who estimates the motive of men.

   Whom have we seen to be meant by "the Angel" (20)? In what way have we
   seen His presence hitherto displayed? On what commission is He now
   sent? What shows His authority? Power? Dignity (21)? What are the
   blessings of obedience (22-27)? What precaution would God take in
   bringing them into possession of the land (28-30)? What final warning
   is given (32-33).

   8. Ratifying the Covenant, 24.

   At the beginning of this chapter we are introduced to the two sons of
   Aaron, soon to be associated with him in the priesthood and to have a
   sad ending nevertheless. With what words do the people accept the
   obligations imposed upon them (3)? What kind of an altar presumably did
   Moses build (v. 4 compared with 20:24-26)?

   What provision is made for the careful transmission of the law (4)?
   What name is given to the book thus written (7)? By what solemn act is
   the covenant ratified (8)? Compare the marginal reference.

   What sublime experience was granted to these representatives of Israel
   on the mount (10)? What this means, in the absence of further record,
   who can say! Why may we judge that they did not see the "face" of God
   (33:20-23)? Or any "similitude" of Him (Deut. 4:15)? What description
   is given of that which they did see?

   How was God's mercy shown to them on this occasion (11)? How is their
   escape from death expressed in the last clause? Is not this escape
   explained by the covenant relationship with God into which they had now
   come? Was this relationship grounded on their keeping of the law or on
   the blood of propitiation that had been shed and sprinkled upon the
   people? What did this typify (Ro. 3:19-25)? Compare also Hebrews
   10:16-20.

   What final seal to the authority of the law is now given (12)? What two
   individuals are here seen for a second time with Moses (13, 14)? What
   grandeur on the mount is now described (15-17)? What new event in
   Moses' experience (18)? The reason for this new event will come before
   us in the succeeding lesson.

   Questions.

   1. What distinction is suggested between "commandments" and
   "judgments"?

   2. What beautiful type of our Lord Jesus Christ does this lesson
   contain?

   3. What testimony to Israel's theocratic status?

   4. How are the rights of the rich guarded as well as of the poor?

   5. What witness have we here to an early written revelation?

   THE PATTERN IN THE MOUNT

   Chapter 25:1-9

   We have now reached in the revelation of the tabernacle the most
   important step in the history of grace yet met with in Holy Scripture.

   There are several reasons for believing this:

   1. The unusual preparation required on man's part for its reception.
   (See the preceding chapter, vv. 9-18).

   2. The large space occupied by its recital -- 13 chapters in all.

   3. The particularity of detail seen throughout.

   An Object Lesson.

   To quote Prof. W. G. Moorehead:

   The tabernacle was "a divine object lesson; an embodied prophecy of
   good things to come; a witness to the grace and saving power of God. It
   taught salvation through propitiation, forgiveness and blood-shedding.
   Access to God and worship it disclosed; the holiness of God; the
   sinfulness of man; the reconciliation which in due time should be
   affected, are all clearly set forth by the tabernacle and its rites."

   Seven chapters are given to the specifications of the tabernacle, and
   six to its construction; while in between the two is the record of the
   unbelief and apostasy of the people in the matter of the golden calf.

   Of the seven chapters of specification, three are occupied with the
   tabernacle itself, three with the priesthood, and one with the
   arrangement for carrying the whole into effect.

   Our present lesson deals with the tabernacle itself.

   The Offering o the People, vv. 1-9.

   On what principle was this offering to be presented (2)? What three
   metals are specified (3)? Three colors (4)?

   What vegetable textile is mentioned, and what animal (4)? What two
   kinds of skins (5)? The badger here spoken of is thought to be not the
   animal commonly known by that name among us. but some other animal
   equally well-known in Arabia.

   What species of wood is named (5)? This is supposed to be the acacia,
   abundant in Moses' day.

   The oil (6) was from the olive, the spices are more particularly
   indicated (30:23, 24); the precious stones (28:15-21), as also the
   ephod and breastplate in the same chapter.

   What name is given to the building in verse 8, and for what purpose is
   it to be? The fulfillment of this purpose was in the visible cloud of
   glory which overshadowed the tabernacle when completed, and rested upon
   the mercyseat in the Most Holy place.

   As to the name "sanctuary," it denotes especially the holiness of the
   place. What other name is given it in verse 9? This simply means a
   dwelling, and is sometimes used in an indefinite way for the curtains,
   the frame-work or the entire structure.

   "Tent" is the name given to it in the following chapter; and at other
   places "the tent of meeting," having reference to the meeting of God
   with His people (29:42, 43); or the tent or tabernacle "of testimony"
   (Num. 2:50, 53), as designating the place where God declared His will,
   and especially testified against the sins of His people, by His holy
   law which, within the ark, witnessed to the covenant they had entered
   into at Sinai.

   According to what design was the sanctuary to be erected (9)? Thus we
   see it was a type of God's dwelling place in the heaven of heavens, a
   fact that profoundly impresses us with its significance in every
   detail.

   We do not know how the pattern or type was shown to Moses in the mount,
   whether by a visible model, or vision presented to his mind, but we
   know it was in some sense a copy of heavenly things, and that hence
   Moses was allowed no liberty in constructing it.

   Archeological Discoveries.

   Archeology has shown an analogy between the tabernacle service and the
   ritualistic practice of some of the heathen nations, but this is not to
   be interpreted as imitation or adoption on Moses' part.

   There is a similitude in the modes of worship fundamental in the human
   race, and Moses may have been used of God to cull out the truth from
   this mass of wrong and falsehood.

   A parallel is that of the "Code of Hammurabi," a Chaldean monarch,
   hundreds of years before Moses, who in this "code" gave laws to his
   people corresponding to those in the previous chapters.

   The critics used to argue that the Mosaic code could not be of so early
   a date as Moses since it presupposed too advanced a civilization on the
   part of the people for whom it was intended. When, however, this code
   of Hammurabi was discovered, their tune was changed, and they
   exclaimed: "Ah! Moses copied after Hammurabi."

   The truth rather is that just suggested about the tabernacle.
   Hammurabi's code is based upon fundamental principles of law in the
   constitution of the race, albeit commingled with many grotesque fancies
   in consequence of the fall. These fundamental principles, however, are,
   in their origin, divine, and in the code of Moses we find them
   separated from the false by the hand of their heavenly originator.

   Questions.

   1. What three reasons show the importance attached to this theme?

   2. What names are given to the tabernacle, and what are their meanings?

   3. How may the "pattern" have been revealed to Moses?

   4. How would you explain the similarity of the tabernacle service to
   the rituals of heathen nations?

   5. What is the "Code of Hammurabi," and what light does it throw on
   Moses' writings?

   THE TABERNACLE AND ITS FURNITURE

   Chapters 25:10-27:21

   1. The Ark of the Testimony, 25:10-16.

   Notice the kind of wood and the dimensions (10). The "cubit" measures
   from the elbow to the tip of the middle finger, and is variously
   estimated from 18 to 21 inches, usually 18. How was it to be overlaid
   (11)? The "crown of gold" meant a rim or moulding. The "four rings"
   (12) were attached to the four "corners," in the sense of the four feet
   of the ark. The "staves" or poles were used in carrying it (14). What
   was to be placed in the ark (16)? The "testimony" means the ten
   commandments. (Compare 24:12.)

   2. The Mercy Seat, 25:17-22.

   Notice its material and dimensions (17). What was to be placed at
   either end (18)? "Even of the mercy-seat," should be rendered "out of"
   or "of one piece with the mercy-seat"; i. e., they were not separate
   attachments from it. What was to be the attitude and position of the
   cherubim (20)? This was the attitude of observant attention, while they
   seemed to guard with their wings the place of the manifestation of the
   divine glory. Where was the mercy-seat to be placed (21)? This does not
   mean that it was merely the cover of the ark, but a separate article,
   composing with the ark a unity "not so much in outward as in inward
   design."

   What promise is connected with the mercy-seat {22)?

   These two articles, the ark and the mercy-seat were the only objects,
   (and they appeared as one), in the Holy of Holies, or the Most Holy
   place of the tabernacle, and about them, or rather about it, the whole
   service of worship centered.

   The "ark" was God's throne (Ps. 80:1, R. V.), but it was a throne of
   grace (Heb. 4:16). The "mercy-seat" means "the place of propitiation,"
   and here the blood of the sin-offering was sprinkled on the day of
   atonement, and satisfaction was rendered to the divine claims on the
   people represented by the law in the ark of the testimony (Ps. 85:9,
   10).

   What the mercy-seat did symbolically for Israel, Christ has
   accomplished perfectly for all who will believe on Him (Ro. 3:25; 1
   John 2:1, 2).

   The Table of Shewbread, 23-30.

   This table was to have not only a "crown" or rim, but also a "border"
   with a crown or rim (24, 25), the distinction between which it is
   difficult to make.

   Observe the appurtenances of the table (29). The dishes were to hold
   the shewbread (30, compared with Lev. 24:5, 6); the bowls were for
   frankincense (Lev. 24:7). "Covers" is, in the Revised Version,
   "flagons" or vessels for wine, used in drink-offerings (Num. 15:1-12).
   The shewbread consisted of 12 cakes (Lev. 24:5, 6), corresponding to
   the twelve tribes of Israel, and is sometimes called the
   "presence-bread," or the "bread of the face."

   At certain times the priests, who represented the whole of Israel, ate
   this shewbread from off the table. As the table is the Lord's and in
   the Lord's house, here we have the idea of hospitality based upon
   friendship. We see the family of God regaled by Him at His paternal
   board, which speaks of perfect reconciliation and communion with Him,
   and helps to explain the phrase, "the bread of the face." That is, man
   is represented as face to face with God in fellowship through atonement
   for sin. (See Gen. 14:18-20.)

   Furthermore, whatever the "bread of the face" was for Israel in old
   times, Jesus Christ is now for His people. In and through Him we have
   communion with the Father (1 John 1:3). and He is the true bread which
   sustains us in our new life (John 6:31-58).

   4. The Golden Candlestick, 25:31-40.

   "His bowls, his knops, his flowers," refers to the ornaments on the
   branches of the candlestick, and which were to be all of one piece. The
   seven lamps rest on the flowers at the extremities of the stems. The
   latter part of verse 37 means that the candlestick shall be so set up
   (on the south side of the tabernacle, 40:24) as to throw light upon the
   table opposite. It was the only light in the tabernacle, the home or
   dwelling place of God.

   According to Zech. 4, the candlestick is a type of Israel, and
   according to Revelation 1, a type of the church. Oil is the symbol of
   the Holy Spirit, and light typifies God (1 John 1:5), and Christ (John
   8:12; 2 Cor. 4:6). The typical significance of the whole in its present
   position is difficult, but may appear as we proceed.

   Note that as the ark and mercy-seat were to be placed in the Most Holy
   place, the table and candlestick were to be placed in the Holy place,
   i. e., outside the veil separating the two, of which later.

   5. The Curtains, 26:1-14.

   After revealing the above-mentioned pieces of furniture, attention is
   turned to the curtains.

   To begin with the inner curtains, they were to be of what number,
   material, colors, design, length and breadth (1,2)?

   Five were to be sewed together in one piece and five in another (3).
   These two halves were to be connected by loops of blue fastened with
   golden clasps (4-6), the whole to cover the top, sides and western end
   of the tabernacle, and correspond to the papering of our modern
   dwellings.

   Of what material were the outer curtains to be made (7)? How many in
   number? Do they differ in length or breadth from the inner curtains
   (8)? How was the sixth curtain to be used (9, 12)? Of what material
   were the clasps to be in this case (11)? How many outside "coverings"
   were to be made (14)? "Badger" is translated "seal" or "porpoise" in
   the Revised Version.

   6. The Framework, 26:15-30.

   Notice the material, length and breadth of the boards (16). How many
   "tenons" to each board? "Set in order," means "mortised." Of what
   material were the "sockets" for these tenons (19)? The word "sides"
   (22) should be translated "back part." The sockets probably rested on
   the ground as nothing is said of sleepers under them.

   How were the boards braced together (26-28)? How were the boards and
   bars overlaid (29)? What a costly edifice it must have been! Some have
   calculated it as reaching $1,500,000.

   7. The Vail, 26:31-35.

   The vail for the Most Holy place, and the hanging or screen for the
   door of the Holy place (36, 37) require no comment here. The typical
   significance of the former will come before us in its proper place.

   8. The Brazen Altar, 27:1-8.

   We are now in the outer court. Notice the material, size, height and
   shape of this altar. The "horns," or the parts of the corner-posts
   projecting above the upper surface of the altar, were to be of one
   piece with it (R. V.), and the whole was to be overlaid with brass to
   protect from fire and weather, whence its name "the brazen altar" (2).
   Upon this altar the burnt-offerings were presented.

   Questions.

   1. What is the meaning of "testimony" in the lesson?

   2. What is the meaning of "mercyseat"?

   3. What is the meaning of "the bread of the face"?

   4. Of what are the candlestick and the oil types?

   5. What is an estimate of the cost of the tabernacle in our money?

   THE PRIESTLY GARMENTS

   Chapters 28:1-43

   The abrupt termination of the directions for the tabernacle at the
   close of the preceding chapter is remarkable; especially as the subject
   is taken up again at chapter 30. There must be some reason why the
   intervening chapters are occupied with the priesthood.

   Some see in this the symbolism of a deep fact. God has in grace come
   out from His throne in the Holy of Holies through the way He has
   prepared for Himself in the table of shewbread and the candlestick, to
   meet man in his sin at the brazen altar. And now man is to be brought
   back through the way God has Himself come, to the place of communion
   with Him before His throne. The priesthood is necessary for this, and
   ere the way is itself shown the arrangements for the priesthood are
   completed.

   As soon we reach the altar, in other words, we feel the need of the
   priest (which means mediator or advocate), who is to officiate thereat.
   From God he comes to man, authorized to invite man to return to God
   with penitence, confession and faith, and to make for him the
   propitiatory sacrifice to that end.

   The garments of the priests as well as the details of their
   consecration are specified in this and the next chapter, because they
   are symbolical of their standing and office before God, as well as
   types of Him of whom Aaron and the Aaronic priesthood are the shadows.
   (See Hebrews, particularly chapters 5 to 10.)

   What family is chosen for the priesthood (1)? What provision has God
   made for the preparation of their clothing (3) ? What are the number
   and names of the garments (4)? Notice the correspondence of color and
   texture of material to those of the inner curtains already named (5).
   It will be seen later that three of these garments are peculiar to the
   high priest -- the first three, and that he wears the rest in common
   with the other priests. There is this further exception, however, that
   whereas he dons a mitre, they only have bonnets or turbans (40). It
   might be advisable to say here that while the high priest typifies
   Christ, the priests, his sons, typify believers on Christ, or the
   church.

   1. The Ephod, vv. 6-12.

   The ephod was a shoulder-piece covering the back and reaching under the
   arms, kept in place by the two shoulder-straps (7) and the belt around
   the waist (8), leaving the breast uncovered. The gold was beaten into
   thin pieces, cut into wire and interwoven with colored threads.

   What two precious stones belonged to the ephod ? What was graved on
   them? How were they set? Where were they placed, and why (9-12)? These
   indicate that God was to have Israel in perpetual remembrance through
   the mediation and representation of the high priest. The shoulder,
   moreover, is symbolical of power, so that the high priest thus arrayed
   became a beautiful suggestion of Him whose everlasting arms are
   underneath His people (Deut. 33:27). This ephod was the upper-most
   garment and worn outside the blue robe whose description follows.

   2. The Breastplate, vv. 13-30.

   What name is given to the breastplate (15)? Its shape and size (16)?
   What precious stones should it contain (17-20)? What graving upon them
   (21)? What was the significance of this latter (29) ? This "breastplate
   of judgment" represents the high priest as the spokesman of God, at the
   same time that he is the affectionate intercessor for Israel -- for
   each tribe and each member of it.

   3. Urim and Thummin, v. 30.

   Urim and Thummin are thought to be the sum of the twelve precious
   stones attached to the breastplate. That is, the twelve stones are Urim
   and Thummin, which means "the lights and the perfections." Lights as to
   their brilliancy, and perfections as to their hardness and absence from
   flaws.

   "They represent the light and the right that are in the high priest for
   the enlightenment and reconciliation of those who come unto God by him.
   He exercises the functions of teaching and sacrificing in their behalf,
   as the type of the great High Priest.

   "The import of Urim and Thummin dawned on the Israelite as he saw the
   high priest making an offering on the altar for the sins of the people,
   thus rendering them imputatively perfect, and then returning oracular
   answers from God out of the Most Holy place to the reverent inquirer.

   "But we have no ground for supposing that God conveyed verbal messages
   to the high priests by illuminating any letters on the stones, as some
   have fancied. In other words there is nothing concealed nor mystical
   about this transaction after the manner of the heathen temples and
   priesthoods, nor anything in the nature of a charm as in an amulet. God
   indicated the light and the perfection which He vouchsafed to His
   people by means of these stones, but that light and perfection did not
   reside in the stones in any way." -- Murphy.

   4. The Robe, vv. 31-36.

   How does verse 31 show that this robe belong to the ephod in some way?
   What shows it to have been entirely woven, and without seam (32)?
   "Habergeon" means "a coat of mail." How was the base to be trimmed (33,
   34)? The significance of this (35)?

   It would appear from the last words of this verse that the wearing of
   this robe on the part of the high priest while ministering, was
   necessary to insure him from death. It becomes therefore a type of that
   robe of Christ's righteousness which is the only security of eternal
   life for human kind (Isa. 61:10). The sound of the bells testified that
   "the mail of proof had been put on, and the dread of death removed" It
   must have been a constant source of comfort and encouragement to the
   high priest as he stood alone in the Holy of Holies in the presence of
   the awful glory of Jehovah. Every slightest movement he made brought
   the assurance from the bells that all was well.

   5. The Crown, vv. 36-38.

   More is revealed about the plate on the mitre (or turban) than the
   mitre itself. What is this place called in 39:30? By the names on the
   precious stones the high priest is shown to be the representative of
   the people, and by what in this case is he shown to be the
   representative of God? For what does this holiness thus qualify him
   (38)?

   The ephod, the breastplate, and the golden crown combined present us
   symbolically with the three-fold office of our great High Priest, Jesus
   Christ. "In the ephod the priestly office is obvious, in the
   breastplate the prophetic comes into the view, and in the crown the
   kingly makes its appearance, although the priestly discloses and
   maintains itself throughout."

   6. The Common Garments, vv. 39-43.

   In these verses we have directions for the garments common to all the
   priests including the high priest.

   The coat was to be woven in chequer work as intimated in the Revised
   Version. It seems to have been provided with sleeves and to have
   reached to the feet. The mitre, or turban, was of the same material,
   and was wrapped around the head. The girdle was wound twice around the
   body it is said, and tied in front with the ends hanging down to the
   feet. Note the difference between this girdle going around the waist
   and holding the coat in place, and the "curious" or cunningly-woven
   girdle of verse 8, which fastened the ephod. Notice also that the
   head-gear of the priests is not called a "mitre" but a "bonnet,"
   evidently different somewhat in shape and appearance. The linen
   breeches are described in verses 42 and 43. They do not seem to have
   belonged to the official dress of the priests, but to have been
   prescribed for the sake of propriety in other respects.

   Questions.

   1. Why may chapters 28 and 29 be a parenthesis in the revelation of the
   Tabernacle?

   2. What New Testament book treats of the typical character of the
   priesthood?

   3. What typical distinction seems to exist between the common priests
   and the high priest?

   4. What may be the significance of Urim and Thummin?

   5. What did the robe and the bells signify ?

   THE INIQUITY OF THE HOLY THINGS

   In the last lesson attention was called to the phrase at the head of
   this lesson found in 28:38.

   The significance of the expression, both for Israel and for Christians,
   and the widely-prevailing ignorance on the subject of which it treats,
   is the justification for a special lesson in the way of an addendum to
   it.

   The following is from William R. Nicholson, D.D., bishop in the
   Reformed Episcopal Church.

   These words, "the iniquity of the holy things," are only part of a
   sentence, their connection being that Aaron the high priest should bear
   the iniquity of the holy things. Of course, the bearing of this
   iniquity means the atoning for it.

   But we are startled by the repellency of the idea. How strange to hear
   of the iniquity of what is holy!

   The "holy things" are described in the context as the sacrifices and
   offerings of Israel. Whatever they presented to God in worship were
   holy in the sense that they were consecrated to and appointed by Him.
   And yet these things themselves had iniquity. When the worshiper
   brought his bleeding victim as an offering for his sins his very act of
   bringing it had in it additional sin which required to be atoned for.

   And the truth with regard to Israel is the same with ourselves. We were
   by nature children of wrath, and now, although as believers on our Lord
   Jesus Christ we are regenerated by His Spirit, still in our flesh there
   dwelleth no good thing (Ro. 7:18; 8:7). The consequence is that we
   entail our sin upon whatever we attempt to do. We worship God, even in
   the way of His own appointment, and yet the sin in us imparts to that
   worship the imperfection of its sinfulness and therefore the sin of
   imperfection. We pray, and our act of prayer has iniquity in it. We
   sing God's praises, we read His Word, we come into His house, we kneel
   at the sacrament and at each and all there is sin, for they have the
   imperfection and defilement of our sinfulness. Indeed, we trust in
   Jesus for the pardon of our sins as the Israelite brought his bleeding
   victim to the altar, and yet the very act of trust is sinfully done and
   needs for itself the divine pardon.

   God's People Are Meant.

   Notice that "the iniquity of the holy things" was affirmed of Israel,
   the type of the true people of God, and not unregenerate men.

   When they assembled at the Tabernacle they did so as the redeemed of
   God. The blood of the paschal lamb had been sprinkled upon their houses
   in Egypt. Sheltered beneath it from the curse which had devastated that
   land, they had gone forth from its bondage and terror, and were now
   brought nigh to God in His own house of communion. They were even
   supplied by His hand with all holy gifts which they were now permitted
   to offer to Him.

   They represent real Christians, therefore, true believers in Jesus
   Christ, delivered out of the condemnation of the world, and having
   received through His blood the forgiveness of sin, made nigh to God in
   the privilege of worship and the joy of fellowship.

   There is therefore iniquity in our holy things, in every act of our
   worship there are imperfection and defilement, because there is present
   in that act the old evil nature along with the new. We need therefore
   to be forgiven for every duty we perform, for every sorrow for sin we
   feel, for every hope we cherish, and for all the love we enjoy.

   Bishop Beveridge said: "I cannot pray but I sin; I cannot hear or
   preach a sermon but I sin; I cannot give alms or receive the sacrament
   but I sin; no, I cannot so much as confess my sins but my very
   confessions are still aggravations of them; my repentance needs to be
   repented of; my tears want washing; and the very washing of my tears
   needs still to be washed over again with the blood of my Redeemer."

   The Proof.

   That the meaning of these words is not exaggerated may be seen in that
   the same truth is taught again in the 16th of Leviticus, where we meet
   with a description of the annual Day of Atonement.

   In the present text the high priest is directed to bear the iniquity of
   the holy things, but in that chapter he is represented as actually
   bearing them. He is attired in his holy garments, his forehead
   glittering with "Holiness to the Lord," and actually sprinkling the
   blood of sacrifice to cleanse the uncleanness of the worshipers, to
   make atonement for the holy sanctuary itself, for the altar on which
   the sacrifices are offered (for these things were polluted by the very
   presence of sinners), for the priests who offered the sacrifices, and
   for all the people accustomed there to worship.

   Once a year regularly and solemnly the great truth of this text was
   recognized and enforced. Every day in the year, to say nothing of extra
   sessions, the blood of atonement was offered for pardon and acceptance,
   but the acts of offering had iniquity in them and needed themselves to
   be specifically sprinkled with the atoning blood. This was done on this
   annual day, the greatest of all the occasions of expiation.

   Moreover, the New Testament is full of this teaching of the iniquity of
   our holy things, it speaks to us concerning it in those words of Paul
   throughout the 7th of Romans, and in his words to the Philippians where
   he speaks of discarding his own righteousness, even that which belonged
   to him as a Christian (3:1-15). Indeed, it speaks to us in all that is
   said in the New Testament concerning the sanctification which comes to
   believers through faith in the blood of Christ.

   A Three-Fold Application.

   The application of this truth is wide-reaching.

   (1) In the first place, it enhances our appreciation of our Saviour and
   the value of His merits for us. It helps us to see how deeply we need
   Him, and how great is the sovereign mercy and the boundless grace of
   God towards us in Him.

   The high priest in the tabernacle typifies Him, and the service he
   rendered for Israel, even in the iniquity of their holy things,
   typifies the service Christ has rendered and is rendering for us in a
   like case. For if there is iniquity in our holy things, thank God there
   is also atonement for it accomplished, and full, and of instant
   efficacy (1 John 2:1, 2)!

   (2) In the second place, it opens our eyes and broadens our vision as
   to the relative meanings of sin and holiness. In the light of this
   text, what Christian can question -- much less deny -- the application
   to him at all times of the words of the apostle John: "If we say we
   have no sin we deceive ourselves, and the truth is not in us" (1 John
   1:8)?

   Who can talk about sinless perfection in the light of this truth? And
   how professions of the eradication of evil shrink into worthlessness,
   and themselves become sin in its shadow! So deeply indeed is the truth
   of this text imbedded, as a living principle, in the experience of true
   and enlightened Christians, that the more devoted they are the more it
   is felt.

   It is indeed a test of our nearness to God to have a Christian
   conscience so cultivated as to appreciate our daily and hourly need,
   and at the same time our daily and hourly completeness only in Christ.
   This is the way to feast upon Him richly. If our faith, considered as
   an act, does itself require to have blood sprinkled upon it, then as we
   appreciate that fact shall our faith itself sink down more and more
   upon Christ for all that He is to us, and rest upon Him with the very
   rest of heaven.

   (3) It furnishes a momentous warning to the unbeliever and the
   unregenerate man. If there is no such thing as even a Christian's
   self-righteousness, if there is no such thing as a Christian's
   purchasing to himself the divine favor even by such life-long goodness
   as that of Paul, how impossible must all this be to the man who has not
   received Christ at all! If no Christian who is himself personally
   accepted in Christ can put forth one act which does not need
   forgiveness, what can he do to commend himself to God who is unwashed
   in redeeming blood, and on whom even now abideth His condemnation?

   With regard to any dependence on one's own righteousness it becomes us
   all to say. Christian or non-Christian, with the patriarch Job: "If I
   wash myself with snow water, and make my hands never so clean, yet
   shalt Thou plunge me into the ditch, and mine own clothes shall make me
   to be abhorred!"

   "The iniquity of the holy things"!

   What Jesus is, and that alone

   Is faith's delightful plea;

   Which never deals with sinful self

   Nor righteous self in me.

   Questions.

   1. Where is the phrase found which is the title of this lesson?

   2. Of whom is this iniquity affirmed, the world's people or God's
   people?

   3. On what great day in Israel was this solemnly enforced?

   4. What New Testament Scripture shows that there is atonement in Christ
   for such iniquity?

   5. What erroneous doctrine does this truth contradict?

   6. To whom is it a solemn warning?

   THE CONSECRATION OF THE PRIESTS

   Chapter 29

   1. The Ceremony in Outline, vv. 1-9.

   What animals were required for sacrifice, and what qualification must
   they have (1)? What offerings accompanied them (2)? Where was the place
   of ceremony (4)? What was the preliminary act?

   This washing of the bodies of the priests typified the cleanness of the
   whole man in a moral and spiritual sense, which, while it was true of
   Aaron only ceremonially, was true absolutely of the Lord Jesus Christ,
   whom he set forth and pre-figured.

   What followed the washing (5, 6)? What followed the investure of the
   clothing (7)?

   This holy anointing oil, for which (as we shall see) God Himself gave
   the prescription, was the emblem of the gift and grace of the Holy
   Spirit communicated to the priesthood for their service. At the same
   time it should be borne in mind that the service accomplished by then
   in a symbolical sense was accomplished actually by Christ for His
   people, who was anointed of the Holy Spirit to that end (Luke 4:16, 21;
   Acts 4:27; 10:38).

   For how long was the office to remain in Aaron's family (9)? This means
   of course to the end of the Levitical economy (Heb. 7:11-19).

   "Consecrate" in v. 9 means "to fill the hands," and signifies "the
   placing of the sacrifices in their hands, in the offering of which they
   are not only sanctified but instituted into their office."

   2. The Sin-Offering, vv. 10-14.

   What was the nature of this offering (10)? Where presented? How were
   Aaron and his sons to identify themselves with it? What was to be done
   to it (11)? How was its blood to be used (12)? Which of its parts
   should be burned on the altar (l3)? Which without the camp, and why
   (14)?

   The presentation of this offering was to remove the legal
   disqualifications from Aaron and his sons on account of sin. The life
   which is in the blood of the animal makes atonement for their life,
   which like the lives of all of us was forfeited through sin. This is
   not to say that there was any intrinsic virtue in the blood of a bull,
   but as we shall be told by and by it is typical of the blood of the Son
   of God, which is efficacious in the cleansing from all sin (1 John
   1:7).

   The details of these offerings come before us in Leviticus, where they
   are commanded for the people as they are here for the priests.

   3. The Burnt-offering, vv. 15-18.

   The nature of this offering (15)? Observe the same act of
   identification as before. What distinction do you see in the use of the
   blood (16)? What was to be done with the flesh of this offering as
   distinguished from the other (18)? And before it was burnt, what (17)?
   What did it then become (18)

   Sin is not named in connection with this offering as in the other case.
   There God's judgment is executed on the victim as charged with the sin
   of the offence, but here God's satisfaction with the offerer is
   expressed as based on the previous putting away of his sin and the
   presentation of himself for acceptance and worship.

   4. The Peace-offering, w. 19-28.

   These two rams bear a close relation to one another, and are to be
   considered theoretically as one. What is done with the blood here (20)?
   Touching the person with the blood symbolizes the purging of that
   person from his guilt.

   What further ceremony follows (21)? This symbolizes "the outward and
   legal and the inward and moral purification essential to the priestly
   office."

   What is this ram called (22)? How is the idea of consecration expressed
   in v. 24? Here Aaron and his sons "take the first step in offering and
   are at the same time initiated into the priestly office."

   Moses who initiates them is to "wave" these offerings, doubtless by
   taking hold of their hands thus filled, and moving them back and forth.
   The significance of this is difficult to determine. The forward
   movement toward the altar might indicate the dedication of the offering
   to the Lord, and the backward movement a transference of it again to
   the priest as his share, only that in this case the offerings are not
   afterward consumed by the priests but are burned on the altar (25). We
   await more light.

   What parts of this ram are assigned as the portion of the priest (27)?
   Observe that a "wave" and a "heave" offering are both mentioned here,
   the motion of one being horizontal and the other vertical. It is
   "heaved" in token of being offered unto God, and then, accepted by Him,
   it is assigned to His representative on earth, the priest (28). To what
   class of offering does this heave offering belong?

   "Peace offering" in this verse is translated in the Septuagint Version,
   "a sacrifice of salvation," and is an acknowledgment of salvation
   already received as expressed through the sin and burnt offering
   previously presented and accepted, and which invariably preceded it in
   the Levitical ceremonial. (Compare Ro. 5.) As indicative of this it was
   essentially a communion feast. God's portion was burned on the altar,
   but of the remainder the priest and the offerer (as we shall see later)
   each had a part.

   5. The Daily Burnt-offering, vv. 38-46.

   What was its nature (38)? How many times a day? What offering
   accompanied it (40, 41)? How would God show His reconciliation and
   communion with them on the ground of this offering (42)? This
   intercourse promised to the people would come, through the high priest.
   How should the tabernacle be hallowed? In what other language is the
   same idea expressed (45)? Of what should this be to them an assurance
   (46)? This manifestation of His presence was the shekinah glory,
   successor in a sense to the pillar of cloud.

   Aaron a Type of Christ.

   This is an appropriate place for a further word concerning the typical
   relation of the Aaronic priesthood to Jesus Christ.

   That priesthood is set before us in two sections. Aaron, the high
   priest, the true type of Christ, and his sons, consecrated to the
   office in virtue of their relation to him. These latter who ministered
   at the altar of sacrifice and in the Holy Place, but never in the Most
   Holy, do not so much typify Christ as believers on Christ, who with Him
   constitute the royal and priestly family of which He is the head.

   Aaron is a type of Christ in his person, since what he was ceremonially
   and symbolically the Lord Jesus is intrinsically and divinely. Although
   as to His humanity He descended from a long line of impure ancestors,
   yet He brought no stain of sin into the world with Him, nor contracted
   any while here (Heb. 7:26).

   The high priest, however, was a type of Christ not only in his person
   but in his office and functions. The Epistle to the Hebrews will amply
   assure us of this. It will be seen indeed that it is in virtue of
   Christ's priestly office that the Aaronic was ever instituted. In other
   words, Christ's priesthood reflects backward and gives to that of Aaron
   all the efficacy and meaning it possessed.

   Aaron was Israel's representative before God, and in his priestly
   character he stood for the whole nation. As God was pleased with him so
   was He pleased with the nation. All his official acts were reckoned as
   having been done by the people here represented. All of which we know
   to be true of Jesus Christ as the representative of them that believe
   on Him. He died for them, and they died in Him (2 Cor. 5:14). They are
   raised in Him, quickened and seated with Him in the heavenlies (Eph.
   2:5, 6). As Aaron bore the tribes into the Most Holy place so Jesus
   Christ bears His people into God's presence (Heb. 10:19-22). The chief
   duty of the human priest was to reconcile men to God by offering an
   atonement for their sins, effected by sacrifice. What Aaron thus did
   for Israel in the type Jesus has done for His people actually (Heb.
   8:3; 9:12; 10:10).

   It is furthermore an element of the priestly office to make
   intercession on behalf of those whom it represents. This was done for
   Israel by the sprinkling of the blood on the mercy seat and the
   offering of incense on the golden altar, of which we shall learn in the
   next lesson. In the same way the New Testament combines Christ's
   intercession for us with His sacrificial death (Heb. 7:25; 9:24; 1 John
   2:1, 2; Ro. 8:33, 34).

   To allude to a feature of the consecration of Aaron and his sons, we
   find something particularly suggestive in their anointing. Aaron was
   anointed before the bloody sacrifices were offered, while his sons were
   not anointed until afterward. And so, long before the cross, Jesus was
   anointed with the Holy Spirit (John 1:33, 34), but the disciples, who
   are the anti-types of the sons of Aaron, did not receive that anointing
   until after Jesus was glorified (John 7:39, R, V.; Acts 2).

   Moreover, Aaron received a greater unction than his sons, the holy oil
   being poured upon his head and running down upon his beard, even to the
   skirts of his garments (Psalm 133). Compare John 3:34, (Heb. 1:9).

   These are hints of the typology of the Aaronic priesthood, of which we
   shall be learning more as we proceed, and from which we shall be
   gaining richer apprehensions of the person and work of our Lord Jesus
   Christ on our behalf. For thus these things have been written for our
   learning.

   Questions.

   1. Whom do the ordinary priests typify?

   2. In what three ways did Aaron typify Christ?

   3. What were two chief duties of the priest?

   4. What New Testament epistle treats especially of Christ's priesthood?

   5. Can you quote 1 John 2:1, 2?

   THE WORK FULLY REVEALED AND THE WORKMEN CHOSEN

   Chapters 30-31

   1. The Altar of Incense, vv. 1-10.

   Of what material and for what purpose was it made (1)? Its size and
   shape (2)? Its furnishings (3)? The means for its removal (4, 5)? Its
   location (6)? How often and at what time was the incense to be offered
   (7, 8)? What prohibition was placed on its use (9)? How does v. 10 bear
   on "the iniquity of the holy things"?

   Although no sacrifice was offered on the altar of incense yet the
   worship there was acceptable only because of the sacrifice previously
   made at the brazen altar. These two altars were connected as one by the
   fact that the live coals which consumed the sacrifice on the brazen
   altar also burned the incense before the altar of incense.

   This incense symbolized prayer, thanksgiving and obedience accepted
   through the intercession of the high priest. The offerer of the
   sacrifice, having been reconciled to God at the brazen altar and
   cleansed or sanctified as shadowed forth by the laver soon to be spoken
   of, is here at the altar of incense seen to be accepted of God and
   adoring Him in consequence.

   See Ps. 141:2; 1 Tim. 2:8, and especially Rev. 5:8; 8:3, 4.

   The fact that the altar was "before the Lord" is significant. Although
   the veil interposed between it and the ark, nevertheless God speaks of
   it as if nothing intervened, thus showing its intimate relation to the
   ark, the mercy seat and the divine presence. So prayer brings us into
   closest communion with our heavenly Father.

   We have spoken of the relation of the two altars, the significance of
   which lies in the fact that in the brazen altar we have Christ typified
   in His atoning sacrifice, and in the incense of the golden altar we
   have Him typified in His intercession. The latter is thus seen to be
   bound up with and finding its efficacy in the former. Compare Ro. 8:34;
   Heb. 9:25. Efficaciousness in prayer, therefore, is always in
   conjunction with the work of Christ for us. In Rev. 8 incense was
   offered with the prayers of the saints. It is the incense, therefore,
   typifying Christ's intercession, which makes the prayers of the saints
   acceptable to God.

   2. Support of the Worship, vv. 11-16.

   The numbering here referred to took place as recorded in Numbers 1:3.
   What accompanied the numbering, and how did it become a testimony of
   their actual condition of guilt before God (12)? What penalty attached
   to failure in this case? Amount of ransom (13)? (The approximate value
   of the shekel was 60 cents.) Upon whom did the obligation rest, and
   upon what scale (14, 15)? For what purpose was the money used (16)?

   3. The Laver, vv. 17-21.

   What next was to be made, of what material and for what purpose (18)?

   Where placed? What parts of the priests' persons were to be washed
   (19)? (Notice the word "thereat," indicating probably that water was
   removed from the laver into a smaller vessel for this purpose.) When
   (20)? What penalty attached to a failure to comply (21)?

   This washing symbolized the soul purity of those who might approach
   God. See John 3:5; Eph. 5:25, 26; Titus 3:5.

   The laver represents not the regeneration of the believer in Christ so
   much as it does his daily renewal in Christ. As Moorehead says, there
   is a bath which requires no repetition, being accomplished once for all
   (John 13:10, R. V.). Regeneration is never repeated (1 Cor. 6:11, R.
   V.). But the believer comes into daily contact with the world's
   defilement, and is polluted by his own remaining corruption. How is he
   to be kept clean? How is interrupted communion to be re-established? By
   washing the disciples' feet Christ gave an illustration of the way in
   which this might be done. This act was a type of His intercession on
   our behalf continually (John 13:1-17; 1 John 2:1).

   This purpose is set before us in the laver, for Aaron and his sons were
   bathed upon their entrance on the priest's office, which acts were not
   to be repeated in the same way or for the same purpose. Their
   acceptance and consecration in that sense were final and complete from
   the beginning. But each time they entered the sanctuary to perform
   their office they must wash their hands and feet. It was for this the
   laver was provided.

   So at the altar our sin is judged and forgiven, and at the laver our
   sin is washed away from our persons. Jesus Christ in His atoning death
   and prevailing intercession is the glorious anti-type of both.

   4. Bezaleel and Aholiab, vv. 31:1-11.

   These are two of the most interesting of the secondary characters in
   the Old Testament.

   They who did the mechanical work on the Tabernacle and the garments of
   the high priests -- work so sacred and important in God's eyes -- must
   have had the consciousness of His being very near to them, and they to
   Him. Humanly speaking, what a nervous strain must have been their
   experience continually! Yet how did God provide against this, and at
   the same time for the perfect execution of His will (3)?

   Note the lesson here of the way God provides for the execution of His
   will and His work in the spiritual realm. Whom he chooses He anoints
   and equips in every necessity for His work. That these two men had the
   natural gifts for such employment were not enough, but these gifts must
   be imbued with power from on high.

   Oh that every preacher, teacher and Christian worker might appreciate
   this, and put himself in that attitude before God where he might attain
   the equipment!

   5. The Sabbath Law, vv. 12-17.

   Why do you suppose his reference to the Sabbath is found here? Was it
   to prevent even so holy a work as the building of the tabernacle to be
   done on that day?

   What does God call the Sabbath in v. 12? What is meant by the closing
   words of v. 17? God does not require "rest and refreshment" as we do,
   but may He not experience "delight from the accomplishment of His work
   and the contemplation of its excellence"?

   6. The End of Moses' Mission on the Mount, v. 18.

   Note this verse and compare it with 24:12. How sacred the words:
   "written with the finger of God"! Certainly no material finger is
   referred to, but there was a putting forth of power for the purpose
   which effected the result just the same.

   Questions.

   1. What truth is illustrated in the order in which this revelation is
   given?

   2. What does the altar of incense symbolize?

   3. The significance of the two altars?

   4. The symbolism of the laver? And the anointing oil?

   5. How does God provide for the execution of His work?

   THE BREACH MADE AND REPAIRED

   Chapters 32-33:6

   Moses for forty days has been absent in the mount, and to the people it
   seemed long. Had they forgotten the awe-inspired sights and sounds they
   had seen and heard? Had all the sublime and stirring events of the
   months since they departed from Egypt been obliterated from their
   memory? How can we explain the folly into which they now fell? If we
   can not explain it, let us ask our own hearts if we know anything like
   it.

   1. The Molten Calf, 32:1-6.

   What demand was made of Aaron (1)? How was their sinful impatience
   shown? How does the phrase: "who shall go before us," indicate the
   cause of their impatience? Describe Aaron's guilt (2-5). Does this
   appear to have been a violation of the first or the second commandment?

   The idol was probably a piece of wood carved into the shape of a calf,
   and overlaid with melted gold. The model was the bull worshipped by the
   Egyptians. The last words of v. 6 refer to unclean practices associated
   with such worship among the heathen.

   2. Divine Wrath, 32:7-14.

   By the use of what pronoun in v. 7 does God renounce leadership of the
   people? What test of loyalty is put to Moses in v. 10? How does he
   apparently ignore God's rejection of the people in v. 11? Notice the
   two strong arguments he presents in his expostulation (12, 13). One is
   God's honor in the sight of Egypt, and the other His honor in the
   keeping of his original promise to Israel. But does Moses excuse the
   sin of the people? When it says: "the Lord repented," does it mean that
   He had changeable feelings like a man? Or should we say, rather that He
   acted on His unchangeable principle, always to show mercy to the
   penitent?

   3. Swift Punishment, 32:15-29.

   Joshua in all probability had been awaiting Moses on the mount outside
   the cloud that enveloped him, and therefore had not heard the
   communication about the idolatrous worship. This doubtless explains the
   conversation in vv. 17 and 18.

   Observe what Moses did: (1) He broke the two tablets of testimony,
   doubtless as emblematic of the breach the sin of the people had made in
   their covenant with God; (2) he destroyed the image, grinding it into
   power and casting it in the brook from which they were supplied with
   drink; then did they experience in a physical sense the bitter results
   of their infatuation; (3) he rebuked Aaron, whose act was inexcusable
   (compare Deut. 9:15-21); (4) he judged the people through the
   instrumentality of the sons of Levi.

   "Fill your hand" (29) means, as in a previous lesson, "consecrate
   yourselves this day unto the Lord." If it seems strange that the
   Levites met no effective resistance in their righteously indictive
   work, an explanation may be found in that many sympathized with them
   and disapproved of the sin committed. Perhaps also there were many
   indifferent ones, who simply had been led away by strong and wicked
   leaders. Then, consider the weakening effect of a conscience stricken
   by the sense of sin, which must have followed Moses' words and actions.

   4. Potent Intercession, 32:30 to 33:6.

   Instant destruction had been stayed, but full pardon had not been
   obtained, hence Moses' action in these verses.

   Note the impassionate form of entreaty in V. 32. The consequences if
   God will not forgive their sin are unutterable. He does not name them.
   He feels that he could not live or enjoy the blessings of eternity if
   this were not done. Compare Paul's words concerning the same people
   (Ro. 9:1-5).

   What can he mean by "the book Thou hast written"? How interesting that
   phrase thus early in the history of revelation! The Israelites were
   familiar with a register of families. Did Moses grasp by faith that
   such a register of the saints was to be found above?

   What divine principle concerning sin and sinners is laid down in v. 33?
   (Compare Ezekiel 17:19-23.)

   What command, promise and warning are found in v. 34? How does v. 35
   show that God assumes the responsibility for what Moses and the Levites
   did? And how docs it show that the people were held responsible for
   what Aaron did?

   For "My Angel" of v. 34 compare 23:20, and recall the previous
   instruction that He possesses the attributes and prerogatives of God.
   Subsequent revelation will conclusively show Him to be the second
   Person of the Trinity.

   The last clause of this verse shows that while "the intercessor has
   prevailed, he has not yet heard the word of full remission." The breach
   is repaired, but the relationship with God is not yet what it was
   before. The next lesson shows how that is brought about.

   THE COVENANT RENEWED

   Chapters 32:7-34

   1. Moses Separated Unto God, 33:7-11.

   The tabernacle, or tent, here referred to (7), was that of Moses, as
   the Tabernacle of the Lord had not yet been erected. As the Lord would
   no longer manifest Himself among the people, it was necessary thus to
   become separated from them if Moses was to enjoy such intercourse.
   (Compare 2 Cor. 6:14-18.) "The tabernacle of the Congregation" is
   rendered in the Revised Version, "the tent of meeting," i. e., the
   place where the Lord met Moses and others who in penitence and faith
   gathered with him there.

   In what now familiar way did the Lord manifest His presence with Moses
   (9)? What effect had this upon the people (10)? How is the Lord's
   loving kindness towards Moses expressed in v. II? Compared with v. 20
   it will be seen that Moses did not behold the divine essence, but only
   such a vision of God's face as it is possible for men to look upon and
   live.

   2. Moses' Interview with God, 33:12-23.

   What information does he seek (12)? And what argument does he use to
   obtain it ? Observe further that he also wants to know God's "way," i.
   e.. His way of salvation and leading for the people (13). Moreover, he
   would know God Himself better, to the end that he might obtain more
   grace. Increasing grace always accompanies increasing knowledge of God
   (2 Peter 1:2). Observe the holy boldness with which he declines to
   relieve the Lord of the responsibility for the people He has chosen. He
   begs Him to consider that they are still His, and that He can not thus
   break His covenant. What startling faith! And how God honors it! "The
   Angel" that shall go with them is the Angel of His presence (Is. 63:9).

   And what greater boon does Moses ask (18)? Murphy has an excellent
   paragraph on this verse, quoted here in full:

   "To show mercy and yet do justly, to magnify grace and holiness at the
   same time, to bestow a perpetuity of blessing on a people wavering now
   and again into disobedience, was a problem that seemed to task the
   highest intelligence, to transcend the ordinary ways of providence, and
   call into exercise some inner and higher reaches of the eternal mind.
   Moved by a wish to do his duty with intelligence, Moses desires some
   insight into this mystery. Feeling that it touches the very center of
   the divine nature, involves the sublimest manifestations of His glory,
   his last and grandest petition is: 'Show me now Thy glory.'"

   And from this point of view what is God's glory (10)? An expansion of
   this thought is found in the next chapter. What necessary limitation
   must be laid upon Moses in the answer to his request (20)? The "face"
   of God means doubtless His essential self, the sight of which would be
   irresistible or insupportable to a finite being tainted with guilt as
   man is. But His "back" is His averted self, that mediate manifestation
   which a man may see and still live {23).

   3. Moses' Vision of the Glory of God, 34:1-10.

   Moses now returns to the mount (2). What is he to prepare and take with
   him (1)? Who prepared the former tables which Moses broke? (Compare
   31:18.) What prohibition is laid upon him in this instance (3)?

   Mote carefully the proclamation of God's glory in seven
   characteristics, "three pairs referring to His mercy and a single one
   affirming His justice" (6, 7).

   If God "will by no means clear the guilty," how can He at the same time
   forgive "iniquity, transgression and sin" ? Only as the guilt falls on
   a voluntary and accepted substitute. A substitute accepted by God in
   the first instance, and humbly and penitently received by the sinner
   when revealed to him. It is this which gives meaning to all the
   Levitical sacrifices of which we are soon to learn more, and which
   typify the person and work of Him whom God had in mind from all
   eternity as the bearer of human guilt -- His Son, Jesus Christ, our
   Lord.

   How is Moses affected by what he sees and hears (8)? In what terms does
   he repeat his intercession for the people (9)? How does he identify
   himself with them?

   Is Moses' prayer heard, and the covenant fully renewed (10)? What
   promise accompanies it?

   4. Moses' Face Reflecting the Vision of God, 34:11-35.

   The first part of this section is occupied with the repetition and
   enforcement of certain admonitions; (a) concerning entangling alliances
   with the idolatrous nations of Canaan (11-17), and (b) concerning the
   observance of the feasts (18-26). Note especially the obligation
   imposed on the males in v. 22, and the provision for their comfort in
   the promises in v. 24, last half. Note further the second command to
   Moses to "write" what he had heard (27). This writing doubtless
   includes the record of his present interview with God, but from Deut.
   10:4 we learn that it was God Himself who wrote the ten commandments
   again on the two tables which Moses had prepared.

   How is Moses' appearance described in v. 29? The word "shone" might be
   rendered "sent forth beams" or "horns," which explains why some of the
   old artists show Moses with horns of light. How did this extraordinary
   lustre affect the people (30)? How is the word "till" of v. 33
   translated in the Revised Version? What a conspicuous sign this was of
   Moses' acceptance with God and his authority over the people ! And how
   it must have demonstrated to the latter their utter unpreparedness as
   yet for any higher manifestations of the divine glory than what they
   had already received. Compare 2 Cor. 3:7-18, in the Revised Version.

   THE TABERNACLE ERECTED

   Chapters 35-40

   The closing chapters of this book give in detail the execution of the
   plan of the Tabernacle previously revealed. In the first we are told of
   the offerings the people made for the work, in the next four the
   progress of the building is recorded, and in the last we have the
   completion and acceptance of the whole on God's part.

   Note (1) that an important principle in the gifts was the willingness
   of those who gave (35:5); (2) the women contributed as well as the men
   (35:22); (3) their liberality exceeded the necessity (36:5, 6); (4) the
   sum total was very large (38:24-29), so large, that although the people
   were laborers in Egypt for the most part, yet they must have had much
   wealth. We should remember, too, the contribution the Egyptians made to
   them as they departed.

   When was the Tabernacle to be set up (40:1, 2)? How long was this after
   they had left Egypt (5:17)? in what manner did God set His seal of
   approval on the work (40:34)? What indicates that the cloud now rested
   permanently on the Tabernacle (40:36)?
     __________________________________________________________________

LEVITICUS

   INTRODUCTORY

   1. The Place and Plan of the Book.

   How does the opening verse of this book show its close connection with
   the preceding book? This connection is seen among all the books of the
   Pentateuch, and not only shows that they are placed in proper order for
   an intelligent grasp of their history and meaning, but also that their
   spiritual use and purpose should be apprehended in the same order.

   As Hubert Brooke suggests, they form the A B C of religious knowledge.
   Genesis represents the first lesson of man's lost estate. Exodus
   unfolds the second step of the divine redemption and way of salvation,
   while Leviticus provides the immediate consequence of those two steps
   in the revelation of Gods way of holiness and communion.

   Mr. Brooke truly says that the practical purpose of Leviticus can never
   be tested in any life unless the lessons of Genesis and Exodus have
   been mastered. Only as we learn that we are lost souls do we desire
   redemption, which is the central topic of Exodus following the
   revelation of the former in Genesis. And so is the next step as
   personal as these two. When the lesson of Exodus is experienced, when
   God's redemption is yours, and you thus are His, then only are you
   prepared for the lesson of Leviticus. This book is entirely occupied
   with the condition of those who are redeemed and brought nigh to God,
   and for all others it is a closed book so far as its spiritual
   apprehension is concerned.

   2. The Divine Authority of the Book.

   How does the first verse show the divine authority of what follows? And
   also the human authorship?

   There are twenty-seven chapters in this book, and in these chapters a
   similar formula to that employed in v. 1 recurs fifty-four times. How
   does this strengthen the claim of the Mosaic authorship of Leviticus?
   Indeed, while all Scripture is given by inspiration of God yet this
   portion of it records more of the exact words of God than any other in
   the Bible.

   Of course it is not necessary to affirm that Moses wrote absolutely
   every word as we now have it, and we may admit that different sections
   of the book may have been combined in their present form by inspired
   men at a later day. But nevertheless in a true and proper sense Moses
   is the human author. Observe how Christ corroborates this statement in
   Matt. 8:4, compared with Leviticus 14:3, 10; and John 7:22, 23 compared
   with Leviticus 12:3.

   3. The Meaning of the Book for Israel.

   It is not to be supposed that Israel understood the full significance
   of Leviticus as we understand it. Its meaning or purpose for them was,
   as Kellogg says, "to furnish a code of laws for their well-being,
   physical, moral and spiritual, and to prepare them for the coming of
   the Messiah."

   If Israel was to be a blessing to all the other nations, as we have
   seen, then Israel must for this purpose be separated from all the other
   nations. This separation was to be effected by a revelation to her of
   the holiness of God, and this revelation is made in the system of
   sacrifices which Leviticus reveals, as well as in the precepts of the
   law, and the enactment of penalties.

   The way Israel was to be prepared for the Messiah was by suggesting to
   her the thought of redemptive mercy to be revealed, which was suggested
   by the conviction that the blood of bulls and goats never could remove
   sin (Heb. 10:4). In the interpretation of this book we are always to
   distinguish between its historical intention for Israel and its typical
   meaning for us.

   4. The Meaning of the Book for Us.

   This book is of great value to Christians, containing five distinct
   revelations of the first importance, Kellogg defines them: (a) the
   character of God; (b) the fundamental conditions of true religion; (c)
   the principles that should guide human legislators; (d) the work of
   Christ; (e) the prophecies in types of things to come in the kingdom of
   Christ.

   It reveals the character of God by showing us His holiness, His
   intolerance of sin, and His mercy to the penitent.

   It teaches us the fundamental truths of true religion by showing the
   need of a mediator with a propitiatory sacrifice for (Heb. 9:22).

   It reveals the right principles of human legislation concerning civil
   government and religion, capital and labor, landholding, the social
   evil and cognate matters.

   It reveals the work of Christ by exhibiting the way of salvation
   through atonement, and showing the present and future position of the
   believer in His name, in this book Christ is the offerer of sacrifice,
   He is the offering, and He the priest or mediator who presents the
   offering. Thus, as Jukes affirms, Leviticus reveals the work of Christ
   differently from any other Old Testament book.

   How wonderful as we thus think of Christ in this threefold way As the
   offerer He is the one who became man to meet God's requirements. As the
   offering He is the victim in His character and work, by which atonement
   was made for man. As the priest He is the officially appointed
   intercessor who brings man to God.

   Finally, this book reveals things to come in the kingdom of Christ by
   showing us in the Day of Atonement (c. 16) a type of the entering into
   the heavens of our great High Priest. In the feast of trumpets we have
   His coming again and the ingathering of the full harvest of redemption.
   In the Sabbatic and Jubilee years we have foreshadowed the millennial
   blessing which follows His second coming.

   5. The Outline of the Book.

   Leviticus might be called the book of the laws -- not law, but laws.
   The whole of the Pentateuch (the first five books of the Bible) is
   called "The Book of the Law." But Leviticus is distinctly the book of
   the laws, in that it gives laws in detail for the government of the
   priests in the regulation of the morals and worship of the people.

   With this thought in mind, the following is a suggested outline of the
   book:

   1. The law of the offerings, 1 to 7.

   2. The law of the priests, 8 to 10.

   3. The law of purity, 11 to 15.

   4. The law of the Day of Atonement, 16.

   5. The law of holiness, 17 to 22.

   6. The law of the feasts, 23.

   7. The law of the Sabbatic year and the Jubilee, 25. -- Synthetic Bible
   Studies.

   Questions.

   1. State the spiritual and evangelical relations of the first three
   books of the Bible.

   2. To what class of persons does the spiritual teaching of Leviticus
   apply?

   3. What distinction has this book with reference to the doctrine of
   inspiration?

   4. What was its historical application to Israel?

   5. How was God's holiness impressed on the nation?

   6. How was she prepared for the coming of the Messiah?

   7. What distinctive value has this book for Christians?

   8. How does it reveal Christ?

   9. How does it reveal things to come?

   10. Can you name the seven great "laws" it contains.

   THE BURNT OFFERING

   Chapter 1

   There are five offerings in cc. 1 to 7, and these five include all the
   offerings and sacrifices referred to in the history of Israel. It will
   simplify matters if we remember this. Sometimes offerings are presented
   for the priest himself, sometimes for the nation, a ruler of the
   nation, or a common individual; sometimes the offering is a bullock,
   sometimes a sheep, a goat, a turtle dove, or a pigeon; but in any case,
   it is always one of these five offerings. In c. 7, for example,
   reference is made to offerings for vows, thanksgiving offerings and
   voluntary offerings, but these are all simply different aspects of one
   of the five, namely, the trespass offering.

   It should not be supposed, that these offerings in themselves satisfied
   God (Heb. 10:4), but their importance lay in what they symbolized,
   namely, the person and work of the Lord Jesus Christ.

   These five offerings, again, may be divided into three kinds. The first
   two (that is, the burnt and the meal offerings) are forms of dedication
   by which the surrender of the offerer to God's perfect service is
   expressed. The third (the peace offering) is really an offering of
   thanksgiving by which the offerer expresses his praise to God and
   communion with Him. The last two (the sin and the trespass offerings)
   are those of expiation, and deal with the removal of sin and pardon of
   its guilt. The order in which these five are revealed here is not that
   in which Israel presented them, but in their actual use the sin and
   trespass offerings came first. Then in the consciousness that sin was
   put away and pardon secured through those offerings the burnt and meal
   offerings followed, by which their desire to devote themselves to God
   wholly for His service was expressed. Lastly, in the peace of a
   cleansed conscience and a surrendered life the peace offering was
   presented, expressing fellowship and communion with God. See 2 Chron.
   29:21-31 for an illustration of the order in which the offerings were
   presented. (Hubert Brooke.)

   The Burnt Offering.

   Which offering is first referred to (3)? It is probably called the
   burnt offering from a Hebrew word which means "that which ascends." It
   is distinguished from the other offerings, in that the whole of it was
   consumed upon the altar, and none of it was eaten by either the offerer
   or the priest. The typical significance of this, to quote Kellogg, is
   as follows: (a) it acknowledged God's claim for the perfect services
   and entire devotedness of the offerer; (b) it acknowledged that the
   offerer was destitute of that service and devotedness, and hence
   presented a substitute in his stead; (c) it acknowledged that the
   absence of this service and devotedness involved guilt and deserved
   death, hence the slaying of the substitute; (d) it acknowledged that
   because no such service and devotedness was found in the offerer he
   needed an offering to be wholly accepted in his place as a sweet savor
   to God.

   How is the acknowledgment of (d) expressed in the first specification
   of the burnt offering (3)? What class of victim is referred to here? Of
   what sex and quality must it be? We thus see that God claims the best
   as to strength, energy and perfectness (compare Mal. 1:8, 13). Christ
   is the only and absolutely perfect One.

   What other kinds of victims might be used in the burnt offerings (10,
   14}? It is difficult to say why these varieties were permitted. Some
   think they represent consideration for the poor, who might be unable to
   present those more costly; others say they represent different aspects
   of Christ, as (for example) service in the case of the bullock,
   submission in the case of the lamb, mourning innocence in the case of
   the dove: while others that they represent different degrees of faith
   or apprehension of Christ on the part of believers, some being more
   feeble than others in their apprehension of Christ, having only a
   partial recognition of what He has done or what He is to them.

   The Ritual of the Burnt Offering.

   Seven features constitute the ritual of the burnt offering, as follows:

   The presentation, v. 3.

   The laying on of hands, v. 4.

   The slaying of the victim, v. 5.

   The sprinkling of the blood, v. 5.

   The separating of the pieces, v. 6.

   The washing of the pieces, v. 9.

   The burning of the whole, v. 9.

   Concerning the presentation, who was obliged to make it (2)? That the
   offerer should do this was doubtless to represent his individual
   confession of his need, his individual acceptance of God's way of
   salvation, and his individual recognition of the excellency of his
   offering. The Revised Version adds a thought to v. 3 namely, that the
   offerer is to present his offering in order that he may be accepted. In
   other words, it is not enough for a man to praise God, or even seek to
   serve Him, until he first is accepted before God, and for this
   acceptance of himself he requires a propitiatory offering. God is thus
   satisfied by the perfectness in the offering. In the sin offering the
   atonement is for sin and not acceptance, but here in the burnt offering
   the worshiper comes without sin. That, therefore, which he offers is
   received as a sweet savor by the Lord (Eph. 5:2), and on the ground of
   it the service of the offerer is received. Note, where the offering was
   to be presented, namely, at the door of the Tabernacle. This not only
   to guard against idolatry in groves, or to compel men to worship as God
   appointed, but to provide for publicity. See Matt. 10:32; Ro. 10:9, 10.

   The laying on of hands (4) is instructive. The act implied the
   identification of the offerer with the offering not only, but also the
   transfer of his obligation of guilt to it as his substitute. What
   expression in this verse proves that the offering was in his stead?
   Compare Lev. 16:21; Numbers 8-11, R. V.; 1 Peter 1:24.

   Who should kill the victim, the offerer or the priest (5)? The fact
   that the offerer did this signifies each individual's responsibility
   for his own sin.

   But who sprinkled the blood? That the priest should do this shows us
   Jesus presenting our offering of Himself before God.

   The flaying and cutting were done by the offerer (6). Some would say
   that this was to render the parts more convenient for burning, but
   others that it signifies a minute appreciation on the part of the
   offerer of the excellency of his offering. The application of this to
   the believer on Christ is clear.

   The burning of the whole is important, since it signifies the ascending
   of the offering in consecration to God, and His acceptance of it
   (9:24). As He taught the Israelites that complete consecration to God
   is essential to right worship, so He teaches us that Christ represented
   us in perfect consecration and surrender (John 17:19; Ro. 5:19; Heb.
   10:5-10). He died that we might not die, but it does not follow that
   since He was consecrated for us we need not be consecrated. This will
   be referred to later, but just now examine Ro. 12:1.

   Questions.

   1. How many offerings are included in "the Law of the Offerings"?

   2. What do they symbolize?

   3. Name them, and describe their meaning.

   4. In what order did Israel present them?

   5. What spiritual acknowledgments were involved in the burnt offering?

   6. Name the seven features of its ritual.

   7. State the spiritual significance of the presentation.

   8. Do the same for the laying on of hands.

   9. Who killed the victim, and what did it signify?

   10 What was signified by the burning?

   THE MEAL AND PEACE OFFERINGS

   Chapters 2-3

   The Meal Offering, c. 2.

   We call the second offering the "meal" instead of the meat offering,
   following the Revised Version. The burnt and meal offerings really
   belong together. They are both offerings of consecration, and when the
   one was presented the other followed as a kind of appendage (see Lev.
   23:12, 13, 18; Num. 28:7-15; Judges 13:19; Ezra 7:17; etc.)

   We have seen that the burnt offering was entirely consumed upon the
   altar as expressive of the entire consecration of the one who offered
   it, and God's acceptance of it as a sweet savor to Him. In this it
   typifies Christ who is the only perfect life of consecration, and who
   has been accepted by God on behalf of all who put their faith in Him.
   This aspect of the sacrifice of Christ is indicated in Eph. 5:2 and
   John 6:38.

   The meal offering, composed mainly of fine flour, is generally taken to
   represent a consecrated life in its use for mankind, since flour is the
   universal food of man. It is a fact that God habitually uses for His
   service among men the lives and powers of those who are truly dedicated
   to Him, and this seems expressed in the fact that the burnt offering
   always had the meal offering attached to it. Our Lord's life represents
   this consecration in such places as Matt. 10:28 and Acts 10:38, and is
   a consecration to God for the service of mankind, which He offered and
   God accepted on behalf of all who put their faith in Him.

   Varieties in the Offering.

   It will be seen that there are certain varieties of the meal offering.
   The first is referred to in vv. 1-3, whose substance was fine flour,
   oil and frankincense. What parts and portion of the offering was to be
   taken out by the offerer to be presented unto the Lord (2)? To whom did
   the remainder belong for their use (3)?

   The second is referred to in vv. 4-10, and contains the same substance
   except the frankincense, the distinction being that the offering is
   baked in the oven, or in a pan, and the priest rather than the offerer
   removes the Lord's portion.

   The third is alluded to in vv. 14-16, and consists of what substance?
   How was it to be prepared? What is included in this class which was
   omitted from the second class?

   In vv. 11-13 reference is made to articles that were prohibited from
   the meal offering, and one was particularly prescribed. Name those
   prohibited, and that prescribed? Leaven and honey represent decay and
   corruption, the first-named being the type of evil recognized as such,
   and the second, evil that is unrecognized because it has earthy
   sweetness in it. Both kinds of evil were absent in Jesus Christ, and
   the perfection of the type necessitates their absence in it. As to
   salt, it is the symbol of incorruption (Matt. 5:13; Mark 9:50).

   Taking the offering as a whole, it may be said to symbolize His
   fulfillment on our behalf of the second table of the law, just as the
   burnt offering symbolizes His fulfillment on our behalf of the first
   table. Of course, in fulfilling the first He fulfilled the second, but
   in the burnt offering the one thought predominates and in the meal
   offering the other thought. To quote Moorehead: "In the burnt offering
   Christ is, representatively, man satisfying God and giving Him what
   belongs to Him, while in the meal offering He is, representatively, man
   satisfying man and giving him what belongs to him as an offering to the
   Lord. The burnt offering represents His life Godward, and the meal
   offering His life manward."

   2. The Peace Offering, c. 3.

   The data for the law of the peace offering are found by comparing c. 3
   with the following passages: 7:11-34; 19:5-8; 22:21-25. We put them all
   together, in this lesson that the student may obtain a complete view of
   the whole. There are certain features of this offering which differ
   from the others:

   (1) The objects offered. The peace offering might be a female (1), the
   explanation for which may be that the effects of the atonement are
   contemplated rather than the act itself. Furthermore, no turtle dove or
   pigeon was permitted, the explanation for which may be that as the
   offering was connected with a sacrificial meal of which several
   partook, a small bird would be insufficient.

   (2) The Lord's portion consisted chiefly of the fat (3-5), the richest
   portion, symbolizing that the best belongs to Him. Kellogg calls
   attention to the fact that the eating of the fat of all animals was not
   prohibited, but only those used in sacrifice, and in these only when
   they were being so used. The prohibition of the eating of blood,
   however, applied to all animals and always (17:10-12). The peace
   offering was to be consumed upon the burn offering (5), thus
   symbolizing that the peace it typified was grounded upon the fact of
   atonement and acceptance on the part of the offerer. The peace offering
   usually followed the meal offering (see the details in the dedication
   of Aaron, c. 8, and those of the Day of Atonement, c. 16).

   (3) By turning to 7:28-34 it will be seen that certain parts of the
   peace offering belonged to the priests. The waving of these parts back
   and forth, and the heaving of them up and down, were a token of their
   dedication to God first, and their being received back again from Him
   by the priests.

   By comparison of 7:15, 22:29-30 and parallel places, it will be seen
   that the offerer himself had for his portion all that remained. It also
   will be seen that he was at liberty to invite his friends to the feast,
   which must always be eaten at the sanctuary and which was an occasion
   of joy (Deut. 12:4-7, 17, 18). The only condition for partaking of the
   feast was that of ceremonial cleanness (7:20, 21).

   The Significance of the Offering.

   The meaning of "peace" in this case includes not only tranquility of
   mind based on a cessation of hostilities (that is, a mere negative
   peace), but positive joy and prosperity. Quoting Moorehead, three
   propositions define it: "Peace with God, Ro. 5:1; the peace of God,
   Phil. 4:7; and peace from God, 1 Cor. 1:3, conceived of as flowing into
   our hearts."

   The feast, therefore, is an expression of friendship and fellowship
   growing out of the fact that the breach between man and God has been
   healed by His grace. The Israelite, who represents the Christian saint,
   is seen to be enjoying a feast with God, where God Himself is the host
   rather than the offerer. God first accepts the victim in expiation of
   sin and then gives it back for the worshiper to feast upon with
   Himself. Moreover, the feast is held in God's house, not in that of the
   offerer, emphasizing the fact that God is the host. Of course Christ is
   the offering represented here, whose blood is shed for our guilt and to
   bring us into reconciled relation with God, and who Himself then
   becomes the meat by which we who are reconciled are thereafter
   sustained (John 6:51-58).

   Keep in mind that this is a joint repast in which all three partake.
   God, the priest and the offerer. It therefore represents our fellowship
   with the Father, and with His Son Jesus Christ (1 John 1:3). Remember
   also that cleanness is the condition (1 John 1:9). An Israelite might
   remain such and be unclean, but he could hold no feast and enjoy no
   communion with God while in that condition. The application to
   Christians is very plain (1 Peter 1:13-16).

   Questions.

   1. By what name is the first of these offerings known in the King James
   Version?

   2. Give the distinction between the burnt and meal offering as to the
   scope of consecration.

   3. What do honey and leaven symbolize?

   4. Where was the peace offering consumed, and why?

   5. What did the waving and heaving mean?

   6. What is the meaning of peace in this case?

   7. What is the idea of the peace offering?

   8. Can you quote 1 John 1:3?

   SIN AND TRESPASS OFFERINGS

   Chapters 4-7

   1. The Sin Offering.

   The data for the sin offering will be found in 4:1-35, 5:1-13 and
   6:24-30.

   1. As to the name of this offering, it will be seen that "sin" is
   mentioned here for the first time in connection with the law of the
   offerings. The idea of sin is included in the others, but it was not
   the predominating idea as it is here. There was atonement for sin in
   the other offerings, but rather for sin in mans nature than the actual
   transgression in his life, while here the latter is brought into view.
   In Hebrew the same word applies for "sin" and "sin offering" as though
   the two were completely identified, or as though the offering were so
   charged with sin as to itself become sin. In this connection read Ro.
   8:3,2 Cor. 5:21 and Gal. 3:14 to see how this was also true in our
   substitute, Jesus Christ. Another matter of interest is that while the
   preceding offerings were all known more or less in other nations and
   before the time of Moses, this offering is entirely new and original
   with Israel. This shows that Israel enters on a new stage of existence
   in the sense that as a nation she has a truer conception of sin and the
   need of expiation than the other nations that received no special
   revelation from God.

   For evidence that the other offerings existed before Moses and were not
   confined to Israel compare Gen. 31:54; Ex. 18:12; 32:6, 1 Cor. 10:6,
   etc. Kellogg, remarks that this should strengthen our faith as showing
   man's natural sense of spiritual need and desire for fellowship with
   God, and also as pointing back to an original revelation from God to
   man on the whole subject. God thus seems to have based the Mosaic
   ordinances upon His earlier revelations to man, correcting them where
   they had been corrupted, and adding to them where it was necessary to
   the progress of revealed truth.

   2. Passing from the name of this offering to its nature, what kind of
   sin is referred to in 4:2? This shows that while ignorance might
   palliate it could not remove the guilt of sin; sin is sinful whether it
   be recognized by the sinner or not, and requires atonement just the
   same. Compare Ps. 19:12; 1 Cor. 4:4, R. V.

   3. Observe the different sections of this law. What class of persons
   are first referred to (3-12)? After the priests, who are mentioned
   (13-21)? The congregation of Israel means the nation. What is the third
   class specified (22-26)? The fourth class (4:27 to 5:13)? In c. 5
   prescriptions were made for the common people (a) as to the nature of
   the offense (1-5) and (b) as to the nature of the offerings (6-13). In
   regard to these the higher the rank of the offerer the more costly must
   be his offering, expressing that guilt is proportionate to privilege
   (compare 1 Kings 11:9; James 3:1). Note the responsibility for sin on
   the part of whole communities (compare here Ps. 2; Rev. 2 and 3). It is
   just as important to note also that no one can be overlooked, however
   obscure. God demands from and provides an offering for the poorest and
   the neediest (5:11-13).

   4. In this offering, where was the victim to be burned (12-21)? To make
   the burning without the camp more distinct from that of the altar,
   another Hebrew word is used (compare in this case Heb. 13:10-13). The
   burning on the altar symbolizes, the full surrender to and the
   acceptance by God of the offerer, while the burning without the camp
   symbolizes the sacrifice for the sin of the world on the part of Him
   who was "despised and rejected of men."

   The Trespass Offering.

   1. The facts associated with the trespass offering are found in 5:14 to
   6:7. and 7:1-10. It is hard to distinguish between the sin and trespass
   offerings because they almost necessarily overlap. "Trespass" means an
   invasion of the rights of others (compare Josh. 7:1; 2 Chron.
   28:20-22), and there are those who distinguish between the two
   offerings by saying that the sin offering represents sin as a
   principle, and the trespass offering sin as an act. Penalty is
   prominent in the first, and reparation or restitution in the second.
   Both find their fulfillment in Christ, who not only bore the penalty of
   but redressed every claim which God had upon the sinner.

   The trespass offering had reference only to the sin of an individual
   and not the nation, as only an individual perhaps could make
   reparation. The victim in this case was the same for the poor as for
   the rich, a ram of the flock, indicating possibly that the obligation
   to repair the wrong cannot be modified to suit the condition of the
   offerer. Furthermore, notice that anything unjustly taken must not only
   be restored but a fifth must be added. In other words, no advantage
   must be gained by the trespass. Thus if the sin offering called for
   faith the trespass offering called for repentance. It is blessed to
   know that in our Lord Jesus Christ both God and man received back more
   than they lost.

   2. There appear to be two distinct sections of this law of trespass
   offering. The first refers to trespass in the holy things of the Lord
   (5:14-19), and the second to trespass on the rights of man (6:1-7). By
   the "holy things of the Lord" are meant -- the eating unwittingly of
   the flesh of the firstling of one's cattle, or using one's tithe or any
   part of it for himself (compare Mal. 3:8, 10). The trespass on the
   rights of man included embezzlement, robbery, fraud, falsehood, etc.
   The order of proceeding in the latter instance was: (a) to confess the
   wrong, (b) to make restitution and add one fifth, (c) to bring the
   guilt offering to God.

   How comforting to know that Christ is the great antitype of all these
   offerings so far as we are concerned, that is, we who have believed on
   Him as our Saviour and confessed Him as our Lord!

   He is our burnt and meal offering in the sense that He is our
   righteousness. In Him we are fully surrendered to and accepted by God.
   He is our peace offering in the sense that in Him our life is in
   perfect fellowship with God. He is our sin offering, the One who has
   fully borne our sin, expiating our guilt. Finally, He is our trespass
   offering, rendering perfect satisfaction unto God and making reparation
   for all our offences against Him in the completest and to the fullest
   extent.

   Questions.

   1. What view of sin is emphasized in the sin offering?

   2. What peculiarity lies in the Hebrew word in this case?

   3. What peculiarity is found in the history of the offering itself?

   4. Is sin which is unrecognized sinful?

   5. What is symbolized by "burning without the camp"?

   6. Define the word "trespass."

   7. Distinguish the sin and trespass offering.

   8. For what spiritual exercise did the trespass offering especially
   call?

   9. Describe how Christ is represented by these offerings.

   10. Have you received Him as your substitute Saviour?

   THE OTHER SIDE OF THE OFFERINGS

   Chapters 4-7

   In the lessons on the offerings we have seen what Christ is to us and
   what He has done for us as symbolized in them, but before we pass from
   the subject it might be well to touch on the response which the work of
   Christ should awaken in our hearts.

   In Brooke's Studies in Leviticus he quotes the following collect from
   the liturgy of the Church of England:

   "Almighty God, who hast given Thine only Son to be unto us both a
   sacrifice for sin and also an example of godly life, give us grace that
   we may always most thankfully receive that His inestimable benefit, and
   also daily endeavor ourselves to follow the blessed steps of His most
   holy life."

   This expresses the two ways in which the lessons from the offerings
   should be applied by Christians.

   We need to "always most thankfully receive His inestimable benefit." In
   other words, we must by faith accept Christ as our five-fold offering,
   on the basis of which alone we are saved and have our standing before
   God. Morning by morning as we awaken let it be with the consciousness
   that in the burnt offering and meat offering of Christ we are accepted
   and blessed of God, that in His peace offering we have the right to
   commune with Him, that through His sin and trespass offering every
   defect is remedied and every fault will find pardon.

   But then let us remember that we should "also daily endeavor ourselves
   to follow the blessed steps of His most holy life." After we have
   accepted Him and represented Him to God as our sacrifice by faith, then
   we can follow His example. But we are not in a position to do this
   before. If He is our example, as the author we are quoting says, then
   we may expect to find Him so in relation to each form of offering or
   sacrifice in which He has been revealed to us.

   He is our burnt offering, a perfect dedication to God, but are we not
   also bidden in Him to present our bodies a living sacrifice, holy,
   acceptable unto God, which is our reasonable service (Ro. 12:1)? He is
   our meal offering, presented to God for the service of man, but we too
   are "every one of us to please his neighbor for his good to
   edification" (Ro. 15:2). He is our peace offering, making and
   maintaining peace between God and us, but we are to be peacemakers, not
   in the sense in which He alone is our peacemaker but in that human
   sense in which we can bring man and man together and so be called "the
   children of God." He is our sin and trespass offering, and in this too
   we may follow His example. It is impossible that we should make
   atonement for sin as He did, but there is a sense in which we may "bear
   one another's burdens and so fulfill the law of Christ" (Gal. 6:2).

   In other words, our lives are to reflect what we have received and are
   receiving from Christ, a surrendered will, a loving walk, a life of
   blessing, a heart of compassion, a spirit of patience. So, "with open
   face beholding as in a glass the glory of the Lord, we are changed into
   the same image from glory to glory as by the Spirit of the Lord" (2
   Cor. 3:18).

   STRANGE FIRE AND ITS CONSEQUENCES

   Chapters 8-9

   In an earlier lesson the present chapters were outlined as "The Law of
   the Priests," though we might better have said, "The Law of the
   Consecration of the Priests." And yet in either case the phrase must be
   used in an accommodated sense, since we are not here dealing with the
   law itself but with the initial execution of the law in the
   consecration of Aaron and his sons. The law itself was considered in
   the Book of Exodus, for which reason we may pass over cc. 8 and 9 of
   the present lesson, the contents of which were sufficiently dealt with
   at that time.

   The Aaronic Line.

   Before taking up c. 10, however, let us consider the history of the
   priesthood which begins here.

   The priesthood was originally appointed to remain in Aaron's family
   through all generations, and no other could intrude into that office.
   Aaron was succeeded by Eleazar, his elder surviving son after the death
   of Nadab and Abihu, and the priesthood continued in his family through
   seven generations, until the time of Eli, named in the earlier chapters
   of First Samuel.

   Because of the wickedness of Eli's sons the priesthood was removed from
   that branch of the family and given to the descendants of Ithamar,
   Aaron's other son; but in the time of Solomon it returned again to the
   line of Eleazar (1 Kings 2:27), in whose line it continued until the
   Babylonian captivity.

   After the return of the Jews from captivity Joshua, the first high
   priest, was of the same family, but subsequent to this time the
   appointment became uncertain and irregular, and after Israel became a
   Roman province no regard was paid to this part of the original
   institution. As a matter of fact, the office became so desecrated in
   the corruption of later times, that it was often sold to the highest
   bidder, whether of the family of Aaron or not. This was the case a long
   while before the coming of Christ (Bush).

   What part the Aaronic line will play on the future return of the Jews
   to their land and their form of worship we cannot say, but there is
   reason to believe that in the millennial age God may restore it for the
   execution of His purposes through Israel in that dispensation.

   1. The Evil Conduct of Aaron's Sons, 10:1-7.

   Resuming here the text of the lesson, what was it that Nadab and Abihu
   did (1)? What was the immediate consequence (2)? How did Moses explain
   this awful circumstance (3)? and what was its effect on Aaron? What
   prohibition of mourning was laid on him and his remaining sons (6)? and
   what further command, and why (7)?

   "To understand the death of Aaron's sons, notice the last verse of c.
   9, which speaks of the sacrifice on the brazen altar in the outer court
   and holy fire from the Lord consuming it. It was this fire that
   consumed the sacrifice, which should have been employed in the censers
   to burn the incense before the Lord. Nadab and Abihu neglected this,
   and offered strange fire, and were instantly slain."

   This looks like a terrible punishment for a slight offence. But the
   offence was not slight. It was a flagrant disobedience of a plain
   command, several commands, in short. Not only did they disobey in the
   matter of the fire (16:12), but also in performing an office which
   belonged only to the high priest, for, as some think, they went into
   the holy of holies. And two went in where only one was permitted.
   Furthermore, the offence was committed at a critical moment in the
   history of the people, at the beginning of their covenant relationship
   with God. It suggests a somewhat similar occurrence in the opening era
   of the Church, Acts 5:1, 3. In both cases a signal manifestation of the
   divine displeasure was necessary for the sake of impressing the lesson
   upon the whole nation in the one case and the whole Church in the
   other.

   It need not be supposed that this punishment involved the eternal loss
   of the souls of these men. That question need not be raised in this
   connection. It was a case of God's judging in the midst of His people,
   not a case of His actings among "them that are without." It affords a
   solemn warning, however, to any within the visible church who would
   depart in worship from the plain revelation of God, and to any without
   who would seek to approach Him in some other way than the prescribed
   one (John 14:6: Acts 4:12).

   2. The Prohibition of Strong Drink, 10:8-11.

   From what are the priests to be prohibited, and when (10, 11)? To quote
   Kellogg: "It is natural to infer from this that the offence of Aaron's
   sons was occasioned by strong drink such as made it possible for
   impulse to get the better of judgment, from which we learn that it is
   not enough for the Christian to abstain from what is in its own nature
   sinful, but also from that which may heedlessly become an occasion of
   sin."

   3. The Renewed Warning, 10:12-20.

   The substance of these verses has been considered in a previous lesson,
   but in view of the occurrence of this day Moses is moved to renew the
   charge to Aaron and his sons upon the matter.

   The explanation of the closing verses seems to be like this: On this
   day of special privilege when they had performed their priestly duties
   for the first time, God's name had been profaned by the will-worship of
   Nadab and Abihu, and the wrath of God had broken out against them and
   their father's house. Could it then be the will of God that a house in
   which such guilt was found should yet partake of the holy things in the
   sanctuary? In other words, Aaron and his remaining sons had been so
   awakened in their consciences as to the holiness of God and their own
   inborn evil that they associated themselves with Nadab and Abihu as
   under the displeasure of God. Thus, although they had disobeyed the law
   in the letter (16-18) yet their offence grew out of a misunderstanding
   and showed how deeply they had been moved by the judgment that had
   fallen upon them (Kellogg). What was the result of their explanation
   upon the spirit of Moses (20)?

   Questions.

   1. Can you rehearse the history of the priesthood to the time of the
   captivity?

   2. What do you know about it subsequent thereto?

   3. What do you understand by the "strange fire"?

   4. What was the real nature of the offence of Aaron's sons?

   5. What may have been the extent of their punishment

   6. What lessons does it teach us?

   7. How do Aaron and his remaining family express a sense of their own
   responsibility for the offence of Nadab and Abihu?

   WHAT TO EAT AND WHAT NOT TO EAT

   Chapter 11

   We begin at this chapter the consideration of that section of the book
   previously designated as "The Law of the Clean and Unclean."

   Let us gather the facts by a series of questions, and then seek to
   learn what they mean. Read the verses and answer the questions, for
   that is the only way to approach a mastery of the lesson.

   How is "beasts" translated in the R. V.? What creatures might Israel
   eat (3)? What exceptions were made (4-7)? How far did the prohibition
   extend (8)?

   Of sea creatures what might be eaten (9)? How should others of them be
   regarded (12)? What were abominations among the fowls (13-20)? What
   might they eat of the fowls (21-22)?

   And of the creeping creatures what were unclean (29-31)? How far did
   the uncleanness extend (32-35)? What exception in the case (36-37)?
   What reason is given for these prohibitions (44-45)?

   Explanation and Application.

   The laws are to be explained:

   (1) On hygienic grounds, and as making for the physical well-being of
   the people. As a matter of fact, the Hebrews have always been marked by
   an immunity from sickness and especially infectious diseases as
   compared with other races.

   This does not mean, however, that all nations are still subject to
   these laws. They were given to a people few in number, living in a
   small country, and under certain climatic conditions. But what is
   unwholesome as food in one part of the world may be the opposite in
   another, and hence when the Jewish religion is merged in the Christian,
   and become world-wide these laws are abrogated (Acts 10:9-15; Gal.
   4:1-3; Col. 2:20-22). The individual Christian is now left at liberty
   to exercise an enlightened judgment, under the law of love to Christ.

   (2) On spiritual grounds, and as engraving on the mind an idea of
   holiness. From this point of view they are to be looked upon as the
   earlier laws touching the offerings and the priests. Each particular is
   so ordered as to reflect purity on all the rest, converging ray upon
   ray to bring out the great conception of what holiness is. Without
   these laws the world does not know the nature of holiness. It is an
   abstract quality which has no place in the thought of man except as
   derived from the outward separations, washings and consecrations of the
   Mosaic ritual. Holiness is not "wholeness" nor "entireness" merely, but
   an idea which signifies separation, higher qualities than common,
   devotion to sacred purposes, and then ultimately, wholeness in the
   sense of the moral purity -- Joseph A. Seiss, in Holy Types.

   This holiness has to do with the body, and through it with the soul.
   There is, therefore, no religion in neglecting the body and ignoring
   the requirements for its health. To do this is to sin and to come short
   of the law of holiness (1 Cor. 6:20, R. V.; 10:31).

   (3) On dispensational grounds, and as preparing the nation for its
   share in the redemptive work of the earth. To execute its mission
   Israel must be kept distinct from other nations, "fenced in and
   barricaded against inroads of idolatry," which was accomplished by this
   system of religious dietetics. The difference between them was thus
   ever-present to their minds, touching at almost every point of every
   day life. Other peoples, like the Mohammedans have had such
   distinctions more or less, and it is stated that wherever they have
   been rigidly enforced as a part of a religious system the people in
   question have never changed their religion. We all know how it has been
   a wall of exclusion to the orthodox Jews which has withstood all the
   changes of these more than three millenniums.

   (4) On symbolic grounds the flesh of certain animals being forbidden
   because typifying by their character certain sins and vices, while
   others, permitted as food, typified certain moral virtues. Hence the
   law was a "perpetual acted allegory" reminding Israel to abstain from
   these sins in the one case, and to practise those virtues in the other.

   "The beastliness of sin" is a common expression, and God has suggested
   it in these laws. The sinner -- and we are all sinners by nature -- is
   unclean, filthy, disagreeable, noxious, brutish. Thank God, that
   although our uncleanness is intense, mercy holds out to us, and
   indicates typically in this chapter, a means of complete and eternal
   deliverance!

   Questions.

   1. Name four grounds on which the laws in this chapter may be
   explained.

   2. Are these laws binding on us all in the same sense?

   3. How have they worked out practically in the history of the Hebrews?

   4. What is Scriptural holiness?

   5. Quote 1 Corinthians 6:20 in the Revised Version.

   SIN AT THE FOUNTAIN HEAD

   Chapter 12

   What period of uncleanness followed the birth of a male(2)? What
   transaction in his life took place on the 8th day (3)? How long was the
   period of the mother's purification (4)? What difference was there as
   to these two periods in the case of a female child (5)? What was
   required of the mother at the close of this period (6)? The reason for
   it (7)? How does v. 8, compare with Luke 2:24, point to the lowly
   condition of the mother of Jesus as well as to her own need of a
   Saviour?

   Explanation and Application.

   The great principles underlying this chapter will come before us more
   definitely in chapter 15. The theme is the same there as here, and
   indeed throughout the whole section, viz: sin and its only remedy.
   Here, however, we have sin at its source, humanly speaking. Sin is not
   merely something which man takes on outside of himself, but something
   which is a part of him. It belongs not to his nature as God made him,
   but to his nature as fallen and transmitted from Adam. Sin is here seen
   mingling with the transmission of life and tainting the vital forces as
   they descend from parent to child, and from generation to generation
   (Ps. 57:5). It is this awful truth that forms the subject of this
   chapter.

   The mere physical uncleanness spoken of is not the real thing, but only
   ceremonial and typical. In other words, the regulations laid down are
   not for women everywhere and always, but as a figure for the time then
   present.

   They impose a special legal disability on the woman because she was
   first in the transgression of Eden (1 Tim. 2:24), and show us that we
   all have come of sinful mothers and hence are ourselves sinful (Job
   14:4). "In the birth of a child," says Kellogg, "the original curse
   against the woman is regarded by the law as reaching its fullest
   expression, for now by means of those powers given her for good and
   blessing she can bring into the world only the child of sin."

   The Meaning of Circumcision.

   We have learned that circumcision was not original with the Hebrews,
   being practiced by other nations in warm climates for hygienic reasons;
   but God adopted and constituted it in Abraham "a symbol of an analagous
   spiritual fact, viz: the purification of sin at its fountain-head, the
   cleansing of the evil nature with which we all are born." Read Col.
   2:10, 11, the meaning of which is that there is no need of ritual
   circumcision for believers on Christ as they have the spiritual
   substance of it in Christ. Their circumcision is not made with hands,
   but is a spiritual thing, a real thing. It is "the putting off of the
   body of the flesh," the realization of that which the other symbolized.
   Not of the putting off of a part, but the nature itself. It took place
   when we are "buried with Him in the baptism," i. e., the baptism of the
   Holy Ghost, by which we were made one with Him so thoroughly that in
   God's sight we lay in the same grave, having died on Calvary in Him.

   The Eighth Day.

   The "eighth day" will be often met as we proceed, and needs to be
   recognized in its symbolic and prophetic significance.

   The old creation was finished in six days with a following Sabbath,
   rendering six the number of the old creation as under imperfection and
   sin. But the eighth day, which is the first of a new week, appears
   everywhere in Scripture as symbolizing the new creation in which all
   things shall be restored in the redemption through the second Adam.

   The thought finds its fullest expression in the resurrection of Christ
   as the Firstborn from the dead, the Beginning and the Lord of the new
   creation, who rose from the dead on the first day, the day after the
   seventh, the eighth day.

   This gives the key to the use of the number eight in the Mosaic
   symbolism.

   With good reason, therefore, was circumcision ordered for the eighth
   day, as it symbolized the putting off of the old nature and the putting
   on of a new and purified nature in Christ (2 Cor. 5:17, R. V., margin).
   -- Hubert Brooke.

   Questions.

   1. What is sin?

   2. Quote Job 14:4.

   3. What Christian fact, is symbolized by circumcision?

   4. What does the 8th day symbolize in Scripture?

   5. Quote 2 Corinthians 5:17 in the Revised Version.

   THE TYPICAL DISEASE

   Chapters 13, 14

   Here we have what appears like a treatise on leprosy, but it is not
   introduced simply for medical purposes. There were other diseases more
   serious, but this is singled out and made the subject of special
   regulations because of its typical character. It is a parable of sin,
   drawn by the divine hand, "of the workings, developments and effects of
   inborn depravity."

   The disease is diagnosed under four heads: (1) leprosy rising
   spontaneously (1:17); (2) rising out of a boil (18:24); (3) out of a
   burn (24-28); (4) on the head or beard.

   To take the first class: What symptoms are named in v. 2? Who is to
   deal with the case? How is the diagnosis to be confirmed (3)? In cases
   of doubt what must be done with the suspect (4-8) What are the symptoms
   of an advanced case (9-1 1)? What further condition showed that it was
   not a genuine case of leprosy (12, 13)? What was necessary to prove its
   genuineness (14-17)?

   What requirements were made of the leper (45, 46)? According to this,
   "he is to assume all the ordinary signs of mourning for the dead; he is
   to regard himself, and all others are to regard him, as dead. He is to
   be a continual mourner at his own funeral."

   One might suppose the reason for this to be hygienic, and because of
   the contagious nature of the disease, but Kellogg finds it still
   deeper.

   It is one of the principles of divine teaching that death is always
   connected with legal uncleanness. It is so connected because it is the
   extreme manifestation of the presence of sin in the race and of God's
   wrath against it. But all disease is a forerunner of death, an
   incipient dying, and thus a manifestation of the presence of sin
   working in the body through death.

   Now it would be impracticable to have a law that all disease should
   render the sick person ceremonially unclean, but in order to keep the
   connection between the two, sin and disease, continually before Israel
   this one ailment which is a kind of living image of death was selected
   from all the others for the purpose. "It is the supreme type of sin, as
   seen by God."

   Typical Features.

   These are the typical features:

   (1) Its extreme loathsomeness.

   (2) Its insignificant and often even imperceptible beginning.

   (3) Its progressiveness in the body.

   (4) Sooner or later it affects the whole man.

   (5) Its victim in process of time becomes insensible to his condition.

   (6) It is hereditary in its nature.

   (7) It is incurable by human means.

   (8) It excludes from the fellowship of the holy people, and hence the
   fellowship of God.

   1. The Cleansing of the Leper, 14:1-32.

   Although leprosy was incurable by human remedies, yet it did not always
   continue for life. Sometimes, being sent as a special judgment from
   God, as in the case of Miriam, it ceased with the repentance and
   forgiveness of the offender. Indeed, the Jews generally looked upon it
   as a judgment, and its very name means "a stroke of the Lord." We know
   also of lepers healed by divine power in the Saviour's time and prior
   thereto.

   In this connection it is noticeable that the regulations in this
   chapter were not for the cure of the leper but for his ceremonial
   cleansing after the cure, which agrees with Matt. 8:1-4. For this
   reason Seiss thinks these rites illustrate the nature of sanctification
   rather than justification, although the latter is also implied.

   2. Leprosy in Garments and Houses, 13:47-59; 14:33-57.

   It seems strange to read of disease in garments and houses? And yet
   Moses, by inspiration of God, was only a few thousand years ahead of
   the science of today which speaks so familiarly of germs, and bacilli,
   and other things of which the fathers never dreamed!

   We now know that minute parasitic forms of vegetable life may exist and
   propagate themselves in other places besides the tissues of the human
   body. We are acquainted with mould and mildew, and know it to imply
   unhealthy conditions, and the leprosy in the present case may border
   thereon, though it be not the same thing.

   The provision in these verses therefore was in the first place
   sanitary, and teaches how God cares not only for the souls but for the
   bodies of men and all their material surroundings.

   But in the second place it was spiritual as in the other instances,
   teaching that the curse of sin and death was not only upon man but his
   environment; that sacrificial cleansing was as needful for the one as
   the other; that the atonement of Christ covered in some mysterious way
   not only animate but inanimate creation as well. Read Romans 8:18-23,
   and 1 Peter 3:10-13.

   Questions.

   1. Of what is leprosy a type?

   2. Name its typical features.

   3. What is absolutely incurable?

   4. What scientific fact in this lesson goes to prove the inspiration of
   the book?

   5. Have you read the New Testament Scriptures referred to above?

   THE GREAT DAY OF ATONEMENT

   Chapter 16

   When was the law of this chapter revealed to Moses (1)? This has led
   some to think that the chapter is misplaced and that it should follow
   chapter 10, an idea strengthened by the fact of its cutting into the
   middle of these laws concerning the clean and the unclean.

   What prohibition is laid upon Aaron, and with what penalty (2)? Is
   there a suggestion here that the disobedience of Nadab and Abihu was
   aggravated by their entering into the Holy of Holies when they should
   not have done so?

   With what sacrifices was Aaron to appear (3), and in what apparel (4)?
   What further ceremonial precaution must he take?

   What is the offering for the people on this occasion (5-7)? What
   peculiarity is mentioned in this case (8-10)? What is the ceremony
   connected with the scapegoat (20-26)?

   In what month, and on what day of the month were these ceremonies to
   occur (29)? What kind of a day was this to be (31)?

   The Significance of It All.

   This Day of Atonement was the most important in the whole Mosaic system
   of sacrifices, for then the idea of the removal of sin received its
   highest expression.

   To illustrate: It must be that countless sins were committed by the
   people collectively and individually of which they were unaware, and
   which were not covered by any of the daily offerings. If, then, there
   were not some great act of atonement covering everything to the fullest
   extent, the sacrificial system had fallen short. To meet this the law
   of the Day of Atonement was instituted.

   On this day atonement was made for Aaron and his house (6); the holy
   place and the tabernacle (15-17); the altar and the outer court (18,
   19); and the whole congregation of Israel (20-22, 33); and this "for
   all their iniquities, and all their transgressions, even all their
   sins" (21); i. e., unknown to every one except God (com-pare Hebrews
   9:7-9).

   Notice further among other things, (1) that only the high priest could
   officiate on this day (17); and (2) that he could do so only after
   certain specific preparations, among them the bathing of himself, the
   laying aside of the "garments for glory and beauty" and the donning of
   a vesture of unadorned white; (3) that he entered the Holy of Holies
   sprinkling the blood even on the mercy seat in that secret place where
   no other Israelite might tread. All these things impress us that the
   sin offering on this day, more than any other, symbolizes in the most
   perfect way the one offering of Christ who now appears in the presence
   of God for us.

   The Scapegoat.

   The significance of the scapegoat is difficult to determine. The
   Revised Version translates the word by the name "Azazel," whose meaning
   is not clear. Either it is a name of an evil spirit conceived of as
   dwelling in the wilderness, or else an abstract noun meaning "removal"
   or "dismissal," as indicated in the margin of the Revised Version.

   If we take it in the latter sense, then the scapegoat may be regarded
   as bearing away all the iniquities of Israel, which are symbolically
   laid upon him, into a solitary place where they are forever away from
   the presence of God and the camp of his people. Thus, to quote Kellogg,
   as the killing and sprinkling of the first goat set forth the means of
   reconciliation with God, so the sending away of the second sets forth
   the effect of that sacrifice in the complete removal of those sins as
   already indicated (compare Ps. 103:12; Micah 7:19).

   If, however, the word is taken as the name of a person, then the
   understanding would seem like this: Satan has a certain power over man
   because of man's sin (Heb. 2:14, 15; 1 Jo. 5:19, R. V.; Rev. 12:10). To
   this evil one, the adversary of God's people in all ages, the live goat
   was symbolically sent bearing on him the sins of Israel. These sins are
   considered as having been forgiven by God, by which it is symbolically
   announced to Satan that the foundation of his power over Israel is
   gone. His accusations are now no longer in place, for the whole
   question of Israel's sin has been met and settled in the atoning blood.

   Questions.

   1. What makes the Day of Atonement the most important in the Mosaic
   system?

   2. Can you quote verse 21?

   3. How does the Revised Version translate "scapegoat"?

   4. If the word be an abstract noun, how would you understand its
   meaning?

   5. If the name of a person, how?

   ABOMINATIONS UNTO THE LORD

   Chapters 17-19

   The underlying thought of this section is in the words of 18:1-5.
   Israel is redeemed and separated unto God, therefore she is to live
   consistently with that fact in all her ways. She is not to do after the
   heathen peoples round about her.

   1. The Question of Eating, c. 17.

   It looks as though the opening injunction of this chapter touched once
   more upon the ceremonial and recurred to a matter considered under the
   offerings. But in that case the design was to prevent idolatry in
   connection with worship, and here to prevent it in connection with the
   preparation of food. It is to be remembered also, that these
   regulations were for the tent life in the wilderness, and were
   afterward repealed in Deut. 12:15-24, ere entering upon the settled
   habitation of Canaan.

   The reasons for the prohibition of blood are clearly stated. It was the
   life of the flesh, and the symbol of that life which was substituted
   for the guilty in making atonement.

   As to the first, modern science is illustrating its wisdom in teaching
   that the germs of infectious disease circulate in the blood. As to the
   second, the relation of the blood to the forgiveness of sins was thus
   always kept prominently before the mind of the people. There is a great
   lesson in this thought for us as well as them.

   2. The Question of Chastity, c. 18.

   All sexual relationship is prohibited as between a man and his mother;
   step-mother; sister; grand-daughter; step-sister; aunt;
   daughter-in-law; sister-in-law; a woman and her daughter or her
   grand-daughter; a wife's sister (while the wife is living); a woman at
   the time specified in v. 19; a neighbor's wife; another man; a beast.
   The Canaanites did these things, which explains their expulsion from
   their land: and these things were also common with the Egyptians among
   whom the Israelites had lived.

   A few comments follow: For example, the law forbidding such
   relationship with a brother's wife (16), is qualified in Deut. 25:5-10,
   so far as to permit marriage with the widow of a deceased brother when
   the latter died without children, in order to perpetuate his family.

   The reference to "Molech" in v. 21, grows out of the connection between
   some of the licentious practices just mentioned and the worship of the
   heathen god (compare 2 Kings 17:31; Jer. 7:31; 19:5). In that worship
   children were slain like beasts and offered in sacrifice to their god.

   3. Contents of Chapter 19.

   It is difficult to generalize in chapter 19, which seems to contain
   repetitions of laws already dealt with in other connections.

   Among these reference is again made to the Sabbath; the making of
   molten images; the eating of peace offerings; gleaning of the harvest
   for the poor; theft, perjury, oppression; the treatment of the blind
   and deaf; fairness in judgment; talebearing; revenge; hybridity; carnal
   connection with bond-women; uncircumcised fruit; enchantment; physical
   marks of idolatry; honoring the aged, etc.

   The first three have to do with reverence for God. The next series,
   having regard to the poor, was not only a protest against natural
   selfishness, but an intimation that the land did not belong to the
   human occupant but to God, and that its husbandman was merely His
   steward.

   In several verses following, God still speaks on behalf of the weak and
   defenseless, but ere long balances the subject by showing that the rich
   are no more to be wronged than the poor.

   Reaching the middle of the chapter, the commands concerning hybridity
   among cattle and in the vegetable kingdom are sufficiently clear, but
   that about the mingling of stuffs in our garments is not. Perhaps this
   whole section of laws is to cultivate reverence for the order
   established in nature by God, nature itself being a manifestation of
   God. In this case the precept about garments would be a symbolic
   reminder of the duty to a large class who aid not so frequently come in
   contact with the other reminders referred to.

   In verses 20-22 we come upon what seems a divine approval of
   concubinage and slavery, but we are to remember the explanation of it
   in Matt. 19:8.

   The "uncircumcised" fruit (23-25) is as interesting a feature as any in
   the chapter. The explanation is in the law that the first-fruit always
   belongs to God. But it must be a perfect offering as well as the
   first-fruit, and this is not usually true of the fruit of a young tree.
   During the first three years of its life it is regarded as analogous to
   the life of a child uncircumcised or unconsecrated to the Lord. It is
   not until the fourth that its fruit becomes sufficiently perfected to
   offer unto God, and not until after that is it to be partaken of by the
   Israelite himself.

   The reference to the trimming of the hair and beard is explained by the
   fact that among heathen peoples to do so visibly marks one as of a
   certain religion or the worshiper of a certain god. Today certain
   orders in the Roman Catholic Church are indicated in this manner. But
   the Israelite was not only to worship God alone, but to avoid even the
   appearance of worshiping another.

   Questions.

   1. To what do the contents of these chapters relate?

   2. Why was "blood" prohibited in eating?

   3. In what way does God claim ownership of the land of Israel?

   4. How does He defend the rich as well as the poor?

   5. Can you quote Matthew 19:8?

   6. What is the meaning of "uncircumcised" fruit?

   7. To what does the trimming of the hair and beard refer?

   NEW TESTAMENT APPLICATION

   Before pursuing these lessons further we would pause, to point out
   their application to the Christian, and how he should make use of them
   for his spiritual advancement and God's glory in this sinful world.

   Brooke will once more be our guide:

   In chapters 1 to 10 there is revealed what God is, and does, and gives
   to His people, but in chapters 11 to 22 we have what His people should
   be and do for Him. The first half of these latter chapters, 11 to 16,
   show that the life of God's people is to be clean, while the second
   half, chapter 17 to practically the close of the book, shows how it is
   to be holy. There is a difference between the two ideas represented by
   "clean" and "holy" (2 Cor. 7:1).

   (1) The word "clean," together with "unclean," "purify" and their
   derivatives, comes from two Hebrew roots, occurring in the 6th chapter
   over 164 times, thus showing the emphasis God puts upon the thought
   they express, and impressing us with the fact that a line of separation
   must be drawn between those who are God's people through redemption by
   the blood, and those who are not.

   (2) But we are taught that only God Himself can indicate what this line
   of separation is. Only He can say what is fit and what unfit for His
   people to think, and be, and do. This is New Testament as well as Old
   Testament teaching (Phil. 1:9-11), and means much more than the broad
   distinction between right and wrong. The people of the world know what
   these distinctions are, and for worldly reasons endeavor more or less
   to maintain them; but the people of God know the mind of God, and are
   expected to follow it in details of which the world is ignorant.

   (3) We learn how communion with God may be hindered or promoted by
   things otherwise exceedingly small, like eating and drinking (1 Cor.
   10:31), the way we dress, or keep our dwellings, the physical condition
   of our bodies, and the like. Indeed there are many questions of
   casuistry, which the full-grown Christian recognizes as essential in
   order to walk with God, of which other people know nothing. Compare
   (Deut. 14:21; 1 Cor. 2:14; 10:23; Eph. 5:17; 2 Tim. 2:4).

   The Christian cannot say: "I may do this for others do it." The
   "others" may not be redeemed and separated unto God, and hence he must
   leave the doubtful things to them "who claim not royal birth," and
   "come out from among them and be separate" (2 Cor. 6:17, 18).

   (4) Our author distinguishes between the first half of this section of
   the book, chapters 11 to 16, and the latter half, 17 to 22, by speaking
   of the latter as presenting on the positive what the former presents on
   the negative side. In illustrating the thought from the New Testament
   point of view he uses 2 Cor. 7:1.

   "Having therefore these promises, dearly beloved, let us cleanse
   ourselves from all filthiness of the flesh and spirit, perfecting
   holiness in the fear of God."

   The two phrases "cleanse" and "perfecting holiness" are in different
   tenses in the Greek. The former is in the aorist, and marks a definite
   action, something done once for all; but the latter is in the present
   tense, and implies a continuous line of conduct, when we are bidden to
   "cleanse ourselves" it means that everything marked by God as unclean
   is to be at once and forever put away; but when we are bidden to be
   perfect in holiness a life-long course of action and conduct is in
   mind.

   Brooke helps us to understand this by his definition of "holiness,"
   which in its primary sense does not mean super-eminent piety but "the
   relationship existing between God and a consecrated thing." It is in
   this sense we read of a holy day, a holy place, or a holy animal.

   (5) But as soon as this title is given to anyone or anything, the power
   of it is supposed to begin to work, that is, it immediately demands
   altered usage or conduct harmonizing with the new relationship to God
   into which it is brought. As applied to human beings, it is an instant
   summons to a new line of conduct, and thus passes into the meaning of
   practical piety. He uses this illustration: If one were rebuking a peer
   for unworthy conduct he might say: "You are a nobleman; you ought to be
   a noble man." In this sense Paul uses it in 1 Cor. 5:7: "Purge out the
   old leaven, that ye may be a new lump, even as ye are unleavened."

   (6) These chapters therefore (17 to 22), bring into startling
   prominence the breadth and depth of the idea of holiness as God
   conceives of it. It concerns the table of God's people, the home, and
   all their social and business relationships.

   It is only as we realize this idea of holiness, and how far we are
   separated from it by our old nature, that we can appreciate the typical
   significance of the Day of Atonement and the place its revelation
   occupies in this book (chapter 16). The other chapters preceding and
   following that revelation raises the question. Who can be clean before
   God? We perceive that, notwithstanding what provisions we make or
   precautions we take, we can never be sure that no spot of uncleanness
   remains, or that the conditions for communion with God are fulfilled.
   Only God can be sure of this, or make us sure, but that assurance is
   what chapter 16 in its typical aspect is intended to provide.

   Once a year, and on that day, "all the iniquities of Israel, and all
   their transgressions, in all their sins" were completely removed, and
   atonement made for every uncleanness. The prototype of this we find in
   the person and work of our blessed Lord, whose grace is sufficient for
   us. and whose blood cleanseth us from all sin.

   Questions.

   1. Why is the standard of righteousness for God's people different from
   that of the world?

   2. Name some of the little things which may affect the saint's
   communion with God.

   3. Quote 2 Corinthians 7:1.

   4. How would you define "holiness"?

   5. Quote 1 Corinthians 5:7.

   PENALTIES FOR PEOPLE AND PRIESTS

   Chapters 20-22

   The 20th chapter is of deep interest as showing what infinite wisdom,
   and love has considered a just punishment for certain crimes. These
   crimes are still committed in civilized communities but a different
   view of their treatment seems to exist. Are human governments in modern
   times wiser, and better than this theocracy, where Jehovah ruled? Are
   the weaknesses of our democracies explained by their indifferences to
   the code here exhibited?

   Why does not this code obtain in Christian nations, since God has
   revealed it and such nations are supposed to serve God?

   The answer is, that no nation on earth is a God-governed nation, as
   Israel was, and shall again be in the millennial age. The laws of
   so-called Christian nations are man-made, not God-made. They may bear a
   likeness or relationship to these laws of God, but only as they grow
   out of a necessity of human experience. No nation has ever set itself
   the task of finding out God's mind with reference to this or that
   penalty, and squaring its legislation accordingly. Hence the
   lawlessness we see on every hand, and the injustice; hence the teaching
   of the prophets that the present order of things shall end in a grand
   catastrophe, and God shall set up His own kingdom on the earth over
   which His Son shall reign.

   Outline of the Chapter.

   The first section (1-6), relates to the giving of seed to Molech, and
   consulting with familiar spirits, or what we call Spiritualism. With
   Spiritualism might be included other occultisms, such as
   fortune-telling, clairvoyance, palmistry and the like.

   A second section (7, 8), consists of a command to sanctification of
   life and obedience to God.

   A third (9-16), enumerates other cases for which death was ordered,
   some of them very unnatural crimes.

   A fourth (17-21), names offenses for which a lesser penalty is
   prescribed.

   A fifth (22-26), consists of a concluding exhortation against
   disobedience enforced by the impending punishment of the Canaanites,
   and the goodness of God to them (Israel).

   For what crimes is death ordained as a penalty (2-5, 10, 12, 13, 14,
   15, 16, 27)? What manner of death is ordained (2)? In the case of
   certain crimes is any difference made between the sexes (10, 11, 12,
   14, 15, 16)? In what instance were the bodies of the criminals to be
   burnt after death (14)?

   In the case of the lesser penalties, which offense demanded the most
   public excommunication (17)?

   The Principles Involved.

   Certain "reformers" claim that the primary, if not the sole, object of
   the punishment of crime is the reformation of the individual. How does
   such a theory square with this divine precedent? Had reformation been
   the chief thought in God's mind, would He have ordained the death
   penalty with such unqualified severity?

   How does verse 3 show that the intention of the punishment is to
   satisfy the outraged holiness of God? How does verse 12 show that it is
   to preserve the natural order of the human family? how does verse 14
   show that it is for the moral benefit of the race?

   The multiplication of murders and crimes against the family in these
   days may be explained by the laxity of the laws, or the indisposition
   of the people to enforce them. "Where God pronounces the death penalty,
   man apologizes for the crime, then lightens the penalty, then abolishes
   it, and at last legalizes the offense. This modern drift bodes no good,
   and in the end can only bring disaster to the family and the state."

   1. Holiness o the Priests, c. 21, 22.

   We pass over chapters 21 and 22 with a remark or two, as they treat of
   the same subject as the preceding chapter except as it applies to the
   priests. While all Israel, as Kellogg says, was called to be a priestly
   nation and holy to Jehovah in life and service, "this sanctity was
   represented in degrees successively higher in each of its three
   divisions, the people, the priest, and the high priests," like the
   three-fold division of the tabernacle, the outer court, the holy place,
   and the Holy of Holies.

   The principle still holds good, in that special privileges place him
   who enjoys them under special obligations to holiness of life.
   Christians, in other words, should not merely be equally correct in
   life with the best men of the world, but more -- they should be holy.
   And within the Church, those who occupy official positions or who are
   otherwise elevated above their fellows, are under the more stringent
   obligations of life and work.

   Questions.

   1. What kind of government was that of Israel?

   2. How would you account for much of the disorder and lawlessness in
   so-called Christian nations?

   3. What will bring this to an end?

   4. Have you tried to answer the questions asked under the head of
   "Principles Involved"?

   5. What peculiar obligation of conduct lies upon Christians, and why?

   FEASTS OF THE LORD

   Chapter 23

   There is nothing more affecting in all this legislation than the
   provision God makes for the physical happiness and the temporal welfare
   of His people. He wants them to rejoice if only they rejoice in Him.
   (Phil. 4:4). This chapter sets this forth.

   Compare the Revised Version and observe that the word in verse 2 is
   "set feasts," or, "appointed seasons."

   Why are they called "set feasts of the Lord"? is it not because He
   appointed them, and because He would be glorified in them? What other
   title do they receive (2)? When "holy convocations" are mentioned we
   think of public gatherings at the tabernacle, or later on, at the
   temple; but these were commanded only for the three occasions, the
   passover in the spring, and the feast of weeks (Pentecost), and
   atonement in the autumn (Exodus 34:22). Probably, therefore, the other
   convocations were local gatherings crystallized afterwards in the
   weekly synagogue.

   1. The Weekly Sabbath, v. 3.

   What is the first feast mentioned (3)? Although the weekly Sabbath is
   included among these appointed seasons, yet it is distinguished from
   them by the fresh heading of verse 4, and by verses 37 and 38. It is
   indeed an appointed season, but dating from the creation of man, and
   not here first prescribed. It is in this sense a kind of germ of all
   the other appointed seasons.

   How is the sanctity of the weekly Sabbath expressed in the Revised
   Version? What was prohibited on this day? Did this prohibition extend
   only to outside work, or what we would call in our day business
   affairs?

   Do you remember what was taught previously about the two reasons for
   the weekly Sabbath? A memorial of God's rest in creation it was, and
   yet also a memorial of redemption (Exodus 31:13; Deut. 5:15). While the
   redemption specifically in mind is the Jews' deliverance from Egypt,
   yet it is a type of our spiritual deliverance from sin through Christ.

   The original Sabbath rest of God, in which man participated, was marked
   by sin, so that the whole creation became "subjected to vanity" (Romans
   8:20). God could not rest in this state of things, and began a work of
   new creation. The object of this is the restoration of that Sabbath
   rest which thus was interrupted; hence, the weekly Sabbath looked
   forward as well as backward.

   2. The Passover and Unleavened Bread, vv. 4-8.

   The feasts of the passover and unleavened bread we met in Exodus, but
   here we learn how the latter shall begin and end with a holy
   convocation, and be characterized by the omission of "servile work."
   This last seems to refer to labor in the field and otherwise, outside
   of the home.

   The spiritual meaning of these two feasts we have considered. Through
   the slaying of the lamb and sprinkling of its blood Israel secured
   deliverance from Egypt, and by eating its flesh strength for the
   journey before them, the unleavened bread, however, had more than an
   historic reference. Leaven is the type of evil or moral corruption, and
   its removal signifies that the redeemed nation must be a holy and
   separate people.

   3. The Sheaf of the Firstfruits. vv. 9-14.

   In connection with the two feasts just named, what further ceremony is
   established (10, 11)? With this what offering should be presented (12,
   13)? What prohibitions are entailed (14)?

   We have here a preliminary feast of the harvest. The waiving of the
   sheaf of the first-fruits indicates that the whole harvest to follow
   belonged and was consecrated to God. Until this action was taken they
   were not at liberty to use the harvest.

   In this we have another symbol. Israel is God's firstborn among the
   nations (Exodus 4:22), of the redeemed earth. She is the earnest of the
   redemption of all these nations -- the beginning of the world's
   harvest, which shall be realized in the millennial age.

   And the idea is not exhausted yet, as we judge by 1 Cor. 5:7, 8. Christ
   our passover was sacrificed for us, and the sheaf of the firstfruits in
   His resurrection was presented unto God as a type of the resurrection
   of all His people (1 Cor. 15:20).

   4. Pentecost, or the Feast of Weeks, vv. 15-21.

   How long after the presentation of the sheaf of the firstfruits came
   the next feast (15, 16)? What should be offered on this day (17-20)?
   With what should these loaves be baked (17)? What was the design of
   this offering (17)? Because this feast came on the fiftieth day after
   the presentation of the sheaf of the firstfruits, it is called the
   Feast of Pentecost, from the Greek numeral meaning fifty; and the Feast
   of Weeks, because it followed seven weeks after that of the sheaf.

   The former festival marked the beginning of the harvest with the first
   sheaf of barley, and this, the completion of the grain harvest, with
   the reaping of the wheat. In the former the sheaf was presented as it
   came from the field, but in this the offering was of the grain as
   prepared for food. Why it might be baked with leaven we do not know.

   Speaking of the typical aspect of this feast, and comparing it with the
   Passover, there God was seen to be the Redeemer of Israel, here He is
   seen to be her preserver.

   Comparing it with the sheaf of the firstfruits, there we see a type of
   Christ's resurrection as "the firstfruits of them that sleep," but here
   a type of the descent of the Holy Ghost on the day of Pentecost when
   "the church of the firstborn" was formed as the beginning of the great
   ingathering of the whole number of the elect. (Acts 2:1-4; Col. 1:18;
   James 1:18).

   As compared with the weekly Sabbath, this feast, in celebrating the
   rest after the labors of the harvest, became a type of the great rest
   to follow the harvest at the end of this age (Matt. 13:39).

   5. The Feast of Trumpets, vv. 23-28.

   We have seen that the Feast of the Sabbath on the seventh day of each
   week was a germ of the whole series of septenary feasts. The Feast of
   Pentecost on the seventh week, and now the Feast of Trumpets at the
   beginning of the seventh month carry forward the idea. Spring, summer
   and autumn each has its feast. This seventh month, corresponding to
   that period of our year from the middle of September to the middle of
   October was the great month of the Jewish year in that three great
   events occurred in it -- the Feast of Trumpets, the great Day of
   Atonement, and the Feast of Tabernacles.

   The blowing of trumpets was an announcement from God to His people that
   the great glad month had come, the month of atonement and of the
   greatest festivity of the year resulting from that atonement, and the
   earthly blessing accompanying it.

   On other occasions trumpets were blown only by the priests and at the
   central sanctuary, but in this case they were blown by everyone who
   would throughout the whole land.

   How reconciled we could be to the noises preceding New Year's Day, or
   the 4th of July, or Thanksgiving Day, if only the blowing of the horns
   were an act of worship in recognition of the goodness and faithfulness
   of God!

   6. The Day of Atonement, vv. 26-32.

   The Day of Atonement has been considered in chapter 16. Coming at this
   season of the year it demonstrated the complete rest brought in, both
   for God and His people, through the expiation of their guilt.

   How were the people on this day to express penitence for their guilt
   (27)? (Cp. Is. 58:3-7; Zech. 7:5.) What penalty followed the absence of
   such penitence (29)?

   How do these great truths of sin, repentance, expiation, rest, apply to
   the people of all ages?

   7. The Feast of Tabernacles, vv. 33-43.

   This is the greatest of the feasts When did it begin, what is it
   called, and how long aid it last? On what two days were "holy
   convocations" called?

   What reference to the complete harvest is found in this enactment (39)?
   With what unusual feature was this feast to be celebrated (40)? What
   did the dwelling in booths commemorate (42, 43)? As the passover
   typified our redemption through Christ, the unleavened bread our
   feeding upon Him for strength, the first sheaf His restoration from the
   dead, Pentecost the descent of the Holy Ghost, or the spiritual
   ingathering of the first fruits of the world's harvest in the formation
   of the church, so the Feast of Tabernacles is thought to typify the
   completion of that harvest in the final ingathering of the elect at the
   end of the age. Then all that are Christ's shall either rise from the
   dead or be translated to meet Him in the air at the second coming (1
   Thess. 4:13-18).

   The eighth day after the feast is a type of that new week ushered in by
   the millennial age, when the earth and all that is therein shall
   experience the rest promised to the people of God (Zech. 14; 16; 21).

   Questions.

   1. Quote Phil. 4:4.

   2. What feast may be said to be the "germ" of all the others?

   3. To what does the weekly rest day look forward?

   4. Of what is "leaven" always the type in Scripture?

   5. Of what is the sheaf of the first-fruits the type?

   6. Of what is the Feast of Weeks the type as compared with that of the
   first-fruits?

   7. What was the great month of the Jewish year, and why?

   8. Give the name, history and typical significance of the greatest of
   the feasts.

   THE SABBATIC AND JUBILEE YEARS

   Chapter 25

   Considering the limited scope of this work, we pass over chapter 24, to
   give more attention to the subject of the present chapter, which, is
   closely connected with that of the "feasts" or "appointed seasons."

   The Sabbatic Year.

   It deals first with the Sabbatic year (1-7). From what were the
   Israelites prohibited in the seventh year (4)? How much further did the
   prohibition extend (5)? But while there should be no sowing, pruning or
   reaping for the year, nevertheless were all the spontaneous produce of
   the land to be a waste (6, 7)? What may have been God's object in this
   law?

   Agricultural science recognizes that a periodic rest of land is of
   advantage, particularly where it is difficult to obtain fertilizers in
   adequate amount. But there must have been a deeper reason here, and we
   wonder whether the enactment was not intended as a discipline in faith
   towards God, teaching the Israelite that man does not live by bread
   alone (Cp. vv. 20-22; with Deut. 8:3). Then may not another thought
   have been to impress him that his right to the soil and its produce
   came from God? We can see also how such an enactment would curb
   selfishness and covetousness, and place the rich and the poor
   periodically on the same level. It has, of course, some symbolical and
   typical aspects as well, which will be considered later.

   The Jubilee Year.

   The chapter deals in the next place with the Jubilee year (8-12). In
   what month, and on what day did it begin (9)? What name was given to
   this day? By what ceremony was it introduced? What was the proclamation
   on this day (10)? Was it also a Sabbath for the land (11)? Then, did
   two Sabbath years come in immediate succession?

   A question may arise as to how a new year could begin in the seventh
   month. But the answer is that Israel had two kinds of years. What might
   be called its religious year, began with the Feast of the Passover in
   the spring (Exodus 12), while its civil year began with the day of
   atonement in the fall.

   Liberty Proclaimed.

   One feature of the "liberty" of the Jubilee year concerned the
   redemption of the land (vv. 12-27:23, 24). In that year what must be
   returned to every man who had suffered a loss of it (13)? What was the
   basis of value in the purchase and sale of land (15, 16)? Since the
   possession must revert to the original holder in the year of Jubilee,
   it had only just so much value as there were years and crops
   intervening between the time it left his hand and the next Jubilee.
   What was the purpose or effect of this law (17)? What was its basis, or
   in other words, why could not the land be sold in perpetuity, but must
   be returned to its first holder (23)?

   Observe from this that in Israel, under the theocracy, there was no
   such thing as either private or communal ownership of the land. The
   owner was Jehovah, and all any man could buy or sell was the right to
   its produce, and that only for a limited time.

   The Kinsman Redeemer.

   The law of the kinsman redeemer is an interesting feature of this
   subject (25-28).

   If one for reasons of poverty was obliged to sell his land, whose duty
   was it to redeem it for him did his circumstances permit (25)? Might
   the original possessor himself redeem it (26)? Observe that the basis
   of price (27) was that referred to above. Observe also, that if it
   could not be redeemed in either case, then it must return to him at the
   Jubilee (28).

   Exceptional Cases.

   The exception as to walled cities is peculiar (29-34). If a man sold a
   dwelling there, might he ever get it back again (29)? If the
   opportunity was not availed of, what then (30)? Did this apply to other
   than walled cities (31)? Was there any exception as to the owners of
   dwellings in walled cities (32)?

   The reason for exempting houses in walled cities seems to be that there
   was no land here which might be used agriculturally for man's support.
   In the case of unwalled towns or villages it was otherwise, hence the
   exception there. The inhabitants of such towns or villages were the
   cultivators of the soil, and their houses belonged to their farms. The
   case of the Levites is explained by the fact that according to the
   divine command, earlier recorded, they had no other possession than
   their houses.

   The Question of Slavery.

   The question of slavery comes again before us in this chapter (vv.
   39-55).

   What kind of a slave is referred to in v. 39, voluntary or involuntary?
   A Hebrew or an alien? What difference must be made in his case? How did
   the Jubilee year effect him (40, 41)?

   What other kind of slave is allowed for in vv. 44, 45?

   Provided that a Hebrew sold himself to an alien, what then (vv. 47-49)?

   We wonder at Jehovah permitting slavery. But if we carefully considered
   the laws governing it in Israel, we must have see" how different it was
   from modern slavery, how just and equitable, and even how desirable for
   those whose circumstances made it necessary. We shall see also that
   these laws had such an educational power as to altogether banish
   slavery from the Hebrew people.

   The Typical and Symbolical Aspect.

   The Sabbatic year and Jubilee year are the last two members of the
   Sabbatic system of septenary periods all of which have a typical
   significance. Each brings out some aspect of redemption through Christ,
   and all combined form a progressive revelation in type of the results
   of Christ's work for the world.

   These last two periods began on the great Day of Atonement in which all
   Israel was to afflict their souls in penitence for sin; and on that day
   they both began when the high priest came out from within the veil,
   where, from the time of offering the sin-offering, he had been hidden
   from the sight of Israel. Both also were ushered in with a trumpet
   blast. We have in both a type of the final repentance of Israel in the
   latter days, and their re-establishment in their own land, of which all
   the prophets speak. The earlier restoration from their Babylonian
   captivity was doubtless prefigured here as well; and yet the ultimate
   reference must be to that event still in the future vs. 11:11.

   The World Fulfillment.

   The type, however, reaches beyond Israel and includes the whole earth.
   See Peter's reference in Acts 3:19-21, when Jesus Christ the heavenly
   High Priest shall come forth and when the last trumpet shall sound and
   He shall appear "the second time without sin unto salvation" (Heb.
   9:28; Rom. 8:19-22).

   Questions.

   1. Name four practical reasons for the Sabbatic year.

   2. When did the civil year of Israel begin?

   3. Who owned the land of Israel?

   4. Can you explain the exemption of "walled cities"?

   5. What effect has God's law about slavery had upon that institution
   among the Hebrews?

   6. On what day of the year did the Sabbatic and Jubilee years begin?

   7. Of what are both these years a type?

   8. How far beyond Israel's history does the type of the Jubilee year
   extend?

   THE GREAT PROPHECY

   Chapter 26

   This chapter opens with injunctions (vv. 1 and 2), which practically
   cover the first table of the law, and then follow (1), promises of
   blessing in the case of obedience (3-13): (2), warnings of judgment in
   case of disobedience (14-39); and (3), a prophecy of ultimate
   repentance and restoration to divine favor in the latter days.

   The Promised Blessings, vv. 3-13.

   These blessings include (1), fruitful seasons (3-5); (2), internal
   security (6-8); (3), multiplication of numbers and the increased
   harvest necessary to support them (9-10); and (4), the abiding presence
   of God with them (11-12). All these promises are based on and grow out
   of their original redemption from Egypt and God's covenant with them at
   that time? (13).

   Warnings of Judgment, vv. 14-39.

   The judgments are first spoken of in general terms, and include
   physical disease, bereavement, famine, conquest and dispersion (14-17).

   Then there follow, as Kellogg shows four series of warnings, each
   conditioned on the supposition that they did not repent as the result
   of the preceding experiences. Each series is prefaced by the formula,
   "I will punish you seven times more for your sins" (vv. 18, 21, 24,
   28). The thought is that each new display of impenitence on Israel's
   part shall be marked by increasing severity. Notice (1), that the rains
   will be withheld (19-20): (2), wild beasts will destroy their children
   and cattle {22); (3), war, pestilence and famine shall follow (25-26);
   (4), all these calamities will come upon them with increasing terror,
   so that they shall eat the flesh of their sons and daughters, and their
   city shall become waste and their land desolate to that extent that
   their enemies shall be astonished at it. Moreover, they will be
   scattered among the Gentile peoples (29-33).

   The importance of this prophecy is that all the later prophecies
   concerning the judgments upon Israel are a kind of application of it to
   the later conditions. It is also an epitome of Israel's history from
   the death of Joshua, say, until the present time.

   This chapter, is of great importance as proof of the divine origin of
   the Bible. We have here an evidence of foreknowledge, and therefore, of
   the inspiration of the Holy Spirit, which cannot be gainsaid.

   Repentance and Restoration. vv. 40-46.

   The word "If" at the beginning of verse 40 is in the R. V. "And." It
   thus becomes a positive statement of God that Israel shall confess her
   iniquity and be humbled before Him; and that in consequence, the Lord
   will remember His covenant with Jacob (42).

   These words had a partial fulfillment in the return from the Babylonian
   captivity, but this did not exhaust the prophecy. Israel again forgot
   Jehovah and committed her greatest sin in crucifying her Messiah. As
   the result her people are now scattered among the nations, and her land
   is desolate. Nevertheless, God's covenant with her fathers is not
   forgotten. The promises to her were renewed after the return from
   Babylon with reference to events that shall take place in her history
   at the end of this age (Zechariah 12:8-14 and 13:1). See also Paul's
   epistle to the Romans (chapter 11:2 and 25-29).

   Observe that the promises for the future pertain to the land as well as
   the people of Israel (42). Compare Luke 21:24. The inference is clear
   that Israel shall not only be restored to God in repentance through
   faith in her Messiah, but she shall also be restored to Palestine,
   whose fruitfulness will be greater than ever.

   Questions.

   1. Give a general outline of this chapter.

   2. What blessings are promised on Israel's obedience?

   3. How does this chapter prove the divinity of the Bible?

   4. How does verse 40 become a positive statement?

   5. Have you read Romans 11

   VOWS AND TITHES

   Chapter 27

   We have in this closing chapter a supplement to the whole book.
   Hitherto we dealt with obligations and duties resting on all Israelites
   alike, but now we come to vows of an additional and voluntary
   character. (Deut. 23:22.)

   Persons Might be Vowed, vv. 1-8.

   The thought is, that persons might be vowed for service in the
   sanctuary; but since service could not be found for so large a number,
   and especially for young children, who might be vowed, there might be a
   money equivalent for them. This equivalent, which was to be paid into
   the treasury of the sanctuary, was determined by the labor value of the
   person vowed as based on sex and age. It was always low enough not to
   burden the poor.

   Domestic Animals Might be Vowed. vv. 9-13.

   If the animal were suitable for sacrifice, it might be accepted for the
   service; but if otherwise, the priest must set a price on it for which
   it might be sold by the owner and the money placed in the treasury. In
   this case one-fifth more was to be added to the price, as a check
   perhaps, on rashness in vowing.

   Exclusions from Vow. vv. 26-33.

   Houses and fields might be vowed (14-25), upon the same principles as
   the foregoing. But three kinds of property could not be vowed, the
   firstlings of the beasts (26); a "devoted thing," in the sense of an
   accursed thing like the property in Jericho, (28, 29 compared with
   Joshua 7:17); and "the tithe of the land" (30).

   The reason for these prohibitions was that these things already
   belonged to God and hence their human possessors had no right to them.

   There is a serious matter here in the devotement or accursing of human
   beings, but we postpone its consideration till we meet with a
   conspicuous application of the principle at a later period.

   Law of the Tithe.

   The "tithe" was one of the things belonging to God in any event, and
   which could not be voluntarily vowed.

   This is specially interesting as raising the question whether the tithe
   is binding upon Christians at the present time. In our judgment it is
   not; but that does not mean that Christians may give according to
   impulse or caprice, since the New Testament lays down the principle of
   giving a fixed portion of our income to the Lord as He hath prospered
   us. (1 Cor. 16:1, 2; 2 Cor. 8:7-9.)

   It is customary under the Gospel to leave much to the individual
   conscience regarding the details of worship and conduct, which, under
   the Mosaic law was regulated by rule. Paul gives the explanation in
   Galatians 4:1-5.

   Christian Vows.

   Has a vow of any kind a place in the practical life of Christians? It
   seems not forbidden in the New Testament, but neither is it approved.

   As Kellogg says, "the true conception of Christian life and duty leaves
   no room for a promise to God of what is not due, inasmuch as through
   the transcendent obligation of grateful love to Him for our
   redemption," everything is due. (2 Cor. 5:14, 15.)

   The question is not speculative, since it constitutes one of the
   distinctions between Romanism and Protestantism. The Romish theory of
   works of supererogation comes in here, and closely associated with it,
   the doctrine of purgatory. Here is the germ of the celibate life of the
   clergy, of sisterhoods and monasticism, the tendency of which is
   towards legalism on the one hand and moral declension on the other.
   (Gal. 4:9; Col. 2:16-23).

   Questions.

   1. What particular kind of vows is dealt with here?

   2. For what service were persons vowed?

   3. What properties could not be vowed, and why?

   4 Quote 1 Corinthians 16:1-2.

   5. Is a vow normal in the Christian life?

   LAW OF THE TITHE

   (Abridged from "The Expositor's Bible.")

   The "tithe" or the dedication of the tenth of one's possessions to God,
   is a practice of antiquity, and a question arises as to whether the
   obligation is still resting upon those who would serve God in this
   dispensation? An answer was given in the last lesson, but it is
   desirable to enlarge upon it.

   While we hear nothing of the tithe in the first Christian centuries, it
   came into practice in the 4th century, and later on was established as
   a law of the church for some centuries.

   The modern spirit has become more and more averse to it, until under
   the present voluntaryism it has seemed likely to disappear altogether.

   In consequence of this there has been a revival of interest in it of
   late as necessary for the maintenance and extension of the church,
   those who would revive it holding that the principle is still binding
   on the Christian.

   In settling the question, it is to be remembered that the moral
   obligation is one thing and the legal another. Morally it is our duty
   to set apart for God a fixed proportion of our income, but the precise
   proportion is a subject on which the New Testament is silent. For the
   moral obligation see 1 Corinthians 16:1, 2, where no reference, is made
   to the legal obligation. If the tithe had been still binding as to the
   letter, this would have been the place for the apostle to have
   mentioned it.

   As a matter of fact, it is commonly found in the New Testament, that
   the individual is left at liberty regarding the details of worship and
   conduct as compared with conditions under the Mosaic law. (Gal. 4:1-5.)

   One author however, calls attention to a matter of importance not
   commonly considered in the discussion of this subject. For example, the
   people of Israel were under a theocratic government, where God Himself
   ruled, where the whole system of law was divinely instituted and
   supposed to be divinely executed. When thus carried out this system
   would have prevented excessive accumulation of wealth in the hands of
   individuals, as we have seen in the consideration of earlier chapters
   of this book. There would thus have been secured an equal distribution
   of property, such as the world has never seen, and doubtless never will
   until the millennium. Under such circumstances it would have been
   possible to exact a certain proportion of income for sacred purposes
   with a certainty that it would have worked with perfect fairness to
   all.

   But with us it is different. Wealth is unequally distributed in our
   economy, and no law of the tithe could be made to work as in Israel. To
   the poor it would be a heavy burden, and to the rich a tax so small as
   to amount to exemption. The poor man would sometimes be required to
   take bread out of the mouths of wife and children, while the
   millionaire would still have thousands to spend in luxuries. The latter
   might often more easily give nine-tenths of his income than the former
   one-twentieth.

   While, therefore, the law of the tithe would not seem to be binding
   upon us as to the letter, let us not forget that from the moral point
   of view it is still in force. It forbids the Christian to give simply
   according to impulse or caprice. He is to lay by in store as the Lord
   hath prospered him. Let there be systematic giving to the Lord's work
   under the law of a fixed proportion of gifts to income, and under the
   inspiration of the memory of God's grace to us (2 Cor. 7:9), and the
   Lord's treasury will never be empty, nor will the Lord Himself be
   robbed of His due.

   Questions.

   1. Is the "tithe" a Biblical conception only?

   2. What is the difference between the moral and legal obligation in
   this matter?

   3. Why could the tithe operate successfully in Israel?

   4. Why not in our system of political economy?

   5. What obligation of giving rests on Christians?
     __________________________________________________________________

NUMBERS

   NUMBER AND ORDER OF THE TRIBES

   Chapters 1-4

   A secondary name for Numbers might be "The Book of the Journeyings"
   since it gives the story of Israel from Sinai to the arrival on the
   border of Canaan. Examine verse 1 and perceive that the time covered by
   Exodus and Leviticus was not more than fourteen months, while that of
   Numbers is over thirty-eight years. You will doubtless find a map in
   the back of your Bible which will aid in mastering this book. The
   journey will be seen to be first northwest as far as Kadesh, then south
   to the fork of the Red Sea, and finally northwest as before, around the
   land of Edom to Moab.

   We will keep this geographical outline in mind, considering first the
   principal events at Sinai before they start, then what occurred between
   Sinai and Kadesh, and finally between Kadesh and Moab.

   "The Book of the Murmurings."

   The book might be called the book of the "murmurings" as well as
   "journeyings," for it is pervaded with a spirit of disobedience and
   rebellion against God, justifying the abstract given of the period in
   Psalm 95:10.

   While annals of many powerful nations of this period are entirely
   forgotten, these of a comparative handful of people are preserved and
   that too, notwithstanding their ungrateful spirit, because of the
   relation they bear to the redemption of the world through Jesus Christ.
   This accounts for the Divine long-suffering towards them, and all the
   exhibitions of Divine love the book contains. We have rehearsed this
   before, but it is well to keep it in mind as we pursue our studies.
   Read also 1 Cor. 10, to discover how their history is a kind of object
   lesson illustrating God's dealings with us in a spiritual sense.
   (Synthetic Bible Studies.)

   1. The Tribes Numbered, c. 1.

   What was Moses commanded to do, and when was he commanded to do it (1,
   2)? What people were thus to be numbered, and why (2, 3)? Comparing 4
   and 16, what description is given of the "heads" of houses who were to
   be with Moses and Aaron in this matter?

   "Renowned" means them that were called out of the different tribes for
   leadership; and "princes" stands for the same thing. These were usually
   the oldest son in each tribe after the manner of the nomads of the East
   today.

   On what basis was the numbering conducted (18)? This reference to
   "pedigrees" is important, as showing the care taken about genealogies.
   This was to keep the Aaronic order intact, but especially as a
   provision for tracing the descent of the Messiah through Judah.

   Which tribe was the most numerous (27)? Can you recall how this
   fulfills Jacob's prophecy (Gen. 49)? What prophecy of his is fulfilled
   in verses 32-35? What was the sum of the enrolment (46)? What an
   increase from the seventy-five who went down into Egypt 215 years
   before!

   And yet this did not include the women and children, nor the old men,
   nor the tribe of Levi! It is estimated there were two and a half
   millions in all.

   About the Levites. What direction is given concerning them (47-49)?
   What were they to do, and where were they to camp, and why (50-53)?

   2. The Tribes Arranged, c. 2.

   What was the rallying point for each family in the camp (2)? We do not
   know the colors or forms of these ensigns, but possibly they were
   copied after Egypt minus their idolatrous symbols, and were of a
   fan-like form maze of feathers, shawls, etc., and lifted on long poles.
   Some think they were symbols borrowed from Jacob's blessing on the
   tribes, and that Judah's ensign was a lion, Benjamin's a wolf, and so
   on. Perhaps the color was determined by the precious stone representing
   the tribe in the high priest's breastplate.

   Were the tribes, other than the Levites, allowed to pitch their tents
   near the tabernacle (2)? Which tribes took the lead on the march (3-9)?
   What seems to have formed the central company (17)?

   3. The Levites' Service, cc. 3, 4.

   What genealogy is given at the opening of this chapter (1-4)? What
   shows the subordination of the rest of the Levites to the family of
   Aaron (6, 7)? Give the history of the choice of this tribe in verses
   12, 13. Who chose them? In substitution for whom? On what ground were
   the latter taken by the Lord?

   On what different principle were the Levites numbered from the other
   tribes (15)? Can you give a reason for this? Name the three
   sub-divisions of this tribe (17). What was the particular place and
   charge of each (23, 25, 26, 29, 31, 35, 36, 37)? Who was Eleazar and
   what official position had he (32)? Compare 1 Kings 4:4; 2 Kings 25:18.
   What location was assigned Moses and the family of Aaron (38)?

   Why was a new reckoning of all the males to be made (40-46)? How much
   was the ransom money (47)? (A shekel was about equal to 60 cents.)

   What was the age limit of Levitical service (4:3)? Compare 8:23-26.
   What precautions were necessary in the case of the Kohathites (15)?
   Compare also 17-20. What carrying work was assigned the Gershonites
   (24-26)? Which of the sons of Aaron had the immediate charge of them
   (28)? What was assigned the Merarites (31, 22)? What word in verse 32
   indicates that an inventory was kept of all the little things that
   nothing might be lost? What a lesson this teaches as to God's regard
   for the details of His service, and His interest in trivial things.
   What a strong light it flashes on the meaning of obedience.

   Questions.

   1. What three-fold geographical division of Numbers might be made?

   2. What secondary name might be given to the book; and why?

   3. Interpret "renowned" and "princes."

   4. How many Israelites in the gross are supposed to have come out of
   Egypt?

   5. Give an illustration of obedience in this lesson.

   OTHER PRELIMINARIES

   Chapters 5:1-9:14

   What command is given Moses in chapter 5:1-4?

   What is the next command, and where has this previously been treated
   (5:5-10)? It must not be supposed that such repetitions are merely
   such. There is always a reason for the repetition which the context
   will commonly disclose.

   1. The Trial of Jealousy, 5:11-31.

   The trial of jealousy, contains some new features to which attention
   should be called. As usual, get the facts in mind by a process of
   questioning, before attempting to generalize upon them.

   The law provides for jealousy in a husband whether he has good ground
   for it or not (12-14). What is he to do under the circumstances (15)?
   What preparations shall the priest make (16-18)? Then follows the
   adjuration of the woman and her assent to it {22), and after this the
   actual test of her conduct {27, 28).

   The law was given, as a discouragement to conjugal unfaithfulness on
   the part of a wife, and as a protection from the consequences of a
   wrong suspicion on the part of her husband.

   "From the earliest times, the jealousy of Eastern people has
   established ordeals for the detection and punishment of suspected
   unchastity in wives. And it has been thought that the Israelites being
   biased in favor of such usages, this law was incorporated to free it
   from the idolatrous rites which the heathens had blended with it.
   Viewed in this light, its sanction by Divine authority in a corrected
   form exhibits a proof at once of the wisdom and condescension of God."
   -- Bible Commentary.

   2. The Law of the Nazarite, c. 6.

   This chapter is new in some respects. It concerns the vow of the
   "Nazarite," from a Hebrew word which means, to separate, this was a
   voluntary consecration of the person such as we studied about under
   "vows" in a former lesson. He has a strong impulse towards a holy life,
   and renounces certain worldly occupations and pleasures to that end,
   for a given period.

   What is the first thing marking his separation (3, 4)? The second (5)?
   The third (6-8)? Suppose the vow in this last respect were accidentally
   violated (9-12)? After the period of the vow is terminated, what is the
   procedure (13-20)?

   The reasons for these restrictions are obvious. Wine inflames the
   passions and creates a taste for undue indulgences. As a shaven head
   was a sign of uncleanness (Lev. 14:8, 9), so the long hair symbolized
   the purity he professed. It kept him in remembrance of his vow also,
   and acted as a stimulus for others to imitate his piety. Contact with a
   dead body, as we have seen, disqualified for God's Service, hence his
   avoidance of it.

   3. The Aaronic Blessing.

   Observe the doctrine of the Trinity foreshadowed in the three-fold
   repetition of the Name "Lord" or Jehovah -- three Persons and yet but
   one God. Observe their respective offices. The Father will bless and
   keep us; the Son will be gracious unto us; the Spirit will give us
   peace. Observe the last verse. It is not the name of man that is put
   upon them, not even Moses' name nor Aaron's, but God's own Name, "I
   will bless them."

   4. The Princes' Offerings, c. 7.

   Who were these princes (2)? What was the first offering they brought
   (3)? Why were none given the Kohathites (9)? (Compare for a violation
   of this rule 2 Samuel 6:6-13). What other offerings did they present
   and for what purpose (84-88)? What shows the voluntary nature of these
   offerings (5)?

   There are two or three practical lessons here. In the first place, an
   example to wealthy Christians to generously support and further the
   work of the Lord. Secondly, an encouragement to believe that while in
   the great matters of worship and church government we should adhere
   faithfully to what God has revealed, yet in minor details liberty may
   be left to the means and convenience of the people. Moses would not
   have accepted and used these gifts, but God relieved his embarrassment,
   from which we infer that other things may be done without a special
   warrant if they are in the right direction, and in general harmony with
   God's will.

   Where were the wagons obtained? Did they bring them from Egypt, or did
   Hebrew artisans construct them in the wilderness? The latter inquiry
   suggests that some of the offerings in this chapter may not have come
   entirely from the individual "prince," but have represented the general
   contributions of the tribe.

   5. The Lamps and the Levites, c. 8.

   The last verse of the preceding chapter seems to belong to the present
   one. What great honor was accorded Moses? Though standing outside the
   vail he could hear the voice of God within (Exod. 25:22). Compare John
   14:21.

   What is now communicated to Moses (1-4)?

   "It was Aaron's duty, as the servant of God, to light His house, which,
   being without windows, required the aid of lights. (2 Peter 1-19.) And
   the course he was ordered to follow was first to light the middle lamp
   from the altar fire, and then the other lamps from each other -- a
   course symbolical of all the light of heavenly truth derived from
   Christ, and diffused by his ministers throughout the world." -- Bible
   Commentary.

   6. Consecrating the Levites.

   What cleansing process was ordained (6, 7)? What offerings required
   (8)? Who were to lay their hands on the Levites (10)? Perhaps some of
   the first-born did this, thus indicating the substitution of the
   Levites in their place.

   What was the next step in their consecration (11)? The word for "offer"
   in this verse is "wave," and the probability is that some such motion
   was made by the Levites in token of their giving themselves to God and
   then being given back again to the nation for His service. (Compare
   verses 14-19.)

   What seeming contradiction is there between verses 24 and 4:3? The
   probable explanation is that at the earlier age they entered on their
   work as probationers and at the later as fully equipped servitors. At
   the age of fifty were they to entirely cease labor, or is there an
   intimation in verse 26 that lighter tasks were assigned them?

   7. A New Passover Law, 9:1-14.

   What is the command in verses 1-5? It may seem strange that any command
   should be given in this case, till we recall that Israel was still in
   the wilderness, and the institution of the Passover only implied its
   being observed in Canaan (Exodus 12:25). To have it observed under
   present conditions required a special command.

   But the circumstance is spoken of here to introduce the case next
   referred to (1-14). What is that case (6-8)? What special provision is
   made for it (9-11)?

   Questions.

   1. What reasons can you give for the law of jealousy?

   2. How are Divine wisdom and condescension shown in that law?

   3. Give your conception of a Nazarite.

   4. Explain the restraints he was to observe.

   5. Learn by heart the Aaronic benediction.

   6. What precious doctrine does it unfold?

   7. What practical lessons are taught by chapter?

   8. What is symbolized by the lighting of the lamps?

   SINAI TO PARAN

   Chapters 9:15-10:36

   The people had been at Sinai for about a year (compare Exod. 19:1).
   They were refreshed after their Egyptian servitude. The law had been
   given, the tabernacle erected, and the means and method of approach to
   God had been revealed. Thus had they entered on a course of moral and
   religious training which inspired them with a conviction of their high
   destiny, and prepared them to begin their journey to the promised land.

   The events of this lesson revolve around the initial step of this
   journey, and include the following:

   (1) Directions about the guiding cloud (9:15-23).

   (2) Directions about the trumpets (10:1-10).

   (3) Record of the first three days (11-28).

   (4) Moses' request to Hobab (29-32).

   (5) Moses' prayer (33-36).

   The Cloud.

   We have sufficiently considered the subject of the cloud (Exod. 13). Of
   what was it the signal (17)? To what was its action equivalent (18)?
   What indicates their strict obedience to this signal (22, 23)?

   The Trumpets.

   The Egyptian trumpets which called their votaries to the temples were
   short and curved like ram's horns, but these of Moses, to judge by
   those represented on the arch of Titus, were long and straight, very
   much like our own.

   Of what, and how were they to be made (2)? What was their purpose (2,
   3)? How many different calls were represented (4-7)? To whom was the
   use of the trumpets restricted (8)?

   Observe verse 9, and compare chapter 31:6 and 2 Chronicles 113:12. The
   sounding of the trumpets on the eve of battle was a solemn and
   religious act, animating the hearts of those engaged in a righteous
   cause. It was a promise also, that God would be aroused to aid with His
   presence in the battle.

   Hobab, the Brother-in-Law.

   Probably this relative of Moses remained during a part of their
   encampment at Sinai, but it was natural that as they started north, he
   should like to remain in his own neighborhood and with his own people.

   But why Moses should have importuned him to remain with them as a guide
   when they had the "cloud" for that purpose, is a question. The answer
   seems to be that the cloud showed the general route, but did not point
   out minutely where pasture, shade and water were to be obtained, and
   which were often hid in obscure spots by the shifting sand. Then too,
   detachments of the Israelites may have been sent off from the main
   body. Hobab meant more to them than a single individual, for he was
   doubtless, prince of a clan, and hence could render considerable
   service.

   Notice the motive Moses places before him (29), and the reward he
   promises him (32), and yet, it does not influence him favorably, if we
   may so interpret Judges 1:16, and 1 Samuel 15:6.

   Preachers will find a text for a gospel sermon in these words of Moses.

   They are:

   (1) A confession: "We are journeying";

   (2) An invitation: "Come thou with us";

   (3) A promise: "We will do thee good";

   (4) A testimony: "The Lord hath spoken good concerning Israel."

   Questions.

   1. About how long had Israel remained at Sinai?

   2. What five events are included in this lesson?

   3. How would you interpret the trumpets on the eve of battle?

   4. How explain Moses' request of Hobab?

   5. Can you give a homiletic outline of Numbers 10:29?

   MURMURING AND SEDITION

   Chapters 11-12

   1. A Complaining People, 11:1-3.

   Fatigue of travel, desolate physical surroundings, disappointment at
   the length of the journey and other things brought about discontent.
   The Revised Version says the people began to speak "evil in the ears of
   the Lord."

   What is represented as the effect on the Lord (1)? How was it expressed
   by Him? What shows the locality in which this "murmuring" chiefly
   occurred? The nature of the "fire" is not stated, and there is some
   question whether it was an external burning, as in the case of Nadab
   and Abihu, or an internal one in the nature of a consuming fever,
   though the circumstances favor the first view. The allusion to the
   extremities of the camp, put with that to the "mixed multitude" of
   verse 4, indicates to some that the discontent originated among the
   Egyptian followers of Israel, however it may have been participated in
   by the latter ultimately (4). In their distress to whom did the people
   resort, and with what result (2)?

   2. Heavenly Provision, 11:4-9.

   For what did the people long (5), and what did they loathe (6)? How is
   it described, and how prepared or used (7-9)? "The resemblance of the
   manna to coriander seed was not in the color but in the size and
   figure; and from its comparison to bdellium, which is either a drop of
   white gum or a white pearl, we are enabled to form a better idea of it.
   Moreover, it is evident, from the process of baking into cakes, that it
   could not have been the natural manna of the Arabian desert, for that
   is too gummy to admit of being ground into meal. In taste it is said
   (Exodus 16:31) to have been like 'wafers made with honey,' and here to
   have the taste of fresh oil. The discrepancy in these statements is
   only apparent; for in the former the manna is described in its raw
   state; in the latter after it was ground or baked. The minute
   description given here of its nature and use, was designed to show the
   great sinfulness of the people in being dissatisfied with such
   excellent food, furnished so plentifully and gratuitously." -- Bible
   Commentary.

   3. Aid for Moses, 11:10-30.

   Who now is complaining, and why (11-15)? We can sympathize with Moses,
   but can we justify him? How does God answer him (16, 17)? The Jews
   believe this to be the origin of the Sanhedrin, the highest court in
   Israel, so often named in the New Testament, and yet it may have been
   only a temporary expedient.

   When God said, "I will come down" He doubtless meant not by a visible
   local descent, but by the tokens of His divine operations (17). By the
   "Spirit" is meant the Holy Spirit, only His person is not referred to
   but His gifts or influences (Joel 2:28, John 7:39). Some of the
   heavenly-bestowed qualities of leadership which had been given Moses
   would in like manner be distributed to them.

   What relief is promised the people (18) ? How does the language show,
   that the blessing would turn into a curse (19, 20). How does even Moses
   show incredulity in this (21, 22)? And how is he rebuked (23)?

   4. The Plague of Quails, 11:31-34.

   These quails (v. 31) were on their migratory way from Egypt, when the
   wind drove them into the camp. When the text says they fell over the
   camp "about a day's journey," it means, that there was a countless
   number of them. When it says they fell about "two cubits high," the
   statement is that the level of their flight was two cubits above the
   earth. Being exhausted with their journey they could fly no higher, and
   so were easily caught.

   How swiftly did the punishment fall on the people (33)? "The
   probability is that their stomachs, having been long inured to manna (a
   light food) were not prepared for so sudden a change of regimen of
   which they seem to have partaken to so intemperate a degree as to
   produce a general surfeit. On a former occasion their murmurs for flesh
   were raised (Ex. 16) because they were in want of food. Here they
   proceeded, not from necessity, but lustful desire; and their sin, in
   the righteous judgment of God, was made to carry is own punishment."

   Kibroth-hattaavah means, "the grave of lust" (see margin), which
   indicates that the deaths were confined to those who indulged
   immoderately.

   5. Miriam and Aaron's sedition, c. 12.

   What was the occasion of this sedition (1)? Judging by the order of the
   names, who may have been the leader in it? What testimony is borne to
   Moses (3)? May this observation have been made because Moses took no
   notice of the reproaches of his relatives, leaving his vindication to
   God ? Have we any other instance of an inspired penman eulogizing
   himself when circumstances seemed to demand it (2 Cor. 11:5; 12:11,
   12)?

   What shows that the divine interposition on Moses' behalf was open as
   well as immediate (4, 5)? How does God indicate a difference of degree
   in the gifts and authority of His servants (6-8). "Mouth to mouth"
   means without an interpreter or visionary symbols and "dark speeches,"
   without parables or similitude. The "similitude" of the Lord" cannot
   mean His face or essence (Ex. 33:20; John 1:18; Col. 1:15) but some
   evidence of His presence of another character (Ex. 33:2; 34:5).

   What punishment fell on Miriam (10)? Why not on Aaron? Perhaps because
   his offense was not so great, or because leprosy would have interrupted
   or dishonored the holy service he performed.

   How did Aaron express penitence (11)? How did Moses show a conciliatory
   spirit (13)? Nevertheless what continued humiliation must his sister
   endure (14, 15)?

   Questions.

   1. In what two ways may the "fire" of chapter 11:1 be interpreted?

   2. What shows the supernatural character of the manna of verse 8?

   3. Why was it so minutely described ?

   4. What deep spiritual lesson is suggested in verse 25?

   5. How would you interpret the phrase "two cubits high" of verse 31?

   6. What is the physical explanation of the plague, verse 33?

   7. How would you harmonize verse 8 with other Scriptures?

   8. Why was not Aaron punished as well as Miriam?

   THE CRISIS AT KADESH-BARNEA

   Chapters 13-14

   The unbelief exhibited at Kadesh-barnea, and the divine comment on it
   invest the transaction with great significance. The people had faith to
   sprinkle the blood of atonement (Ex. 12:28), and to come out of Egypt
   (type of the world), but had not faith to enter their Canaan rest.
   Therefore, though redeemed, they "grieved" Jehovah for forty years.
   Compare the chapters of this lesson with Deut. 1:19-40; 1 Cor. 10:1-5;
   Heb. 3:12-19; 4:3-11.

   Outline of the Chapters.

   In the lesson we have:

   (1) God's command to Moses and his execution of it (13:1-20).

   (2) The work of the spies (21-25).

   (3) Their report to Moses, Aaron and the congregation (26-33).

   (4) The effect on the congregation (14:1-10).

   (5) Jehovah's threat (11, 12).

   (6) Moses' intercession (13-19).

   (7) Jehovah's answer and decree of chastisement (20-38).

   (8) The presumption and punishment of the people (39-45).

   Matters to be Noted.

   (1) By comparing Deut. 1:23, it will be seen that the proposition about
   the spies came from the people themselves, God granting their request
   both as a trial and punishment of their unbelief. Led by the pillar of
   fire and cloud they might have entered and conquered the land without
   any reconnaissance of it.

   (2) Kadesh (13:26) is usually identified with Kadesh-barnea mentioned
   in 32:8, and since the researches of Henry Clay Trumbull (1884) there
   has been little doubt about it.

   (3) According to Neh. 9:17. the unbelief of the people actually went
   the length of nominating a "captain" to lead them back to Egypt,
   demonstrating the wisdom of the decree that debarred that generation
   from entering the promised land.

   (4) Remember the two witnesses for God (14:6), often referred to
   afterwards, and reflect on the arguments they present (7-9). If
   Jehovah's word be true as to the land, may we not believe it as to His
   ability to bring us in? By what divine interposition only where the
   lives of these witnesses preserved (10)?

   (5) Moses' intercession is another of the great prayers of the Bible.
   See the boldness of his faith in the arguments he employs. For whose
   honor is he most concerned (13-16)? What promise does he quote (17,
   18)? Where in previous lessons was this commented on? What precedent
   does Moses rely upon (19)?

   (6) Do not pass by the prophecy of V. 21. How much of human hopes are
   wrapped up in these words! Primarily they mean that the report of God's
   doings at that time would spread over all the land magnifying His name,
   but their ultimate application is to the millennium and beyond, as we
   shall see.

   (7) How perverse the conduct of the Israelites, who, shortly before,
   were afraid that, though God was with them, they could not get
   possession of the land; yet now they act still more foolishly in
   supposing that, though God were not with them, they could expel the
   inhabitants by their unaided efforts. The consequences were such as
   might have been anticipated.

   Questions.

   1. Give the outline of this lesson by chapters.

   2. With what other location is Kadesh identified, and on whose
   authority chiefly?

   3. Have you read Neh. 9:17?

   4. Name the two faithful witnesses for God, chapter 14:6.

   5. Name two great prayers of the Bible.

   6. How would you interpret the prophecy of verse 21?

   7. What illustrates the foolishness of Israel at this crisis?

   THE WILDERNESS WANDERINGS

   Chapters 15-20

   "The wilderness was part of the necessary discipline of the redeemed
   people, but this was not true of the years of wandering. The Red Sea,
   Marah, Elim. Sinai were God's ways in Israel's development and have
   their counterpart in Christian experience; but from Kadesh-barnea to
   the Jordan all is for warning, and not imitation (1 Cor. 10:1-11; Heb.
   3:17-19). There is a present rest of God, of which the Sabbath and
   Canaan were types into which believers may and therefore should
   immediately enter by faith, but alas, too many Christians never enter
   into it, and in a spiritual sense their carcasses fall in the
   wilderness. It is remarkable, that just when the people are turning in
   unbelief from the land, God should be giving directions (as in c. 15)
   for their conduct when they should enter it; but this is grace, and
   illustrates God's purpose in human redemption always." -- Scofield
   Bible. It is not for anything in us that God has redeemed us in His
   Son, but for the magnifying of His own Name, and hence he has the same
   reason for keeping us saved to the end that He has for saving us at the
   beginning. Read here Ro. 11:29 and Phil. 1:6.

   The Chief Events.

   The chief events of this section are the rebellion of Korah and his
   associates (16, 17), the death of Miriam and Aaron (20), and the
   miracle at Meribah (20), interspersed with particular laws and
   regulations of a Levitical chapter (15, 18, 19).

   1. The Laws and Regulations, c. 15.

   (1) Note that the sin of ignorance needs to be atoned for as well as
   other sins (15: 22-29), and God in His grace has provided for it.
   Christians who talk about possessing sinless perfection need
   forgiveness for such talk, for it is sin.

   (2) Note the difference between ignorant and presumptuous sins, and the
   illustration furnished of the latter (30-36), compare also Ps. 19:12,
   13.

   The law of the Sabbath was plain, and this transgression of it very
   aggravated. Remember in the punishing that Jehovah was acting not only
   as Israel's God, but King. Israel was a theocracy, whose Sovereign was
   Jehovah, which is not true of any other nation. This offense was not
   only a violation of a divine command in the ordinary sense, but a
   violation of the law of the realm. It was as Sovereign that God gave
   this order to execute the man.

   2. The Great Rebellion, cc. 16, 17.

   Who were its chief leaders (1)? How many joined, and who were they (2)?
   What was their grievance and their argument (3)? What test is proposed
   by Moses (5-7)? How does he describe the ambition of Korah (8-11)? What
   indicates that the rebellion of the other leaders was instigated by
   jealously of the supremacy of Moses (12-14)?

   How is God's wrath expressed (21)? And His punishment (32-35)? What
   exhibition of popular passion follows (42)? Its punishment (49)? How
   does Aaron's action (48) typify Christ?

   This controversy required a decisive settlement, for which reason, as
   we see in the next chapter, a miracle was wrought. In a word, what was
   that miracle?

   3. The Ordinance of the Red Heifer, c. 19.

   Among the regulations of this section that of the red heifer stands out
   with peculiar distinctness.

   Was the heifer to be presented by an individual or the whole
   congregation (2)? This indicates that it was to be used for the general
   good. What must be its color? Just why is not known, unless it be in
   opposition to the superstition of the Egyptians who sacrificed red
   bulls and oxen, but never red heifers or cows which were sacred to
   their goddess Isis.

   What ritualistic action of the priest showed that he was presenting an
   expiatory sacrifice (3, 4)? How does v. 6 suggest the ordinance for
   cleansing the lepers? (Lev. 14:4-7.)

   The subsequent verses of the chapter show the uses to which this "water
   of separation" was to be applied. For example, in case of a death. --
   "As in every family which sustained a bereavement, the members of the
   household became defiled, so an immense population, where instances of
   mortality and other cases of uncleanness would be daily occurring, the
   water of separation must have been in constant requisition."

   We need to remember that the defilement here to be remedied as, in some
   other cases we have met with, implied no moral guilt but had only a
   ceremonial and typical significance. It was part of that system which
   God would teach Israel, and through Israel the whole world, the
   essential nature of holiness.

   4. The Miracle at Meribah, c. 20.

   If you compare v. 1 with vv. 22 and 23, and then chapter 33:38, you
   will see that between the last verse of the preceding and the first
   verse of this chapter "there is a long and undescribed interval of Z7
   years." In other words, "in this book only the most important incidents
   are recorded, and these are confined chiefly to the first and second
   and the last years of the wanderings in the wilderness."

   Where were the people now (1)? This was their second arrival there
   after an interval of 38 years (compare Deut. 2:16). The old generation
   had nearly all died, and the new was now encamped here with the view of
   soon entering Canaan.

   We need not suppose that during all this time the people moved about in
   a compact mass without any employment or object, but that their life
   was similar to nomads generally.

   What event occurred at Kadesh at this time (1)? What physical necessity
   arose (2)? How did the people deport themselves (3-5)? Where as usual,
   did their leaders take refuge (6)? What were they commanded to do (8)?
   What "rod" is meant (compare 17:10)? How is the hasty and passionate
   conduct of Moses illustrated (10)? Compare Ps. 106:33. He had been
   directed to speak to the rock, but what did he do? How were the leaders
   rebuked (12)?

   Contrast this miracle with the one in Ex. 17:5-7. The rock in both
   instances typified Christ (1 Cor. 10:4); but Christ once smitten, needs
   not to be smitten (crucified) again. Moses' act not only displayed
   impatience and perhaps vain glory, but (in type) made of none effect
   one of the most vital doctrines of grace. The believer from whom the
   divine blessing has been withheld through sin needs not another
   sacrifice. It is for him to confess his sins according to 1 John 1:9,
   and receive cleansing and forgiveness. This is the symbolism of
   speaking to the rock instead of smiting it a second time.

   Questions.

   1. How do the wanderings of Israel differ from their experience in the
   wilderness from a Scriptural point of view?

   2. Give the chief events of this lesson?

   3. Is ignorance counted a sin?

   4. How did Israel in its government differ from every other nation?

   5. State from memory what you know about the ordinance of the red
   heifer.

   6. Do the same of the miracle at Meribah.

   THE JOURNEY RENEWED

   Chapters 20:14-21:35

   1. Preparation for the Journey, 20:14-29.

   Israel prepared to renew the journey, what now does Moses do (14-18)?
   In what spirit does Edom meet this request (18:20)? For the reason
   Israel was not permitted to force a passage through Edom, see Deut.
   2:1-8.

   What event in Israel's history takes place at this juncture (23-28)? In
   what sense was this a chastisement on Aaron (24)? Who succeeded him
   (26:28)? (Note the manner in which this incident is used in Is.
   22:20-25). Compare Heb. 7:23-25. A tomb has been erected near the spot
   where Aaron was buried.

   2. Fightings and Fears, c. 21.

   What event is narrated in the opening of chapter 21? We wonder why this
   discomfiture of Israel at the first was permitted, but perhaps to teach
   them the lesson of their weakness and of dependence solely upon God
   (Ps. 44:1-8. The phrase "utterly destroy" (2) might be rendered by
   "devote." In what earlier lesson was this subject of devotement
   considered?

   What prolongation of their journey was necessitated by Edom's refusal
   (4)? What effect had this on the people? What previous cause of
   murmuring was renewed (5)? What chastisement followed (6)? What effect
   had it (7)? How did God provide for their deliverance (8:9)? In what
   way did this show that the deliverance was not the effect of nature or
   art, but of God's power and grace? How is it used in the New Testament
   as a type of our salvation from sin through Christ? (See John 3:14,
   15.) How did this "brazen serpent" subsequently become a snare to
   Israel? (See 2 Kings 18:1-4.) "That part of the desert where the
   Israelites now were -- near the head of the gulf of Akaba -- is
   infested with reptiles of various kinds, particularly lizards, which
   raise themselves in the air, and swing from branches; and scorpions
   which lying among long grass, are particularly dangerous to the
   bare-legged, sandaled people of the East. The species that caused so
   great mortality amongst the Israelites cannot be ascertained. They are
   said to have been fiery, either from their bright color, or the
   inflammation their bite occasioned." -- Bible Commentary.

   In studying the verses that follow it will be desirable to have a good
   map.

   Note what is said (14) about the book of "The Wars of the Lord" as
   indicating a writing of some sort of which we have little record. The
   words following to the end of verse 16 are apparently a quotation from
   this book, and presumably inserted to decide the position of Aaron.

   What discovery was made near this point, and how was it celebrated (17,
   18)? What country did the Israelites now obtain by right of conquest
   (21-32)?

   Questions.

   1. How does this lesson teach that trials sometimes come for our good?

   2. Quote John 3:15, 16.

   3. Why is "fiery" used of the serpents?

   4. What ancient historical writing is quoted in this lesson?

   BALAAM AND HIS PROPHECIES

   Chapters 22-24

   1. The Historical Setting, c. 22.

   In what neighborhood are the Israelites now camped (1)? Where is this
   located? Who was the king of this people (4)? What effect on him was
   wrought by Israel's victories over his neighbors (2-4)? What plan of
   defense other than war does he adopt (5, 6)?

   Balaam's History and Character.

   Balaam is a mystery. He comes from Mesopotamia where the knowledge of
   the true God lingered after it had been lost in the other parts of the
   known world. He is one of the group containing Melchizedec and Job, who
   testified that although Jehovah was now revealing Himself peculiarly to
   the Hebrews, yet He had not left Himself without witnesses in the other
   nations.

   Not only Balaam's history but His character is a mystery, some thinking
   him a saint, and others a charlatan. Probably he was between the two,
   worshiping God ostensibly and yet serving himself where the temptation
   was strong, as it seems to have been in this case.

   Examine v. 13 as an illustration where his answer conceals the reason
   for the divine prohibition while it shows a willingness to go if only
   he could get permission.

   When that permission is obtained (20), it is an instance where God gave
   up a man to his own lust without approving it (22), while he proposed
   to over-rule the wrong desire for the furtherance of His own will. It
   is one thing to serve God and another to willingly serve Him. For the
   ultimate fate of Balaam, compare c. 31:8, and for inspired comments on
   his character, 2 Peter 2:16 and Jude 11.

   The Dumb Ass Speaking.

   Some say that verses 22-35 represent merely a version and not an actual
   occurrence, but this seems inadmissible in the middle of a plain
   history. That the ass may have been uttering sounds like a parrot,
   without understanding them is probable, but the tenor of Peter's
   language strengthens the conviction that we are dealing with an
   external act.

   But why does not the prophet show astonishment at the phenomenon? He
   may have done so, without a record of it being made, or the lack of it
   may be explained by the engrossment of his mind with the prospect of
   gain, for Peter speaks of "the madness of the prophet."

   2. The Disappointed King, c. 23.

   Balak prepared these altars and offered these sacrifices (23:1-3) in
   honor of Baal, the god of his country, but in whose honor did Balaam
   intend them (4)? And yet how is his superstition mingled with the true
   worship? Compare 2 Kings 18:22; Isa. 17:8; Jer. 11:13; Hosea 8:11.

   How does the prophet express the truth that no charms or demoniacal
   power can avail against God's purposes (8)? How does verse 9, last
   part, harmonize with what we have learned about Israel previously?
   (Compare Ex. 19:5; Lev. 20:24 and Deut. 33:28). How does the prophecy
   show not only Israel's separateness but greatness (10)? Do you recall
   Gen. 13:16 and 38:14?

   When Balaam says, Let me die the death of the righteous," he is still
   referring to Israel. The Hebrew word for "righteous" is Jeshurun,
   another name for the Israelites. And the prophet's meaning is that as
   they were blessed above others, not only in life but in death, because
   of their knowledge of the true God, he desired to have a part with
   them. But his desire was not very strong, in which he represents a
   large class in the world who wish for the salvation of Christ, and yet
   never accept it by receiving and confessing Him.

   God's Unchangeable Grace.

   In the second prophecy (18-24), how is the unchangeable purpose of
   God's grace expressed (19)? Compare how this principle in Israel's case
   still maintains, and applies to believers on Jesus Christ in this
   dispensation. The following will aid: 1 Sam. 15:29; Mal. 3:6; Ro.
   11:29; Titus 1:2; Heb. 13:8; James 1:17, etc.

   How does verse 21 show that this divine purpose toward Israel is one of
   grace? Does it say that there was no iniquity in Israel, or simply that
   God took no cognizance of it? But does His non-cognizance of it mean
   that He never chastised Israel for it? On the contrary, we have seen
   Him chastising Israel continually as she has provoked it. What then do
   these words mean?

   They mean that God neither has seen, nor shall see any iniquity in
   Israel that shall cause Him to change His original promise to Abraham
   and discard them as a nation from the place of privilege He has
   intended for them. This promise to Abraham is based on His original
   promise of the redemption of man in Gen. 3:15. This promise is
   unalterable, and depends not on man's goodness, but on God's truth and
   honor and grace. That is not to say that it has no effect on human
   character, and that mankind never will become good as the result of it,
   but only that its source is heavenly love and not earthly conduct. John
   6:37-40; Ro. 4:4-8: 8:28-39; Eph. 2:1-10; 1 Peter 1:3-9; 1 John 5:9-13.

   3. The Great Prophecy, c. 24.

   At what conviction has the prophet now arrived, and with what effect on
   his conduct (24:1)? What was the feeling in his heart, do you suppose?
   Look at Deuteronomy 23:5 for an answer. One wonders why God should use
   such a man as a prophet of good for His people, but before He ordained
   a regular line of prophets. He was pleased to reveal His will
   instrumentally through various persons.

   Christians are sometimes solicitous to be "anointed for service," as
   though that were the highest or only fruit of the new life. But while
   not disparaging the aim but encouraging it in its proper place, let us
   be humbled by the thought that God can get service out of bad as well
   as good men when He pleases. There is a higher aim for the Christian,
   and that is to "walk worthily of the Lord unto all pleasing" (Col.
   1:10). When one is doing that he is not likely to come short in
   service.

   The prophecy of Balaam is arranged as poetry in the Revised Version.
   "The redundant imagery of verses 5 to 7, depicts the humble origin,
   rapid progress and great prosperity of Israel."

   With what king and kingdom is Israel compared (7)? The Amalekites are
   meant, the most powerful of the desert tribes, a common title for whose
   kings was "Agag," like "Pharaoh" or "Caesar."

   What does Balaam say of the future of Israel (8)? With what effect on
   Balak (10, 11)? How does the next prophecy particularize (14)? Who do
   you suppose is the ultimate fulfillment of the word "him" in verse 17?
   It may mean the nation of Israel, but doubtless it is identical with
   the "star" and the "sceptre" of the same verse, whose application is
   Christ. That is not to say that the prophet knew this, but only that
   the event proves it. He only saw some great one coming out of Israel,
   not knowing whom, but we know whom in the light of the New Testament.
   Compare Gen. 49:10; Ps. 110; Matt. 2:2. Of course, David was an
   approximate fulfillment of the words, and did the things referred to in
   verses 17 and 18, but in the completest sense the reference is to
   Christ, and especially at His second coming, see Is. 59:20; Ro.
   11:25-29.

   What other national fate is predicted as well as Amalek (21)? What
   great nation would ultimately deport the Kenites (22)? What ultimately
   would be its history (24) ? "Chittim" or "Kittim" is an earlier name
   for Greece and some of the other western lands bordering on the
   Mediterranean, particularly Italy. What finally would become of the
   conqueror of Assyria (24)?

   Compare for some of the fulfillments of these prophecies Ex. 17:14; 1
   Sam. 15:1; Judges 1:16; 4:11, 16, 17; 2 Kings 15:29; Dan. 2:36-45; 5:7,
   3, etc. The Assyrians were overthrown by the Greeks under Alexander and
   his successors, and afterwards by the Romans who conquered the Greeks.
   The Romans, however, are yet to be overthrown with the son of perdition
   at their head, by the second coming of Christ to set up His kingdom on
   the earth through restored Israel. Some of these things we shall learn
   more about later on, but in the meantime what a sweep there is in this
   vision of Balaam! Little did he know the meaning of it all!

   Questions.

   1. With what group of men may Balaam be classed and why?

   2. What is your impression of his character?

   3. What two ways are there of serving God?

   4. What shows the unusual incident of the ass historical?

   5. What is the explanation of 23:21?

   6. What is a higher aim for a saint than merely service?

   7. Give the common title of the kings of Amalek.

   8. Apply the words of 24:17 and tell why.

   9. What territory is defined by "Chittim"?

   10. What is the sweep of Balaam's prophecy?

   BALAAM'S SCHEME AND ITS CONSEQUENCES

   Chapters 25-31

   We are not through with the "hireling" prophet. We find him referred to
   in three places in the New Testament. 2 Peter 2:5 speaks of his "way,"
   Jude 11 of his "error" and Rev. 2:14 of his "doctrine."

   His way is that which characterizes all false teachers, viz: making a
   market of their gifts. His error lay in failing to see the principle of
   the vicarious atonement by which God can be just and yet the justifier
   of believing sinners (Ro. 3:26). In other words, he felt that a holy
   God must curse such a people as Israel, knowing only a natural
   morality. His doctrine, which concerns us more particularly just now,
   refers to his teaching Balak to corrupt the people whom he could not
   curse (compare 25:1-3 with 31:16). -- Scofield Bible.

   1. Harlotry and Idolatry, c. 25.

   Into what sin did the people fall (1)? This fall in morality was soon
   followed by what fall in religion (2, 3)? Baal was a general name for
   "lord" and "peor" for a mount in Moab. The real name of this lord of
   the mount was Chemosh, whose worship was celebrated by the grossest
   obscenity.

   What punishment fell on them (4, 5)? Capital punishment in Israel meant
   that the victim was first stoned to death or otherwise slain, and then
   gibbeted. "The heads of the people" means the chief leaders in the
   outrage.

   Verse 6 speaks of a flagitious act in connection with this disgraceful
   conduct, promptly revenged by whom (7)? What reward to him follows (12,
   13)? What judgment had come to Israel (8)? What judgment does God order
   upon the Midianites (17, 18)?

   2. Second Numbering, c. 26.

   What new command is now given Moses (1, 2)? The probability is that the
   plague just mentioned had swept away the last of the older generation
   and hence the census.

   This census was necessary to preserve the distinction of families in
   connection with the distribution of Canaan soon to take place.

   By comparing the numbers with those of chapter 1, it will be seen that
   divine judgments had reduced the ranks of some of the tribes which had
   been particularly disobedient, while others had been increased so that
   Israel still continued about the same in numbers at the close of this
   period of thirty-eight years as at the beginning. What was the total
   diminution?

   Before passing to the next chapter observe verse 64 and note that its
   statement must not be considered absolute. For, besides Caleb and
   Joshua, there were alive at this time Eleazar and Ithamar, and in all
   probability a number of Levites, who had no participation in the
   defections in the wilderness. The tribe of Levi, having neither sent a
   spy into Canaan, nor being included in the enumeration at Sinai, must
   be regarded as not coming within the range of the sentence; and
   therefore would exhibit a spectacle not witnessed in the other tribes
   of many in their ranks above sixty years of age -- Bible Commentary.

   3. A Brief Glance at Chapters 27 to 30.

   We pass over the request of the daughters of Zelophehad (27:1-11), the
   injunction to Moses (12-14), and the ordination of Joshua (15-23), as
   requiring no explanation under the circumstances. The same may be said
   about the offerings (chapter 28) whose repetition was necessary
   doubtless because a new generation had sprung up since their enactment,
   and because the people would soon be settled in the land where they
   could be observed.

   4. The Midianites Judged, and Balaam Slain, c. 31.

   What is practically the last command Moses received from God (1, 2)?

   The Midianites, as may be recalled, were descendants of the marriage of
   Abraham with Keturah, and occupied the east and the southeast of Moab.
   They were the chief actors in the plot to seduce Israel into idolatry,
   by which it was hoped Jehovah would withdraw His blessing from them and
   permit their enemies to triumph. Were the plan successful it would mean
   in so far the defeat of God's purpose for the redemption of the nations
   through the instrumentality of Israel as we have already learned. An
   understanding of this fact is necessary to preserve this chapter from
   misinterpretation.

   A Religious War.

   Who were to be avenged according to Jehovah (2)? And who according to
   Moses (3)? How interesting to perceive here another illustration of the
   identification of God with His people! They have the same cause, the
   same friends, and the same enemies. Compare Acts 9:4, 5.

   And note another circumstance equally strange as the world considers
   things; viz: the preparation for death enjoined upon Moses! Were these
   Midianites his own enemies merely, one would expect him to be exhorted
   to forgive them and thus "die in peace with all the world." But being
   God's enemies, the most appropriate close of his earthly career would
   be to execute God's judgment upon them.

   Are there not lessons here for the peace advocates of this century?
   While sympathizing with them in many things, yet if they expect wars to
   cease until God has had a final settlement with the wicked nations of
   the earth, they are yet in the primary class of Bible instruction.

   "Some Things Hard to be Understood."

   The faith of some will stumble at things in this record, but a deeper
   knowledge of God makes all plain, and our duty is to trust Him until
   that knowledge comes.

   (1) The slaying of the males (7), was in accordance with the divine
   principle in all such cases, as shown in Deuteronomy 20:13. In this
   instance, however, the destruction seems to have been only partial, if
   we may judge by Judges 6:1 and the following verses. Perhaps this is
   explained by the circumstance that only those families were slain who
   were in the neighborhood of the Hebrew camp or had been accomplices in
   the plot. Many may have saved themselves by flight.

   (2) The slaying of Balaam (8) raises a question when we compare the
   statement with chapter 24:25. Perhaps he changed his plan about
   returning home after starting, and remained among the Midianites for
   the evil purpose already spoken of; or, learning that Israel had fallen
   into the snare laid, he may have returned to demand his reward from
   Midian. His judgment was just in consideration of his sin in the light
   of special revelations received from God.

   (3) The killing of the women and children (14-18) will stagger us till
   we remember that Moses' wrath was not an ebullition of temper, but an
   expression of enlightened regard for the will of God, and the highest
   interests of Israel. By their conduct the women had forfeited all
   claims to other treatment, especially in view of the sacred character
   of this war. As to the male children, it is to be remembered that a war
   of extermination required their destruction. We will deal with this
   subject more fully when we come to the broader illustration in the
   destruction of the Canaanites in Joshua.

   (4) Observe the declaration in verses 48-50, especially the last clause
   of 49. Here we have an astonishing miracle witnessing to the
   interposition of God in this whole matter, and in so far silencing
   every objection raised on the ground of cruelty and injustice. Compare
   here the opening verses of Psalm 44, and other similar places. These
   judgments of God on sin and disobedience should open our eyes to its
   nature, should cause us to tremble at the fear of it, and adore the
   grace which has given such guilty souls as we a sin bearer in Jesus
   Christ.

   Questions.

   1. How is Balaam spoken of in the New Testament, and by whom?

   2. Define the meaning of Baalpeor.

   3. Define capital punishment in Israel.

   4. What was the need for this census?

   5. Which tribe had the most of the older men at this time, and why?

   6. Who were the Midianites, and where were they located?

   7. What justifies their punishment?

   8. What comment on the universal peace theory does this lesson contain?

   9. What particular circumstance shows God's approval on the
   extermination of these enemies?

   GETTING READY FOR CANAAN

   Chapters 32-34

   1. Reuben and Gad's Choice, c. 32.

   What was their choice of possessions, and on what ground was it made
   (1-5)? What suspicion of their motive possessed Moses (6-15)? What
   assurance is given him (16-19)? How is the matter closed (20-27)? What
   charge does Moses transmit to his successors (28-32)?

   2. Review of the Journey, c. 33.

   The following from the Bible Commentary is useful: "This chapter may be
   said to form the winding-up of the history of the travels of the
   Israelites, for the following chapters relate to matters connected with
   the occupation and division of the land.

   "As several apparent discrepancies will be discovered on comparing the
   records here with Exodus, and the occasional notices of places in
   Deuteronomy, it is probable that this itinerary comprises a list of
   only the most important stations in their journeys; those where they
   formed prolonged encampments, and whence they dispersed their flocks
   and herds to pasture on the plains till the surrounding herbage was
   exhausted. The catalogue extends from their departure out of Egypt to
   their arrival on the plains of Moab."

   At whose authorization was this record made (2)? Thus was established
   the truth of history, thus a memorial of God's marvelous work on
   Israel's behalf preserved for all generations.

   For additional light on verses 3 and 4, consult the Revised Version.

   "As there are no less than eighteen stations inserted between Hazeroth
   and Kadesh, and only eleven days were spent in performing that journey
   (Deut. 1:2) the record here must refer to a different visit to Kadesh.
   The first was when they left Sinai in the second month (c. 1:2; c.
   13:20), and were in Kadesh in August (Deut. 1:45), and 'abode many
   days' in it, and murmuring at the report of the spies, were commanded
   to return into the desert 'by the way of the Red Sea.' The arrival at
   Kadesh, mentioned in this catalogue, corresponds to the second sojourn
   at that place, being the first month, or April (c. 20:1).

   "Between the two visits there intervened a period of 38 years, during
   which they wandered hither and thither, often returning to the same
   spots, as the pastoral necessities of their flocks required."

   When did Aaron die, and at what age (38, 39)? What command is renewed
   to Moses (50-53)? What warning accompanies it (55, 56)?

   3. The Boundaries, c. 34.

   It is difficult to trace these boundary lines on the map, especially
   those on the south, and students must be referred to Bible dictionaries
   on the subject.

   In the meantime, it is clear that Israel never entered on the
   possession of all this territory, even in the golden era of David and
   Solomon. That they will do so in the millennial age there can be no
   doubt.

   Questions.

   1. How would you explain certain discrepancies between these chapters
   and other parts of the Pentateuch?

   2. How is the truth of this history established?

   3. What explanation might be given of the 18 stations and only 11
   journeys?

   4. Has Israel ever entered on possession of all her territory?

   5. Is she likely to do so?

   THE CITIES OF THE LEVITES AND CITIES OF REFUGE

   Chapter 35

   We may conclude our exposition of Numbers with this chapter, as the
   final one contains no difficulties not dealt with in previous lessons,
   or that are not explained in the text itself.

   1. The Cities of the Levites, vv. 1-5.

   "As the Levites were to have no domain like the other tribes, they were
   to be distributed throughout the land in certain cities appropriated to
   their use; and these cities were to be surrounded by extensive suburbs.

   "There is an apparent discrepancy between vv. 4 and 5 with regard to
   the extent of these suburbs; but the statements refer to different
   things -- the one to the extent of the suburbs from the walls of the
   city, the other to the space of 2,000 cubits from their extremity.

   "In point of fact, there was an extent of ground, amounting to 3,000
   cubits, measured from the wall of the city. One thousand were probably
   occupied with out-houses for the accommodation of shepherds and other
   servants, with gardens, or oliveyards. And these, which were portioned
   out to different families (1 Chron. 6:60), might be sold by one Levite
   to another, but not to any individual of another tribe (Jer. 32:7). The
   other two thousand cubits remained a common for the pasturing of cattle
   (Lev. 25:34)." -- Bible Commentary.

   2. The Cities of Refuge, vv. 6-29.

   The remarks which follow, taken from the same source as the preceding,
   will furnish a general introduction to an analysis of the text:

   "The practice of Goelism -- i. e., of the nearest relation of an
   individual who was killed being bound to demand satisfaction from the
   author of his death, existed from a remote antiquity (Gen. 4:14;
   27:45).

   "It seems to have been an established usage in the age of Moses; and,
   although in a rude state of society it is a natural principle of
   criminal jurisprudence, it is liable to great abuses. The chief of the
   evils inseparable from it are, that the kinsman, who is bound to
   execute justice, will often be precipitate, little disposed, in the
   heat of passion, to discriminate between the premeditated purpose of
   the assassin and the misfortune of the unintentional homicide.

   "Moreover, it had a tendency not only to foster a vindicative spirit,
   but, in case of the Goel being unsuccessful in finding his victim, to
   transmit animosities and feuds against his descendants from one
   generation to another. This is exemplified among the Arabs in the
   present day.

   The Humane Object.

   "This practice of Goelism obtained among the Hebrews to such an extent
   that it was not expedient to abolish it; and Moses, while sanctioning
   its continuance, was directed to make special regulations, which tended
   to prevent the consequences of personal vengeance, and, at the same
   time, to afford an accused person time and means of proving his
   innocence.

   "This was the humane end contemplated in the institution of cities of
   refuge. There were to be six, three on the east of Jordan, both because
   the territory there was equal in length, though not in breadth, to
   Canaan, and because it might be more convenient for some to take refuge
   across the border. They were appointed for the benefit, not of the
   Israelites only, but of all resident strangers."

   Analysis of the Text.

   How many of these cities were there (6)? For whom appointed? From among
   what other cities? What important qualification is made in verse 11?
   And what further one in verse 12? How were these cities arranged with
   reference to the Jordan (14)? "On this side Jordan" should be rendered
   beyond Jordan, and the idea is that three were specially for the
   accommodation of those tribes which so recently had elected to stay on
   the east side of the river. Was this refuge limited to the Israelites
   (15)?

   The Avenger of Blood.

   What three cases of premeditated murder are mentioned in verses 16-18?
   What three in verses 20 and 21? What name is given him whose duty it
   was to slay the murderer (19)? The word "revenger" or avenger (see v.
   12), is the translation of the Hebrew word Gaal. from which comes
   Goelism. It means a kinsman, the nearest of kin. It was he, only, who
   could perform this office.

   In the case of premeditated murder was there any escape for the guilty?
   But in the case of unpremeditated murder what protection did these
   cities provide (22-24)? What was the method of operation (24, 25)? What
   condition was necessary for the man-slayer to observe (26-28)? "Once
   having reached the nearest city, for one or other of them was within a
   day's journey of all parts of the land, he was secure. But he had to
   'abide in it.' His confinement was a wise rule, designed to show the
   sanctity of human blood in God's sight, as well as to protect the
   man-slayer himself, whose presence in society might have provoked the
   passions of the deceased's relatives. But the period of his release
   from confinement was not until the death of the high priest. That was a
   season of public affliction, when private sorrows were overlooked under
   a sense of the national calamity, and when the death of so eminent a
   servant of God naturally led all to serious consideration about their
   own mortality."

   We meet this subject again in Deuteronomy 19 and Joshua 20, all of the
   passages put together furnishing rich material for a Bible reading or a
   sermon on the cities of refuge as

   A Type of Christ.

   They are a type:

   (1) In their origin, since they were divinely ordained.

   (2) In their necessity, for without them there was no hope for the
   pursued.

   (3) In their accessibility, for being on both sides of the Jordan, and
   within a day's journey of all parts of the land, they might be easily
   reached.

   (4) In their security, for the man-slayer once received within their
   walls could not be assailed.

   (5) In their applicability, for they were designed for all, Jew and
   Gentile, friend and alien, without distinction.

   Any able to use such an outline will not need to be reminded of the New
   Testament Scriptures which parallel the different divisions. In working
   out the details it might be well to show that like our salvation in
   Christ, the value of these cities of refuge was limited to those that
   remained in them, "Abide in Me."

   Also, point the contrast, that whereas they were restricted to the
   innocent man-slayer, Christ receives the guilty. The man-slayer had to
   be judged first, we believers are already judged, condemned, and yet
   free in Christ.

   It is proper to say also that the "avenger of blood" or the kinsman
   redeemer is a beautiful type of Christ, some think more fitting than
   the cities of refuge themselves, but of this we shall speak in the next
   lesson.

   Questions.

   1. How is the supposed discrepancy between verses 4 and 5 explained?

   2. What is meant by the word "Goelism"?

   3. Of what is "Gaal" or "Goel" the translation?

   4. What is the meaning of the word?

   5. To what abuses was Goelism liable?

   6. In what ways was the Mosaic legislation intended to restrain them?

   7. Where were the cities of refuge located with reference to the
   Jordan, and why?

   8. How comprehensive were their benefits?

   9. Why should the man-slayer be confined in them?

   10. In how many ways may they be considered typical of Christ?

   THE KINSMAN REDEEMER

   In fulfillment of the promise in the last lesson there is here a
   consideration of the kinsman redeemer as a type of Christ, being an
   abridgment from the Rev. Henry Melvill, D.D., an eloquent English
   university preacher of an earlier generation. Our object is not only to
   open up the subject to those who have never considered it, but also to
   furnish material for a Gospel sermon to those who have opportunities in
   that direction.

   Great Truths Taught by Common Things.

   Melvill begins by speaking of the close connection between the Jewish
   and Christian dispensations as we have discovered in our study of the
   Pentateuch. We have seen this especially in regard to redemption, the
   redeemer under the law being the type of the Redeemer under the Gospel.
   There may be no distinct allusions to Christ, but whenever you meet
   with a transaction of redemption, either of land or of a person, the
   matter is so ordered as to be typical of the person and work of Christ.
   Thus the Jews were taught even through the common dealings of life the
   great spiritual deliverance that was wrought out in the fullness of
   time.

   There are three conditions marked in the Old Testament as requiring the
   interposition of a redeemer:

   (1) If there had been a forfeiture of an inheritance, a loss of
   personal liberty, or the shedding of blood. In each it was enjoined
   that the Goel or redeemer should interfere on behalf of the distressed
   individual. Moreover, the occasions which necessitated the interference
   of the Goel, and the manner in which it was conducted, bear so close a
   likeness to the Gospel redeemer that we can scarcely doubt it to have
   been the purpose of the Holy Spirit to keep the scheme of human
   redemption always before Israel.

   The Forfeiture of an Inheritance.

   To begin with the forfeiture of an inheritance alluded to in the
   twenty-fifth chapter of Leviticus. If an Israelite had become poor, and
   sold some of his possessions, the Goel was directed, if possible, to
   redeem the land. In that case it became the property of the Goel until
   the year of jubilee, when it returned to the original proprietor. The
   forfeited possession might be redeemed by the latter at any time were
   he able to pay the price of it; but were he not, then only the Goel
   could redeem it for him, and if he did or could not do so, no stranger
   might interfere, the possession must remain unredeemed.

   We see the typical character of this transaction indicated first in the
   fact that only a kinsman could fill the office of Goel. Some other
   individual might be ready to render aid, but had he the rights of the
   closest kinsmanship? If not, the law refused to allow his
   interposition. In laying down this principle, God taught that He who
   should arise as the Goel or Redeemer of a lost world, must be bone of
   our bone, and flesh of our flesh. No angel could redeem us. (Hebrews 10
   to 18.)

   In the next place, if you wish to describe man's natural condition and
   the change effected in it by the work of Christ, where can you obtain a
   better illustration than from the directions of this law in regard to a
   forfeited inheritance? Who is the Israelite that has grown poor and
   alienated himself from the possession of his fathers if it be not the
   sinner originally made in the image of God, and who has destroyed that
   image by an act of rebellion? An eternity of happiness was our
   possession, but we threw it away, bringing upon ourselves the curse of
   death of body and soul. We became poor, and who shall measure our
   spiritual poverty? Have we a solitary fraction of our own to pay for
   our redemption? Therefore the inheritance must be forfeited forever,
   unless a kinsman redeemer shall arise. God has provided this redeemer
   in a man, and yet infinitely more than a man, the God-man Christ Jesus.

   But furthermore, as in the case of the impoverished Israelite, what
   Christ had redeemed tie has not instantly restored. The year of jubilee
   has not yet come for us, but with a mightier trumpet peal than could be
   heard upon the mountains of Israel shall that jubilee year be
   introduced. The resurrection and glorifying of our bodies will be their
   completion for entrance on the fullness of the purchased possession.

   The Loss of Personal Liberty.

   To pass now to the second instance of redemption where there has been a
   loss of personal liberty, and where all that has been spoken of in
   regard to the forfeiture of an inheritance applies with only a slight
   change. The same chapter shows that for the discharge of a debt or the
   procurement of subsistence an Israelite might sell himself either to
   another Israelite or a stranger. Should he become the servant of an
   Israelite, there was no right of redemption, but he must remain in the
   house of his master till the jubilee. But should he become the servant
   of a stranger and cause arise for the interposition of the Goel the law
   ran: "After that he is sold he may be redeemed again; one of his
   brethren may redeem him." If he were able to redeem himself he might do
   so but were the ability lacking then his kinsman must interpose, no
   stranger could discharge the office.

   Observe that the Goel had no right to interfere unless the Israelite
   had sold himself to a stranger. The reason is that if his master was an
   Israelite like himself, then he had not become separated from God's
   people and the exigency had not arisen for his redemption in the same
   sense. It were only when the master were a stranger that the serving
   became typical of man's bondage to Satan. It was in such a case only
   that we find the illustration of the New Testament, saying that the
   servant of sin has been "made captive by Satan at his will."

   Thank God in such a case the sinner need not languish forever in
   bondage. The chain need not be eternal, for there advances his kinsman,
   made of a woman, made under the law, and in the likeness of sinful
   flesh, to pay down the price of redemption and to bid the prisoner come
   forth into the glorious liberty of the children of God.

   The Shedding of Blood.

   The third case of redemption, where there had been the shedding of
   blood, differs from the two already examined.

   This is referred to in the thirty-fifth of Numbers, and in connection
   with the appointment of the cities of refuge.

   The King James translation speaks only of the "avenger of blood," but
   the original is Goel or the kinsman redeemer. You will recall that the
   latter must pursue the murderer and take vengeance if he overtake him
   before reaching the city of refuge. But if the Goel were not at hand to
   follow him no stranger had the right to do so. This feature of the Goel
   therefore stands out as prominently here as in the other instances.

   It is the common idea that the cities of refuge were typical of Christ
   and the murderer was the human race pursued by the justice of God. Of
   course, there is some fidelity in this figure, and under certain
   limitations it may be considered as a type, but still it remains that
   the standing type of Christ under the Mosaic law was the Goel, or
   kinsman redeemer. It is for this reason we seek the figure of Christ,
   not in the cities of refuge, but in the avenger of blood.

   For example, those who were really guilty fled in vain to the city and
   must be delivered tip to the punishment due their crime. Who can find
   in this any emblem of the flying of sinners for refuge to Christ?

   On the other hand, observe that the human race, created deathless, was
   slain by Satan when he moved our first parents to the act prohibited in
   the words "in the day that thou doest it, thou shalt surely die." It
   was with reference to this slaughter of mankind that Christ said of
   him: "He was a murderer from the beginning." It was through Satan that
   death, whether of body or soul, gained footing in this creation, and we
   count it therefore proper to describe him as the great man-slayer.

   Our Nearest of Kin.

   But who pursued the murderer? Who took on him the vengeance which drew
   the wonder of the universe and "through death destroyed him that had
   the power of death"? Who but the kinsman redeemer? Who but that "seed
   of the woman" predicted to bruise the serpent's head? Though Satan for
   a while may be permitted to roam over this creation, there has been
   gained a mastery over him which has reduced him into the bond-slave of
   our kinsman. And the latter is only reserving the full taking of
   vengeance until the year of jubilee arrives, when the enemy will be
   hurled into the lake of fire forever and ever.

   Finally, we should not suppose that in pleading for the typical
   character of the God we plead for the existence of a figure hidden from
   the men of the old dispensation. When Job exclaims: "I know that my
   redeemer liveth," what he really says is, "I now that my God, my
   kinsman, liveth." And if the saints among the Jews could describe
   Christ as the God, would they not naturally turn to the offices of the
   Goel that they might ascertain the offices of Christ?

   Who is there that is not the kinsman of Christ, since that kinsmanship
   resulted in His taking human nature upon Him? It is enough to be a man
   to know oneself Christ's kinsman. He tasted death for every man. He
   redeemed every man's inheritance. He regained every man's liberty. He
   avenged every man's blood. Will anyone put from him through unbelief
   the benefits of His interposition? "If ye will not believe, surely ye
   shall not be established."

   This is the glorious Gospel of the Son of God, and nothing but unbelief
   can exclude the poorest, the meanest, the wickedest among men from a
   full and free share in the perfect redemption.

   Questions.

   1. What great truth were the Jews taught even in the common duties of
   life?

   2. What three conditions in the Old Testament required the
   interposition of a redeemer?

   3. What relation must this redeemer bear to the distressed person?

   4. Could any other person act in this capacity?

   5. What great principle of our redemption is illustrated in this case?

   6. How long might the Goel retain a redeemed possession, and what does
   this illustrate?

   7. Why, in the second case, might not the Goel interpose unless an
   Israelite had sold himself to a stranger?

   8. Can you quote Job 19:25-27?
     __________________________________________________________________

DEUTERONOMY

   NOTE

   There were fewer lessons in Numbers in proportion to its length than in
   the previous books, and the same will be true of Deuteronomy and some
   others. The reason is because of the lesser comparative importance of
   these books, and because of the repetitions they contain.

   It would be serious, however, both to the understanding of the Bible
   and the spiritual life of those following these lessons if the books
   referred to should be omitted in the course of study. They are part of
   the revelation of God's will, and have their value in our coming to
   know Him, and in the moulding of our character and our training for
   service.

   How to Utilize the Lessons.

   But how shall the teachers of Bible classes utilize such lessons? Let
   not their length discourage them, but let that feature be seized upon
   as a precious opportunity to get their classes feeding on the Word of
   God in large portions, and drinking from the fountain of life in
   copious draughts. The experience to many will be new, but that will
   give it freshness. At the same time the task will be easy, simply to
   read and not necessarily to study the assigned chapters. The interest
   is likely to increase with the reading, until the variety afforded by
   such lessons over those briefer in space and more closely analytic in
   character will be anticipated with pleasure.

   A Method Suggested.

   The author would recommend this method: Announce to the class that the
   next lesson will be on such or such a general theme, and cover so many
   chapters. As it has few difficulties of any kind, or covers matters
   treated previously, the class are asked merely to read the text
   carefully and in a prayerful spirit. But they are asked to read it
   several times, if possible make it their daily reading for the
   intervening week. Then when they come together in the class they will
   begin to discuss its contents as familiar with it, having something to
   communicate worth while.

   The teacher or leader of the class will always find a basis or starting
   point for such discussions in the questions and annotations furnished
   in the Commentary.

   REVIEW OF ISRAEL'S HISTORY

   Chapters 1-3

   A book has been written by Canon Bernard entitled, "The Progress of
   Doctrine in the New Testament," in which he shows not only that the
   contents of its books are inspired, but their arrangement and order as
   well.

   The same might be said of the Old Testament, especially of the
   Pentateuch. To illustrate, the purpose of the Bible is to give the
   history of redemption through a special seed. In Genesis we have the
   election of that seed (Abraham), in Exodus their redemption, in
   Leviticus their worship, in Numbers their walk and warfare, and in
   Deuteronomy their final preparation for the experience towards which
   all has been directed. (C. H. M.)

   The Book of Review.

   A secondary name for Deuteronomy might be "The Book of Review." The
   word comes from two Greek words, deuter, "second," and nomos, "law,"
   the second law, or the repetition of the law. And yet when it comes to
   reviewing the law it adds certain things not mentioned previously (see
   29:1).

   The one great lesson it contains is that of obedience grounded on a
   known and recognized relationship to God through redemption.

   The Divisions of the Book.

   1., Review of the History, 1-3; 2. Review of the Law, 4-1 1; 3.
   Instructions and Warnings, 12-27; 4. Prophecy of Israel's Future,
   28-30; 5. Moses' Final Counsels, 31; 6. Moses' Song and Blessing,
   32-33; 7. Moses' death, 34.

   Review of the History.

   "This side Jordan" (v. 1), is in the Revised Version "beyond Jordan,"
   and means the east side, where Moses and the people now were. How long
   is the direct journey from Horeb (or Sinai) to Kadesh-Barnea (2)? The
   allusion is doubtless to remind the people of their sin, which
   prolonged this journey from eleven days to forty years.

   What is the first great fact of the review (5-8)? The second (11-18)?
   What do you recall about this second fact from our previous studies?
   What is the third fact (19-46)? What do you recall about this? What is
   the fourth (2:1-8)? The fifth (9-12)? Is there anything in vv. 10-12 to
   suggest an addition by a later hand than Moses?

   Note to the Student.

   It is hardly necessary to analyze the chapter further. Every student
   who has pursued the course thus far will be able to do it for himself,
   after receiving the suggestions above. If there are any beginning to
   study the Commentary now for the first time, let them examine the
   marginal references in their Bible for the places where the facts are
   first mentioned in Numbers, and it will be easy to compare the
   instruction given upon it in the previous lessons.

   This may be a good place to again state that the object of this
   Commentary is to assist the reader to study the Bible. It has little
   value for those who eat only predigested food. There are better helps
   of that kind at hand, and more are scarcely called for.

   The author also has in mind leaders of adult Bible classes who are
   looking for suggestions more than anything else, and to whom it is
   hoped the Commentary may be a blessing.

   An Explanation or Two.

   While further questions on the text of this lesson are hardly
   necessary, there are some things calling for explanation.

   For example, chapter 2:4 says: "The children of Esau shall be afraid of
   you," which seems contradictory to Num. 20: 14. But the solution is
   that in the former instance the Israelites were on their western
   frontier where the Edomites were strong, while now they were on the
   eastern, where they were weak.

   It may be asked why they should be necessitated to buy food of the
   Edomites, when the manna, still continued to be given them. The reply
   is, that there was no prohibition against eating other food, if they
   did not have an inordinate desire for it.

   A reasonable explanation of other seeming contradictions may be found,
   but the student must be referred to larger commentaries, and a good
   many of them, if he wishes to learn everything that can be learned.
   Many things must be taken for granted in these lessons, but if we only
   get well acquainted with those that are explained we shall be in a fair
   way to master the rest.

   Og and His Bedstead.

   But what about the giant Og and his bedstead? He was the only remnant
   in the transjordanic country (Joshua 15:14) of a gigantic race,
   supposed to be the most ancient inhabitants of Palestine.

   Although beds in the east are with the common people a simple mattress,
   yet bedsteads were not unknown among the great. Taking a cubit at half
   a yard, the bedstead of Og would measure thirteen and one-half feet,
   and as beds are usually a little larger than the persons who occupy
   them, the stature of the Amorite king may be estimated at about eleven
   or twelve feet.

   But how did the bedstead come to be "in Rabbath, of the children of
   Ammon"? Perhaps on the eve of the engagement they conveyed it to
   Rabbath for safety. This is so unlikely, however, that some take the
   Hebrew word "bedstead" to mean "coffin," and think that the king having
   been wounded in battle, fled to Rabbath, where he died and was buried,
   and that here we have the size of his coffin.

   Questions.

   1. How far may the inspiration of the Scriptures have extended, and how
   is it illustrated in the Pentateuch?

   2. What is the meaning of "Deuteronomy"?

   3. Name the seven divisions of the book.

   4. On which side of the Jordan was this book written?

   5. How would you explain the allusion to the bedstead of Og?

   REVIEW OF THE LAWS

   Chapters 4-6

   1. The Lessons of Sinai, c. 4.

   What makes a nation wise and understanding (6)? What makes a nation
   great (7, 8)? What obligation does one generation owe the next (9)? Of
   all the divine commandments, which are the most important (10-13)? Of
   these ten, which one is particularly emphasized (15-28)? How is God's
   merciful character illustrated in one connection with these
   commandments (29-31)? What expression in v. 31 gives a peculiar
   interest to this promise just now? On what divine action does the hope
   of Israel rest (31, last clause)?

   2. The Mosaic Covenant, cc. 5, 6.

   By "all Israel" (1) may be meant a general assembly of the people, or
   possibly only the elders, as their representatives. "The Lord made not
   this covenant with our fathers, but with us" (3), means not with our
   fathers only, but also with us, their successors. "The Lord talketh
   with you face to face" (4), means not in a corporeal or visible form,
   but in a free and familiar manner.

   What comment is added to the fourth commandment in this review (15)?
   What expression of mingled desire and disappointment is attributed to
   God in connection with the original giving of the law (29)? What is the
   sum of the commandments (6:4, 5)? in what particular do these words
   testify to the divine nature? How do verses 6-9 amplify the thought in
   chapter 4:9 previously referred to? As suggested by the verses
   following, how were the people to keep their religion in mind through
   the avenue of their eye? What provision was made for its inculcation in
   the young?

   Jewish Phylacteries.

   The following quotation is interesting as bearing upon the Jewish
   phylacteries: "It is probable that Moses used the phraseology in the
   seventh verse in a figurative way, to signify earnest and frequent
   instruction; and perhaps the eighth verse is to be taken in the same
   sense also. But as the Israelites interpreted it literally, many
   suppose that a reference was made to a superstitious custom of the
   Egyptians, who wore jewels and trinkets on the forehead and arm,
   inscribed with words and sentences, as amulets to protect them from
   danger.

   "These, it has been conjectured, Moses intended to supersede by
   substituting sentences of the law; and so the Hebrews understood him,
   for they have always considered the wearing of the tephilim or
   frontlets a permanent obligation.

   "The form was as follows: Four pieces of parchment, inscribed, the
   first with Exod. 13:2-10; the second with Exod. 13:11-16; the third
   with Deut. 6:1-8; and the fourth with Deut. 11:18-21, were enclosed in
   a square case or box of tough skin, on the side of which was placed the
   Hebrew letter shin, and bound round the forehead with a thong or
   ribbon. When designed for the arms, these four texts were written on
   one slip of parchment, which, as well as the ink, was carefully
   prepared for the purpose.

   "With regard to the other usage supposed to be alluded to, the
   Egyptians had the lintels and imposts of their door and gates inscribed
   with sentences indicative of a favorable omen, which is still the case;
   the front doors of houses -- in Cairo, for instance -- are painted red,
   white and green, bearing inscribed upon them sentences from the Koran,
   the Mohammedan bible.

   "Moses designed to turn this custom to a better account, and ordered
   that, instead of the former superstitious inscriptions, should be
   written the words of God."

   Questions.

   1. What three allusions are explained under the head of the "Mosaic
   Covenant"?

   2. What is the history of the Jewish phylacteries?

   3. Describe the phylacteries.

   4. What was the Mosaic design in their use?

   WARNINGS AND EXHORTATIONS

   Chapters 7-11

   1. Obedience, c. 7.

   What were the names of the seven nations of Canaan to be cast out for
   their iniquity (1)? Who would cast them out, and in what manner is the
   supernatural character of the act emphasized? Nevertheless, what
   illustrates the divine use of means (2)? What command is laid on the
   Israelites in the premises (2, 3)? And why (4)? To what extent should
   their zeal be exhibited, and why (5, 6)? What shows the choice of
   Israel to be of grace and not debt (7, 8)?

   What shows the blessing of Israel to be grounded on obedience (9-12)?
   How is the temporal and material character of the blessing illustrated
   (13-15)? How are the people encouraged (17-21)? What shows God's very
   particular care for them {22, 23)?

   2. Gratitude, c. 8.

   What shows that Israel was too small a people to occupy the land at
   first (1)? Notice in the verses following (2, 3), how their experiences
   in the wilderness were intended to teach obedience as well as impress
   them with the goodness of God. What miraculous occurrence is noted in
   verse 4? Compare 29:5.

   What attractive features of the land are named (7-9)? All accounts,
   speak of the natural beauty and fertility of Palestine, and its great
   capabilities when properly developed. To be among its brooks, and hills
   and valleys after passing through the desert, can be appreciated by
   those who have entered California after crossing the plains.

   For the plenteousness of the wheat and barley of Palestine see Matt.
   13:8; but these products of the northern regions were equalled by the
   fruits of the south. "Honey'' is often used indeterminately to signify
   a syrup of dates or grapes, which was esteemed a great luxury in the
   east, "Iron" was found in the mountains of Lebanon. The "brass" was not
   the alloy brass, but copper ore. Compare 1 Chron. 22:3; 29:2-7; Isa.
   60:17.

   After mentioning these instances of God's goodness, what arguments are
   founder upon them in the closing verses? Note the appropriateness of
   this chapter to be read on Thanksgiving day, and other national
   holidays.

   3. Humility, cc. 9-11.

   Notice the description of the Canaanitish cities in v. 1. They are
   called "great" because of the space they covered. Unlike our cities,
   the houses stood far apart, with gardens and fields intervening. They
   were usually fenced, sometimes as high as forty feet, with burnt or
   sun-dried bricks. It would not be much to demolish such a wall in our
   day, but such engineering skill was then unknown. Nevertheless, would
   any obstacle prevent their taking possession?

   Would the victory be theirs, or God's? And would He give it to them on
   the ground of merit (4)? What would move Him in the premises (4, 5)?
   How does Moses dissuade the people from any idea of their own
   righteousness (see the remainder of the chapter)? The plainness of
   Moses' speech and the submission of the people is a strong evidence of
   the truth of the history. An impostor would have operated on opposite
   lines.

   What instances of unfaithfulness does Moses name? For answer note vv.
   12-21, 22, 23. The reference to his humiliation in the last-named verse
   does not apply to a third experience of the kind, but is a fuller
   description of the second named in v. 18.

   The Bible Commentary has the following on "the brook that descended out
   of the mount" (21): "Though the Israelites were supplied with water
   from this rock when they were stationed at Rephidim (Wady Feiran),
   there is nothing in the narrative which should lead us to suppose that
   the rock was in the immediate neighborhood of that place (see on Exod.
   17:5, 6). The water of this rock was probably the brook that descended
   from the mount. The water may have flowed many miles from the rock, as
   the winter torrents do now through the wadys of Arabia Petraea (Ps.
   78:15, 16). And the rock may have been smitten at such a height, and at
   a spot bearing such a relation to the Sinaitic valleys, as to furnish
   supplies of water during the journey from Horeb by the way of Mount
   Seir and Kadesh-Barnea (c. 1:1, 2). On this supposition new light is
   cast on the language of the apostle, when he speaks of 'the rock
   following' the Israelites (1 Cor. 10:4)."

   The general subject of chapter 9 is extended into chapters 10 and 11.

   In chapter 10 note, in verse 4, that it was not Moses who wrote the
   words on the tables of stone, but God Himself. A professor in one of
   our universities is quoted as making light of this by inquiring whether
   God is supposed to have turned stone mason and chiselled these words
   with His own hand. We can afford to treat such remarks with silence,
   remembering the words of Scripture that some professing themselves to
   be wise have become fools (Rom. 1:22).

   Note in v. 5, a minute circumstance, the mention of which at the time
   attests the truth of the record.

   Note that vv. 6-9 seem to be inserted out of their place, the
   explanation of which no one knows. The address of Moses is resumed
   again at v. 10.

   With v. 16 compare Rom. 2:25, 29 for its New Testament application to
   the Jew, and Col. 2:11, to the Christian.

   In chapter 11 there is little requiring particular notice. The blessing
   and the curse (26-32) will be referred to in a later chapter, but just
   here it may be mentioned that "most signally is the execution of the
   curse seen in the present sterility of Palestine."

   Questions.

   1. What were the wilderness experiences intended to teach Israel?

   2. What were the chief products of northern and southern Palestine,
   respectively?

   3. Why were the cities of Canaan called "great"?

   4. What evidence of its truth does this record contain?

   5. Can you quote 1 Cor. 10:4?

   CONDITIONS OF BLESSING IN THE LAND

   Chapters 12-16

   1. Places of Worship, c. 12.

   In Canaan, what were the Israelites to destroy and how thoroughly was
   the work to be done (1-3)? What contrast were they to place between
   themselves and the heathen in public worship (4-7)? Did this apply to
   the same extent in the wilderness, and if not, why not (8-14)? What
   exception was made as to their private and domestic affairs (15, 16)?
   What were they not at liberty to eat in their own homes (17-19) Against
   what snare were they to be on their guard (29-32)?

   In explanation of the foregoing it should be observed that no mention
   is made of heathen temples in Canaan at this time, and doubtless none
   were in existence. The places chosen for worship were the mountain
   tops, or groves, in order to direct attention toward heaven and secure
   retirement.

   Note that while God promises to choose a place for the worship of
   Himself in the land, yet He does not divulge it in advance. Was this to
   prevent the Canaanites from concentrating their opposition there, or to
   prevent a course of strife among the Israelites themselves?

   Notice from v. 12 that while the males only were commanded to appear
   before God at the annual feasts (i. e. at Jerusalem), yet the women
   were at liberty to accompany them.

   The heathen believed in local deities who expected their dues from all
   who came to inhabit the country they protected.

   This explains the caution in the closing verses of the chapter.

   2. False Prophets, c. 13.

   How were they to regard the teachings of false prophets (1-3)? How were
   they to deal with the prophets themselves (5)? Did it make any
   difference even if the wonders of the prophet had a show of reality?
   Does God ever permit such wonders to be done by false prophets, and if
   so, for what purpose? How are God's people to be preserved from such
   temptations (4)? Compare Isaiah 7:19, 20, and 1 John 4:1-6. The student
   will see the bearing of this upon the false teachings of the present
   day, such as Theosophy, the New Thought, Spiritualism, Christian
   Science, and anything else, no matter how fair it appears, that is not
   in accord with the Gospel (see Gal. 1:8).

   In the case of these false teachers should it make any difference if
   they were friends or relations (6-11)? Suppose a whole city should have
   been led away into idolatry thus, what then (12-16)? Might this action
   be taken hastily, or only after investigation?

   The Jews appeal to this chapter as justifying their crucifixion of
   Jesus Christ, but it is replied that "to Him gave all the prophets
   witness." He had all the characteristics of the true prophet and was
   the fulfillment of all that had been written in the Scriptures
   concerning the Coming One. Moreover so far from alienating the people
   from Jehovah and His worship, He honored Him by observing His worship,
   and the purpose of His life was to fulfill the law and the prophets and
   put away the reproach of sin.

   3. Dietary Matters, c. 14.

   This chapter is taken up chiefly with dietary matters, but before they
   are touched upon what prohibition is laid in vv. 1, 2, and for what
   cause? It was an idolatrous practice on certain occasions (1 Kings
   18:28; Jer. 16:6, 41:5), to make cuttings on the face and other parts
   of the body with the finger nails or sharp instruments. To make a large
   bare space between the eyebrows was another such custom in honor of the
   dead. This was referred to in Lev. 19. These usages, were degrading,
   and inconsistent with the people of God (1 Thess. 4:13).

   Coming to the dietary matters, the student must be referred to what was
   said in earlier lessons, particularly in Leviticus.

   No misunderstanding of verse 21 should be allowed as though what was
   not good enough in the physical sense for the Jew might do for the
   Gentile. The explanation has been shown previously, that it was for
   ceremonial and spiritual reasons.

   4. The Sabbatic Year, c. 15.

   The subject of this chapter has been dealt with in Exodus and Leviticus
   (see the marginal references in your Bible), but there are a few
   features calling for particular notice.

   (1) The first matter is release from debt in the Sabbatic year (1-11).
   At this time what is every creditor obliged to do, and why (2)? It is
   not necessary to suppose that this was an absolute discharge of the
   debt, but a suspension of payment for the period named; and this,
   because in that period there was a suspension of agricultural labor
   which might have made it a hardship to pay a debt. We have seen that
   the underlying idea of the Sabbatic year was to impress all with the
   fact that they held their property from God, and that supreme gratitude
   was due to Him.

   From whom might such civil rights and privileges be withheld (3)? What
   further qualifying thought is in v. 4? This seems to mean that in the
   case of well-to-do Israelites debts might be collected even in the
   Sabbatic year. But some think the words should be: "In order that there
   may be no poor among you," which would preclude any exception.

   What promise does God renew unto Israel (6)? Remember that this is to
   be literally fulfilled unto Israel in that day when, obedient and
   penitent, they shall return unto God and Jesus as their Messiah.

   Read carefully vv. 7-11, and observe the detail with which God as the
   theocratic King of His people would watch over their welfare. The
   foregoing law of release might prevent some covetous Hebrew from
   lending to the poor, hence the warning and the promise.

   (2) The second matter is release from slavery. For the former treatment
   see Lev. 25. What provision is made for enabling such an one to regain
   his original status in society (13-14)? For the ceremony of the
   awl-boring see the chapter before mentioned. The meaning of verse 18
   seems to be that such a servant is entitled to double wages because his
   service was more advantageous on the ground that he was serving
   "without wages and for a length of time, while hired servants were
   commonly engaged only by the year."

   5. The Feasts, c. 16.

   There is nothing in this chapter calling for particular attention.
   Students will find the feasts treated of in Exodus and Leviticus where
   they are first brought before us. See the marginal references in your
   Bibles for these places.

   Questions.

   1. Why were groves or mountains chosen by the heathen as places of
   worship?

   2. Why presumably did not God reveal His intended place of worship?

   3. Have you examined the New Testament references in this lesson?

   4. What argument offsets the present Jewish appeal to chapter 13?

   5. How would you explain 14:21?

   6. Does 15:2 contemplate an absolute discharge of debt?

   7. When will the promise of 15:6 be fulfilled?

   8. Give the probable meaning of 15:18.

   9. Are you observing the marginal references in your Bible?

   FURTHER CONDITIONS OF BLESSING

   Chapters 17-20

   1. The Judge and the King, c. 17.

   In the preceding chapter, v. 18, provision was made for judges and
   other officers of the civil law. They were to hold court in the gates
   of the cities, the place of ingress and egress, for the cities were
   walled. This idea of judges sitting in the gates still lingers in the
   Orient and gives significance to the Mohammedan terms "Ottoman Porte"
   and "Sublime Porte."

   Review the preceding chapter and observe the charge laid on these
   judges to be just, straight, impartial and of clean hands. Then compare
   the present chapter, vv. 2-13, and note the method of procedure in the
   courts.

   What is the offense here treated of (2, 3)? How should they guard
   against hasty judgment (11)? What was the punishment in such cases (5)?
   The extent of the testimony (6)? Who were the executioners of the
   penalty (7)? (Compare Acts 7:58.) The object of this requirement "was
   to deter the witnesses from rash charges and to give a public assurance
   that the crime had met its due punishment."

   Verses 8-13 are explained by the Bible Commentary thus: "In all cases
   where there was difficulty in giving decision, the local magistrates
   were to submit them to the Sanhedrin -- the supreme council, composed
   partly of civil and partly of ecclesiastical persons. 'The priests and
   Levites' should be 'the priests -- the Levites'; and who, as forming
   one body, are called 'the judge.' their sittings were in the
   neighborhood of the sanctuary, because in emergencies the high priest
   had to consult God by Urim (Num. 27:21). From their judgment there was
   no appeal; and if a person were so perverse as to refuse obedience, his
   conduct was to be punished as a capital crime."

   What prophecy is made in v. 14 (compare 1 Sam. 8:7)? What prohibition
   is laid on them in the matter (15)? What prohibitions are laid upon the
   king himself (16, 17)? (Compare 2 Sam. 8:4; 1 Kings 16:26; 2 Chron.
   1:16; Isa. 31:3.) Can you name a king who violated both these
   prohibitions? What command is laid upon the king, and why (18-20)?

   2. The Messianic Prophecy, c. 18.

   This chapter is one of the most important in the Mosaic legislation.

   After touching on the Levitical dues elsewhere considered, abominations
   are dealt with which, under other names, are ripe in our own time
   exposing those under their influence to the divine curse.

   Note the things warned against in vv. 10, 11; the relation they bore to
   the cursing of Canaan, 12; and the obligation resting upon Israel, and
   on us, to have nothing to do with them. (Compare the marginal
   references for former allusions to these matters.)

   The modern names of some of these are fortune telling, clairvoyance,
   astrology, mesmerism, palmistry, spiritualism and the like, all
   associated more or less with demonolatry, and although practiced
   sometimes by professing Christians, as much of an abomination unto God
   as they ever were. Verse 13 shows the reason. To be "perfect (or
   sincere) with the Lord thy God," means to worship, and serve Him
   implicitly and without the intrusion of another god. But they who
   consult fortune tellers, mediums, etc., do so to be guided or comforted
   by what they reveal. And since that which they reveal, when it is fact
   and not fraud, comes through demoniac channels and from the powers of
   darkness, it is really worshiping and serving Satan when the lips are
   professing to worship and serve God.

   The Israelites might plead that since Moses was to leave them before
   they entered Canaan, and they would be without a mediator between them
   and Jehovah, it might be necessary to cultivate these who were regarded
   as the gods of the land.

   How is such a plea met before it could be advanced (15)? Had they ever
   sought a mediator (16, 17)? How does this show that the successor to
   Moses, here referred to, was to have all his power and authority? What
   was the nature of that authority (18)? And power (19)? How might they
   be satisfied as to the divinity of such a prophet (21, 22)?

   This prophet, the immediate successor of Moses, we know to have been
   Joshua, but it is evident from John 1:45, Acts 3:22, 23 and other
   places that ultimately it is Jesus Christ.

   What a solemn obligation is thus placed upon all Christians to hearken
   to Jesus Christ, and how awful the consequences to those who while in
   lip they confess Him, do in heart and in life deny Him? (Compare Heb.
   10:28-31.)

   3. Landmarks and Warfare, cc. 19-20.

   The first part of chapter 19 deals with the cities of refuge which we
   considered in our concluding lesson in Numbers. The only other matter
   claiming special attention is that of landmarks (14). Palestine in this
   respect was the same then as now. Gardens and vineyards were surrounded
   by hedges or walls, but tilled fields were marked by a little trench or
   a simple stone placed at certain intervals, hence a dishonest person
   could easily fill the trench and remove the stones. Thus he would
   enlarge his own field by stealing part of his neighbor's.

   The oft repeated question, "Is war ever justifiable?" is answered in
   this chapter. In a world of sin war must needs be. It is one of God's
   methods of punishing sin in the present time. As the theocratic King of
   Israel He expected war and made ample provision for it, a consideration
   which should aid us in determining another question about the future
   retribution of the sinner. Thoughtless and ignorant men say He is too
   good to punish. But the fact is that He punishes because He is so good.
   As long as sin exists punishment must exist, and since Jesus Christ
   teaches that there is such a thing as eternal sin (Mark 3:29, R. V.),
   we may expect, alas! eternal punishment.

   What words of encouragement are to be addressed to the army and by what
   officials (1-4)? The presence of the priest in this case rather than an
   army officer is explained by the fact that in a theocratic government
   everything is done directly by God through His delegated ministers, and
   these were the priests.

   On what principles was the army to be sifted, or rather, what were the
   grounds of exemption from army service (5-8)? The answer is:

   (1) The dedication of a new house which, as in all Oriental countries
   still, was an important event, and celebrated by festive and religious
   ceremonies (Neh. 12:27); in this case there was exemption for a year.

   (2) The planting of a vineyard. The fruit of the first three years
   being declared unfit for use, and the first-fruits being producible
   only on the fourth, the exemption in this case lasted at least four
   years.

   (3) The betrothal of a wife, which was a considerable time before
   marriage. It was deemed a hardship to leave a house unfinished, a new
   property half cultivated, and a recently contracted marriage; and the
   exemptions in these cases were founded on the principle that a man's
   heart being engrossed with something at a distance, he would not be
   enthusiastic in the public service.

   (4) The fourth ground of exemption was cowardice. From the composition
   of the Israelitish army, which was an irregular militia, all above 20
   years being liable to serve, many, totally unfit for war, must have
   been called to the field; and it was therefore a prudential arrangement
   to rid the army of such unwarlike elements -- persons who could render
   no efficient service, and the contagion of whose craven spirit might
   lead to panic and defeat." -- Bible Commentary.

   The same authority thus comments on the following verses of this
   chapter:

   "With the cities of those people which God doth give thee" in Canaan,
   it was to be a war of utter extermination (vv. 17, 18). But when on a
   just occasion they went against other nations, they were first to make
   a proclamation of peace, in which case, if followed by a surrender, the
   people would become dependent, and in the relation of tributaries. The
   conquered nations would then receive the highest blessings from
   alliance with the chosen people; they would be brought to the knowledge
   of Israel's God and of Israel's worship, as well as a participation of
   Israel's privileges. But if the besieged city, or nation, refused to be
   taken, a massacre was to be made of the males, while the women and
   children were to be preserved and kindly treated (vv. 13, 14). By this
   means a provision was made for a useful connection being established
   between the captors and the captives; and Israel, even through her
   conquest, would prove a blessing to the nation.

   In a protracted siege, wood would be required, both for military work
   and for fuel, but fruit bearing trees were to be carefully spared. In
   countries like India, where the people live much more on fruit than we
   do, the destruction of a fruit tree is a sort of sacrilege.

   Questions.

   1. What significance attaches to the Oriental use of the word "Porte"?

   2. What was the later name of the Jewish Supreme Court, and of whom was
   it composed?

   3. Give modern names to some of the abominations mentioned in chapter
   18.

   4. Explain v. 13 of that chapter.

   5. How can you prove the application of verses 15-22 to Jesus Christ?

   6. Why the need of landmarks in Palestine?

   7. What evidence of future retribution is suggested by the legislation
   concerning warfare?

   8. Can you name the grounds and give the reasons for exemption from
   army service?

   9. How does this lesson magnify God's attributes of righteousness and
   holiness?

   10. Do you think God can ever overlook sin?

   11. What provision has He made for satisfying Himself on the question
   of sin?

   DIVERS REGULATIONS

   Chapters 21-22

   In these chapters are a number of matters which, for want of a better
   title, we class as above.

   1. Expiation of Innocent Blood, c. 21:1-9.

   These ceremonies showed the sanctity associated with human life. The
   "rough valley" of verse 4 is in the Revised Version "running water,"
   and the whole was calculated to lead to the discovery of criminals and
   repress crime.

   2. Female Captives, vv. 10-14.

   These regulations were to improve the usages of the nations concerning
   the capture of females in war. A month was the period of mourning among
   the Jews, and the details of v. 4 were the signs of grief which the
   captive must be permitted to manifest for the loss of her parents and
   old associates now the same as dead. The delay was an act of humanity
   and kindness. How further were these virtues to be manifested (14)? We
   should ever remember, that we are comparing conditions not with our
   present ideas of social and domestic obligations, which are what they
   are because of the later teachings of the Bible, but with those
   existing in the days of Moses.

   3. Right of the First-born, vv. 15-17.

   In this case it is presupposed that the first wife was dead at the time
   referred to. The opening of verse 15 should be: "If a man have had two
   wives." In other words, the legislation does not touch a man who has
   two wives at the same time, for polygamy, while tolerated under the
   Mosaic law, was never legalized.

   4. Prodigal Sons, vv. 18-21.

   This law was qualified by the fact that the consent of both parents was
   necessary to its execution.

   5. Common Humanities, c. 22:1-12.

   "Brother" in v. 1 comprehends not only relatives, but neighbors or even
   strangers which should stand in need of such justice and charity.

   The command of vv. 6, 7 needs re-enforcement today in certain quarters.
   Birds serve important uses in nature, and the extirpation of a species
   is productive of evils. The mother bird should be left for propagation,
   but the young occasionally might be taken as a check on too rapid an
   increase.

   There is a lesson in the prohibitions of vv. 9-11, to which reference
   has been made in Leviticus; but touching v. 10: "An ox and ass being of
   different species, and different characters, cannot associate
   comfortably, nor unite cheerfully in drawing a plough or a wagon. The
   ass being smaller and his step shorter, there must be an unequal and
   irregular draught. Besides, the ass, from feeding on poisonous weeds,
   has a foetid breath, which its yoke-fellow seeks to avoid, not only as
   offensive, but producing leanness, or, if long continued, death; and
   hence it has been observed to hold away its head from the ass, and to
   pull only with one shoulder." -- Bible Commentary.

   6. Sexual Matters, vv. 13-30.

   On these verses Home says: "The regulations might be imperatively
   needful in the then situation of the Israelites; and yet, it is not
   necessary that we should curiously inquire into them. So far was it
   from being unworthy of God to leave such things upon record, that the
   enactments must heighten our admiration of His wisdom and goodness in
   the management of a people so perverse and so given to irregular
   passions.

   "Nor is it a better argument that the Scriptures were not written by
   inspiration to object that this passage, and others of a like nature,
   tend to corrupt the imagination, than it is to say that the sun was not
   created by Gou, because its light may be abused by men as an assistant
   in committing crimes."

   Questions.

   1. What was the intended effect of the legislation about innocent
   blood?

   2. With what conditions should this legislation be compared?

   3. Was polygamy legalized by Moses?

   4. How is the severity of the legislation about the "prodigal son"
   qualified.

   5. How does this lesson illustrate the divine care for the comfort of
   animal life?

   6. How would you reply in general terms to arguments against the
   contents of vv. 13-20?

   DIVERS REGULATIONS -- CONTINUED

   Chapters 23-26

   1. Public Privileges, c. 23:1-9.

   The privileges referred to here are doubtless honors in the state and
   perhaps, in the case of foreigners, incorporation with Israel by
   marriage. Eunuchs and bastards were denied these privileges (1, 2), and
   also members of what Gentile nations (3)? What caused the latter
   prohibition (4-6)? Such passages as Neh. 13:1; Ruth 4:10, and 2 Kings
   10:2, show that there were some exceptions to this prohibition,
   although it may be that it excluded males, but not females. What other
   two nations were exempt from this rule, and on what grounds (7, 8)?

   2. Bodily Uncleanness and Other Details, vv. 10-25.

   Verse 13, should be translated as in the Revised Version, "thou shalt
   have a paddle (marg. or shovel) among thy weapons," which explains the
   meaning of the direction. Think of it in the light of the following
   verse, and remember the words of Wesley, that "cleanliness is next to
   godliness." There is a sense indeed, in which it is godliness, and the
   man who honors his Creator and Redeemer will see to it that himself and
   his surroundings are ever in a wholesome and sanitary condition. These
   directions have reference to camp life when engaged in war (9), but how
   much more obligatory in ordinary living.

   Verses 15 and 16 refer to slaves who run away from tyrannical masters,
   or for deliverance from heathenism, and they afforded a ground for the
   action of Northern abolitionists who aided runaway slaves prior to our
   civil war.

   As to verses 19 and 20, the Israelites lived in a simple state of
   society, and were encouraged to lend to each other without hope of
   gain. But the case was different with foreigners, who, engaged in trade
   and commerce, borrowed to enlarge their capital, and might reasonably
   be expected to pay interest on loans. Besides, the distinction was
   conducive to keeping the Israelites separate from the rest of the
   world.

   3. Marriage and Divorce, c. 24:1-5.

   Divorce seems to have become known to the Hebrews in Egypt, and was
   tolerated by the Mosaic laws for the reason indicated in Matt. 19:3-9.
   But it was restricted by two conditions. What was the first (1)? And
   the second (4)? Because of increasing laxity in these matters today, we
   ought to familiarize ourselves with these two passages of Scripture,
   and especially the words of Christ.

   4. Consideration for the Poor, vv. 6-22.

   Why was a creditor not at liberty to take either the mill (R. V.), or
   the upper millstone as a pledge for debt (6)? Corn was ground every
   morning for that day's consumption, and if either were taken it would
   be depriving a man of his necessary provision.

   According to verses 10 and 11, how were a borrower's feelings to be
   considered?

   Verses 12 and 13 are explained by the fact that the cloak of a poor man
   was commonly all the covering he had to wrap himself in when he retired
   for the night.

   What beneficient provision for the poor is made in verses 19-22, and
   why?

   5. Justice in Law and in Trade, c. 25.

   The bastinado was common to Egypt, but God through Moses here
   introduces two important restrictions (1-3):

   First, the punishment should be inflicted in presence of the judge,
   instead of in private by some heartless official;

   Second, the maximum amount should be forty stripes, instead of the
   arbitrary will of the magistrate. The Egyptian, like Turkish and
   Chinese rulers, often applied the stick till they caused death or
   lameness for life. In later times, when the Jews were exceedingly
   scrupulous in adhering to the letter of the law, and, for fear of
   miscalculation, were desirous of keeping within the prescribed limit,
   the scourge was formed of three cords, terminating in leathern thongs,
   and thirteen strokes of this counted thirty-nine (2 Cor. 11:24).

   The usage concerning a childless widow existed before this time (Gen.
   38), but the law now made it obligatory on younger brothers or the
   nearest kinsman to marry the widow (Ruth 4:4, Matt. 22:25). The reason
   for this was not only to perpetuate the name but also preserve the
   property in the family and tribe.

   The reference to Amalek's deed (17-19) is not mentioned in Exod. 17,
   where the battle is recorded, but as it was a daring defiance of God,
   this command against them went forth. (See 1 Sam. 15.)

   6. The Laws of Tithing, c. 26.

   The regulations here considered, like almost all the foregoing, were
   for observance, not in the wilderness, but in Canaan after they should
   enter it (1). What were they then to do? Where were they to go (2)?
   What were they to say (3)? After the priest's acceptance of the basket
   and its contents, what was the next feature in this ritual (5-10)? In
   what spirit should this be done (11)?

   This is not so much a question of tithing, i. e., the giving of
   one-tenth, as a general acknowledgment that all belongs to God as
   represented by the basket of first fruits and the confession and
   thanksgiving.

   The actual tithing is referred to in the verses following (12-15).
   There were really two tithings. The first was appropriated to the
   Levites (Num. 18:21); and the second, the tenth of what remained, was
   brought to Jerusalem, in kind or in money value. In the latter case,
   the money was used to purchase materials for the offerings and their
   thanksgiving feast (Deut. 14:22, 23). This was done for two years
   together, but on the third year (Deut. 14:28, 29), the thanksgiving was
   to be eaten at home and distribution to be made among the poor.

   Questions.

   1. Name the six leading subjects of this lesson.

   2. What two restrictions on divorce are given?

   3. How would you explain 24:12, 13?

   4. What light can you throw on 2 Cor. 11:24?

   5. Who should marry a childless widow, and why?

   PROPHECY OF ISRAEL'S FUTURE

   Chapters 27-28

   As we approach the conclusion of this book we come to its most
   important part from a prophetical point of view -- indeed the present
   lesson contains (chapter 28), a foreview of Israel's history to the end
   of the present age, in some respects unparalleled in the 'Bible,
   although touched upon in Leviticus (26), as we saw.

   1. Stones for the Law and Stones for an Altar, c. 27:1-8.

   What should they do when they crossed the Jordan (2)? How should they
   cover these stones to obtain a writing surface or to render them more
   conspicuous? What was to be written on them (3)? (It is a question
   whether the decalogue is here meant or the blessings and cursings that
   follow.) Where were they to be set up (4)? Rocks and stones are seen in
   the Far East today with inscriptions in paint or plaster thousands of
   years old.

   Besides these stones for the law, what others are commanded, and for
   what purpose (5) ? Were these to be hewn or unhewn? The probability is
   that this pile was to be a pedestal for the other stones containing the
   law, as well as a place for sacrifice. What religious ceremonies were
   to be observed there (6, 7)? The burnt offerings were part of the
   "worship for sinful men," while the peace offerings were connected with
   the "festivities of a reconciled people." Hence we have here, "the law
   which condemned and the typical expiation -- the two great principles
   of revealed religion."

   2. Mount Gerizim and Mount Ebal, vv. 11-26.

   These ridges lay in Samaria, the peaks being near Shechem, rising to
   about 800 feet, and separated by a valley about 500 yards wide.

   On Mount Gerizim (now Jebel-et-Tur) were the descendants of Rachel and
   Leah, the two principal wives of Jacob, and to them was assigned the
   office of pronouncing the benedictions; while on the twin hill of Ebal
   (now Imad-el-Deen) were the posterity of the two secondary wives,
   Zilpah and Bilhah, with those of Reuben, who had lost the
   primogeniture, and Zebulun, son of Leah; to them was committed the duty
   of pronouncing the maledictions (see Judges 9:7). Amid the silent
   expectations of the assembly, the priests, standing round the ark in
   the valley, said aloud, looking to Gerizim, "Blessed is the man that
   maketh not any graven image," when the people ranged on that hill
   responded, "Amen"; then turning round to Ebal, they cried, "Cursed is
   the man that maketh any graven image"; to which those that covered the
   ridge answered, "Amen." The same course at every pause was followed
   with all the blessings and curses (see Josh. 8:33, 34).

   "These curses are given in the form of a declaration, not a wish, as
   the words should be rendered, 'cursed is he.' and not 'Cursed be he.' "
   -- Bible Commentary.

   3. The Great Prophecy, c. 28.

   This chapter seems a continuation of the former, the blessings and
   cursings being enumerated more at length. Here the whole destiny of
   Israel is laid out before them as the result of their obedience or
   disobedience.

   What comprehensive blessing is promised in verse 1? Observe that the
   lesser blessings following go to make up this great one. These include
   every kind of material prosperity (2-6); the confusion of their
   national enemies (7); and the independent power of Israel (12, 13).
   Moreover, all this shall tend to the glory of Jehovah before the
   nations (9, 10).

   The curses are the counterpart of the blessings (15-19). "Sword," verse
   22, is in some ancient versions "drought"; which agrees better with the
   figurative expressions of the two following verses.

   The history of the Jews for the past 2,500 years has been a minute
   fulfillment of this prophecy, but it may be said to be divided into
   three periods, marked off by the Babylonian and Roman captivities and
   their present scattered and distressed condition.

   (1) The Babylonian captivity comes into view at verse 36, say, to the
   close of verse 48.

   (2) The Roman captivity, begins at verse 49, continuing to verse 64.
   The Romans "came from afar"; their ensign was an "eagle"; their
   "tongue" was not understood; they were of a fierce countenance," i. e.,
   bold, implacable; they let neither "corn, wine nor oil," but strewed
   devastation everywhere. They successfully besieged the fortified
   cities, even Jerusalem being razed to the ground. So terrific was the
   suffering from famine (verses 53-57), that parental affection was
   extinguished, and delicate and refined women ate the flesh of their own
   children. For the details we are indebted to Josephus.

   (3) The present scattered and distressed condition of Israel is
   depicted, beginning at verse 64, for an account of whose fulfillment it
   is only necessary to keep one's eye on the daily press. Well,
   therefore, may we ask, with Bishop Newton, "What stronger proof can we
   desire of the divine legislation of Moses?"

   Questions.

   1. What is the sweep of the great prophecy in this lesson?

   2. Describe Mounts Gerizim and Ebal.

   3. What three things are included in the blessings?

   4. Into what three periods is the fulfillment of the curses divided?

   5. Who is a distinguished uninspired historian of the Jews?

   THE PALESTINIAN COVENANT

   Chapters 29-30

   The subject of these chapters is new and exceedingly important,
   containing what is called the Palestinian covenant.

   Following the Scofield Bible, note that while the land was
   unconditionally given to Abraham and his seed in what we call the
   Abrahamic covenant (Gen. 13:15; 15:7). yet it was under another and
   conditional one that Israel ultimately entered the land under Joshua.
   It is this covenant that is recorded in the present chapters.

   This was utterly violated by the nation, for which reason the latter
   was first disrupted (1 Kings 12), and then altogether cast out of the
   land (2 Kings 17:1-8; 24:1; 25:11). But this covenant unconditionally
   promises a national restoration of Israel yet to be accomplished, in
   accordance with the original promise to Abraham (Gen. 15:18). It will
   be then, and not till then, that Israel will possess the whole land.
   This she has never done hitherto.

   The Need of Eye Salve.

   The first of these chapters is simply an introduction to the covenant
   fully declared in the following one. We would not pause in its
   consideration were it not for the spiritual truth of verse 4, which we
   would emphasize.

   Great as the events were which the Israelites had seen in Egypt and in
   the wilderness, yet, they had made no lasting impression on them. The
   reason was that they lacked the divine wisdom to apprehend them.

   Do not pass this verse without comparing the passages in the Old and
   New Testaments, which throw light upon it. These are indicated in the
   margin of your Bible, such as Isa. 6:9, 10; 63:17; Matt. 16:17; John
   8:43; Acts 28:26, 27; 1 Cor. 2:9-14 ; Eph. 1:15-23; 4:18; 2 Thess.
   2:11, 12; 1 Peter 1:10-12; Rev. 2:29; 3:18.

   The Terms of the Covenant, c. 30.

   The Scofield Bible analyzes the Palestinian covenant into seven parts,
   as follows:

   Verse 1. Dispersion for disobedience. Compare c. 28:63-68 and Gen.
   15:18.

   Verse 2. Future repentance while in dispersion.

   Verse 3. Return of the Lord (compare Amos 9:9-14; Acts 15:14-17).

   Verse 5. Restoration to the land (compare Isa. 11:11, 12; Jer. 23:3-8;
   Ezek. 37:21-25).

   Verse 6. National conversion (compare Hos. 2:14-16; Rom. 11:26, 27).

   Verse 7. Judgment on Israel's oppressors (compare Isa. 14:1, 2; Joel
   3:1-8; Matt. 25:31-46).

   Verse 9. National prosperity (compare Amos 9:11-14).

   We are not to suppose that the promises were fulfilled by Israel's
   restoration from the Babylonian captivity. It will be recalled that she
   was not then scattered "among all the nations" or "unto the utmost
   parts of heaven." Moreover, when God recalled them from Babylon, they
   were not all brought back nor multiplied above their fathers (5), nor
   were their hearts circumcised to love the Lord (6).

   It may be said that there was a foreshadowing of the ultimate
   fulfillment of the prophecy at that time, but nothing more. The
   complete accomplishment is yet to come. Israel is yet to be converted
   to Jesus Christ as her Messiah, and returned to her land in accordance
   with what all the prophets teach.

   Questions.

   1. Name and distinguish between the two covenants mentioned.

   2. How many of the Scripture references have you examined under the
   paragraph "The Need of Eye Salve"?

   3. Name the seven features of the Palestinian covenant.

   4. Why was not the restoration from Babylon the fulfillment of these
   promises?

   5. When will they be fulfilled?

   THE CLOSE OF MOSES' LIFE

   Chapters 31:1-32:43

   1. Encouragement, 31:1-8.

   The law has been rehearsed and Moses' exhortation is drawing to a
   conclusion. Several days may have been occupied in the review covered
   by Deuteronomy thus far. And now, Israel, by its leaders, having been
   gathered together at the place of meeting, Moses is apprising them of
   his departure.

   Though advanced in years (2), was he conscious of mental or physical
   decay (34:7)? Can you perceive a reason for the mention of this fact?
   Has it any bearing on the truth and virility of the divine messages
   Moses was chosen to communicate? What indicates that it was by
   revelation he knew of his approaching separation? Name three or four
   elements of the encouragement Moses gives Israel in verses 3-6.

   2. Responsibility, vv. 9-13.

   What provision was made for the perpetuity of the law (9)? Note the
   allusion to the bearing of the ark by the priests, which they did on
   extraordinary occasions (Joshua 3:3-8; 1 Chron. 15:11, 12), although
   commonly it was borne by the Levites.

   While the people were to be instructed in the law in their homes, what
   public rehearsal of it was here provided for (10-11)? We appreciate how
   this guaranteed the preservation of the sacred oracles from generation
   to generation, and can thank God for remembering us in this obligation
   upon them.

   3. Prediction, vv. 14-30.

   In what language is the infidelity of Israel foretold (16)? What would
   cause this apostasy? What consequence would follow (17, 18)? When God
   says, "I will forsake them," "I will hide My face," etc.. He refers to
   that withdrawal of His protection as symbolized by the cloud of glory,
   the shekinah. This never appeared in the second temple, i. e., after
   the Babylonian captivity, and, "its non-appearance was a prelude of
   'all the evils that came upon them, because their God was not among
   them.'"

   Where was the book of the law placed (26)? In the Revised Version "in"
   is "by." It is thought that it was deposited in a receptacle by the
   side of the ark which contained nothing but the tables of stone (1
   Kings 8:9). But some, guided by Hebrews 9:4, believe it was placed
   within, and that this was the copy found in the time of Josiah (2 Kings
   22:8).

   4. Inspiration, 32:1-43.

   In verse 19 of the preceding chapter Moses is commanded to write a song
   and teach it to Israel, and get them singing it as a witness for God
   against them in the day of their unfaithfulness.

   "National songs take deep hold of the memories and have a powerful
   influence in stirring the deepest feelings of a people," and because of
   this God causes this song to be composed, and is indeed Himself the
   composer of it. In the Revised Version the whole chapter down to verse
   44 is arranged as poetry.

   (1) After the exordium (1), notice the comparison of the divine
   instruction to what gentle, useful and beautiful feature of nature (2)?
   What gives this instruction this character (3)? Point out the seven
   attributes of God indicated in the ascription of praise that follows
   (3, 4). Notice that these attributes constitute the proclamation of His
   name. Preachers and Christian workers will find the outline of a rich
   discourse here.

   (21 After the exordium we come to an indictment of the people (5, 6).
   It is predictive as indicating what they would do in the future, and
   yet also a historic record of what they had already done. These verses,
   especially 5, are clearer in the Revised Version.

   (3) The indictment leads to a reminiscence of God's goodness to them,
   to deepen their repentance in that day as it shall quicken their
   gratitude (7-14).

   With verse 8, compare Acts 17:26, 27 in the light of chapter 2:5-9 of
   the present book, and Genesis 10:5, and observe that God has from the
   beginning reserved Palestine for this people, through whom He would
   show forth His wonders to the other nations. And admirably suited is
   the locality for the purpose. In Ezekiel it is described as "the middle
   of the earth," and as from a common center the glad tidings were, and
   shall be, "wafted to every part of the globe."

   Notice the figure in verses 11 and 12. When the eaglets are
   sufficiently grown, the mother bird at first supports them on the tip
   of her wing, encouraging and aiding their feeble efforts to higher
   flight.

   (4) This reminiscence of God's goodness is followed by another
   indictment, fuller than the former, and showing the aggravation of the
   people's sin.

   "Jeshurun" is a poetic name for Israel. Notice the reference to
   "demons" of verse 1"? (R. V.), and observe that such beings exist and
   are the real objects of the worship of false religions.

   (5) This second indictment is followed by an announcement of punishment
   (19-28). Note the allusion to the calling out of the Gentiles into the
   Church in verse 21 (third clause). What are God's arrows (23)? See for
   answer the following verses -- famine, pestilence, wild beasts, the
   sword, fear, captivity, etc. Why would He not altogether destroy such a
   faithless people (26, 27)?

   (6) The announcement of punishment leads to a promise of forgiveness
   and restoration in the latter time (29-47). When will the Lord lift His
   hand from off His people (36)? How shall He afflict them who afflicted
   Israel (41)? What shows that the day of Israel's blessing will be that
   of the whole earth (43)? Compare Psalm 65.

   THE BLESSING AND THE END

   Chapters 32, 44-34:12

   After Moses ended his song (32:44) he exhorted the people in language
   familiar to us (45-47), and then the voice of the Lord was heard to
   what purport (49, 50)? And why (51)? Can you recall the details
   referred to in that verse? If not, look up the story again as indicated
   in the margin of your Bible. What grace does God show Moses,
   notwithstanding his disobedience (52)? Does Moses complain at his
   disappointment? On the contrary, what does he now do, as indicated in
   the next chapter?

   1. Blessing the Tribes, c. 33.

   Notice the sublime exordium (2, 3). From what object of nature is the
   metaphor borrowed? Why does he describe the law as "fiery"? (Compare
   again Ex. 19:16-18). Nevertheless, in what spirit had the law been
   given (3)? What shows the law to have been a great privilege to as well
   as a great obligation upon Israel (4)?

   Which tribe is first blessed (6)? Reuben, as we saw in Genesis 49, was
   denied the right of primogeniture, and yet he was to hold rank as one
   of the tribes of Israel. Observe the reward of Levi (8-11) for their
   zeal in supporting Moses at the time of Israel's idolatry (Ex.
   32:26-28). What indicates their impartiality in executing judgment at
   that time (9)?

   Read the beautiful words expressive of Benjamin's blessing (12).
   Historically it means that the land of this tribe was located near the
   temple. "Between his shoulders" might be rendered "on his borders," and
   means that Mt. Moriah, the site of the temple, lay in the territory of
   Benjamin, although Mt. Zion, on which Jerusalem itself stood, was in
   Judah.

   How does the language of Joseph's blessing (13-17) show that his
   territory would be diversified in beauty and rich in productions?

   What shows that Zebulun's progeny would be sailors and traders, while
   that of Issachar would be landsmen (18)? And yet would not the latter
   traffic in the things the Zebulunites would bring home with them (19)?

   Do you remember on which side of the Jordan Gad was located, and why?
   May this explain the reference (20) to the enlargement of his borders?
   What expression (21) may refer to his having been settled in his
   territory by Moses himself, and before the conquest by Joshua?

   What is said of Dan (22)? His original settlement was in the south, but
   these quarters being limited, he suddenly leaped, made an irruption,
   and established a colony in the north.

   Which tribe seemed to have no occasion for murmuring with their
   assignment (23)? And which was a close second (24, 25)? Is there
   anything to indicate that Asher's soil may have been particularly
   adapted to the olive? Were there any minerals in his rocky coast?

   Do not omit the map in the back of your Bible, entitled, "Canaan in Its
   Division among the Tribes," which will aid you in fastening the details
   on your minds.

   2. Moses' Death, c. 34.

   This chapter seems to have been written after the death of Moses, and
   has been regarded as a kind of introduction to Joshua.

   Travelers say that no miraculous powers were necessary to be
   communicated to Moses to discern what is here recorded (1-3), and that
   any one could see the same from that elevation, the climate being very
   "subtle and free from vapor."

   What distinction had Moses in his death above all other men (6)? While
   the concealment of Moses' tomb seems wise to prevent its becoming the
   resort of superstitious pilgrims, yet that there was a deeper reason
   for it seems clear from Jude 9. What that was we may not at present
   know, and yet there are hints about it which will be considered later
   on.

   What eulogium does inspiration pronounce upon Moses (10-12)?
     __________________________________________________________________

JOSHUA

   THE DESTRUCTION OF THE CANAANITES -- INTRODUCTORY

   At the close of the Pentateuch we left the Israelites at Moab, where,
   after the death of Moses and the investiture of Joshua as his
   successor, the people were to cross the Jordan and take possession of
   Canaan.

   But before entering upon the study of Joshua, a few words should be
   said as to the justification of such a course.

   The substance of what follows is from Kellogg's Leviticus, but before
   quoting him we should like to state our own feeling in the premises.

   Among men it is not a wrongful thing on the part of a landlord to eject
   a tenant who has not only failed to pay his rent, being able to do so,
   but also injured the property for which the rent was due.

   This was the situation with the Canaanites, magnified a thousand-fold,
   in their rebellion and opposition to the true God.

   Therefore the justice and holiness of God, without which the respect of
   His creatures could not be commanded, made necessary just such a
   judgment as that which befell this people, and will befall every other
   people who equally defy Him. His sovereignty requires it, and the
   well-being of His creatures who serve and trust Him require it.

   Canaan Accursed.

   Kellog connects the accursing of Canaan with what he had said on "The
   Law of the Ban" (Lev. 27:28, 29), to which attention was called when we
   were studying that book. He says in substance:

   (1) It is imperative to remember that we have before us not the
   government of man but of God, a true theocracy. It is obvious that if
   fallible men may be granted power to condemn men to death for the sake
   of the public good, much more must this right be conceded to the
   righteous and infallible King of kings, who was the political head of
   the Israelitish nation, if that expression may be allowed. Further, if
   this right of God be admitted, it is plain that He may delegate its
   execution to human agents. (2) The only question now remaining concerns
   the justice of the exercise of this right in particular cases. It is
   possible that men might sometimes apply this law without divine
   authority, a situation we are not required to defend any more than the
   infliction of capital punishment in America sometimes by lynch law. As
   to its execution in the case of the Canaanites, however, it is not so
   difficult to find justification. Indeed, when the facts are known, this
   destruction cannot be regarded as irreconcilable with the moral
   perfections attributed to the Supreme Being.

   (3) The discoveries of recent years have let in light upon the state of
   society in Canaan at this date, and warrant us in saying that in the
   history of our race it would be hard to point to any civilized
   community which has sunken to such a depth of moral pollution.
   Leviticus gives many dark hints of these things, such as the worship of
   Molech, the cult of Ashtoreth, the moral sacrifice required of every
   female, and other things into which one cannot go. Indeed, if the holy
   and righteous God had not commanded these depraved communities to be
   extirpated His omission to do so would have been harder to reconcile
   with His character.

   (4) It must be noted that these corrupt communities were in no obscure
   corner of the world, but no one of its chief highways. The Phoenicians
   more than any people of that time were the navigators and travelers of
   the age, so that from Canaan this moral pestilence was carried hither
   and thither and, worse than the "black death," to the very extremities
   of the known world. Have we then so good reason to call in question the
   righteousness of the law which ordains that no person thus accursed
   should be ransomed, but be put to death? Rather are we inclined to see
   here not only a vindication of the righteousness of God but a
   manifestation of His mercy, not merely to Israel, but to the whole
   human race of that age who, because of this infection of moral evil,
   had otherwise sunk to such depravity as to have required a second
   deluge for the cleansing of the world. Read Psalms 62:12 and 136:17-22,
   where God's mercy is shown in His judgment upon the wicked and their
   iniquity.

   (5) Nor can we leave this matter without noting the solemn suggestion
   it contains, that there may be in the universe persons who, despite the
   redemption of grace, are irredeemable and hopelessly obdurate. Persons
   for whom nothing remains but the "eternal fire which is prepared for
   the devil and his angels" (Matt. 25:41). And this because God's mercy
   endureth forever.

   Questions.

   1. What is the nature of the book of Joshua?

   2. What made necessary this judgment on the Canaanites?

   3. What is a theocracy?

   4. What do we know of society in Canaan?

   5. What geographical relation did Canaan bear to the world?

   6. Have you read the quotations from the Psalms?

   7. What bearing has this lesson on future retribution?

   JOSHUA IN COMMAND

   Chapters 1, 2

   This book might have for a secondary name, "The Book of Conquest and
   Division," with reference to the events it records. The marginal
   chronology indicates that it covered a period of about 25 years, but we
   have seen that this chronology is not part of the inspired text, and is
   not to be taken as absolute authority. It is safer to say that we do
   not know how long a period may have been covered by these events.
   According to Martin Anstey's "The Romance of Chronology," 7 years
   elapsed from the entry into Canaan to the division of the land.

   The book is a record of a military campaign, and criticisms of it from
   that point of view have placed Joshua in the first rank of military
   leaders.

   1. The Call of Joshua, 1:1-9.

   (1) Here note that "the Lord spake unto Joshua" (v. 1), just how we do
   not know, but as He may have spoken unto Moses out of the cloud of
   glory, or by Urim and Thummin (Num. 27:21).

   (2) Note the renewal of the promise of the land which had been given to
   Moses and to Abraham (vv. 2-4), and with this a reassurance of the
   divine support to Joshua as it had been with his predecessor.

   Observe the reference to the Hittites. They were the dominant nation of
   Canaan and rivals of Egypt, and to merely human eyes it seemed
   preposterous that Israel could dispossess them, but, "Is anything too
   hard for the Lord?" Notwithstanding the greatness of the Hittites
   secular history has known nothing about them until recently, and
   archaeological discoveries revealing their record have been one of the
   triumphs of the past century and one of the strongest evidences to the
   historicity of the Old Testament.

   (3) Only one condition is required of Joshua for the fulfillment of
   these promises -- strength and courage. But this strength and courage
   is not physical, but the moral quality found in obedience to God. And
   even this is narrowed to one thing -- the observance of the written
   law, knowledge of and meditation upon which will produce this virtue
   within him (vv. 6-9). Thus God provides our requirements and rewards us
   for exercising them!

   2. The Preparation of the People, 1:10-18.

   The "victuals" in verse 11 could scarcely have been the manna, which
   would have spoiled in the keeping, but the corn, cattle, etc., which
   may have been gotten in the enemies' country through which they had
   passed.

   The reference to the two and a half tribes (vv. 12-16) recalls their
   wish to Piloses and his consent that they might locate east of the
   Jordan for the sake of their flocks; provided, that leaving their
   families for the time being, the men of war should cross the river and
   aid in the conquest of the land (Num. 32: 1-42).

   The point that strikes one here is the relation of faith and works in
   the execution of God's plans by His people Why should these tribes be
   required to cross the Jordan since in one sense they were not
   necessary? Could not God have conquered Canaan without them? But God
   does not work miracles unnecessarily, and what man himself can do,
   consistently with the divine glory, he is obligated to do, a principle
   which has a wide sphere of application.

   3. The Reconnoitering of Jericho, c. 2.

   (1) We cannot pass by Rahab's falsehood (vv. 1-7), which we must not
   suppose God endorsed, notwithstanding the commendations she received in
   Hebrews 11:31 and James 2:25. It is her faith that is spoken of in
   those instances, but God was no more pleased with her lie than her
   unchastity. Lying is a common vice among the heathen, and Rahab
   probably had no consciousness of its moral guilt.

   (2) Rahab's faith was very simple (vv. 8-14). Like the heathen round
   about, she believed that each nation had its own god, and that some
   gods were stronger than others. The God of the Hebrews seemed the
   strongest of all, for she had heard what He had done for them (v. 10).
   Her city could not stand before such a God and hence she surrendered at
   once. The other inhabitants of Jericho from the king down had the same
   evidence as she, but did not act on it. In other words she had faith
   and they had not. There was fear mingled with her faith, and ignorance,
   and superstition, and selfishness, but God overlooked these things.

   In the same way we are not expected to have a perfectly intelligent
   faith in our Lord Jesus Christ before we can be saved, nor must we know
   the whole Bible, or be able to explain its great mysteries. Do we
   apprehend our danger, and are we disposed to fly to the refuge He
   offers, that is all.

   (3) Every Christian is impressed with the symbolism of the red cord in
   the window (vv. 15-22). It forces itself upon us in the light of all
   the Bible teaches about the blood of Jesus Christ and the token of our
   salvation from the more awful destruction than that awaiting Jericho.
   It was Rahab's sign of the covenant the men had made with her. It was
   her mark of identification as one to be saved in the day of calamity.
   And it was that which her deliveries required as the condition of the
   fulfillment of their pledge. The story affords many points of
   resemblance to that of our redemption through Christ, and will repay a
   study as a basis for a Bible reading or address.

   Questions.

   1. Give a secondary name to this book.

   2. How has Joshua been estimated?

   3. What can you say about the Hittites?

   4. What gives moral courage to men?

   5. Give an illustration of how God uses second causes.

   6. Does God commend men for bad deeds?

   7. Describe the nature of Rahab's faith?

   JORDAN CROSSED

   Chapters 3-5

   1. Preparation of the People, 3:1-13.

   The events in this section are the removal to Shittim and the
   encampment there (v. 1); directions about the leadership of the priests
   (vv. 2-4); sanctification of the people (v. 5); encouragement of Joshua
   (vv. 7-8); encouragement of the people (vv. 9-13).

   There is little requiring explanation, but notice in v. 4 the care God
   took for the people's guidance and the occasion for it. And as not
   forget the obedience required if the guidance were to prove effectual.
   All these things have their spiritual lessons and were "written for our
   ensamples."

   Notice in v. 5 the forerunner of divine wonders. When we sanctify
   ourselves by putting away all known sin, God does wonders among us.
   Notice the demand for faith, "tomorrow" He will do it.

   Notice in v. 7 how God removes all apprehension from Joshua so far as
   the allegiance of the people is concerned. They will follow him because
   God will put His honor upon him as upon his predecessor. When God calls
   a man into His service He equips him for it, and makes it so plain that
   His people recognize it and submit themselves to his leadership (cp.
   4:14).

   Notice in vv. 9-13 that presumably the people had no knowledge how they
   were to cross the river till just before the event. These words of
   Joshua therefore, with the miraculous result, must have greatly
   confirmed their faith in Jehovah as unlike the idols of the nations
   round about.

   2. The Division of the Waters, 3:14-17.

   What play for the imagination here: "As the feet of the priests were
   dipped in the brim (brink) of the water"! Not a minute before, but just
   then "the waters which came down from above stood and rose up upon an
   heap." Read the comment in Psalm 114.

   All the more marvelous because it was the time that Jordan overflowed
   its banks (v. 15), i. e. about our April or May, the period of the
   early harvest in that land. The river about Jericho is ordinarily only
   about 150 to 180 feet across, but at this time it was twice as broad,
   as well as deep and rapid.

   The city of Adam beside Zaretan (v. 16) is about 30 miles north. There
   the river suddenly stayed and the waters gathered into a heap. From
   that point downward being no longer supplied from above, they began to
   fail, and hurrying towards the Dead Sea were swallowed up. The
   river-bed for miles was dry, it has a pebbly bottom there, and the
   people "passed over right against Jericho."

   3. The Memorial Stones, 4:1-9.

   Observe that v. 2 is a repetition of 3:12, indicating that these 12 men
   had been chosen previously for this service, though only now had they
   been made acquainted with its nature. That nature is described in the
   verses following. Verses 19 and 20 show where the stones were placed.

   Observe their purpose (vv. 6-7). A common mode in earlier times of
   remembering remarkable events. No inscription need have been placed
   upon them, as tradition would hand down the story from age to age.

   Observe that another set of stones was set up elsewhere (v. 9). "Unto
   this day" means when the record was made in the book, which may have
   been in Joshua's own time and by him, or at a later time by some other
   hand.

   4. The Circumcision and the Passover, 5:2-12.

   The reason for this circumcision is in vv. 2-7, but the moral effect of
   it is stated in v. 9.

   The observance of the Passover at the time fixed by the law (v. 10, see
   marginal references) was another evidence that the national existence
   was recommenced, and it was appropriate that the manna should cease at
   this time and the new chapter of their history begin with a new
   dietetic regimen.

   "The old corn of the land" seems to mean that found in the storehouses
   of Gilgal and its neighborhood on which they levied. The fact that the
   manna ceased at this time when they no longer needed it, is a further
   proof of its miraculous provision in the wilderness.

   5. The Lord of Hosts, vv. 13-15.

   This occurrence is another of the theophanies, a subject on which we
   have commented. "Theophany" means a manifestation of God to men by
   actual appearance. It might be called a "Christophany" or manifestation
   of Christ, for all such appearances in the Old Testament were those of
   the Second Person of the Trinity.

   We are impressed with the intrepidity of Joshua, suggesting a
   supernatural enduement of courage (v. 13). We are impressed, too, with
   the warlike appearance and the warlike declaration of his divine
   visitor. As before stated, men ask in ignorance whether war is ever
   justifiable . Let them remember that the Lord is a God of war, and that
   until His enemies are subdued war will never end. In the present
   instance everything betokens heaven's approval of this war of invasion.
   Only a weak apprehension of sin, and of the divine character, can argue
   otherwise.

   Observe the evidences of the deity of this Person -- His name. His
   acceptance of worship. His command and the reason for it. The place of
   His appearance was Gilgal, part of accursed Canaan, and yet His
   presence made it holy (v. 15).

   Questions.

   1. Name the events in the first section of this lesson.

   2. At what period of the year was the Jordan crossed?

   3. How far north of the crossing did the flow of the river cease?

   4. How many sets of memorial stones were there?

   5. What further evidence of the miraculous nature of the "manna" does
   this lesson afford?

   6. What is the meaning of "theophany"?

   7. How is the deity of this "Captain" proven?

   JERICHO AND AI

   Chapters 6-8

   1. Divine Orders, 6:1-5.

   These verses should not be separated from the foregoing by a chapter
   division, since it is evident that the orders here received by Joshua
   were given by the Captain of the Lord's host previously described.
   Observe another proof of His deity in the words, "I have given into
   thine hand Jericho."

   The mode by which Joshua was to proceed (vv. 3-5) calls for no
   explanation. What had been his own preparations for the attack on the
   city? Was he meditating upon them when the "Captain of the Lord's host"
   met him? Nevertheless he surrenders to the divine will, and implicitly
   obeys.

   But it was not Joshua merely, but the whole nation which was to be
   taught great lessons about God in this transaction. And are not the
   same lessons applicable to us? Behold divine omnipotence, and the power
   of faith and obedience on our part in laying hold of it!

   God could have destroyed the walls of Jericho in the twinkling of an
   eye, and without any such precedure on Israel's part, but the circuits
   they were to make and the length of time involved had value in
   arresting attention and deepening the impression upon them and their
   enemy. What if the latter had repented as did Nineveh at a later time?

   2. Human Obedience, vv. 8-16.

   The record in these verses is the fulfillment in detail of the
   foregoing decree. "Passed on before the Lord" (v. 8) refers to the ark
   of the covenant, the symbol of His presence, which was carried in the
   procession.

   It is supposed that, at least upon the seventh day, only the fighting
   men engaged in the march, it being almost inconceivable that two
   millions of people more or less, young and old, could have compassed
   the city seven times in one day.

   But what a trial of faith this was! No battlement raised, no foundation
   undermined, no sword drawn, no spear pointed, no javelin hurled, no axe
   swung, no stroke given -- they must "walk and not faint," that was all.

   3. Promised Results, vv. 17-27.

   The first three verses appear somewhat out of place in the record -- a
   command in the midst of a historic recital, but the subject to which
   they refer is familiar to those who have studied the previous lessons
   (see Deut. 7:2, 20-17 and other places).

   If we conceive of Joshua as pronouncing this curse we must remember it
   was done by divine command, while on the reasonableness of the curse
   itself, we should consider what was said in the introductory lesson.
   The sin of Jericho was aggravated by their closing their eyes to the
   miracle at the crossing of the Jordan. God might have swept them away
   by famine or pestilence, but "mercy was mingled with judgment in
   employing the sword, for while it was directed against one place, time
   was afforded for others to repent."

   "By faith the walls of Jericho fell down" (Heb. 11:30). Faith did not
   do the work of a battering ram, but it put Israel in an attitude toward
   God where He might work for them who required no outward agencies. It
   is the same kind of faith that saves the sinner and sanctifies and
   builds up the saint.

   Rahab's deliverance (vv. 22-25) speaks for itself. She and all her
   kindred were left "without the camp," doubtless for fear of its
   ceremonial defilement. The remark that "she dwelleth in Israel even
   unto this day" shows that the book must have been written within a
   reasonable date after the event.

   The curse on the rebuilding of the city (v. 26) reads in the Revised
   Version: "Cursed be the man with the loss of his first-born shall he
   lay the foundation, and with the loss of his youngest son shall he set
   up the gates thereof." For the fulfillment of this curse see 1 Kings
   16:34.

   4. Sin and Its Consequences, c. 7.

   The sin is named in v. 1, and the consequences to Israel in vv. 2-5 in
   language which needs no commentary, the effect on Joshua is equally
   intelligible (vv. 6-9), but one is not more impressed with his
   humiliation and alarm than his jealousy for the divine honor (v. 9,
   last clause).

   The divine interpretation of the situation (vv. 10-15) is of the
   deepest interest to every generation of God's people. Israel had
   sinned, transgressed the covenant concerning Jericho, and dissembled
   besides by hiding the stolen articles. The whole nation had not done
   so, but the sin of a part was that of the whole (James 2:10).

   The curse of Jericho now rested on Israel itself (v. 12), and could
   only be removed by the punishment of the offender who is soon
   discovered (vv. 16-18), and confesses his crime (vv. 19-21).

   The retribution seems severe (vv. 22-26), but not in the light of the
   offence if we judge of it as God did, and who is wise if he set up
   another standard? Observe that it is not said positively that Achan's
   sons and daughters were stoned, although c. 22:20 witnesses that he did
   not perish alone. They may have been brought out only as witnesses to
   his punishment, but if it also fell on them then they must in some way
   have been partakers of his sin. (Read Deut. 24:16.) "The valley of
   Achor" means "the valley of troubling."

   5. Defeat Turned to Victory, 8:1-29.

   Why was Joshua to "take all the people of war" with him in this case,
   say 600,00, when the whole population of Ai was only 12,000 (v. 25)?
   Was it as a rebuke for their self-confidence before (7:3)? Was it to
   inspire courage after the memory of their former repulse? Or was it,
   that the division of the spoil now to be allowed (v. 2) might be shared
   amongst all as a reward for their former obedience and a stimulus to
   further exertions (Deut. 6:10)?

   The campaign outlined in vv. 3-13 is common in modern warfare, but
   apparently unsuspected by the Aites. Observe that the people of Bethel
   were confederate with the Aites.

   6. The Altar on Mt. Ebal, vv. 30-35.

   For the history of this altar compare Dent. 27, a command the
   Israelites presumably could not obey until this victory, since Ebal was
   20 miles beyond and through a hostile country.

   Questions.

   1. What spiritual lessons are taught us in the fall of Jericho?

   2. How was the sin of Jericho aggravated?

   3. What expression shows an early origin of this book?

   4. In whose reign was Jericho rebuilt?

   5. Can you quote James 2:10?

   6. What does "Achor" mean?

   7. Name three possible reasons why all the men of war were to advance
   against Ai.

   8. With what sacred event is this period of the campaign brought to an
   end?

   CONQUEST OF THE SOUTH

   Chapters 9, 10

   1. The Compact with the Gibeonites, c. 9.

   Verses 1 and 2 are a general statement, telling how the kings of the
   surrounding nations felt in view of Israel's victories, and what they
   planned to do about it. The narrative then ends in order to describe
   the method of the Gibeonites, which differed from the others. We must
   again refer the student to the map in the back of his Bible, for
   details as to the location of these nations.

   Gibeon will be discovered a little to the west, perhaps southwest, of
   Jericho. It was of the Hivites (v. 7), and seemed to represent a
   democracy more than a monarchical form of government (v. 11).

   "They did work wilily" and caught Joshua and his associates by guile,
   vv. 4-15. "Wine-bottles" is in the R. V. "wine-skins," for bottles were
   made of the skins of animals, goats for example, and when they were old
   or much used they were liable to be rent.

   Notice in v. 7 that the Israelites were a little on their guard.
   "Suppose you really dwell here in Canaan," they said, "we are not at
   liberty to enter into a covenant with you" (cp. Exod. 23:34; 34:12;
   Deut. 7:2). One would have thought they would have asked counsel of the
   Lord, but this they disobediently failed to do (v. 14).

   Joshua now comes into the colloquy (v. 8), but even he is guilty of the
   same oversight. And yet, as another suggests, if they had sought divine
   guidance, perhaps "they would not have been forbidden to connect
   themselves with any Canaanites who renounced idolatry and worshipped
   the true God. " Rahab is in point. "At least no fault was found with
   them for making this league with the Gibeonites: while the violation of
   it later was punished (2 Sam. 21).

   "Hewers of wood and drawers of water" (v. 21) were the menials who
   performed the lowest offices in the sanctuary (called "Nethinim" in 1
   Chron. 9:2 and Ezra 2:43). But notwithstanding the chastisement of the
   Gibeonites in this respect, their relationship to Israel brought them
   into the possession of great religious privileges (see Psalm 84:10).

   2. The Great Battle with the Kings, c. 10.

   The story now seems to return to the opening of c. 9. The kings are
   exercised by the compact between Israel and Gibeon, for the latter is a
   strong power. To be opposed by Israel was serious, but Israel and
   Gibeon united were a greater menace (vv. 1-5).

   Gibeon's extremity is Joshua's opportunity (vv. 6, 7), but he receives
   new encouragement from God for this, the heaviest undertaking in which
   he has engaged. Everything about this conflict is supernatural, which
   if we keep in mind will remove the strangeness of the miracle in vv.
   12-14. For example, observe vv. 10 and 11.

   "Beth-horon" (v. 10) means the "house of caves," and as throwing light
   on the record, the following from Dr. Robinson will be interesting:

   "There were two contiguous villages of that name, upper and nether.
   Upper Beth-horon was nearer Gibeon, about ten miles distant, and
   approached by a gradual ascent through a long and precipitous ravine.
   This was the first stage of the flight. The fugitives had crossed the
   high ridge of upper Beth-horon, and were in flight down the descent to
   Beth-horon the nether. The road between the two is so rocky that there
   is a path made by steps cut into the rock.

   "Down this path Joshua continued his rout. Here the Lord interposed,
   assisting by means of a storm, which burst with such fury that they
   were more which died with hailstones, than they whom the children of
   Israel slew with the sword.

   "The oriental hailstorm is a terrific agent; the hailstones are masses
   of ice, large as walnuts, and sometimes as two fists; their size, and
   the violence with which they fall, make them injurious to property, and
   often fatal to life. The miraculous feature of this tempest, which fell
   on the Amorite army, was the preservation of the Israelites from its
   destructive ravages."

   Sun and Moon Stand Still.

   In the New Testament we are taught to pray in the Holy Ghost, and that
   the Holy Ghost prays in us (Jude 20; Rom. 8:26). "The effectual fervent
   prayer of the righteous man" of which James speaks (5:16), would seem
   to be the prayer "energized" in the believer by the Holy Ghost himself,
   the prayer He prays in the man according to the will of God. May we
   explain Joshua's prayer in v. 12 this way?

   It is as follows that the Bible Commentary speaks of this event:

   "The inspired author here breaks off the thread of his history of this
   miraculous victory, to introduce a quotation from an ancient poem, in
   which the mighty acts of that day were commemorated. The passage, which
   is parenthetical, contains a poetical description of the victory which
   was miraculously gained by the help of God, and forms an extract from
   "the book of Jasher," i. e., "the upright" -- an anthology, or
   collection of national songs, in honor of renowned and pious heroes.

   "The language of a poem is not to be literally interpreted, and
   therefore, when the sun and moon are personified, and represented as
   standing still, the explanation is that the light of the sun and moon
   was supernaturally prolonged by the laws of refraction and reflection
   that ordinarily cause the sun to appear above the horizon, when it is
   in reality below it. Gibeon (a hill) was now at the back of the
   Israelites, and the height would soon have intercepted the rays of the
   seating sun. The valley of Ajalon (stags) was before them, and so near
   that it was sometimes called 'the valley of Gibeon' (Isa. 28:21).

   "It would seem from v. 14 that the command of Joshua was in reality a
   prayer to God for this miracle; and that, although the prayers of men
   like Moses often prevailed with God, never was there so astonishing a
   display of divine power in behalf of his people as in answer to the
   prayer of Joshua. Verse 15 is the end of the quotation from Jasher: and
   it is necessary to notice this, as the fact described in it is recorded
   in due course, and the same words, by the sacred historian, v. 43."

   Questions.

   1. What geographical relation did Gibeon bear to Jericho?

   2. How does c. 9:11 indicate that Gibeon may not have been a petty
   kingdom like the other cities?

   3. Are you familiar with the story in 2 Sam. 21?

   4. Name the supernatural phenomena associated with the battle of
   Beth-horon.

   5. Can you quote Romans 8:26?

   6. What do you know about the book of Jasher?

   CONQUEST OF THE NORTH

   Chapters 11, 12

   Owing to the length of the last lesson no comment was made on the
   latter half of the previous chapter. But it will be seen that vv. 16-27
   gave an account of the final destruction of the five kings in the
   confederacy against Gibeon.

   The map will show Makkedah (16) to the west of Gibeon, near the sea and
   in what we know as the Philistine country. In a cave the kings hid and
   were imprisoned by Joshua until the rout of the warriors was complete
   (17-21), when they were slain (22-27).

   Then in a rapid survey (28-42) we get the record of the campaign
   through the South as far as Goshen, including victories over Libnah,
   Lachish, Gezer, Eglon, Hebron, Debir, Kadish-Barnea and Gaza. "All
   these kings and their land did Joshua take at one time, because the
   Lord God of Israel fought for Israel" (42). It was the conquest of the
   whole Southern Canaan, leaving Israel free to turn attention to the
   North, the later Galilee region, whose conquest begins in chapter 11.

   1. The Battle at Lake Merom, c. 11.

   As the decisive battle in the South seems to have been at Beth-horon,
   that in the North seems to have been at Merom (5). Let the student
   trace the localities on the map if he wishes to have his interest
   kindled, and the facts fastened on his mind.

   Notice that horses and chariots appear for the first time and it was
   for this reason the battle was attempted to be fought on the shores of
   Lake Merom, where there could be free play for such a force.

   Emphasis is laid upon the great numbers of the enemy engaged in this
   encounter (4). Josephus in his Wars of the Jews gives 300,000 infantry,
   10,000 cavalry and 20,000 war-chariots. If true, a formidable host was
   this in every way, and Israel may well have been dispirited at the
   knowledge of it, but God comes with timely encouragement (6), which He
   makes good (7, 8).

   Inquiry may be raised as to why they should destroy the horses and
   chariots (9), and not keep them for subsequent use, but Psalm 20:7-9 is
   a sufficient answer. What a flood of meaning is thrown on such
   expressions by an event like this! Then, too, not only was Israel to
   trust in the Lord independent of such means, but to be neither a
   traveling nor trading, but rather an agricultural people, which would
   not require accessions like these. The following verses in this chapter
   give a survey of the completed conquest of the North as in the former
   case of the South (10-14), and after recapitulating the Southern
   campaign, the story reaches a conclusion at verse 23.

   2. Recapitulation, c. 12.

   We give but little space to this chapter. In vv. 1-6 we have an account
   of the kings overcome and the cities taken by Moses on the east of
   Jordan, and the distribution of their land to the two and a half tribes
   (see Num. 21:31, Deut. 2:36; 3:3-16).

   Following this we have a record of the 31 kings overcome by Joshua on
   the west of Jordan in the two campaigns, already dwelt upon.

   Questions.

   1. What was the decisive battle in the conquest of Southern Canaan?

   2. Reply to a similar question about Northern Canaan.

   3. Have you located Makkedah and the waters of Merom on the map?

   4. Can you quote Psalm 20:7?

   5. How many kings were overcome by Joshua in his campaign west of the
   Jordan?

   SPIRITUAL TEACHINGS AND TYPES

   Having come to a natural division of this book, we pause to consider
   some of its spiritual teachings and types.

   1. For example, take Joshua himself, who is a type of Christ as the
   "Captain of our salvation" (Heb. 2:10, 11). It is interesting that
   "Joshua" is a combination of Jehoshua, which means Jehovah-Saviour. The
   more important points in the typical relation of Joshua to Christ are
   indicated in the Scofield Reference Bible:

   "(1) He comes after Moses. Compare John 1:17; Rom. 8:3, 4; 10:4, 5;
   Heb. 7:18, 19; Gal. 3:23-25.

   "(2) He leads to victory. Compare Rom. 8:37; 2 Cor. 1:10; 2 Cor. 2:14.

   "(3) He is our advocate when we have suffered defeat. Compare Joshua
   7:5-9; 1 John 2:1.

   "(4) He allots our portions. Compare Eph. 1:11, 14; 4:8-11

   2. We have already spoken of Rahab as illustrating the history of
   redemption, but going into the subject more minutely we mention the
   following:

   (1) She lived in a condemned city, and we live in a condemned world.

   (2) Her character was bad, and we all are sinners.

   (3) She believed in the power of God for her deliverance, and we are
   justified by faith.

   (4) She received a promise for her faith to rest upon, and God has said
   that whosoever shall call upon His name shall be saved.

   (5) She displayed a token and seal of her faith in the scarlet cord,
   and we believe with the heart unto righteousness, but "with the mouth
   confession is made unto salvation."

   (6) Her deliverance was sure and complete, and "there is therefore now
   no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus."

   All these can be wrought out into a helpful discourse by a selection of
   the New Testament passages called for by the different divisions.

   3. The crossing of the Jordan has always seemed an impressive type of
   the intercessory work of Christ on behalf of His people. The priests
   standing in the river-bed until every member of the host passed over,
   brings to mind Heb. 7:25.

   To other teachers the passage of the Jordan is an impressive type of
   our death with Christ. Compare Rom. 6:1-11; Eph. 2:5, 6; Col. 3:1-3.

   4. "The twelve stones taken out of Jordan and erected by Joshua in
   Gilgal, and the other twelve left in Jordan to be overwhelmed by its
   waters, are memorials marking the distinction between Christ's death
   under judgment in the believer's place, and the believer's perfect
   deliverance from judgment."

   For the first-named consider Psa. 42:7; Psa. 88:7; John 12:31-33. For
   the second, one has a large variety of New Testament passages which
   will readily come to the mind.

   5. The Rev. F. B. Meyer speaks of the significance of the vision of the
   Captain of the Lord's hosts:

   "We sometimes feel lonely and discouraged. The hosts with which we are
   accustomed to co-operate are resting quietly in their tents. No one
   seems able to enter into our anxieties and plans. Our Jerichos are so
   formidable -- the neglected parish; the empty church; the hardened
   congregation; the godless household. How can we ever capture these and
   hand them over to the Lord?

   "We summon all our wit and energy to solve the problem. We study the
   methods of others, put forth herculean exertions and questionable
   methods, borrowed from the world. But still we are disappointed, and
   have gone forth alone, confessing our helplessness, and then it is that
   we have seen the Captain of the Lord's host. He will undertake our
   cause, and marshal His troops and win the day.

   "But we must be holy. 'Put off thy shoes from off thy feet, for the
   place whereon thou standest is holy ground.' We must put off the old
   man, with his affections and lusts, and cleanse ourselves from all
   filthiness of the flesh and spirit. Cleanness rather than cleverness is
   the prime condition of successful service. It is only out of such a
   heart that the faith can spring which is able to wield the forces of
   the unseen and spiritual and divine."

   6. The author mentioned above uses the story of the Valley of Achor for
   a chapter on sin, from which the following is taken, which might be
   easily filled up for a Gospel address:

   "(1) We should grieve more for sin than its results. Joshua smarted
   from the disgrace inflicted upon his people and the consequences which
   would ensue when the tidings were noised abroad. He was dreading the
   discovery more than the misdoing. But with God it was not so, and never
   is so. It is our sin in itself that presses Him down, as a cart groans
   beneath its load.

   "(2) We should submit ourselves to the judgment of God. 'Get thee up;
   wherefore liest thou thus upon thy face?' It were as though God said,
   'Instead of grieving for the effect, grieve for the cause.' In
   searching the cause of our failures we must be willing to know the
   worst. And that we may know the worst God traces our sin back through
   its genealogy, just as He did in this case.

   "(3) We should hold no parley with discovered sin. God never reveals an
   evil which He does not require us to remove. When this is done the
   Valley of Achor becomes 'the door of hope' (Hos. 2:15).

   7. "And the land rested from war 11:23. In the use of this text Mr.
   Meyer compares the rest experienced by Israel in Canaan with the rest
   the believer may share in Christ:

   "(1) There is the rest of reconciliation. The soul no longer works up
   towards the cross to obtain justification, but is assured that all
   needed to be done has been done by Jesus Christ on our behalf.

   "(2) There is the rest of assured victory. When we realize all that
   Jesus has done, we see that Satan is a conquered foe, and that his
   weapon cannot reach a life hidden in God.

   "(3) There is the rest of a surrendered will. When our wills move off
   the pivot of self on to the pivot of God, our lives become concentric
   with the life of God, and our feet keep step to the music of His divine
   purpose.

   "(4) There is the rest of unbroken fellowship. As Jesus is one with the
   Father, so we become one with Him, and through Him one with the blessed
   trinity. Truly 'our fellowship is with the Father and with His Son
   Jesus Christ.'

   "(5) There is the rest of perfect love. When we enter into the life of
   the ascended Jesus, we find that our hearts become pervaded with the
   love of God, and there is no longer the yearning and bitterness of
   unsatisfied desire. We hunger no more, neither thirst any more.

   "(6) There is the rest of the holy heart. It is not occupied with
   inbred lust nor tossed to and fro on seething passion. The flesh is
   crucified, the self-principle quelled, and the empire of the Holy
   Saviour is supreme."

   Questions.

   1. Have you compared the New Testament Scriptures with reference to the
   typical character of Joshua?

   2. Can you give from memory the points in which the story of Rahab
   illustrates that of our redemption?

   3. In what two ways may the crossing of the Jordan be used
   symbolically?

   4. What symbolical distinction is there between the two mounds of
   memorial stones?

   5. To what spiritual use might you put the reference to Israel's rest
   in the land?

   DIVISION OF THE LAND

   Chapters 13-19

   Seven chapters make a long lesson from one point of view but not from
   another, as the subject-matter will not require the same attention as
   in other cases. It is about the division of the land among the tribes,
   and we will touch on the principal points by chapters.

   Chapter 13. Although the warfare of extermination had been carried on
   for some time, some think seven years, yet it was not entirely
   completed (1). The Lord therefore stirs Joshua to portion out the
   territory among the tribes, that each may continue to work in its own
   neighborhood after he has departed. He died at 110 (24:29), from which
   it may be gathered that he was now past 100.

   There follows an account of the land unappropriated which includes, as
   a first division, the country of the Philistines on the southwest, and
   that of the Geshurites bordering on it and further south (comp. 1 Sam.
   27:8). A second division is that of the Canaanites near by the
   Sidonians, in what we know as Upper Galilee. A third the land of the
   Giblites on the Mediterranean north of Sidon (2-6).

   This sketch of the unconquered territory finished, the directions for
   allotment are taken up (7), but not until a record is made of the
   boundaries of the two and a half tribes on the East of Jordan which
   Moses alloted them in his lifetime (8-33).

   The distribution was by lot (6), as announced in Num. 33:54, a system
   which accomplished two purposes, (1) the prevention of partiality on
   the part of the leaders, and (2) the acknowledgment of God's rights in
   the disposal of His and not their property. The lot seems to have been
   used only in determining the general locality where a tribe should be
   settled, the actual extent of the settlement being otherwise determined
   (Num. 26:54). The control of God in the whole matter is seen in that
   each tribe received the possession predicted by Jacob and also Moses
   (comp. Gen. 49 and Deut. 33).

   Chapter 14. At this point the allotment begins on the west of the
   Jordan. Nine and a half tribes only are mentioned (2), because the
   other two and a half, Reuben, Gad and half of the tribe of Manasseh,
   were provided for on the east.

   It is to be remembered that the Levites were to have no allotment as
   the others (3), but only certain cities with their suburbs. To make up
   the even number of the 12 tribes, Joseph's inheritance had been
   multiplied by two, and Ephraim and Manasseh, his sons, each represented
   a separate tribe (4). This covers vv. 1-5 of this chapter. From v. 6 to
   the end we have the story of Caleb's choice and allotment of Hebron.
   See Num. 14:24, and Deut. 1:36.

   Chapter 15. This gives the borders of the tribe of Judah, whose
   possession was large because of its preeminence over the other tribes.

   Caleb's possession is within Judah, and in connection with it is the
   story of his daughter's dowry (16-19). She married Othniel the brave,
   the first successor to Joshua in the time of the Judges.

   The last verse is interesting because of the subsequent history of the
   Jebusites and Jerusalem in David's day. If Judah could not drive out
   the Jebusites it was not for lack of power, but faith. But O, how fatal
   to them as to other tribes with a similar history, that they should
   have neglected the divine command to drive out the idolaters. All the
   sufferings of Israel for hundreds of years arose from that neglect.

   Chapter 17. This describing the lot of Manasseh is interesting for two
   things. The first is the apportionment made to the daughters of
   Zelophehad (3-6) according to the command of God through Moses (Num.
   27:1-11). And the second, Joshua's rebuke of the unbelief of Ephraim
   (14, 15). There was the spirit of patriotism in this sarcasm.

   Chapter 18. The first verse of this is the most important, testifying
   to the setting up of the tabernacle at Shiloh whither the camp had now
   removed. By the camp is meant the remainder of the tribes after the
   departure of those receiving their allotments (2). Look up Shiloh and
   identify its location about 25 miles north of Jerusalem.

   The importance of this is its bearing on certain questions of the
   "higher criticism." The view of the rationalistic critics is that the
   Pentateuch was written much later than the period commonly supposed.
   That instead of its contents being revealed by God they were conceived
   by the priests and palmed off on the people as the work of Moses, to
   bolster up their power. According to this the tabernacle and its
   worship were of comparatively late origin, a hypothesis shaken by the
   circumstances recorded here. The tabernacle seems to have remained at
   Shiloh for a long period, probably more than 300 years, if we may judge
   by the reference to the ark in 1 Sam. 4:11.

   Verse 3 of this chapter is an unhappy revelation of the feeling in
   Israel at this time. Perhaps the people loved ease, perhaps they
   preferred a nomadic life, but for some cause they were slow to avail
   themselves of their opportunities to do the will of God.

   If Canaan be a type of Christ and the privileges of the risen life in
   Him, what a rebuke these words convey to many a Christian heart! How
   foolish we are, and how ungrateful to God to be satisfied with present
   attainments when there is so much more and so much better ahead.

   And do we say, "O, that our Joshua would stir us up to possess the
   land?" Is He not doing it? Do we not hear the rebuke of the still small
   voice?

   Let us get back to the Word of God and its great and precious promises.
   Let us "arise and go through the land and describe it," that a holy
   passion may be quickened to possess it.

   Joshua's directions to the 21 land surveyors in vv. 4-9 give rise to
   the question as to where, or how, the latter obtained their knowledge,
   for the task was no simple one. Had they been taught geometry in Egypt?
   What light this throws upon the civilization of the Hebrews at this
   time.

   Chapter 19. The feature in this chapter is the allotment to Joshua
   recorded in the last two verses. Notice when it was done (49), and by
   whose authority and decree (50). There is no record of this decree, but
   it probably had a similar history to that in the case of Caleb (14:9).

   "So they made an end of dividing the country."

   Questions.

   1. About how long a period was covered by the campaign of conquest in
   Canaan?

   2. Was the conquest entirely completed by Joshua?

   3. What advantages were there in the distribution by lot?

   4. How was the providence of God shown in the distribution?

   5. What was the character of the allotment for the tribe of Levi?

   6. Of what sin of neglect were the tribes guilty?

   7. What was the root cause of this sin?

   8. Where was the tabernacle set up in Joshua's time, and how long
   presumably did it remain there?

   9. What bearing has this circumstance upon the science of Biblical
   criticism in these days?

   10. What important spiritual analogy do we find in chapter 18?

   SPECIAL CITIES AND THE ALTAR OF WITNESS

   Chapters 20-22

   1. The Cities of Refuge, c. 20.

   The decree concerning the cities of refuge was considered in its place.
   It will be well, however, again to notice that they were not instituted
   to shield criminals but innocent murderers. Whether innocent or guilty
   though, the murdered had an asylum until his case could be heard by the
   authorities (v. 6). If innocent he was permitted to remain in the city,
   immune from the legal avenger, until the death of the high priest. When
   this occurred he was free to return to his home town, and the rights of
   the avenger ceased (v. 6).

   Observe the symbolical character of the high priest in this particular.
   How the man-slayer, desirous of his liberty, must have calculated the
   probabilities of his death, and wondered whether, after all, it would
   antedate his own? But what a type it is of the Mediator of the new
   covenant who by means of death has secured redemption and deliverance
   for all that believe on Him (Heb. 9:15-17).

   2. The Cities of the Levites, c. 21.

   In the distribution of these there is nothing more remarkable than the
   allotment of the priests (vv. 9-19), in which all the cities falling to
   them were located within the territories of Judah and Benjamin. Simeon
   indeed is named (v. 9), but an earlier chapter showed that this tribe
   had received part of the territory of Judah which had proven too large
   for them.

   Behold, the providence of God! At a later period there is a revolt
   among the tribes (1 Kings 12), and they separate themselves on the
   north to form the kingdom of Israel, while two on the south remain
   loyal to the Davidic and Messianic line, retaining the temple worship
   and Aaronic priesthood intact, and these two are Judah and Benjamin!

   3. The Altar of Witness, c. 22.

   Notice the commendation Joshua is enabled to give the men of war of the
   two and a half tribes, who for a probable period of seven years, had
   separated themselves from their families and flocks in fulfillment of
   their pledge, to assist in the conquest of the land and the settlement
   of the tribes on the other side of the Jordan (vv. 1-4).

   Note the warning and benediction he bestows upon them (vv. 5, 6), and
   the share of the spoil they carry back, and the purpose of it (v. 8).

   But soon a misunderstanding arises. Note its cause (v. 10); the
   commotion it occasioned among the tribes on the west (vv. 11, 12); the
   wise counsels that prevailed (vv. 13, 14); the conference held with the
   supposed offenders (vv. 15-20); the explanation offered (vv. 21-29),
   and the satisfaction experienced (vv. 30-34).

   Questions.

   1. In what parts of the Pentateuch are the cities of refuge referred
   to?

   2. What type of Christ, not heretofore mentioned in these lessons, is
   found in the record concerning them?

   3. What providence is seen in the lot of the priests?

   4. Can you give the history of the altar of witness?

   5. What name was given it, and why?

   RENEWAL OF THE COVENANT AND DEATH OF JOSHUA

   Chapters 23-24

   1. The Gathering at Shiloh, c. 23.

   "A long time after that the Lord had given rest unto Israel," refers to
   a period elapsing after the distribution of the land. We do not know
   how long it was, but Joshua is old and his departure is near (v. 1).

   This is a gathering of the leaders presumably at Shiloh, where the
   central place of worship was (v. 2).

   It is an occasion to exhort the people to faithfulness in their
   obligations to God, the address of Joshua falling into three parts: (1)
   He recalls past blessings (vv. 3, 4); (2) He rehearses promises yet to
   be fulfilled (vv. 5-11); (3) He renews the warnings in the event of
   disobedience (vv. 12-16).

   Under the second head, he applies almost the same words to Israel that
   the Lord spake to him at the beginning (v. 6). Courage is necessary to
   drive out the enemy, but it consists in doing the will of God. The
   enemy will vanish if they do this. Moreover the will of God is their
   separation from the nations which constitute the enemy, and especially
   the worship of their gods. How aptly this fits in with the obligations
   of the Christian. The world is our enemy, but "this is the victory that
   overcometh the world, even our faith" (1 John 5:4). That is, as we
   believe God and obey Him in the Gospel of His Son, He subdues our enemy
   and the world loses its power over us. "The Lord your God, He it is
   that fighteth for you" (v. 10).

   Under the third head, note verses 12 and 13, which serve as a text,
   alas! for the whole story of the book of Judges which follows this.

   2. The Gathering at Shechem, c. 24. Just why this gathering was held at
   Shechem instead of Shiloh is not revealed, but it may have been because
   this was the locality between Mounts Gerizim and Ebal, where the
   covenant had been ratified on their entrance into the land (see chapter
   8). It may have been desired to give the present occasion the
   impressiveness of that memory, and of other events which had taken
   place there (see Gen. 12:6, 7; 33:18-20; 35:2-4).

   (1) God's past blessings are once more rehearsed (vv. 2-13): (2) The
   covenant solemnly renewed (vv. 14-25); (3) The words written and the
   witness recorded (vv. 26-28). It is a wondrous recital of God's grace
   towards Israel that verses 2 to 13 contain. And it was grace towards
   all the world, too, when we consider the purpose of Israel in the
   redemption of the latter. Let not these verses be passed over hastily.

   Grace precedes service on our part, but service follows grace, hence
   the obligations in verses 14-25. Notice Joshua's example (v. 15), and
   the all too prompt vow of the people. Joshua seems to doubt them (vv.
   19, 20), but they reiterate their allegiance (vv. 21-24), and the scene
   closes.

   Note the existence of "the book of the law of God" in Joshua's time and
   his own addition to it (v. 26), as a historical fact bearing upon the
   science of Biblical criticism in our time. This testifies to the early
   origin of the Pentateuch and points to Moses as the author.

   Archaeological Corroboration of Joshua.

   Before concluding our lessons in Joshua it will be stimulating to faith
   to speak of the new light thrown on Canaan during Joshua's time by the
   excavation work in southern Palestine under Prof. Sellin.

   He tells us that the foundations of the walls built by the Canaanites
   around their cities can easily be traced. During their occupation by
   the Israelites these walls were repaired or "pointed," and as the
   Canaanites used polygonal stones and the Israelites four-sided ones,
   the archaeologist is enabled to exactly define the portions of the
   walls of Israelitish origin.

   The ruins of the walls of Jericho are well preserved, and the remnants
   of house walls over six feet high. The houses of the Israelites were
   small, and the difference between those occupied by the common people
   and the princes is largely one of the number of rooms.

   These discoveries bear on the religious conditions of the people and
   their development. Under the high altars in the groves, vessels,
   amulets, and idols, made of clay and bronze, were found. The
   inscriptions point to the offering of newborn children in these vessels
   as a votive offering to the goddess, Astarte. Professor Sellin says
   that the exact truthfulness of the Biblical records receives emphatic
   corroboration from these discoveries.

   Speaking of the walls of Jericho again, a well-defined citadel was
   unearthed upon the northern boundary having two sturdy towers upon its
   flanks, one of them with an area of 40 x 16 feet. The inner wall was
   about 26 feet high and afforded protection to various apartments and
   offices for military and domestic uses. In and about the citadel were
   remains of the older Canaanite time which preceded the siege of Joshua.

   It is doubtful whether the towers existed in Joshua's time, although
   they seemed to have preceded the reign of Ahab, during which Hiel of
   Bethel rebuilt the city. Referring to this rebuilding, Professor
   Vincent speaks of a gap observed by explorers between the early
   Canaanite remains and those of the Jewish monarchy, and he sees in this
   a corroboration of the fact that Jericho lay in ruins for several
   centuries between its destruction at the hands of Joshua and its
   rebuilding under Ahab.

   Of course the material of these discoveries needs sifting and
   collocating, and some conclusions may receive modification, but
   nevertheless they are of great value and likely to become increasingly
   so.

   Questions.

   1. What was the central place of worship in Joshua's time?

   2. Can you quote 1 John 5:4?

   3. Name some events that have made Shechem memorable in the history of
   Israel.

   4. What evidence of the Mosaic origin of the Pentateuch does this book
   afford?

   5. How does archaeological science corroborate the historicity of this
   book?
     __________________________________________________________________

JUDGES

   INTRODUCTION

   The story of Judges is something like this: While Joshua and the elders
   of his generation lived -- those who had personally known the wonders
   of Jehovah -- the people continued in measurable obedience to the
   divine law. But when these died and another generation came on the
   scene there began a decline.

   The way had been made easy for this by their failure through unbelief
   to drive out all the Canaanites from amongst them, as was related in
   Joshua.

   The proximity of these heathen acted like leaven in the dough. Israel
   intermarried with them contrary to the divine decree, and was led into
   idolatry thereby. This weakened their power so that from conquerors
   they were changed into the conquered. Turning their back upon God, He,
   in a sense, turned His back upon them, and allowed them to be taken
   captive and sorely oppressed.

   In their distress they would repent and cry for mercy, when He would
   deliver them through a leader miraculously endued, and called a judge.
   As long as this judge lived they would be held in obedience again, but
   on his decease a relapse into sin followed and the same round of
   experience was repeated.

   An Inspired Summary.

   The story of the book is practically outlined for us in chapter 2,
   verses 6 to 19, which takes the place of a summary, and suggests as the
   spiritual outline of its contents these four words:

   Sin.

   Punishment.

   Repentance.

   Deliverance.

   General History of the Period.

   There are twelve judges named in the book unless we count Abimelech and
   Barak in the number, which would make fourteen. Abimelech was a
   conspirator and usurper (c. 9) and is not usually counted a judge, as
   he was not of divine appointment. Barak was associated with Deborah and
   the honor of the judgeship is assigned to her rather than him.

   It will stimulate interest in the book to read it through in advance,
   and if possible at a single reading, as far as the close of chapter 16,
   where the real history of the judges concludes. Use a sheet of paper
   and record the name of each judge and that of the nation from which he
   delivered Israel. You will find these nations were Mesopotamia, Moab,
   Philistia, Canaan, Midian and Ammon.

   Now examine the map, or a Bible dictionary, and see where these nations
   were located on the north, east, south and west of Israel. This will
   raise the question as to whether the whole of Israel was in captivity
   to each of these nations at different times, or only those tribes which
   were in closest proximity to each.

   If the latter be our conclusion, as seems likely, a second question
   arises as to whether each judge ruled over the whole of Israel at any
   time, or only so many of the tribes as he delivered from bondage? The
   latter seems the more probable, and gives a different conception of the
   history of the period from that commonly understood. It indicates, that
   the periods of these judges were not necessarily successive, and that
   two or more may have been ruling at the same time in different parts of
   the land. It was this unsatisfactory state of things that was
   instrumental in moving the people to demand a king.

   The Chronology of the Book.

   As was stated above, the history of the judges so far as this book is
   concerned ends at chapter 16, the remaining chapters being
   supplementary. The dates given at the beginning of the book and at
   chapter 16 indicate the period covered to be about 300 years, to which
   might be added the time of Eli, if not Samuel, both of whom judged
   Israel, and whose story is found in the next book but one.

   But even with these additions the period does not approximate that
   named in Acts 13:20, "about the space of 450 years until Samuel the
   prophet."

   A perfectly satisfactory explanation of this disagreement cannot as yet
   be given, but a suggestion Is that there is a divine chronology
   distinct from the human, whose centre seems to be Israel. It is
   important to note, that God does not count time in the history of
   Israel while she is absent from her own land, or dominated by, or in
   captivity to, other nations.

   The most striking illustration of this is in the present age. Nineteen
   hundred years in round numbers have elapsed since Jerusalem was
   destroyed by Titus and the Jews became scattered among the Gentiles,
   but the briefest mention is made of them in prophecy in ail this time.
   When we reach the prophets we shall see that they break off their
   references to Israel at the time of this dispersion, and take it up
   again at their restoration at the end of this age, just as though no
   time had intervened. It is on this principle only that one can
   understand the meaning of the seventy weeks in Daniel 9.

   Many minor illustrations of this are found in the Old Testament. Of
   Israel's thirty-eight years in the wilderness, when they were out of
   touch with God through disobedience, we are told almost nothing. "Abram
   listened to Sarah concerning Hagar, which was a suggestion of the
   flesh, and we find a blank in his life of thirteen years, see Gen.
   16:16; 17:1 In the same way we may be able to explain this apparent
   discrepancy between the chronology in Judges and that in the Acts.

   For example, during the captivities in Judges, the nation lost
   successively, 8, 18, 20, 7, 18 and 40 years, a total of 111 years (see
   Judges 3:8; 3:4; 4:3; 6:1; 10: 8; 13:1). Add to these 111 years 200
   during which they were said to have had rest, 136 during which they
   were ruled by judges, and the 3 years of Abimelech's usurpation, and
   you have precisely 450.

   In the same way some would explain the seeming discrepancy between 1
   Kings 6:1 and this passage in Acts. All of which is interesting and
   will be found more so as we come to other illustrations of the
   principle in later books.

   Questions.

   1. Give in a sentence or two the story of Judges.

   2. How do you explain the spiritual decline of Israel during this
   period?

   3. Give from memory a spiritual outline of the book.

   4. How many judges are named in the book?

   5. What reason is there to believe that the servitudes mentioned did
   not always extend over the whole of Israel at one time?

   6. How does divine chronology seem to differ from the human?

   7. On what principle only can we understand the meaning of the seventy
   weeks in Daniel 9?

   8. Apply this principle to the apparent discrepancy between the
   chronology in Judges and Paul's reference to the period.

   JOSHUA TO SHAMGAR

   Chapters 1-3

   1. Judah's Incomplete Victory, c. 1:1-20.

   After the death of Joshua the question of which tribe should lead in
   the subsequent campaign was answered by the Lord in the choice of Judah
   (vv. 1, 2), which was in accordance with the divine prophecy through
   Jacob (Gen. 49:8). Doubtless the inquiry was made by Urim and Thummim
   on the breastplate of the high priest, to which reference was made in
   Exodus.

   Judah invites the co-operation of Simeon because the territory of the
   latter was contiguous and intermixed with Judah (v. 3).

   These tribes are guilty of barbarity in the case of Adonibezek (vv.
   5-7), but it is not to be supposed that God commended this action. It
   was, however, in accordance with the warfare in that day, and even the
   heathen king admitted the justification of the act in his case.

   The defeat in verse 19 is explained not by the lack of power in the
   case of Judah, but by unbelief.

   2. Similar Experiences of the Other Tribes, vv. 21-36.

   Judah's example of unbelief is followed by all the tribes named in the
   conclusion of this chapter, Benjamin, Ephraim (the house of Joseph),
   Manasseh, Zebulon, Asher and Naphtali. Note particularly verse 21 in
   comparison with verse 8. The border of the two tribes, Judah and
   Benjamin, seems to have run through Jerusalem, and while the first
   named expelled the heathen from their part of the city, the latter were
   unable to do so and, this city did not fully come into possession of
   Israel until David's time.

   3. Divine Warning, c. 2:1-5.

   The Revised Version indicates by the definite article before "angel,"
   in verse 1, that He who came from Gilgal to Bochim to warn Israel was
   the Angel of the Covenant, who appeared in human form as the Captain of
   the Lord's host to Joshua. In other words, the Second Person of the
   Trinity. It was a serious indictment He laid against them and an awful
   penalty He announced (vv. 1-3). No wonder the people wept, but would to
   God their sorrow had been to better purpose. The result shows how
   temporary it was and how little confidence may be put in tears for sin,
   which do not mean amendment of life.

   4. The Summary of the Book, vv. 6-23.

   We called attention to these verses in the preceding lesson as giving
   an outline of the whole story of Judges. Verse 6-10 are copied from
   Joshua 24, and inserted here to explain the warning preceding. The
   following verses should be read with care, because they give the key,
   not only to Judges, but to 1 Samuel, and the whole of this period of
   Israel until the monarchy.

   In explanation of verse 16 the Bible Commentary speaks of the judges as
   God's vicegerents in the government of Israel, He Himself being the
   supreme ruler. As we shall see, there was no regular unbroken
   succession of judges, but individuals prompted by the Spirit of God
   were from time to time aroused and empowered to achieve deliverance.
   They were without pomp or emolument, and had no power to make laws. In
   a special sense, however, they were executors of the law and avengers
   of crimes, especially that of idolatry.

   5. Othniel, the First Judge, c. 3:1-11.

   After enumerating the nations left in the land unconquered, and the
   reason for permitting them to remain, the story takes up the first
   general apostasy of Israel and the rule of the first judge. Notice in
   verses 1-4 the interacting of divine sovereignty and human
   responsibility. We have seen the reason why these nations were not
   exterminated from the human point of view to be a lack of faith, but
   from the divine point of view there was another reason. God permits
   these nations to remain, as a school for Israel in the art of war (v.
   2), and, as an instrument for their discipline in divine things (v. 4).

   From intermarrying with these nations the Israelites soon came to serve
   their gods (vv. 6-7). When therefore they turned their back upon
   Jehovah, He, in a sense, turned His back upon them, so that they were
   compelled to serve the Mesopotamians eight years (v. 8). Distress
   followed sin and repentance resulted from distress. Whereupon God
   raised up a deliverer in Othniel, whose history has been spoken of
   before (vv. 9, 10). No details are given of this war, though it must
   have been a serious struggle. Othniel is victorious and rules Israel in
   peace for forty years (v. 11).

   6. Ehud, the Second Judge, vv. 12-30.

   When Israel again fell into sin, God's scourge against them was the
   Moabites, who joined their earlier enemies, the Amorites and
   Amalekites, in a successful conquest for eighteen years (v. 14), when
   distress and repentance are again followed by deliverance.

   It makes the blood run cold to read what Ehud did, but we must remember
   that he was not a murderer but a warrior, and the world has always made
   a distinction between these two. His act was not one of personal
   revenge, but patriotic and religious fervor. Moreover, while he was
   doing God's service in the general sense of that term. his deed is
   nowhere approved in Scripture. This last remark suggests an important
   qualification, to which attention has been called before, and which
   should be applied in instances of a similar character in the Bible
   record. Lange calls attention to the further fact that a shadow seems
   to hang over the official career of this man, for his name is not
   praised in Israel, neither is it said anywhere that the Spirit of the
   Lord was upon him, nor that he judged Israel. These omissions may be
   without significance, but are they not noticeable?

   7. Shamgar, the Third Judge, v. 31.

   The notice of this judgeship is brief and limited to a conflict with
   the Philistines. The "ox goad" with which he slew 600 men is as an
   implement eight feet long and about six inches in circumference. At one
   end it has a sharp prong for driving cattle, and at another a small
   iron paddle for removing the clay which encumbers the plow in working.
   Such an instrument wielded by a strong man would do great execution.

   Questions.

   1. What tribe takes the lead after Joshua's death?

   2. What heathen people inhabited Jerusalem?

   3. Name a theophany in this lesson.

   4. What illustration of divine sovereignty and human responsibility
   does it contain?

   5. Do you know the location of Mesopotamia?

   6. Is God necessarily responsible for the atrocities named in this
   lesson?

   7. What can you say about the story of Shamgar?

   THE PERIOD OF DEBORAH

   Chapters 4-5

   1. The Servitude to Canaan, c. 4.

   We met before with "Jabin king of Canaan, that reigned in Hazor" (see
   Joshua 11), but this seems to have been a second of the name who built
   a new capitol on the ruins of the former one. The Israelites failed to
   exterminate these enemies on the north, who had now become strong
   enough to visit them with the severest oppression they had yet
   experienced, and which lasted twenty years, (v. 3).

   Deborah's appearance on the scene (v. 4) is remarkable, who stands out
   uniquely in the sacred history of her nation. There was no predecessor
   and no successor like her. The palm tree under which she dwelt (v. 5)
   may mean the open-air court where justice was administered during her
   judgeship.

   While a judge, she was not a military leader, hence the call for Barak
   to rally Naphtali and Zebulon which were in proximity to the enemy and
   suffered the heaviest oppression (v. 6). This was not her call, but
   God's call communicated in some special way to her, and it was God, and
   not Barak, who was to deliver the enemy into their hands (v. 7).

   Barak's reply may not have been such an evidence of weakness as it
   appears, since the presence of the prophetess would encourage the
   troops and add sanction to the conflict (v. 8). Nevertheless, it met
   with rebuke (v. 9) and an ultimate disappointment very humiliating to a
   conqueror.

   Notice that this was the Lord's battle, and not man's (v. 15), as we
   have seen so many times in the history of Israel. That the panic was
   caused in a supernatural way is seen in chapter 5:20.

   Jael's Savage Deed.

   No apology can be made for the action of Jael the Kenite woman of vv.
   17-21. Her house was at peace with the Canaanites. She had invited the
   fugitive into her dwelling. She had given him the special protection of
   the women's apartment, always sacred to the Oriental, and she had come
   upon him unawares with probably one of the pins with which the tent
   ropes are fastened to the ground. She was the meanest of maddest
   murderers.

   It must not be supposed that although her action was foreknown to God
   it was sanctioned by Him; neither that because Deborah praises it in
   her song (c. 5), therefore she is pronouncing a eulogy on the moral
   character of the woman.

   The following is the manner in which The Expositor's Bible refers to
   it:

   "Jael is no blameless heroine, neither is she a demon. Deborah, who
   understands her, reads clearly the rapid thoughts, the swift decision,
   the unscrupulous act, and sees, behind all, the purpose of serving
   Israel. The praise of Jael is therefore with knowledge, but she herself
   would not have done the thing she praises.

   "Not here can the moral be found that the end justifies the means, or
   that we may do evil with good intent, which never was a Bible doctrine,
   and never can be. On the contrary, we find it written clearly that the
   end does not justify the means.

   "Rightly does Christian society affirm that a human being in any
   extremity common to men, is to be succored without inquiry whether he
   is good or bad.

   "Law is to be of no private, sudden, unconsidered administration. Only
   in the most solemn and orderly way is the trial of the worst malefactor
   to be gone about, sentence passed, justice executed. To have reached
   this understanding of law with regard to all accused and suspected
   persons is one of the great gains of the Christian period.

   "We need not look for anything like the ideal of justice in the age of
   the Judges; deeds were done then and honestly praised which we must
   condemn. They were meant to bring about good, but the sum of human
   violence was increased by them, and more work made for the reformer of
   after times."

   While quoting the above with approval, in the main, yet the author
   feels obliged to close the subject by alluding to what he has said in
   Synthetic Bible Studies (page 40) that these are questions too deep for
   his soul to fathom, and he would be careful not to be found replying
   against God.

   2. Deborah's Song, c. 5.

   The words of this chapter appear in better form in the Revised Version,
   where they are arranged as poetry.

   The song begins with a reference to God's interposition on behalf of
   His people by a storm (vv. 4, 5). Then the condition of the people is
   depicted (vv. 6, 7) and their apostasy from God (v. 8). This latter was
   the cause of their affliction (same verse).

   Praise is spoken for the tribal leaders and especially for God in the
   help rendered in extremity (v. 9), and all the great and wealthy are
   urged to join in it (vv. 10, 11).

   At v. 12, Deborah bestirs herself to greater flights of fancy, and
   Barak is urged to parade his prisoners in triumph. Then follows an
   account of the tribes of Israel which assisted in the conflict,
   Ephraim, who dwelt near the Amalekites, Benjamin, Zebulon, Issachar.
   Reuben is reproached for abiding among the sheepfolds, and Gad, Dan and
   Asher for not leaving their ships to assist in the fight. Zebulon and
   Naphtali are again especially commended (vv. 14-18).

   The battle is described. Jabin seems to have been reinforced by other
   kings, who joined him without any money recompense (v. 19). The storm
   helped Israel, swelling the river so that the enemy were sunk in the
   quicksands, or washed into the sea (vv. 20, 21).

   The story of Jael's action follows in vv. 24-27. "Butter" in v. 25
   seems to refer to curdled milk. From Jael a transition is made to the
   mother of Sisera, the Canaanitish commander, who is looking through the
   window wondering why her son is so long in returning from the battle.
   Her companions help her to the answer by suggesting that the victors
   have waited to divide the prey (vv. 28-30).

   The song concludes with an invocation to Jehovah in v. 31.

   The land now rested for forty years.

   It is to be remembered that this was a song of Deborah, and not a song
   of God. The record of the song is inspired by God, and in that sense is
   part of His Word, but it is not to be supposed that the Spirit of God
   indicted it, as is true of some other parts of Holy Writ.

   A parallel has been found in the history of Oliver Cromwell, in whose
   letter after the storming of Bristol he ascribes the victory to God,
   saying: "They that have been employed in this service know that faith
   and prayer obtained this service for you. God hath put the sword in the
   parliament's hands for the terror of evil-doers, and the praise of them
   that do well."

   This may have been true, and yet God should not be held accountable for
   everything that Cromwell did or said with reference to that action.

   Questions.

   1. To what part of Canaan is our attention called in this lesson?

   2. Which tribes seemed to have taken the lead in this conflict?

   3. Name some evidences of supernatural interposition.

   4. Is Jael's action justifiable?

   5. Of what does this lesson speak as one of the gains of Christian
   teaching?

   6 Make an analysis of Deborah's song.

   7. Where does inspiration terminate in this case, in the thoughts of
   Deborah or in the record of her thoughts?

   8. Where has a parallel been found in modern history?

   GIDEON AND THE MIDIANITES

   Chapters 6-8

   The old story of sin and suffering is repeated after the death of
   Deborah.

   The Midianites occupied territory on the south and east, contiguous to
   Moab, and were wandering herdsmen like the modern Bedouins, who, in
   connection with the Amalekites, harassed Israel at every opportunity
   with the results indicated in c. 6:1-6.

   God sends a prophet to His people in this case before He sends a
   Saviour (vv. 7-10), for they must be brought to repentance before
   deliverance can be vouchsafed.

   1. Gideon Called, c 6:11-24.

   "An angel of the Lord" (v. 11), should read "The angel," for the
   context shows this to be another manifestation of the Second Person of
   the Trinity. Study the context for evidences of this. Observe Gideon's
   consciousness of it, the angel's assumption of it (vv. 14 and 16), and
   its final demonstration (vv. 21-23). Note Gideon's modesty and
   diffidence (v. 15), suggesting Moses at the burning bush. His request
   for a sign (v. 17) is neither wrong nor unreasonable as the event
   shows. Although the acceptance of his sacrifice meant the acceptance of
   himself (v. 21), yet so deep-seated is fear in the heart because of sin
   (v. 22), that a special assurance from Jehovah is needed to restore his
   peace after he has become conscious of the Divine Presence (v. 23).

   2. The Ensign Raised, c. 6:25-32.

   Immediately upon his call Gideon enters upon service (v. 25). The
   "second bullock" of his father is named probably because the first had
   been stolen by the enemy. The father was an idolator like all the rest,
   it would appear, and the altar on his ground may have been one for
   public use. Secrecy is necessary in destroying this altar (v. 27), as
   the commotion following evidences (vv. 28-30). Joash's defense of his
   son suggests Elijah on Mt. Carmel (1 Kings 18), and, in another sense,
   Gamaliel before the Sanhedrin (Acts 5), or the town clerk at Ephesus
   (Acts 19).

   3. The Battle Arrayed, c. 6:32-40.

   "The Spirit of the Lord came upon Gideon" (v. 34). The margin of the
   Revised Version says, "The Spirit of the Lord clothed Himself with
   Gideon," an Old Testament way of speaking of the filling of the Spirit
   of which the New Testament so often speaks in connection with Christian
   experience (see Eph. 5:18). No wonder that Gideon could "do exploits"
   (Dan. 11:32), under such circumstances. This explains the gathering of
   the people to Gideon's standard (v. 35).

   And yet Gideon's weak faith calls for another sign -- two of them
   indeed (vv. 36-39) -- for he has reached a second crisis in his career,
   and God condescends to manifest it (vv. 38, 40).

   4. The Victory Won, c. 7:1-23.

   This must be God's victory and not man's, therefore, although 32,000
   men (v. 3) were few enough against an army "as grasshoppers for
   multitude" (c. 6:5), they must be reduced still further. For the first
   test (v. 3), compare Deut. 20:8, the second (vv. 4-7) was unique.
   Wandering tribes in Asia, when in haste, do not stoop deliberately on
   their knees to drink water, but only bend forward to bring their hand
   in contact with the stream, and throw up the water rapidly and with
   great expertness into their mouths. The Israelites who chose to do so
   on this occasion were the earnest and energetic ones fitted for the
   expedition God now had in mind.

   What a trial of faith to attack an overwhelming force with only 300
   men! No wonder Gideon needed another sign to reassure him for the
   engagement, which God now vouchsafed to him.

   Observe the expression in v. 9: "Arise, get thee down unto the host."
   The latter were in the valley and attention to this is of importance to
   understand something of what follows. The dream and its interpretation
   in their effect on Gideon require no explanation. They were God's way
   of animating the little band of Israelites and they had such result.

   But if the smallness of the army is astonishing, what shall we say of
   the foolishness of their armament (v. 16-18)? Compare 1 Cor. 1:18-31.
   The pitchers concealed the lamps, which were what we call torches, and
   being earthenware were easily broken. The 300 men were divided into
   three bands that they might seem to be surrounding the camp. Suddenly,
   in the darkness and stillness of the night, a loud echo of trumpets is
   heard, followed by a mighty shout from every side; a blaze encircles
   the camp, and the sleepers started from their rest and supernaturally
   alarmed as they doubtless were, run tumultuously hither and thither,
   not knowing friend from foe, and soon precipitately flee (vv. 19-22).
   "The men of Israel" who pursued after them, were either the 10,000 or
   the 32,000 who had lingered near the scene and were now ready to join
   in the fight when everything appeared so hopeful.

   5. The Campaign Extended, c. 8:1-21.

   Verses 1-4 require little comment, but should not be passed over
   without observing Gideon's modesty and greatness in soothing the
   wounded pride of Ephraim (compare Prov. 15:1 and Phil. 2:4).

   "The men of Succoth" (v. 5) and those of Penuel (v. 8), were of the
   tribe of Gad, but one would hardly think they were of Israel at all by
   the way they acted in this case. They were afraid of the Midianitish
   kings, and doubted Gideon's ability to overcome them. Verse 14 shows
   that it was the chief men of these places that had treated him thus,
   and whom he now returns to punish. "He taught the men" (v. 16) means
   according to the margin that he "threshed" them. The method was placing
   thorns and briers on the naked body and pressing them down by heavy
   implements of some kind. Cruel torture, but we can say nothing more
   about it than in the cases of cruelty mentioned earlier.

   The Midianitish kings had slain Gideon's brothers (vv. 18, 19), and it
   was his duty as nearest of kin to take requital, although he offered
   the honor to his son (v. 20). Jether failing in the premises, Gideon
   acted the part (v. 21).

   6. End of Gideon's Life, c. 8:22-32.

   The tribes would have made Gideon king (v. 22) had not the latter
   showed his loyalty to God, and to them also by declining the offer (v.
   23). He would be judge, but Jehovah must be King. And yet he made a
   mistake, though not intentionally perhaps, in what follows (v. 24-27).
   In other words, there seems no reason to believe that he had idolatry
   in view in what he did, although after his decease it worked that way
   (v. 33). What he had in mind apparently was an ephod for his use as a
   civil magistrate as in David's case later (1 Chron. 15:27).

   Questions.

   1. Where were the Midianites located with reference to Israel?

   2. How many signs in all does God grant Gideon?

   3. To what tribe did "the men of Succoth" belong?

   4. Give two or three illustrations of Gideon's modesty.

   5. How long did he judge Israel?

   GIDEON TO JAIR

   Chapters 9-10:5

   1. Abimelech's Usurpation, c. 9:1-6.

   The close of the last lesson shows idolatry creeping into Israel, the
   fruit of which is reaped in the years following. God is forgotten and
   Gideon also (8:34, 35), the meaning of the last verse being interpreted
   by the story of Abimelech.

   This Abimelech fraternized with his nearest of kin, the relatives of
   his mother's side (vv. 1-3), a striking instance, as one says, of the
   evils of polygamy, where one son of a father has connections and
   interests totally alien to his brethren. Contrast the verses just
   alluded to with 8:22, 23 and observe the difference in spirit and
   motive between father and son.

   What is meant by the allusion to the "one stone" in v. 5 on which
   Abimelech slew his brothers, it is difficult to say. Some think he
   dashed them from one rock, and others that the stone was the pagan
   altar on which their lives were sacrificed.

   2. Jotham's Parable, c. 9:7-21.

   The reason Jotham, the youngest son of Gideon, was spared from the
   general slaughter is given in v. 5. The spot chosen for his
   proclamation was the public place of Shechem, and "the parable drawn
   from the rivalry of the various trees was appropriate to the foliage in
   the valley below." With a little exertion of voice it is said he could
   easily be heard in the city.

   Someone may ask an explanation of V. 13, and in what sense wine could
   be said to "cheer" God? Jotham not being present to explain the
   expression, we are at a loss, for it is not God who is here speaking,
   but man, whose word God is causing to be recorded. Wine was sometimes
   used in sacrifices as was oil. The latter is said to "honor" God (v.
   9), and perhaps in the same sense it is meant that wine cheered Him.

   Note the malediction Jotham pronounces on Abimelech and Shechem (v.
   20), and the fulfillment we reach at the close of chapter 9. Thus would
   it appear that Jotham was in this case a prophet and minister of God.

   3. Gaal's Conspiracy, c. 9:22-49.

   The combination of Abimelech's usurpation and Shechem's idolatry did
   not work well, for by and by God sent a judgment upon them (vv. 22-25).
   Gaal, who, some think, represented the original Canaanites of the
   locality, took advantage of the feeling against Abimelech and raised an
   insurrection (vv. 26-29). Zebul, the ruler of the city, is loyal, and
   informs on him (vv. 30-33) with the result following (vv. 34-40).
   Subsequently Shechem itself is destroyed (vv. 41-45), and the people
   who took refuge in the stronghold consumed with fire (vv. 46-49).

   4. Abimelech's Death, c. 9:50-57.

   A subsequent campaign against Thebes, now called Tubas, was not so
   successful (vv. 50-55), and Abimelech like Sisera, came to his end at
   the hand of a woman. Thus his evil deeds met their reward (56-57).

   5. The Judgeships of Tola and Jair, c. 10:1-5.

   Not much is said about these two judges, and yet together they ruled
   forty-five years. As foreign aggression is not spoken of, the
   probability is that the "defense" or saving of Israel referred to was
   from internal dissension of usurpation like that of Abimelech. For this
   cause they have sometimes been called "civil" judges.

   Something of the magnificence of the second of the two may be gathered
   from v. 4. To ride on an ass is characteristic of royalty in those
   times, and if each of these sons did that, and each had his own city to
   rule, Jair's possessions were extensive. "Havoth-jair," interpreted,
   means "the towns of Jair."

   It will be interesting to compare Num. 32:41, Deut. 3:14 and 1 Chron.
   2:22 for the story of an earlier Jair, but although the two have points
   of unusual similarity they were evidently different persons.

   Questions.

   1. What is the spiritual condition of Israel following Gideon's death?

   2. Give the history of Abimelech's rise to power.

   3. Recite Jotham's parable and give its application.

   4. What shows Jotham to have been a prophet?

   5. Give the history of Shechem's destruction.

   6. With what earlier military captain may Abimelech be compared in his
   death?

   7. What characteristic has sometimes been given the judgeships of Tola
   and Jair, and why?

   8. What is the meaning of "Havoth-jair"?

   9. Have you compared the histories of the two Jairs?

   JEPHTHAH AND HIS VOW

   Chapters 10:6-12:7

   1. Oppression East and West, 10:6-18.

   The story of these verses suggests that preceding the deliverance of
   Gideon's time (chapter 6). There seem, indeed, to have been no such
   widespread idolatry and iniquity in Israel before, and for 18 years the
   nation suffered at the hands of the Ammonites on the east and the
   Philistines on the west (v. 8). The Ammonites were very bold and
   pressed their conquests across the Jordan (v. 9).

   The repentance of Israel (v. 10) seems to have been genuine for there
   is no cloaking of their sin, and yet Jehovah would put in the plow
   deeper (vv. 11-14). Just how the communication of these verses was made
   the record says not. It may have been gathered in substance from the
   providences in the case, or it may have come directly through the high
   priest; probably the latter. Nevertheless, when they are ripe for mercy
   the mercy comes (vv. 15-16). The ripeness is shown in their putting
   away sin, and making their backs bare for the punishment, whatever it
   may be, "Do any- thing you will to us, O Lord, but send deliverance."
   When the sinner in the present dispensation gets into this place of
   surrender, help through Christ is not long delayed. Compare the close
   of Romans 7 with the opening verses of the next chapter in that
   epistle.

   2. Jephthah the Deliverer, 11:1-11.

   Jephthah was low-born and had a hard time of it (vv. 1-3). He was at
   the head of a band of outlaws, with a history not unlike David at one
   time; but he was a gallant leader and his innings have come at last
   (vv. 4-11). Notice that Jephthah was not without a knowledge of God as
   shown in verses 9 and 11, so that with all his roving habits and his
   life of plundering on his enemies, the Ammonites perhaps, he may have
   been more godly and loyal than the people who cast him out.

   3. The Ambassage to Ammon, 11:12-28.

   The record of these verses is self-explanatory, and is noticeable,
   first, for Ammon's false assumption based on an untrue interpretation
   of history (vv. 12, 13); second, Jephthah's acquaintance with Israel's
   past, pointing to the accuracy with which the records were kept,
   notwithstanding the long period of turmoil since Moses's day (vv.
   14-22); and third, his abounding faith in Jehovah's power in the
   premises (vv. 23-27).

   4. Jephthah's Vow, 11:29-40.

   The vow of Jephthah is celebrated for its awfulness and, like others,
   we have tried to explain it in some other than its literal sense, but
   the effort has not brought satisfaction. We can understand why he made
   it, because it was a custom with heathen chieftains on the eve of
   battle to promise their gods oblations or booty; and also because vows
   were practiced by the Israelites and approved of God, as we saw in
   Leviticus 27 and other scriptures, although, of course, not vows of
   this kind. Jephthah lived beyond the Jordan, far from the tabernacle,
   and on the borders of a heathen country, where human sacrifices were
   common. It was, too, a time of great spiritual declension in Israel.
   All these things are to be considered, and yet why did he do it, and
   why did God permit it, abhorrent to him as it must have been, if it
   absolutely occurred? We might as well ask the old question. Why did God
   permit sin ? We can say nothing in answer, but simply wait. There are
   many mysteries to try our faith and patience. One thing is certain, it
   furnishes an awful lesson against rash and hasty vows.

   It is but just to add that the other view of this matter is that
   Jephthah consecrates his daughter to a life of virginal service. This
   indeed would have been a serious sacrifice to him as it ended his hopes
   as the head of his line, inasmuch as she was his only child. It also
   deprived her of the crown of motherhood. Verses 39 and 40 are thought
   to offer justification of this latter view.

   5. Close of Jephthah's Career, 12:1-7.

   Ephraim shows the same jealous spirit in this case as in the earlier
   time of Gideon. They wanted the glory without earning it, and, although
   Jephthah dealt with them almost as tactfully as his predecessor, the
   issue was different (vv. 1-3).

   Verse 6 shows the test by which the escaping Ephraimite was discovered.
   "Shibboleth" means a stream, and "sibboleth" a burden. The
   appropriateness in the demand that they pronounce the first word is
   that they were trying to pass the fords of Jordan. The Ephraimites had
   a dialect peculiarity that identified them anywhere.

   Questions.

   1. How long was Israel in bondage at this time and to what peoples?

   2. How does she testify her sincere repentance?

   3. Have you examined the passages in Romans?

   4. Give the early history of Jephthah.

   5. Give evidences of his reverence for Jehovah.

   6. Give the story of Jephthah's debate with Ammon.

   7. Give the story of his vow.

   8. Give the story of the word "shibboleth."

   SAMSON THE NAZARITE

   Chapters 13-16

   The close of chapter 12 furnishes the history of three other civil
   judges, and then we reach that of another warrior as picturesque as
   Gideon or Jephthah. And Sampson's life is so full of inconsistencies
   and mysteries considered from the divine standpoint, that again we can
   only wait the explanations until we shall know as we are known.

   1. The Promised Son, c. 13.

   Here is another theophany for "the angel of the Lord" is none other
   than Jehovah -- Jesus.

   The beginning of this captivity to the Philistines is recorded in
   chapter 10:6, apparently, when the historian digresses to speak of the
   probably simultaneous captivity to the Ammonites on the east and here
   returns to the south again.

   "Zorah" (v, 2) was in the tribe of Dan on the border of Judah, and
   hence approximate to the Philistine country. For the law of the
   Nazarite, compare Numbers 6. Manoah and his wife were of faith and
   piety remarkable for these times, as illustrated in the former's prayer
   (v. 8). Verse 16 identifies the angel with Jehovah. The word "secret"
   (v. 18) is, in the revised version, "wonderful," and harmonizes with
   the name of Christ in Isa. 9:6. "Wondrously" (v. 19) is the same word.

   The angel's words (v. 16) are similar to those of our Lord in Matthew
   19:17, and spoken for the same reason, viz: to instruct Manoah that the
   viands must be offered, not to a human prophet or an ordinary angel,
   but to the Lord Himself.

   While both husband and wife had faith, the latter seemed to possess the
   better spiritual understanding, as judged by vv. 22, 23. She was able
   to draw a logical inference, and her words offer a suggestive text for
   a Gospel Sermon on "God's Love -- Proven by His Work." His
   manifestation in the flesh of Jesus Christ, His sacrifice and
   resurrection from the dead, and His revelations in the written Word, to
   follow the outline of v. 23, are all so many evidences of His purpose
   to eternally save them that believe.

   2. Sweet from the Strong, c. 14.

   The key to this chapter has been put thus: "Jehovah by retributive
   proceedings, was about to destroy the Philistine power, and the means
   he chose was not an army but the miraculous prowess of this
   single-handed champion. In such circumstances the provocation to
   hostilities could only spring out of a private quarrel, and this
   marriage seems to have been suggested to Samson as the way to bring it
   about." See v. 4 as authority for this line of thought.

   In the East parents negotiated the marriages of their sons, and the
   Israelites were not commanded against intermarrying with the
   Philistines as they were not of the accursed nations.

   It may not be that Samson loved this woman so much, as that he found
   her well-suited for his purpose, which may explain the last clause of
   v. 3.

   Observe that it was by the Spirit of the Lord, i. e., through
   superhuman courage and strength, he was enabled to slay the lion (v.
   6), an incidental circumstance by which with others of the kind, he was
   gradually trained to trust in God for greater and more public work.

   The bees are clean creatures, and time enough must have elapsed for the
   sun and the birds of prey to have put the lion's carcass in fit
   condition for their use (vv. 8, 9). The thirty companions (v. 11) were
   to honor Samson, and yet the outcome shows that they were there with
   ulterior motives also. "Sheets" (v. 12) means linen garments. "If ye
   had not plowed with my heifer" (v. 18) means if ye had not used my wife
   to deceive me. There must have been some reason why Samson went to
   Ashkelon (v. 19), and it is thought the men of that city were
   particularly hostile to Israel. Verse 20, compared with the first two
   verses of the next chapter, indicates base treachery to Samson, which
   might well arouse just resentment.

   3. The Hill of the Jawbone, c. 15.

   Samson now feels that he has a reason for revenge (v. 3), which (with
   assistance perhaps) he executes in vv. 4, 5. The margin of the Revised
   Version translates "foxes" by jackals, a cross between a wolf and a
   fox, which prowl in packs. Two of these were tied together, tail by
   tail, a slow fire brand being fastened between each pair. The brand
   lighted, they were started down the hillside into cornfields, and, of
   course, nothing could stop them as they ran widely here and there.

   The remainder of the chapter calls for little explanation, except to
   say that the slaughter accomplished by the jawbone of the ass must have
   been like the breaking of the cords that bound Samson, a supernatural
   act.

   4. The Pillars of the Temple, c. 16.

   The event at Gaza is discreditable to Samson both on account of his
   sinful conduct and the careless exposure of his life to his enemies,
   but God is still pleased to continue His power toward him (v. 3).

   The event with Delilah is equally discreditable and he pays the penalty
   for it (v. 21). Of course Samson's strength did not lie in his hair,
   but in God (v. 17), and in the consecration of his life to Him as
   symbolized by the growth of his hair. He broke his Nazarite vow by
   cutting it and in that sense cut himself off from God. The loss of
   spiritual power to the Christian is always accompanied by grinding in
   the prison-house of sin.

   But how merciful God was to Samson that on his repentance, as evidenced
   in the growth of his hair again. He should have vouchsafed power to Him
   once more, albeit it was to use him further as an executioner (vv.
   22-30). It is important to bear this latter point in mind, to relieve
   Samson of the charge of suicide. He put forth his strength against the
   pillars of the temple in the exercise of his office as a public
   magistrate, and his death was that of a martyr to his country's cause.
   His prayer was doubtless a silent one, but the fact that God revealed
   it and caused it to be recorded is an evidence that it was heard and
   approved.

   As we dwell on the biographies of these judges, so reprehensible, and
   yet so used of God, we see the great distinction between a holy life
   and simply power for service. 'There are Christians seeking the latter
   who appear indifferent to the former, but for the individual in
   eternity it is the former that counts and not the latter. God may use
   any man, but it is only the holy man who seeks to do His will who
   pleases Him. Let our ambition be not to do great things so much as to
   be acceptable to Christ when He comes (2 Cor. 5:9). Samson, like
   Jephthah, is honored for his faith in God (Heb. 11:32), and it was
   great, but he could never be honored for anything else.

   Questions.

   1. Name the three judges referred to in the close of chapter 12.

   2. Define the law of the Nazarite.

   3. Quote Isaiah 9:6.

   4. Quote Matthew 19:17 and explain it.

   5. Quote Judges 13:23 and expound it, giving topics and divisions.

   6. State the key to chapter 14.

   7. What is the meaning of "sheets" in 14:12?

   8. Describe the burning of the Philistine cornfields.

   9. Where lay Samson's strength?

   10. Was Samson a suicide?

   11. Which is preferable, and why, power for service or a holy life?

   12. Quote 2 Cor. 5:9.

   APPENDIX TO THE BOOK

   Chapters 17-21

   The chapters concluding the book, give in detail certain incidents at
   various periods during the preceding history, when the whole nation was
   disordered and corrupt, and "every man did that which was right in his
   own eyes."

   1. A Man-made Priest, c. 17.

   Chapter 17 tells of Micah who established a sanctuary of his own in
   imitation of the tabernacle. Of course it was contrary to the law and
   evinced ignorance and superstition, although the motive may not have
   been bad.

   2. Origin of the City of Dan, c. 16.

   Chapter 18 carries the story further and shows how Micah lost his
   tabernacle, and his priest obtained a broader field. The Danites wanted
   more territory and dispatched five men to search out a good place (vv.
   1, 2). By accident they discovered Micah's self-made "priest" and
   sought counsel of him, which was as ambiguous as the heathen oracles
   (vv. 3-6). Nevertheless they come to a town called Laish, which seems a
   desirable and easy prey, and which they persuade the men of war of
   their tribe to advance upon (vv. 7-12). Passing through Micah's town on
   their errand, they impress his priest into their service (13-21), and,
   although Micah and his fellow townsmen pursue them, it is without avail
   (vv. 22-26). They overcome Laish at the end, build their city there and
   call it Dan. They also continue their idolatrous worship introduced by
   Micah's priest, down to the captivity (vv. 27-31).

   3. An Awful Deed and an Awful Retribution, cc. 19-21.

   Chapters 19 to 21 tell an awful story of lust, civil war and pillage
   fearfully illustrative of a world without God.

   A Levite, after the manner of those days, married a secondary wife who
   proved unfaithful. Returning to her father's house at Bethlehem, he
   followed her to persuade her to come back (19:1-4). After a few days
   they start on their journey accompanied by a servant, lodging the first
   night at Gibeah (19:5-21). Here wicked men abuse the concubine until
   she dies; her husband, his servant and his host acting so discreditably
   as to be almost unbelievable, were it not for the sacred record of the
   fact (19:22-28).

   Subsequently her husband took a remarkable way of obtaining redress,
   explicable only on the absence of regular government among the tribes.
   He divided the corpse into 12 pieces and distributed them with the
   story of the wrong among all the tribes, so that the latter came
   together saying: "There was no such deed done nor seen from the day
   that the children of Israel came up out of the land of Egypt unto this
   day; consider of it, take advice, and speak your minds" (19:29, 30).

   The result was a conference of the tribes at Mizpeh (20:1). The phrase
   "unto the Lord" is possibly explained by the circumstance that Mizpeh
   was near Shiloh, the place of the tabernacle, and that the leaders went
   there to consult Jehovah, if haply He would reveal His mind at this
   crisis, through the high priest.

   The Levite is now given an opportunity to state his case formally, in
   which he inferentially lodges a complaint against the whole tribe of
   Benjamin, as Gibeah was in its territory (20:4-7).

   The decision is to punish that city (20:8-11), but first to demand that
   the perpetrators of the crime be surrendered for execution, which
   Benjamin, through pride or some other reason, refuses to do (20:12-13).
   Internecine war follows, in which the Benjamites are at first
   successful, but in the end succumb to the greater numbers and the
   strategy of the united tribes (20:14-48).

   Humbling Experiences and Their Cause.

   But why, if the united tribes asked counsel of the Lord, and acted on
   it were they so unsuccessful at first, and why did they suffer so
   heavily? Perhaps they did not seek it early enough. Their own plans
   seem to have been formed first, and all they sought of the Lord was to
   name their leader (20:18). It was their disasters that seemed to bring
   them to their senses and to the Lord, in real earnestness, and then the
   tables were turned (20:26-28).

   It is notable that Phineas, the grandson of Aaron, was their high
   priest, indicating the time to be not long after Joshua's death.

   Folly upon Folly.

   All that was left of Benjamin was 600 men (20:47), for it appears that
   all the women and children were slain. Mow, the other tribes had sworn
   that they would not give their daughters to the Benjamites for wives,
   and the result was that the whole of that tribe was likely to become
   extinct -- another illustration of a rash vow.

   Ashamed of their folly, they repented of it, but not to the extent of
   taking back their vows (21:1-8). Instead of this, having discovered
   that none of the men of Jabesh-gilead had gathered to the battle, they
   determined to destroy its inhabitants, with the exception of the
   unmarried women, and give the latter to the Benjamites (21:8-15).

   But there were not enough of these to suffice. Therefore, they decided
   upon the expedient of permitting 200 more to be stolen by the
   Benjamites from the other tribes under the circumstances narrated in
   chapter 21:16-23. No wonder the book closes with the refrain heard
   several times before, "In those days there was no King in Israel; every
   man did that which was right in his own eyes."

   Questions.

   1. What designation might be given to the closing chapters of the book?

   2. Did these events come presumably after the last judgeship, or
   before?

   3. State the history of the city of Dan.

   4. What was the occasion of the war between Benjamin and the other
   tribes?

   5. What means were taken to perpetuate Benjamin?

   6. How is the disorder in Israel explained?

   7. Was a divine or human king required the more?
     __________________________________________________________________

RUTH

   BACK TO THE HOMELAND

   Chapters 1-2

   Chapter 1.

   This beautiful story is an event occurring during the Judges (c. 1:1),
   but separated from the former to give prominence to the genealogical
   record with which it concludes (c. 4:18-22), showing Ruth an ancestress
   of David, and hence of Jesus Christ.

   The story is so simply told as to render necessary but the briefest
   comments.

   Elimelech and his family are called "Ephrathites of Bethlehem-judah"
   (c. 1:2) for the reason that Ephrath was originally the name of
   Bethlehem (Gen. 35:19; 48:7; Mic. 5:2), and also because there was a
   Bethlehem in Zebulun as well as Judah (Joshua 19:15).

   The marrying of Moabitish women by the sons of Elimelech was contrary
   to the Mosaic law (Deut. 7:3; 23:3), but such disobedience was common
   in those times, as we have seen.

   Why Naomi should not have encouraged her daughters-in-law to return
   with her (v. 8) is explained by the thought that they would fare better
   in material things in their own land and among their own people. Her
   piety was not of the depth to make her feel that the spiritual benefits
   of Israel would offset these advantages.

   The utterances of Naomi in verses 11-13 are explained by the ancient
   custom (Gen. 38:11), sanctioned by the law of Moses. (Deut. 25:5),
   requiring a younger son to marry the widow of a deceased brother.

   Naomi seems not to have been a cheerful person (vv. 13, 20, 21), but
   were we in her circumstances perhaps we would not have felt
   differently. And then she may have had reason to believe her affliction
   a divine chastisement upon her household.

   Chapter 2:1-17.

   Verse 2 reminds us of Lev. 19:9, 10, and Deut. 24:19-21, giving the
   right to the poor and to strangers to glean after the reapers; but we
   are not to suppose that Ruth purposely selected the field of Boaz, or
   that she had knowledge at this time of her relationship to him.

   Reaping was done by women (v. 8), but the gathering and threshing was
   the work of men. How beautifully Boaz' character shows in these verses!
   His greeting to the reapers, his interest in his relatives, his
   attention and generosity toward them, and his confidence in Jehovah.
   What poetry of faith in the expression, "The Lord God of Israel, under
   whose wings thou are come to trust!" (v. 12.)

   Verses 18-23.

   Naomi recognizes the relationship of Boaz, and the phrase, "one of our
   next kinsmen," might be rendered, "one of them that hath the right to
   redeem for us." (Lev. 25:25.) This "right to redeem" carried with it
   the duty to protect them, to purchase their tribal lands, and in this
   case to marry Ruth and maintain the family name. Naomi's advice to
   Ruth, therefore, can readily be understood and appreciated (v. 22).

   Questions.

   1. During what period did the history of Boaz and Ruth occur?

   2. What gives special prominence to the Book of Ruth?

   3. What was the original name of Bethlehem, and how many towns of that
   name were in Israel?

   4. What law was violated by the sons of Elimelech?

   5. What was involved in the kinsman's right of redemption?

   A BLESSED BRIDE

   Chapters 3-4

   Chapter 3:1, 2.

   The "rest" Naomi would secure for Ruth is that of a husband and a home.

   Threshing-floors were commonly on the field where the grain was reaped,
   the process consisting in throwing it against the evening wind, the
   farmer remaining all night on the field for that purpose as well as to
   protect his property.

   Verses 3-6.

   The indelicacy of these verses is removed by the fact that it was the
   custom thus to remind a kinsman of his duty in such a case. The
   openness of the location is also to be kept in mind, together with the
   circumstance that orientals sleep by night in the clothing worn during
   the day, reclining simply upon a cloak or rug. Servants frequently
   sleep in the same tent with their master, lying crosswise at his feet,
   and if a covering be needed are allowed to draw the skirt of his
   covering over them.

   Verses 7-18.

   Spreading a skirt over one is in the East a symbol of protection, and
   in the case of a man's doing it for a woman equivalent to a marriage
   contract.

   Rising while it was still dark, Ruth could without immodesty remove the
   veil from her face to receive in it the generous gift of barley for her
   and her mother-in-law. The word "veil" might be rendered "'apron" or
   "sheet," which in the case of poorer women, was linen or cotton and
   wrapped around the head so as almost entirely to conceal the face.

   Note Boaz testimony to Ruth's character from one point of view (v. 11),
   and Naomi's testimony to his from another (v, 18).

   Chapter 4:1-8.

   The "gate' was something like the town hall with us, where all the
   legal business was transacted. It was a building with a cover but
   without walls, and a place which everybody passed by. It was easy to
   find a jury of 10 men there any time; and as soon as the kinsman came
   in sight whose duty it was first to redeem before Boaz, calling him to
   wait, the case was entered upon with simplicity and informality (vv.
   1-4). (For the law governing this matter, see Lev. 25:25.)

   The kinsman was disposed to take the land until he learned that he must
   take Ruth with it when he changed his mind (vv. 4-6). (For the law, see
   Deut. 25:25.) How it would have marred his inheritance to have married
   Ruth is not clear (v. 6), except it be that a son born to him by her
   could not have carried his name but that of his brother, or possibly
   her Moabitish nationality alarmed him because of its contrariness to
   the Mosaic law. Boaz believes that the law is suspended in Ruth's case,
   who has become a proselyte to the Jewish faith, but the other kinsman
   does not.

   "The shoe symbolized a possession which one had, and could tread with
   his feet at pleasure. Hence when the kinsman pulled off his shoe and
   gave it to Boaz, he surrendered to him all claims to the possession
   which would have been his under other circumstances." -- Cassel.

   Verses 9-17.

   Verses 11, 12 seem to be a bridal benediction. Rachel and Leah had been
   greatly blessed with offspring and Pharez was honored as an ancestor of
   the Bethlehemites (v. 18).

   The blessing of Ruth is regarded as that of Naomi as well (v. 14), for
   in the former's child her house will be raised up again. This is set
   forth in the name, Obed, which means "one that serves," i. e., one that
   serves Naomi.

   In the conclusion of this verse we have the words in which the whole
   book reaches its culmination, the completion of the blessing pronounced
   on Ruth by Boaz (c. 2:18). "Thus the coming of the King is prepared
   for, on whom the Lord had determined to confirm the dominion over His
   people for evermore. And the converted Moabitess, who entered as a
   worthy member into the commonwealth of God's people, became the mother
   of David and of Christ." -- Gerlach.

   Speaking of the genealogical question itself, there is an interval of
   380 years between Solomon and David (vv. 20-22). Whole generations are
   omitted evidently and only leading characters are named.

   Questions.

   1. Describe an Eastern threshing floor, and the process of threshing.

   2. How would you explain the indelicacy in verses 3 to 6?

   3. How did Boaz testify to Ruth's character?

   4. With what may the gate of an oriental city be compared?

   5. For what reasons may the nearer kinsman have declined to purchase
   this land?

   6. What did the shoe symbolize?
     __________________________________________________________________

FIRST SAMUEL

   THE BIRTH AND DEDICATION OF SAMUEL

   Chapters 1-2:11

   1. A Sorrowful Wife, c. 1.

   Like Ruth, the opening of First Samuel deals with events in the time of
   the Judges, and is the book of transition from that period to the
   monarchy.

   Verses 1-8. Though there is difficulty in locating the city named in
   verse 1, yet it appears that Elkanah was a native of Bethlehem-judah
   like Elimelech (see the first lesson in Ruth). He was a Levite, as we
   see by 1 Chron. 6:33, 34, and if it is surprising that he should have
   practiced polygamy (v. 2), we must remember the moral condition of the
   people at this time, but not imagine that God approved it.

   Verses 4 and 5 suggest a situation not unlike that of Jacob and Rachel
   and Leah (Gen. 29:15-35). The latter of the verses is rendered in the
   Septuagint: "But unto Hannah he gave a single portion, because she had
   no child; howbeit Elkanah loved Hannah." It will be recalled from Lev.
   3:7 and Deut. 12:12 that the offerer received back the greater part of
   the peace-offerings, which he and his family might eat at a social
   feast in connection with the act of worship, and it is to this that
   "portion" alludes. The "adversary" (v. 6) is translated "rival" in the
   Revised Version and refers to Peninnah.

   Verses 9-18. What a beautiful illustration of Psalm 50:15 is found in
   these verses! As Hannah was the wife of a Levite, a son would in any
   event have belonged to the Lord (v. 11); but if this one was to be a
   Nazarite from his birth (Num. 6:5; Judges 13:5) it meant that his
   residence and service in the sanctuary must begin at an earlier period
   than usual.

   Eli's words in verse 17 were spoken by the Holy Spirit through him
   whether he were aware of it or not. And Hannah seemed to understand
   them as a divine answer to her prayer (v. 18).

   2. A Joyous Mother, 2:1-11.

   Hannah's song will recall that of Mary in Luke 1:46-55, and must not be
   regarded simply as a natural song of thanksgiving, although it came
   from Hannah's heart. It was a prophecy of the Holy Spirit within her,
   making her joy to overflow in praise for those greater blessings in
   Christ of which the whole race will partake, and of which Samuel's
   birth was an earnest and pledge.

   Study the words carefully, and see how they pass over all the
   intermediate steps of the development of the kingdom of God, and point
   to the final goal when the dominion is extended over the ends of the
   earth.

   Doctrinally considered, the song expresses joy in the power of God (v.
   1); it praises Him for His holiness and faithfulness, which is as firm
   as a rock (v. 2); it extols His providence in His omniscience and
   omnipotence in dealing with the strong and the weak, the rich and the
   poor, the high and the low, the godly and ungodly (vv. 3-8); and
   finally, it bears prophetic testimony to His victory at the end and the
   establishment of His Kingdom on the earth through Jesus Christ (vv. 9,
   10.)

   Questions.

   1. How may this book be characterized?

   2. To what tribe did Elkanah belong?

   3. Can you quote from memory Psalm 50:15?

   4. Have you read the law of the Nazarite in Numbers 6:5?

   5. What was the nature of Hannah's song?

   6. State its scope in a sentence or two.

   7. Give a theological or doctrinal exposition of the song.

   ELI AND HIS SONS

   Chapter 2:12-36

   After leaving their son with Eli in Shiloh, Elkanah and his wife
   returned home (v. 11). Then follows an account of how "Samuel
   ministered before the Lord" (vv. 18, 19), and how he grew in favor with
   God and man (v. 26).

   In the meantime other blessings had come to Hannah (vv. 20, 21), a
   confirmation of the divine principle, "Them that honor Me, I will
   honor" (v. 30).

   But what ministry could a child have wrought in the sanctuary? It is
   difficult to say, but he may have played upon the cymbals or lighted
   the lamps, or performed other simple tasks.

   Priestly Graft, vv. 12-17.

   But the burden of this lesson is the wickedness of Eli's sons, over
   against whom the life of Samuel is placed by contrast.

   The explanation of verses 13-16 seems like this: When worshipers
   presented a peace-offering it was brought to the priest, who caused the
   Lord's portion to be burnt on the altar, and whose further duty was to
   cause the other portions for himself and the offerer to be sodden. The
   priests were entitled to the breasts and shoulders of the animal (Ex.
   29:27; Lev. 7:31, 32), but Eli's sons demanded more, and even seized
   upon it before the waving and heaving before the Lord took place (Lev.
   7:34). They added also the offence of taking up with their fork
   whatever portion they wanted while it was still raw, in order to have
   it roasted. The injustice of this must have been revolting to devout
   worshipers.

   A Powerless Remonstrance, vv. 22-25.

   But wicked as this was, the offence in verse 22 was more rank. The
   women referred to are mentioned in Ex. 38:8, but what their duties were
   in the sanctuary is not told. (Compare Luke 2:36, 37.)

   Eli's old age (v. 22) is named not as an excuse but an explanation of
   his weakness. He seems to have been an over-indulgent father, whose
   duty set before him in Deut. 21:18-21, was not performed. Love
   triumphed over justice with the usual evil consequences to other
   people. It is only God who holds the balance evenly.

   A Good Gospel Text.

   God must be the judge when man fails (v. 25, last part), but it was not
   His fore-ordination but their willful sin which was to cause the
   destruction of these sons.

   Pastors will find a text for a Gospel discourse in the former part of
   this verse, "If a man sin against the LORD, who shall entreat for him?"
   The idea is that when men sin against men, God, through appointed human
   agents, restores the disturbed relations by composing the strife; but
   when men sin against God, who is there to arrange the matter." As
   Wordsworth puts it, "A man may intercede with God for the remission of
   a penalty due for injury to himself, but who shall entreat for one who
   has outraged the majesty of God?" Who, save Him Who is Himself God, and
   yet made Himself of no reputation that He might take upon Him our sins,
   and suffer in our stead?

   The Punishment of Eli and His House, vv. 27-36.

   Eli is held directly responsible for the conduct of his sons (v. 29).
   Notice that God can change His mind when it is conditioned on the
   conduct of His people (v. 30). Notice further, the prophecies upon Eli
   and his house.

   1. "I will cut off thine arm and the arm of thy father's house" (v.
   31). This meant that the high priesthood would be taken from the line
   of Ithamar, to which Eli belonged, and restored to that of Eleazar,
   from which it had been taken previously.

   2. "There shall not be an old man in thy house," a circumstance which
   lowered the respectability of a family in Israel.

   3. "Thou shalt see an enemy in my habitation" (v. 32), or as the
   Revised Version expresses it, "Thou shalt behold the affliction of my
   habitation."

   Eli would not personally live to see these things in detail, but he
   would see enough to assure him that the rest was coming (v. 34).

   But God would take care of His own, and fulfill all His promises, as
   indicated in verse 35, which seems like a prophecy of Christ. The
   following verse somewhat qualifies this application, but perhaps the
   prophecy finds a partial fulfillment in Samuel and Zadok (of whom we
   shall learn later on), and a complete and final one in Christ, which
   would meet the difficulty.

   Questions.

   1. What blessing came to Hannah as her reward?

   2. What ministry could a child exercise in the sanctuary?

   3. Explain the nature of the priestly graft?

   4. What was Eli's fault as a father?

   5. What chastisement came upon him?

   ELI'S DEATH AND THE LOSS OF THE ARK

   Chapters 3-6

   1. God Speaks to Samuel, c. 3.

   "The word of the Lord was precious (or rare) in those days" (v. 1), is
   introductory to the record that it was now heard in the case of Samuel.
   It was Israel's sin that hid God's face from them and caused His voice
   to be silent so long, -- only twice heard during the period of the
   Judges (Judges 4:4; 6:8) -- but He was again to be gracious unto them
   in this respect, and a new epoch was to open in their history.

   How God spake to Samuel we are not informed, but His voice in earlier
   times was heard in a literal sense, and there is no good reason to
   doubt that it was here. Of course, God is not a man with physical
   organs, but who shall say that He who made man's voice is not able
   Himself to be heard and understood by man?

   It is touching that the "man" to whom God chose to reveal Himself was a
   boy, and yet by this time perhaps quite a lad. How interesting that He
   is willing to reveal Himself to such an instrument! How it should
   encourage the ambition of a boy.

   The revelation God gives to Samuel concerning Eli is a repetition of
   that of the "man of God" of the preceding lesson (2:27). And the
   meekness with which the old priest takes it is an evidence that his
   personal character was good, notwithstanding his conduct as regards his
   sons.

   2. A Crisis in Israel, c. 4.

   Verse 3 furnishes another illustration of the low spiritual state of
   Israel at this time, and how little removed they were from their pagan
   neighbors. To trust in the ark of the covenant instead of the God it
   symbolized was scarcely different from the worship of the idols of the
   Philistines. It is significant that the elders and the priests were the
   leaders in this folly (v. 4). Their fathers had carried the ark at
   Jericho, but there was a reason for it then, and God had commended it,
   but how different now.

   What judgment fell on Israel for this! And surely as we read the
   chapter to the end, we can understand the prophecy, "Thou shalt behold
   the affliction of my habitation."

   But notice how the character of Samuel as a prophet is being
   established (3:19-21). How sad that he had not been consulted in the
   case of the ark. If he had been, what a different story might have been
   written for Israel!

   3. The Ark Among the Philistines, cc. 5, 6.

   This lesson will not be too long if we add the story of the ark among
   the Philistines, especially as there is little requiring explanation.

   "Dagon" was a heathen god represented by a human bust joined to the
   belly and tail of a fish. The details of verses 3 and 4 of chapter 6
   show the manner in which God was pleased to demonstrate His superiority
   over this heathen god, so-called. "Unto this day" (v. 5) means the date
   when the story was recorded, probably the later years of Samuel's life.

   "Emerods" is vulgarly known as piles, which the Philistines regarded as
   a judgment upon them (vv. 6-12). Thank-offerings were made to heathen
   gods for recovery from illness in the form of metal images of the
   diseased parts of the body, (still true in some Roman Catholic
   countries and in India), which accounts for the advice of the priests
   and diviners (6:1-6). Note especially verse 6, and the witness it bears
   that written records or tradition had kept some knowledge of the true
   God before the minds of these nations contiguous to Israel in all these
   years.

   The lowing of the cattle for their young, notwithstanding that they did
   not turn back to recover them, shows that God was controlling their
   steps in another direction (vv. 10-12).

   The judgment that fell on the Bethshemites (v. 19), was calculated to
   impress Israel anew with the sacredness attaching to the worship of
   Jehovah, but there seems to be an error in the translation here.
   Bethshemesh was only a village, and it seems unlikely that 50,070 men
   could have been slain there; but there is no explanation of the
   difficulty of which we know.

   Questions.

   1. Why was not God's voice heard for so long in Israel?

   2. What stimulus to the spiritual life of a boy does this lesson
   contain?

   3. Give an illustration of Eli's goodness of character.

   4. What was the nature of Israel's sin in carrying the ark into the
   battle?

   5. Tell the story of the discomfiture of the Philistines because of the
   ark.

   6. Describe the sacrilege of the Bethshemites.

   PASSING OF THE JUDGESHIP

   Chapters 7-10:16

   1. A National Revival and Its Results, c. 7.

   In our last we left the ark in care of the men of Kirjath-jearim, which
   means "the city of woods," and is located near Bethshemesh and
   northwest of Jerusalem. Why the ark was not brought to Shiloh is not
   stated, but only that it remained in the city before-named twenty
   years. It would appear from 2 Samuel 6, and 1 Chronicles 13, that it
   remained there longer, but that period had elapsed when the event of
   this chapter began.

   That event was a revival. "Israel lamented after the Lord" (v. 2),
   because they were suffering the consequences of His averted face, which
   included the oppression of the Philistines.

   Samuel tells them how to find relief (v. 3). "Ashtaroth" was a goddess
   of the Sidonians, whose worship was popular in other lands, and which
   the Greeks and Romans knew by the name "Astarte." The worship was
   licentiousness under the guise of religion. Baal and Ashtaroth are
   named together, and taken by some to represent the sun and the moon,
   and by others the male and female powers of reproduction. "Asherah"
   translated in the King James Version "grove," was really an idol-symbol
   of the goddess.

   The people listened to Samuel and gathered to Mizpah (v. 6). This
   refers to a public meeting for the observance of religious ceremonies,
   one of which was fasting, and another the pouring out of water before
   the Lord as a token, of their need of purification of which it was an
   emblem. Samuel seems to have begun his duties as a judge or civil
   magistrate at this time, having only exercised the office of prophet
   and teacher theretofore.

   The enemy is quick to discern danger, for a return of Israel to God
   means a return to power, and hence they spring upon them while
   unprepared (v. 7). But Samuel's intercession is effective (vv. 8-10),
   and Israel so follows up the advantage gained by the supernatural
   interposition that the Philistines never fully recover the blow all the
   days of Samuel's judgeship.

   Observe in verse 16 that Samuel was a "circuit" judge. As later we read
   of "schools of the prophets" in the places named in that verse, some
   think that Samuel was the founder of them at this time.

   2. The Demand for a King, c. 8.

   This chapter presents no difficulties. Observe how history repeats
   itself in the case of Samuel and his sons as compared with his
   predecessor (vv. 1-5). Samuel's displeasure may have been in part
   personal, but chiefly because of the dishonor done to God and the
   injury that would be wrought by such a revolution to the people
   themselves (v. 6). God will grant them a king in His anger (vv. 7-9,
   compare Hos. 13:10, 11), and tells them what kind of a ruler they will
   have (vv. 9-18).

   3. Seeking for Asses and Finding a Kingdom, cc. 9:1-10:16.

   The drama in this chapter and the next disposes itself into five
   scenes:

   We have first the country lad seeking his father's asses (9:3-5). Like
   the cattle on our western plans they were allowed to roam at will
   during the grazing season and were brought home at its close.

   Secondly, there is the meeting with the prophet (9:6-21). That he
   should have been consulted on so trifling a matter, and that it should
   have been thought proper to offer him so insignificant a present as
   "the fourth part of a shekel of silver," perhaps 15 cents of our money,
   seems strange to us; but probably we appreciate Samuel's greatness
   better than his contemporaries. Moreover oriental ideas are different
   from ours.

   It was probably the peace-offering that was to be presented on this
   occasion, which under special circumstances seems to have been
   permissible at a distance from the sanctuary.

   "Now the Lord had told Samuel in his ear a day before" (v. 15). How
   intimate this expression! In the 103d Psalm it is written that God
   "made known His ways unto Moses, His acts unto the children of Israel,"
   and here He is honoring Samuel in the same way. His acts are what men
   see. His ways are the reason and foreknowledge of them, and to them
   that fear Him such secrets are still given (1 Cor. 2:9-12).

   Samuel's words to Saul in verse 20 are "a covered and indirect promise
   of the royal dignity that awaited him."

   Thirdly, the introduction to the people (9:22-24). The things here
   recorded were intended to show honor to the young man, and in so far
   prepare the people to receive him as king. For example, his being
   received into the apartment assigned to the special guests, and given a
   high seat among them (v. 22); and his being offered the choicest
   portion of the feast (v. 24). The words "that which is left" should be
   rendered "that which is reserved."

   Fourthly, the communion on the housetop (9:25-26). Oriental houses
   being low and flat-roofed, the roof offered the most desirable place
   for quiet conversation and rest in the cool of the day. Here the
   prophet instructed Saul in the way of the kingdom, pointing out to him,
   perhaps, the religious decline of the people, and the need of a leader
   obedient to God.

   Fifthly, the anointing with oil (9:27-10:1), which was the ancient
   ceremony of investing with the royal office. This was followed by
   predictions of what should be met by Saul on the way home, which, as
   they came to pass, by testifying to Samuel's authority as a prophet,
   would confirm Saul's reliance upon what he had declared concerning
   himself.

   Questions.

   1. Have you looked up the location of Kirjath-jearim?

   2. What does "Ashtaroth" stand for?

   3. In what sense was Samuel a "circuit" judge, and what institution may
   have grown out of that fact?

   4. How would you expound Psalm 103:7?

   5. In what manner does Samuel distinguish Saul at this feast?

   6. What was the significance of the anointing with oil?

   7. How was Samuel's authority certified to Saul?

   SAUL CONFIRMED AS KING

   Chapters 10:17-12:25

   1. The Peasant Becomes a Prince.

   There was one verse in the last lesson (10:6) we should think of more
   fully. When Samuel said the Spirit of the Lord would come upon Saul and
   he would be turned into another man, it is not necessary to suppose it
   meant his regeneration. There is a question as to whether Saul ever was
   regenerated, for his life-story would not lead us to believe he was.

   The Spirit of the Lord coming on a man is one thing, and the Spirit of
   the Lord coming into a man is another. He comes on a man for service.
   He comes in him for salvation. We saw Him coming on Balaam, enabling
   him to prophesy, although the event shows that Balaam was not in
   fellowship with God, and so it may have been with Saul, and so it may
   be with any man. Service should not be out first desire, but salvation.

   Saul had been a farmer's son, with no training for a monarch's throne,
   but the Spirit of God "rushed" upon him, as the word means, and endowed
   him to act in a manner far superior to his previous character and
   habits. "Instead of the simplicity of a peasant he now displayed the
   wisdom and energy of a prince."

   2. The Choice of the Lot, 10:17-27.

   The event here is an illustration of the relation of the divine
   sovereignty to human free agency. It was God's purpose that Saul should
   be king as indicated in His earlier selection of him and yet, so far as
   we can see, the people who were ignorant of this were perfectly free in
   their casting of the lot. So in the case of our salvation. "No man
   cometh to the Father but by me" (John 14:16), and yet, "whosoever will
   may take of the water of life freely" (Rev. 22:17).

   Note, that the "Magna Charta" of the kingdom was laid up "before the
   Lord," placed with the other sacred records for safe-keeping and
   transmission, a circumstance to which attention has been called on
   earlier occasions as bearing upon the history of the text of Scripture.

   That is a beautiful expression in verse 26, showing how God provided
   for the suite of the new sovereign and the dignity of the kingly state.
   These men feared God and honored the king (1 Peter 2:17). There were
   others, however (v. 27), but Saul in his treatment of them showed
   himself a king.

   3. The Selection Confirmed, c. 11.

   This chapter divides itself into two parts: Saul's victory over the
   Ammonites (vv. 1-11), and the effect upon the people in reference to
   himself (vv. 12-15). It contains no difficulties, but it ought to be
   stated that the demand of the Ammonites (v. 1) was based upon a
   supposed right of original possession in Gilead (read Judges 11).

   Notice that no appeal was sent to Saul personally for aid, indicating
   that the people generally had not accepted him as king. But God had
   chosen and equipped him, which was sufficient (vv. 6-8).

   Do not pass this by without observing God's sovereignty in the
   deliverance of His own. The men of Jabesh-Gilead are not looking to Him
   but to the people -- to some man who may help them. And yet their only
   hope is in God. And when He helps them it is through the instrument
   they have ignored. Moreover, it is His Spirit that does the work. Where
   otherwise could Saul have obtained the boldness to act as he did? And
   even then, would the people have had confidence to follow Him had not
   the Lord put His fear upon them?

   What a lesson for our churches and missionary boards! How the magnitude
   of their work oppresses them in these days; how feeble the results in
   comparison with the effort and the size of the need. Why not turn to
   the God of Israel instead of wearing ourselves out with our own
   planning? Why not expect Him to carry on His work in His own way and
   His own time? The Spirit of God may fall upon any man He pleases, and
   His fear upon the people when He will, and then a revival comes and
   great is the accomplishment. Let us turn to Him in continual, humble
   and expectant prayer if we want to put the Ammonites to shame.

   There is nothing so successful as success, and the enthusiasm of the
   people for Saul now is so strong, that with difficulty are they
   restrained from summary vengeance on those who would not follow him
   theretofore (vv. 12, 13). But Saul once more shows the strong reserve
   of a king, and is fully confirmed in the kingdom.

   4. The Challenge of the Old Leader, c. 12.

   The people have no charge to lay against Samuel (vv. 1-15), but he has
   one to lay against them, not for himself but for God. It was wrong and
   ungrateful for them to have desired a human king, yet they might be
   spared many of the unhappy consequences of that act if, even now, they
   would fear the Lord and serve Him (vv. 13-15).

   It was needful that there should be a sign of the authority by which he
   spake. A thunderstorm in itself was not a miracle, but coming from a
   clear sky, in an unusual time of the year, and at the word of the
   prophet made it so (vv. 16-19).

   Notice the testimony to the divine faithfulness and consistency in
   verse 22. How ever-recurring it is in Holy Scripture! And notice the
   cause of it, it hath "pleased" Him to do so. No desert on the part of
   His people, but just His own gracious pleasure (compare Eph. 1:4-6, 11,
   12). This is humbling but assuring. If He pleases to save. He will
   save. And He pleases to save all who put their trust in His Son. It is
   the mark of the regenerated man that he submits to the Lord's pleasure
   always. It brings him pleasure to do so.

   But do not lose the lesson of what Samuel says in verse 23. He would
   consider it calamitous for him to neglect the office of intercessor.
   Could a parent think more of his child than he of this nation? What an
   example for pastors! What an example for every Christian! (Eph. 6:17,
   18.)

   Questions.

   1. How might one explain the reference to the Spirit of the Lord coming
   upon Saul in chapter 10:6?

   2. Which should be our first desire, salvation or service, and why?

   3. What theological problem is illustrated in the choice of the lot?

   4. What circumstance bears on the history of the sacred text?

   5. How is God's sovereignty in salvation further illustrated in this
   question?

   6. What made the thunderstorm in this case supernatural?

   7. What lesson about prayer did we learn from Samuel?

   THE MONARCHY ON ITS WAY

   Chapters 13-14

   The period covered by these chapters is doubtless of some length, whose
   history is summed up in the closing verses of the second (47-52). But
   there are special features reported in detail which constitute the
   substance of the lesson.

   1. The Rendezvous at Gilgal, 13:1-4.

   Saul's plan seems to have been not a large standing army but a small
   bodyguard, divided between him and his son (v. 2), for the purpose of
   harassing the enemy in detachments.

   "Garrison" (v. 3), is rendered by some "pillar" or "flag-staff." In any
   event Jonathan's act was a signal for battle, and the hosts gather (vv.
   3, 4).

   2. Saul Weighed in the Balance and Found Wanting, vv. 5-14.

   Some regard "30,000 chariots" (v. 5), as a textual error, and that it
   should be "3,000." But the Israelites act as though there were 30,000
   (vv. 6, 7), and even Saul loses his balance (v. 9). Had he withheld his
   hand until the end of the seventh day Samuel would have appeared, whose
   delay doubtless was providentially ordered to test the king's
   character.

   The king failed. He had no right to intrude into the priest's office.
   It showed a lack of faith and obedience, and a desire to get glory to
   himself rather than God. Moreover, under rebuke he showed no humility
   or penitence, but a self-Justifying spirit (vv. 11, 12), that led to
   his rejection from the kingdom and the prophecy of a successor of
   another type (vv. 13, 14).

   3. "A Trembling of God," 14:15-18.

   The closing verses of chapter 13 depict the awful condition into which
   Israel had fallen under the mastery of the Philistines. They were
   totally disarmed. With the exception of a "file" for sharpening their
   smaller instruments of husbandry, there were weapons in the hands of
   none except the two named.

   It is clear from this that what follows at the opening of the next
   chapter was supernatural. Verse 6 shows Jonathan's faith, superinduced
   doubtless by a special enduement of the Holy Spirit. Otherwise his
   conduct would have been rashness. The thought is further strengthened
   by the earthquake in verse 15, which contributed to the panic in the
   enemy's camp. "There was a trembling in the host," is in the margin, "a
   trembling of God," i. e. a trembling which He produced.

   4. Zeal Without Wisdom, 14:19-46.

   Ecclesiastes says there is "a time to every purpose under the heaven"
   (3:1), and Saul thought there was a time to cease praying and begin
   acting, for God had heard his prayer and was answering it (v. 19). The
   deserters were all coming back and the Lord was giving victory (vv.
   21-23).

   But the king had laid a foolish obligation on his soldiers, and a
   foolish vow upon himself (vv. 24-30). It was a case of zeal without
   wisdom as his son points out, and it came near costing him the loss of
   his son, but for the intervention of the people (vv. 36-41).

   When Jonathan speaks of the honey "enlightening" his eyes (v. 29), it
   is another way of referring to the refreshment experienced by eating
   it.

   The event in verse 32 took place at the end of the day's battle, when
   the obligation about eating being removed, the hungry soldiers could
   wait neither to cook their meat nor properly slay their animals. The
   stone Saul commanded to be brought (v. 33), was to slaughter the
   animals upon in accordance with the Levitical law about the blood, and
   seems afterward to have been used for an altar of worship.

   Questions.

   1. What, do some think, "garrison" means in this lesson?

   2. What was the character of Saul's failure in this case?

   3. What shows the extent of Israel's subjection to the Philistines?

   4. How would you explain Jonathan's action in verse 6?

   5. Tell the story of Saul's foolishness in this battle.

   6. What is the meaning of "enlightening" in verse 29?

   THE MAN AFTER GOD'S OWN HEART

   Chapters 15-16:13

   1. Another Commission for Samuel, 15:1-9.

   How long a time elapsed since the last chapter is indeterminable.
   Saul's victory seems to have driven the Philistines out of Israel's
   territory, and to have been followed by successful sallies against
   other enemies.

   He had been warned of God that because of his presumption at Gilgal (c.
   13), the kingdom would be taken from him and given to another; but God
   seems willing to allow him another chance, or at least another test of
   his quality to be His vice-regent in Israel before executing His
   purpose (v. 1).

   For an explanation of verse 2 look up Ex. 17:8-14; Num. 24:20; Deut.
   25:17-19. We have seen the reason for God's anger against such nations
   as Amalek in that they represented the powers of darkness, and sought
   as the instruments of Satan to frustrate His purpose of redemption of
   the world through Israel.

   2. Saul's Rejection from the Kingdom, 15:10-31.

   This part of the chapter requires little comment. Notice Saul's
   falsehood (v. 13), and his self-justifying spirit (vv. IS, 21). Notice
   the principle in verse 22, and the final rejection of him in verse 23.
   Nor is his repentance sincere, inasmuch as he is still trying to excuse
   himself (v. 24), and desires to make a good showing before the people
   (v. 30).

   God's Repenting and Not Repenting.

   Here is a seeming contradiction which needs a word of explanation.
   Twice is it said that it repented the Lord that He made Saul king (vv.
   11, 35), and in another place that "He is not a man that He should
   repent" (v. 20). In the last case "repent" is to be taken in the
   positive sense that God s decrees are unchangeable, which is necessary
   to be believed of the divine nature. But in the former case it is to be
   taken in the figurative sense, as explaining in terms capable of human
   understanding why He was about to act as He did.

   He intends to alter His purpose with reference to Saul because of the
   latter's wickedness. It would not have been altered but for this, and
   yet He foreknew in choosing Saul that this would take place. In the
   larger sense, He did not repent or change His mind at all, while in the
   narrower sense He did. But since the narrower was included in the
   larger, it is to be regarded as part of His original decree, from which
   point of view God did not repent, but carried out His purpose as from
   the beginning.

   3. The Choice of David, 16:1-13.

   When in chapter 13 it was said that the Lord sought Him a man after His
   own heart, the reference was to David. But it is not to be supposed
   that David was a perfect man in the natural and moral sense, for we
   know to the contrary. It will be found, however, that while he was a
   sinner like Saul, he was a regenerated sinner while Saul was not, so
   far as man can judge. With all his sin, David, loved God supremely, and
   his underlying motive was to do His will. His history, checkered as it
   is, establishes this fact, and the sense in which he was a man after
   God's own heart is seen by a comparison of his history with that of
   Saul.

   There is nothing of difficulty in the section of Scripture now under
   consideration.

   Questions.

   1. How extensive does the conquest of the Philistines seem to have
   been?

   2. What further opportunity does God afford Saul?

   3. Have you refreshed your memory concerning the history of the
   Amalekites?

   4. Have you located them on the map?

   5. Can you quote the principle in verse 22?

   6. What indicates the insincerity of Saul?

   7. How would you explain the apparent contradiction about God's
   repenting?

   8. In what sense could David be said to be a man after God's heart?

   DAVID BEFORE SAUL

   Chapters 16:14-18:4

   1. As a Minstrel, 16:14-23.

   When it is said that "the Spirit of the Lord departed from Saul" (v.
   14), we have a further illustration of the distinction between the
   Spirit coming on a man and the Spirit dwelling within him. In the
   latter case we do not think of His departing from him (John 14:16; Rom.
   11:29), but in the former He may do so for more than one reason, but
   especially when the man through disobedience has placed himself outside
   the pale where God cares to use him. As to "an evil Spirit from the
   Lord" troubling him, we are to regard it as a judgment upon him (see
   Judges 9:23; 1 Kings 22:15-23; Job 1 and 2; 1 Cor. 5:1-5), in
   consequence of which he became "jealous, irritable, vindictive and
   subject to morbid melancholy." The ancients believed music had an
   influence in healing such disorders (v. 23).

   It is easy to see why this providence came in the way of David (vv.
   18-22), when we consider how it may have prepared him for his future
   position by acquainting him with the ways of the court and the business
   of government.

   We are interested in the description of the young man David, by one who
   knew him well (v. 18). The word "servants" is "young men" in the
   Revised Version, indicating that it may have been one of his former
   chums. But how could David have been a "man of war"? If not on the
   battlefield as yet, nevertheless in his conflicts with wild beasts
   (17:34, et seq.), which demonstrated that he had the soldier in him
   when the time came.

   2. As a Champion, 17:1-54.

   This story is so familiar as to require little comment. The event
   occurred, according to the chronology in the margin of our Bibles,
   almost a quarter of a century after the victory over the Philistines at
   Michmash (c. 14), and when that old time enemy of Israel had again
   become bold. The place (Shocoh) seems to have been a town in the
   western section of the territory of Judah.

   There is no explanation of David's prowess in the presence of this
   strong enemy (vv. 26, 32), save the supernatural enduement of God. It
   was not the temporal reward that moved him, but the desire that God be
   magnified. This is discovered in the faith evidenced in verse 37. His
   success had been God's success rather than his own and would continue
   so to be (v. 45). And yet works wrought with his faith, since he took
   not only his staff but five stones, not one alone. If one failed he had
   others (v. 40). Surely the description of him was true, he was "prudent
   in matters."

   But why should David have brought the giant's head to Jerusalem (v.
   54)? Probably because it was the nearest city, and hence the
   appropriate place of deposit for such a trophy. We learned (Joshua
   15:63 and Judges 1:21) that the Jebusites possessed this city, but
   probably that means only the fortress on Mount Zion, while the rest was
   in Israel's hands.

   3. As a Courtier, 17:53-18:4.

   We are not surprised to find David a favorite at Saul's court after
   this, but we are surprised that he does not identify him (vv. 55-58).
   In explanation, remember Saul's mental condition at times, as well as
   the fact that time had elapsed since David's minstrel days, and the
   ruddy youth may have changed into the bearded man. And as to Abner, he
   may have been absent from court when David had been there.

   In the next chapter (18), we have the beginning of a friendship that
   has gone into history as one of the most beautiful among men.

   Jonathan and David were doubtless nearly of an age and, although the
   former had taken no notice of the minstrel, the heroic though modest
   warrior had commanded his admiration and affection at once, and "he
   loved him as his own soul" (v. 3).

   "To receive any part of the dress worn by a sovereign or his eldest son
   and heir, is deemed in the East the highest honor which can be
   conferred on a subject." (cf. v. 4 with Esther 6:8).

   Questions.

   1. How are we to regard the saying that "an evil Spirit from the Lord"
   troubled Saul?

   2. Have you read 1 Corinthians 5:1-5?

   3. How is David described in verse 18?

   4. Where was Shocoh?

   5. What was David's motive in the conflict with Goliath?

   6. What do you know about the Jebusites and Jerusalem?

   7. How would you explain Saul's failure to identify David the second
   time?

   DAVID AND JONATHAN

   Chapters 18:5-20:42

   1. Jealousy and Fear, c. 18.

   Jonathan's love for David is put to a serious rest, but is found
   genuine.

   On the homeward march from the victory over the Philistines, the women
   of Israel, following oriental custom, met the warriors and accompanied
   them along the road, singing and dancing. But their joy outran their
   judgment, so that they praised David more than their king. A better man
   than Saul could scarcely have resisted the temptation to envy, sinful
   as it was (vv. 6-9).

   No wonder his malady returned and made him a murderer in his heart (vv.
   10, 11). When it is said "he prophesied," it cannot be that he was the
   mouthpiece of God, but as the term denotes, one under the influence of
   either a good or bad spirit; the probability is he was in a kind of
   frenzy. In religious meetings, where some have professed miraculous
   tongues, a similar phenomenon has been witnessed. There has been
   prophesying, and some have supposed it was God speaking; but events
   have proven otherwise, for there are evil spirits in the universe as
   well as good, and, if possible, they would "deceive the very elect."

   Saul would give David a military commission, but he would no longer
   retain him at the court (vv. 12, 13). The latter had merited the king's
   eldest daughter in marriage (17:25); but this is now forgotten and,
   like Jacob with Laban, he must do something more to obtain her. Nor is
   this enough (vv. 17-19). Another snare is set for him in the case of
   the younger daughter (vv 20-25), for to slay an hundred Philistines, in
   order to their circumcision, meant a hazard that might easily have
   resulted in his death.

   No wonder Saul was afraid of him (v. 29), for supernatural power was
   exerted on his behalf continually, and nothing could prevent his
   accession to the throne. Of course the wisdom of his behavior, the
   self-control he showed in the face of danger, at Saul's hands, was
   equally the gift of God.

   2. The Strategy of Love, c. 19.

   The story of this chapter is plain. For the incident of verse 12,
   compare Joshua 2:15. Michal's subterfuge (v. 17) is justifiable though
   its recital in the record is not necessarily a divine approval of it.
   Endeavor to find Ramah an the map, northeast of Jerusalem and a little
   south of Bethel The meaning of "prophesied" in verse 20, may be similar
   to that expressed above concerning Saul, and yet it is more likely
   "that the influence of the sacred exercises produced such an effect
   upon them that they were unable to discharge their commission, and were
   led by a resistless impulse to join in praising God." "Stripping off
   his clothes" (v. 24) is to be understood of his armor and outer robes,
   as he lay in a state of trance.

   3. The Faithful Friend, c. 20.

   The beginning of a new moon was celebrated by sacrifices and feasting
   at which all the family were expected to be present (v 5). But David's
   excuse for visiting his old home was a good one, since a "yearly
   sacrifice" seemed more important than a monthly one (v. 6).

   Notice the renewal of the covenant between Jonathan and David at this
   time, and the projection of its terms beyond the lifetime of the former
   who, with a prophet's eye, saw the outcome of the struggle in which his
   father and his friend were engaged (vv. 12-17).

   "Clean" (v. 26), has reference to some ceremonial law such as was
   studied in Leviticus. The reproach of Jonathan's mother (v. 30) was not
   a reflection upon her character necessarily, but a stronger way of
   insulting the son than to fling a charge against him personally. The
   phrase has been rendered "thou son of perverse rebellion," with the
   reference to "woman" omitted. The last expression of the verse is an
   oriental way of saying that the son's conduct would bring shame on the
   mother.

   "Artillery" (v. 40) is "weapons" in the Revised Version. The French
   "artillerie" signifies "archery," a term still used in England of an
   association of archers who long since disused bows and arrows.

   The closing verses are an affecting conclusion of a chapter in the
   lives of two of the best and greatest men who ever lived.

   Questions.

   1. What mistake did the Hebrew women make?

   2. What is meant by "prophesied" in Saul's case?

   3. What illustration of Saul's perfidy toward David does this lesson
   contain?

   4. Did Saul's fear of David arise from natural or supernatural causes?

   5. Have you identified "Ramah"?

   6. What indicates Jonathan's conviction that David, rather than he,
   would ascend the throne?

   7. What does "artillery" mean?

   DAVID IN EXILE

   Chapters 21-24

   1. Deceiving the Priest, c. 21.

   Nob was northeast of Jerusalem and about five miles from Gibeah.
   David's unexpected presence there, and alone, caused alarm (v. 1). His
   falsehood was unnecessary and wrong (v. 2), and is not commended of God
   (Psa. 119:29). "Hallowed bread" (v. 4) was the shew-bread in the
   tabernacle, of which we studied in Exodus and Leviticus. It was removed
   the day before the Sabbath when it became lawful for the priests to use
   it (Lev. 24:9). David might have it under the circumstances, if only he
   and his companions (supposed to be elsewhere) had complied with a
   requirement of the Levitical law. (Compare vv. 4 and 5 with Ex. 19:15.)

   The last clause of verse 5 is in the margin thus: "especially when this
   day there is other sanctified in the vessel." The idea is that it was
   the Sabbath, and the new bread having been put on the table, there was
   no risk in giving David of the old. (Compare 22:10 with Matt. 12:3,
   Mark 2:25 and Luke 6:3).

   Doeg, the Edomite, was a proselyte of the Jewish religion and perhaps
   detained at Nob because of the law forbidding journeys on the Sabbath
   (v. 7).

   David's going down to the Philistines at Gath (vv. 10-15) is
   unaccountable, except as he may have had special divine guidance. He
   was no longer safe in his own country. Go somewhere he must, and
   Philistia was the less of two evils.

   2. Leading the Outlaws, c. 22.

   The cave of Adullam (v. 1) has been identified as the present
   Deir-Dubbon, on the border of the Philistine plain and about six miles
   southwest from Bethlehem. It is a location of natural pits or vaults,
   some of them 15 to 20 feet deep.

   It was undesirable for David to dwell in hiding if innocent, and if he
   desired to commend himself to the people as Saul's successor, hence
   God's advice (v. 3).

   Saul's motive in seeking to arouse Benjamin against David of the tribe
   of Judah is not hard to find (vv. 6-8), but it is notable that the
   Edomite is the first to respond (vv. 9, 10).

   Abimelech, whom Doeg gets into trouble, is innocent of wrong against
   the king. David seemed faithful; he was the king's son-in-law; why
   should he not aid him when he asked, seeing he knew nothing of the
   trouble (vv. 14, 15)?

   But his plea is in vain, though only the Edomite would lift his hand
   against him (vv. 16-19). Compare Psalm 52:1-3, and note that this
   slaughter of the priests was a fulfillment of the prophecy against Eli
   in an earlier lesson.

   3. Defending a City, c. 23.

   Keilah was southwest from Jerusalem and near the Philistine country,
   though not far from the wooded district of Hareth where David had
   located himself (22:5). The event now recorded seems to have occurred
   prior to the destruction of Nob, as we judge by comparing verse 6 with
   the closing verses of the preceding chapter.

   How David inquired of the Lord (v. 2) is not stated, but is suggested
   by verse 8. We have seen what the "ephod" was, and know from Exodus
   28:26-30 that it contained the breastplate of the high priest in which
   was the mysterious "Urim and Thummim" by means of which God was pleased
   to communicate with His people (Num. 27:21).

   It will be interesting to read Psalm 31, which David is supposed to
   have written and which remarkably tallies with his experiences here.

   4. Befriending the King, c. 24.

   Engedi will be found southeast of Keilah on the Dead Sea.

   The diversion in Saul's pursuit of David caused by the attack of the
   Philistines (23:27-29) has come to an end, and he is seeking him again.

   "To cover his feet" (v. 5) means to go to sleep.

   Notice David's wonderful self-restraint and the motive for it (vv.
   4-6), which affords another illustration of his being "a man after
   God's own heart." (Read Psa. 142.)

   The chapter affords a striking illustration of heaping coals of fire on
   an enemy's head with the promised result of overcoming evil with good
   (Rom. 12:20, 21). But alas! the evil did not stay overcome, nor, if we
   may judge by the last verse, does David expect it will.

   Questions.

   1. Can you identify Nob, Hareth, Keilah and Engedi on the map?

   2. What is the meaning of "hallowed bread"?

   3. What prophecy did the slaying of Abimelech's family fulfill?

   4. Describe the "ephod."

   5. Have you read Psalms 31, 52 and 142?

   MORE BROKEN PROMISES

   Chapters 25-27

   1. David and Abigail, c. 25.

   The romance of this chapter has a setting like this: The "Wilderness of
   Paran" on the south was a common pasture like our prairies, and for
   this reason open to marauders from among the Arabs.

   David and his men must have been a protection to their countrymen from
   such incursions, and in the habit of receiving practical
   acknowledgments of their service.

   Nabal was a rich sheep owner who must have been indebted to them, and
   "good business," to say nothing of gratitude, should have induced him
   to contribute to David's need without asking, and his refusal to do so
   was a violation of established custom.

   This does not justify David's bloodthirsty action, but explains it.

   The "bottles of wine" (v. 18) were goatskins holding a large quantity.

   The "bundle of life" (v. 29) is a poetic expression alluding to the
   security of the person to whom it is applied.

   The last phrase of verses 22 and 34 should be rendered "any man child."

   When Nabal's "heart died" (v. 37), it means that he fainted at the
   thought of his narrow escape, the shock ultimately ending his life (v.
   38).

   David's taking Abigail to wife was in accordance with eastern custom.
   He was the head of a clan, Abigail seemed to recognize him as the
   successor of Saul (v. 30), and such an one fancying a woman for his
   wife had a right to command her submission to his will. Abigail seems
   to have been very willing, however.

   Polygamy was wrong, (v. 44), but, because of the condition of the
   times, God seems to have permitted it (Matt. 19:3-9).

   2. David and Abner, c. 26.

   Why David returns to Hachilah (see 23:19) is not clear, especially when
   he was near his old enemies, the Ziphites.

   "Within the trench" (v. 7), means "within the place of the wagons" (see
   Revised Version). The encampment was a circle, the wagons and the men
   lining it, and the place of the leader being in the center. "His
   bolster" is the same as "his head."

   In explanation of verse 13 we are told that the air of Palestine
   enables the voice to be heard at a great distance. (Compare Judges
   9:7.)

   David's heroic strategy gave good ground for his sarcastic inquiry of
   Abner (vv. 14-16).

   Saul repents again and makes more promises; but he has broken so many
   hitherto that David's confidence is not restored (v. 25).

   3. David and Achish, c. 27.

   David's resolution (v. 1) was probably wrong (see 22:5), but God
   overruled it for good by making it contribute to the final destruction
   of Saul.

   "Achish" seems to have been another than he named in the earlier
   chapter, and there is likelihood that he invited David into his
   territory. Perhaps it was good policy to do so in view of the feud
   between David and Saul, and his warlike purposes toward the latter.

   Ziklag belonged originally to Canaan and was given to Israel, but never
   conquered or occupied by the latter. It was far in the south on the
   border of Philistia, just northeast of Beersheba.

   "Road" (v. 10) should be rendered "raid." David deceives Achish in what
   he says, for instead of destroying the king's enemies, he really did
   away with the king's allies and engaged in an awful slaughter to
   conceal the fact (vv. 11, 12).

   As in other cases we must not suppose God endorses this because it is
   in the record or because it was done by one of His servants.

   Some of ourselves are in point. Though redeemed by the blood of Christ,
   and indwelt by God's Spirit, what unsatisfactory instruments do we make
   in His service, and how often we bring dishonor on His name. Yet He
   loves and bears with us and, though He chastens, still uses us.

   It is one of the proofs of the credibility of the Bible that it tells
   us the whole truth about a man. If it were false it would be covering
   over the defects of its heroes; but as it is, both the Old and New
   Testaments never compromise the facts for the sake of a good
   appearance. And very grateful we should be therefore

   Questions.

   1. How may Nabal have become indebted to David?

   2. How would you explain David's polygamous relations with Abigail?

   3. Do you know where Paran, Hachilah, Ziph and Ziklag are located?

   4. What was the name of Saul's chief captain?

   5. Name a strong, incidental proof of the Bible, suggested in this
   lesson.

   SAUL'S CAREER ENDED

   Chapters 28-31

   1. Calamity Foretold, c. 28.

   This chapter is important and illustrates again the deceptive character
   of Saul. Having professedly put the necromancers out of Israel in
   obedience to the divine command (Lev. 19:31; 20:27; Deut. 18:10, 11),
   he no sooner finds himself in straits than he seeks out one of them for
   his aid.

   Two questions arise. Did Samuel really come forth from the dead, and
   was it the woman's power that brought him forth? To the first we answer
   yes, on the evidence of verses 12 to 16, and to the second, no. The
   woman was surprised to see Samuel and affrighted (v. 12), which is
   proof that she was not a factor in the matter, and that God brought up
   Samuel to rebuke Saul.

   Two other questions follow. Is it possible for human beings to talk
   with the dead, or lawful to do so? We answer no in both cases.
   Spiritualistic mediums may have intercourse with demons who by their
   superior knowledge personate the dead, but they are not permitted of
   God to bring back the dead themselves. On the other hand God may be at
   liberty to do what He would not permit His creatures to do.

   How are we to understand the words "Tomorrow shalt thou be with me."
   Was not Samuel one who feared God and Saul the opposite? How then could
   the future life of both be located in the same place? The answer is
   that the Jews regarded the place of the dead as composed of two realms,
   one for the righteous and one for the unrighteous. Saul might be with
   Samuel in that he was among the dead, and yet not in the sense that he
   was in the company of the righteous dead.

   2. The Evil in Operation, cc. 29, 30.

   There is no apology for David's hypocrisy in this chapter, but the
   situation in which he found himself was the result of the unbelief that
   led him to leave the land of his fathers and throw in his lot with the
   Philistines (27:1).

   Achish, shows up better than he in this transaction, for he seemed to
   have confidence in David (28:1, 2). And had it not been for the
   shrewder judgment of his princes (29:3-5), David would have been found
   playing the traitor to him later, for it is unlikely he would have
   fought for him against his own kith and kin.

   Chapter 30 may be included in this division because it still has to do
   with David. There is nothing in it requiring explanation except the
   observation in verse 6, "that David encouraged himself in the Lord his
   God." How he did it, and what encouragement he received is indicated in
   verses 7, 8, but why God would be willing to encourage such a man
   puzzles us, till again we think of ourselves. The best of us are
   unbelieving, mean, and hypocritical at times, and yet God's patience
   waits, and does not destroy and cast away. The reason is that God's
   love for us terminates on His own glory. He is doing these things for
   His Name's sake. His honor is at stake in the execution of His purposes
   and the fulfilling of His will. He had great plans for Israel and the
   world through David. And He is not measuring us by what we now are, but
   by what He sees us to be when the work of grace is perfected in us in
   the ages to come. David becomes a different man even before his earthly
   career is ended, and we find something of the same transformation in
   his career as in that of his progenitor, the supplanted Jacob who
   became Israel, the prince who prevailed with God (Gen. 32:28).

   3. The End Reached, c. 31

   We need not comment on the events of this chapter which tell their own
   story, but the following from Illustrations of Scripture, by Hackett,
   will be quickening to faith:

   "I venture to affirm that he who compares the Bible account of this
   battle with the regions around Gilboah, has the same sort of evidence
   that it relates what is true as a person would have concerning the
   battles of Saratoga, Yorktown and Waterloo, should he compare their
   histories with the localities where they occurred.

   "Some of the most celebrated battle fields of Grecian and Roman history
   correspond but imperfectly with the descriptions of ancient writers.
   The writers may be trustworthy, but the villages they mentioned have
   changed their names or entirely disappeared. In some cases convulsions
   of nature have altered streams, or disturbed landmarks between hills
   and valleys. But Saul's battle ground remains mapped out on the face of
   the country, almost as distinctly as if it occurred in our time, and
   yet it occurred in an age more remote than the founding of Rome, or the
   siege of Troy."

   Questions.

   1. How does chapter 28 illustrate hypocrisy?

   2. What reason is there to doubt that the woman's power brought forth
   Samuel?

   3. What is the nature of mediumistic power, and how is it limited?

   4. How did the Jews regard the place of the dead?

   5. Describe the equivocal position in which David finds himself in
   chapter 29, and explain it.

   6. What is the secret of God's long suffering patience with His people?

   7. How do present facts substantiate the story of the battle?
     __________________________________________________________________

SECOND SAMUEL

   Chapters 1-5:5

   1. Lamenting the Dead, c. 1.

   Surely the harshness and gentleness of David are strangely blended in
   this chapter. That one should so lament an enemy and slay the man who
   professed to murder him surpasses ordinary thought; but David was built
   on a large mould. Of course the Amalekite lied to David, for the
   inspired record of the death of Saul in the preceding book must be
   regarded as correct.

   Observe the motive governing David: "Wast thou not afraid * * * * to
   destroy the LORD's anointed?" (v. 14). It is his zeal for God that
   moves him, and furnishes the key to his whole life, notwithstanding his
   defects and iniquities. This is the thing which distinguishes him from
   Saul, and gives him the right to the peculiar appellation attached to
   him.

   The obscurity of verse 18 is perhaps explained thus: "The use of the
   bow," might be rendered "the song of the bow," and doubtless refers to
   the song which follows (vv. 19-27), and which David composed, after the
   manner of the times, on the death of Saul and Jonathan. "The book of
   Jasher," or "the book of the upright," is mentioned in Joshua (10: 3),
   and seems to have been a compilation of sacred poems not otherwise
   known to us.

   2. War Between the Houses, cc. 2:1-3:6.

   The leading facts of this section are: David's anointing as king over
   Judah, his own tribe (v. 4), including his tactful commendation of the
   men of Jabesh-Gilead (vv. 4-7). David was a diplomat as well as a
   warrior. Second, the succession of Ishbosheth to the throne left vacant
   by his father, Saul (vv. 8-10). Third, the earliest battle between the
   opposing forces, precipitated by the failure of the duel to settle the
   question between them (vv. 12-17). "Hel-Kath-hazzurim," means "the
   field of strong men" (see the margin), appropriately named from the
   deed of valor wrought that day. Fourth, the remarkable armistice (vv.
   18-32). Evidently if Abner had not asked for a stay, Joab would have
   put it into execution the next day, and for the same reason (vv.
   25-28). The great value of Asahel is graphically expressed in the words
   "nineteen men and Asahel" (v. 30). He was more than merely a twentieth.
   God needs such men in His service. Can He count on us?

   3. David Comes Into His Own, cc. 3:6-5:5.

   The circumstances leading up to David's ascendancy are as follows:

   (a) Abner's indignity to the memory of Saul, and Ishbosheth's protest
   against it (3:7-11);

   (b) The former's league in consequence with David (vv. 12-21);

   (c) The murder of Ishbosheth (4:1-12);

   (d) The anointing to the office of king (5:1-5).

   The intervening verses (3:22-4:27) tell their own story of jealousy and
   murder. It was a dastardly act of Joab, and Abner seems to have been
   all through the better man, although Joab was valiant and loyal to his
   king. Note, however, the curse David puts upon him (3:28, 29),
   notwithstanding that he continued to use him as his chieftain. David
   was a noble soul, and his sincere lament for Abner won him the hearts
   of Israel (vv. 31-39).

   Questions.

   1. Where in this lesson is there an illustration of the difference
   between the truth of the record and that which the record contains?

   2. What illustrates David's personal loyalty to God?

   3. What can be told about "The Book of Jasher"?

   4. How long did David reign over Judah alone?

   5. How long over Israel and Judah?

   6. In how many instances are the wisdom and tact of David shown in this
   lesson?

   "GOING AND GROWING"

   Chapter 5:6-7:29

   1. Conquering Foes, c. 5.

   The title of this lesson is the literal rendering of verse 10, "David
   went on and grew great." The margin reads, "going and growing."

   First, he overcame the inhabitants of Jerusalem known as the Jebusites
   and, capturing the city, made it his capital (w. 6-9). The parallel
   passage in First Chronicles 11:4-9, will show the two accounts to
   complement and confirm one another, Samuel being the more biographic
   and analistic and Chronicles the more historical. -- Lange.

   The reference to the "blind and the lame" may mean that the Jebusites
   felt themselves so strongly fortified on Mount Zion, that in derision
   they put such persons on the wall as defenders -- even then David could
   not take the citadel, they thought.

   This is the first time "Zion" is referred to (v. 7), and it is well to
   identify it as the southwest hill of Jerusalem, the older and higher
   part of the city. It was here that later David brought the ark of the
   covenant, from which time the hill became sacred. After the building of
   the temple by Solomon on Mount Moriah, a different eminence, and the
   transfer of the ark thither, the name "Zion" was extended to comprehend
   it also (Isa. 8:18; Joel 3:17; Mic. 4:7). Often it is used, however,
   for the whole of Jerusalem (2 Kings 19:21), occasionally for the Jewish
   system of religion (Psa. 126:1), and once, at least, for heaven (Heb.
   12:22).

   David next overcomes the Philistines (vv. 17-25). Note the supernatural
   interposition in verses 23, 24. "The sound of a going," means probably
   the sound of human steps as of an advancing army, the symbol of
   Jehovah's approach in power. "Thou shalt bestir thyself," means, "Be
   sharp!" "Rush quickly!"

   Thus victory comes from the Lord, (1) when it is humbly asked for,
   according to His will and word; (2) when the battle is undertaken in
   His name and for His cause; (3) when it is fought in obedience to His
   directions and guidance.

   But observe, as Matthew Henry says, that "though God promises to go
   before them, yet David must bestir himself and be ready to pursue the
   victory." God's grace must quicken our endeavors (Phil. 2:12, 13).

   Broadus calls the chapter "King David's first year of sunshine." After
   years of darkness, he now gains a new crown, a new capital, a new
   palace, a new victory over an old enemy, and in them all a new proof of
   God's favor.

   2. Installing the Ark, c. 6.

   The first attempt to bring up the ark is unsuccessful (vv. 1-11)
   because of the sacrilegious act of Uzzah (Num. 4:14, 15; 7:9; 18:3);
   but the motive of David s heart was laudable, and unlike anything we
   read of Saul.

   "Baale of Judah" is another name for Kirjath-jearim (1 Sam. 6:21;
   Joshua 15:60).

   The second attempt was successful (vv. 11-19), because the Levitical
   law was obeyed (see 1 Chron. 15:1-14), an incidental evidence that this
   law had been recorded, though overlooked. This, so far, answers the
   destructive criticism which would relegate the Pentateuch to a later
   period than David.

   There may have been too much abandon in David's dancing (v. 16), but
   the spirit of Michal's criticism (v. 20) was not God-glorifying, for
   David's rebuke of her seemed to have the divine sanction (v. 23). See 1
   Chron. 16, the Psalm composed on this occasion.

   3. The Messianic Covenant, c. 7.

   We have here one of the most important chapters in the Old Testament,
   ranking in Messianic significance with Gen. 3, 12 and 49, and Deut. 18.
   The seed of the woman, who was to come in the line of Abraham and
   Judah, is now seen to belong to the family of Jesse; and the prophet
   like unto Moses is to be also a king on the throne of his father David.

   A great honor for David is now to be revealed. He has a lofty motive in
   desiring to build a temple for the ark, and Nathan, not taking counsel
   of the Lord, is disposed to favor it, until differently informed (vv.
   1-17).

   In these words of the Lord by Nathan observe the promise of Israel's
   future prosperity and peace -- still future (vv. 10, 11). Observe
   further that the "house" God promises to build for David (vv. 11, 13),
   is neither a material nor a spiritual one, but, as distinguished from
   either, a political one. It is a house in the sense of an earthly
   kingdom to be set up in his son. But it is clear that the son is not
   merely Solomon who immediately succeeded to the throne, but the Lord
   Jesus Christ, of whom, in a limited sense, Solomon is a type. The word
   "forever" in verse 13 foreshadows this, but the first sentence of verse
   14 compared with Hebrews 1:8, settles it.

   In this connection Bishop Horsley's and Adam Clarke's translation of
   the latter part of that verse is interesting and significant: "When
   iniquity is laid upon Him, I will chasten Him with the rod of men" -- a
   parallel to Isaiah 53 concerning the suffering Messiah.

   David's adoration and thanksgiving at the revelation of this great
   truth is beautiful (vv. 18-29). Its humility, faith, and gratitude
   reach a sublimity unequaled since Moses.

   He seemed to have recognized by faith the Messianic character of
   Nathan's words, if we may judge by Horsley's and Clarke's translation
   of verse 19: "O Lord God, Thou hast spoken of Thy servant's house for a
   great while to come, and hast regarded me in the arrangement about the
   MAN that is to be from above, O God, Jehovah." (See the author's
   Synthetic Bible Studies.)

   Questions.

   1. From what do we obtain the title of this lesson?

   2. What other book of the Old Testament parallels Second Samuel?

   3. Give the meaning of "Zion" in the Bible.

   4. When may victory be expected from the Lord?

   5. What makes this David's "year of sunshine"?

   6. How was the ark brought up the second time?

   7. What makes chapter 7 so important?

   8. What kind of a house does God promise David?

   9. How would you prove the Messianic character of this promise?

   10. Which, to you, is the best verse in chapter 7?

   VICTORY EVERYWHERE

   Chapters 8-10

   1. Introductory Words.

   The title to this lesson is from the phrase, twice repeated in chapter
   8, "And the Lord preserved David whithersoever he went"; which the
   Revised Version renders, "And the Lord gave victory to David
   whithersoever he went."

   The Lord's Battle.

   It is important to keep in mind that the Lord gave the victory and that
   it was not David's prowess that won it. Neither did his character merit
   it. God has a purpose concerning the redemption of the race in which He
   is using Israel, and what He is now doing through David is part of the
   program. We have seen this before, but we must never lose sight of it.

   Of course David is, in his heart, submitted to the will of God, and one
   whom God, for that reason, delights to use; but still it is God working
   and not David.

   God also is responsible for what follows in the punishment and
   destruction of the nations. That is not to say that He approves of all
   of David's acts in detail, far from it indeed; but the great outlined
   plan or policy is His, a fact that should make the careless pause to
   think.

   War's Cruelties.

   There are things David does which are cruel in our eyes; but remember
   it is war we are considering and, as one of our own generals said, "War
   is hell," i. e., a taste of hell on earth, The barbarities of David's
   acts were in accord with the thinking of his time, just as the
   barbarities of the present are in accordance with the thinking of our
   time. A milder age, a millennial state, will look back at the wars of
   the twentieth century with the horror that we now contemplate some of
   the history of the Bible.

   Foreshadowing Coming Judgments.

   But worse things are coming on the earth before those days, as we judge
   by the book of Revelation. The God who is judging and punishing the
   people of David's period is the same who will be judging and punishing
   when the Antichrist is potent in the earth.

   Little is said about these things in current preaching and teaching. It
   is unpopular to talk of sin and judgment, and death and hell; but these
   things are in the Bible, and we have no right to believe what we like
   and turn a deaf ear to what we do not like. He is the faithful witness
   for God, and the faithful friend of his fellowmen, who warns them
   truthfully of the wrath to come.

   2. Details of the Story, c. 8.

   "Metheg-ammah" (v. 1) is identical with "Gath and her towns" (1 Chron.
   i8:1). Be careful to examine the map for these localities, as it will
   aid in mastering the lesson; and remember that light will be thrown
   upon the text here and there by comparing the parallel record in 1
   Chronicles.

   The "line" (v. 2), is explained by a custom of Eastern kings to make
   their prisoners lie on the ground, while they determine by lot, or a
   measuring line, who should be spared as slaves and who should be slain.

   "To recover his borders" (v. 3), may refer to David's purpose to get
   possession of all the dominion God promised his fathers (Gen. 15: 8;
   Num. 24:17). Horses were forbidden Israel either in war or agriculture,
   and perhaps it was an act of disobedience for David even to save 100
   for his kingly retinue.

   Verse 15 shows that while David was much in war yet he also reigned
   well at home. He had a strong cabinet (vv. 16-18). An explanation of
   the two priests (v. 17) is that the former had been put in office by
   Saul, while David had exalted the latter. But now that David was
   supreme a compromise seems to have been effected, and Zadok exercised
   his office at Gibeon (1 Chron. 16:39) while Abiathar did the same at
   Jerusalem.

   3. An Illustration of Grace, c. 9.

   We need not dwell on chapters 9 and 10, but the Christian worker will
   discover a fine illustration of grace and a good outline for a sermon
   in that of Mephibosheth:

   (a) He had nothing to commend him to David.

   (b) David not only forgives and delivers him from the dread of
   retribution, but restores him to a good position in the kingdom.

   (c) He did this for the sake of another, Jonathan.

   (d) Mephibosheth served David faithfully all his days.

   Questions.

   1. From what is the title of this lesson obtained?

   2. Why is God working for and through David?

   3. How would you explain some of David's acts?

   4. To what future event do David's victories point?

   5. How would you explain the contemporary priests?

   6. Can you tell the story of Mephibosheth from memory, and point out
   some of its spiritual lessons?

   DAVID'S GREAT SIN

   Chapters 11-12

   1. God's Estimate of David's Sin, 12:1-14.

   Why the incident in this lesson should be designated "David's great
   sin," when he committed so many which the popular mind might consider
   more serious, can only be answered by the divine estimate of it.
   Jehovah regarded nothing David had done as comparable in its iniquity
   with this. Nathan's address to David shows this, the chastisement that
   followed David through the rest of his life shows it, and David's own
   feelings revealed in Psalms 51, 32 and 103, which he is supposed to
   have written on his repentance for this sin, bear a similar testimony.

   2. Uriah's Character, 11:6-17.

   David's sin is scarcely more conspicuous in the picture than Uriah's
   self-restraint, patriotism and general nobility of character; and this,
   whether or not we regard him as having a suspicion of the king's
   motives in the premises and the reason for them.

   3. Forgiveness Consistent with Chastisement, 12:10-14.

   The king's indignation at the offender in the parable (12:1-6) is an
   illustration of a common fact that when men are most indulgent to their
   own sins they are most ready to condemn those of others. The judgment
   pronounced upon David shows it possible for a saint to be restored to
   God's favor, while at the same time the divine abhorrence of sin must
   be shown in bitter results in the present time. David lost four sons
   after this, and other evils came upon him. (Compare 1 Cor. 5:1-5;
   11:28-32).

   4. David's Faith and Ours, 12:15-23.

   David's remark in verse 23 may be taken as an intimation of the belief
   of a future life and the immortality of the soul; and yet David's faith
   could not have been as deep or broad as that vouchsafed to the believer
   in these days. When the child of a saint now passes hence, it is not
   for the latter to say that he shall not return to him for, according to
   1 Thess. 4:13-18, Jesus may return before the saint dies and bring the
   loved one with Him.

   5. Explanatory Words, 12:26-31.

   The concluding verses of chapter 12 require explanation. For example,
   as throwing light on Joab's words in verses 27 and 28, it would seem
   that Rabbah, which had been besieged for a long period, was divided
   into two parts, a lower and an upper town divided by a stream. The
   first had been taken by Joab, but the second, the more important of the
   two, must be taken by David in person if the latter were to get the
   honor for it. Nowadays kings gain victories by their generals, but in
   earlier times it could not be done by proxy. This was a great city, and
   should it fall to Joab's arms it would have been named in his honor to
   David's humiliation.

   The torture (v. 31) is another illustration of the horrors of war in
   that day, and is justified by some as an act of retributive justice on
   a people infamous for their cruelties (1 Sam. 2:2; Amos 1:13), but
   there is a happier explanation. The word "under" used three times, is
   by others translated "to," as referring not to their being slain in
   this manner, but being subjected to this kind of slavery. And so when
   it says he "made them pass through the brickkiln," with a slight change
   it would read, he "made them labor at the brickkiln."

   Questions.

   1. What three facts show the awfulness of this sin of David?

   2. How does this lesson distinguish between forgiveness and
   chastisement?

   3. Have you read 1 Thess. 4:13-18?

   4. How might chapter 12:31 be rendered?

   5. Try to memorize Psalm 51 and 103.

   "O, ABSALOM, MY SON, MY SON!"

   Chapters 13-18

   1. Lust, Murder and Deceit, c. 13.

   In the preceding lesson judgments were foretold as coming on David, and
   we are entering on that part of his career when the prediction is
   fulfilled in earnest.

   The foulness of this chapter we would not dwell upon more than we can
   help. Tamar of course, while sister to Absalom, was half-sister to
   Amnon, the two young men being sons of David by different wives.

   "A garment of divers colours" (v. 18) might be rendered "a long garment
   with sleeves."

   "Geshur," whither Absalom fled, was in the north near Syria and the
   country of his maternal ancestors (2 Sam, 3:3), for no refuge could
   have been given him in Israel (Num. 35:21).

   2. A Strategem Well Meant, c. 14.

   Joab could not be charged with lack of love and loyalty to his king, as
   the story of this chapter shows. He knows the struggle in David's heart
   between his love for his son and his desire to respect the law in the
   case of murderers. Therefore he concocts the scheme of this woman by
   whose supposititous case the king is brought to see that there may be a
   higher justice in ignoring a lower one. As Absalom was the light of
   Israel in the sense that on the death of Amnon he was heir to the
   kingdom, David would be doing nothing more in pardoning him than he had
   agreed to do in the case of this widow's son (vv. 13-17). But David's
   action was wrong nevertheless. See Gen. 9:6, Deut. 18:18, etc.

   Let not the beautiful words of verse 14 escape attention. How they
   suggest the love of God for us in Jesus Christ! He was the means
   devised that we might not be banished from His presence.

   3. Love Ill-requited, c. 15.

   Absalom had rather be free in Geshur than a prisoner in Jerusalem, and
   Joab is forced, after two years, to make an effort to bring him and his
   father together, which succeeds (14: 21-33).

   But Absalom is as mean in spirit as he is noble in appearance. His
   father has reigned too long to suit him and, availing himself of
   certain causes of complaint, and using the arts of the demagog, he
   raises a formidable insurrection to put himself on the throne (vv.
   1-12).

   The word "forty" (v. 7) is thought to be an error, and some versions
   have "four." With the reference to Ahithophel (v. 12), compare Psalms
   41 and 55, and for the further experience of David, see Psalm 3.

   The foreigners named in verses 18-22 were doubtless special guards
   David kept about him since the days of his exile among the Philistines.

   The rest of the chapter is a striking illustration of how David
   combined piety with statesmanlike leadership. He was still "behaving
   himself wisely" as in the days of his youth.

   4. Kissing the Rod that Smites, cc. 16, 17.

   Ziba was a liar seeking favor with the king he foresaw would return to
   power (16: 1-4), and Shimei a cowardly avenger of his supposed wrongs
   who imagines David's days are numbered. Nursing his wrath a long while,
   now at a safe distance he displays it (vv. 5-14). But David kisses the
   rod that smites him. He sees the hand of God in it all and worships His
   will (vv. 10-12). Happy the penitent in such a case who can exclaim
   with Elizabeth Prentiss:

   "Let sorrow do its work,

   Send grief and pain;

   Sweet are Thy messengers.

   Sweet their refrain,

   When they can sing with me.

   More love, O Christ, to Thee,

   More love to Thee."

   Ahithophel, highly esteemed as a counselor recommends, in verses 20-23,
   that which to Absalom would be like burning his bridges behind him and
   which would compel every man in Israel to determine whose side he was
   on. There could be no reconciliation between father and son after this
   indignity.

   The contents of chapter 17 carry their explanation on their face.
   Ahithophel's counsel is wise to seize David's person before he can
   gather a formidable army (vv. 1-4), but the Lord defeats it through
   Hushai (vv. 5-14). (Compare 1 Cor. 1:27, 28). Hushai doubts whether his
   counsel will be taken, which explains his efforts to get the news to
   David (vv. 15-22); but Ahithophel, finding that it is taken, commits
   suicide foreseeing David's victory and his retribution as the result
   (v. 23).

   5. How Fathers Love, c. 18.

   The praises of a mother's love are often sung, but this chapter teaches
   us that a father's can be just as passionate and unreasoning (v. 5}.
   Joab's act (vv. 14, 15) seems to have been justified by all the
   circumstances, for there could be no peace in Israel and Absalom alive.
   His death spared many lives. The manner of his burial, expressing
   loathing and abhorrence of him (v. 17), was different from what he had
   expected for himself (v. 18).

   The heartrending cry of David (v. 33) seems to pierce all space from
   that day to this, and we hear it ringing in our ears even now.

   Questions.

   1. Have you refreshed your mind on the Levitical law concerning murder?

   2. Can you quote 2 Samuel 14:14?

   3. How does Absalom bring Joab to terms?

   4. Memorize Psalm 3.

   5. How does this experience in David's life bring out his piety?

   6. Have you examined 1 Corinthians 1:27, 28?

   7. What lessons, if any, does this lesson present to you?

   BRINGING BACK THE KING

   Chapter 19

   1. An Over-Zealous Servant, 19:1-8.

   Joab was to David what Bismarck was to King William. He had the same
   iron in his blood, but sometimes, like the latter, he overdid things.
   The kaiser was glad to be rid of Bismarck, and Joab's conduct towards
   David is preparing the way for his successor. Those were too strong
   words he used in verse 7, and show the power he assumed over the army.

   2. A Backward People, vv. 9-15.

   Judah, the king's tribe, should have taken the initiative for his
   return, and the priests should have stirred them to it. It is
   disappointing that it was otherwise and perhaps explains David's
   adroitness in choosing Amasa to supersede Joab, who persuades the
   people to act as one man.

   We can hardly pass the event without speaking of its parallel in the
   case of

   "Great David's Greater Son."

   Why is His Church so silent about His coming back again? One would
   think He was not wanted back by the little that is said about it. And
   yet He has promised to come -- "This same Jesus" -- and to bring His
   reward with Him! Who can tell whether, if we spake one to another about
   it, we might not begin to act in such a manner as to hasten His coming?
   Will it be necessary for Him to cast away the present leaders of His
   Church and call to His aid some Amasa with the power to bow the hearts
   of His people toward Him as the heart of one man?

   Why say ye not a word of bringing back the king?

   Why speak ye not of Jesus and His reign?

   Why tell ye of His kingdom and of its glories sing?

   But nothing of His coming back again?

   3. A Lenient Sovereign, vv. 16-40.

   We wonder David should have been so forbearing to Shimei (vv. 16-23)
   when we consider the latter's conduct in the last lesson; and on the
   other hand we are surprised that Mephibosheth should not have had more
   cordial treatment (vv. 24-30). The meaning of verse 29 is not clear.

   4. A Jealous Outbreak, 19:41-20:26.

   The closing verses of chapter 19 exhibit the beginning of that tribal
   dissension which ultimately led to the dismemberment of the kingdom.

   Nothing is known of Sheba (20:1, 2), but he was of much influence among
   the adherents of the former dynasty of Saul.

   Amasa seems to have been unequal to rallying the army and Abishai is
   called into the service, to the further affront of Joab. But the last
   named joins in the battle and doubtless with the wicked intention he
   afterward executes (v. 10). His influence with the army is seen in
   that, even under these circumstances, the warriors rally around him and
   are led to victory (vv. 11-23). David is obliged to reinstate him, and
   the conclusion of the chapter shows the whole government reestablished
   in its wonted course.

   5. A Wrong Avenged, 21:1-14.

   Joshua had made a covenant with the Gibeonites (Joshua 9:3-27). But
   Saul, for political reasons, had violated its terms (v. 2) -- just
   under what circumstances there is no record. It was a case of national
   guilt and received at God's hands a national punishment (v. 1). Awful
   was the atonement rendered and yet it might have been more severe.
   Moreover, God permitted, and indeed directed it (vv. 3-9), and the
   Judge of all the earth shall do right (Gen. 18-25). Let the
   circumstance teach us to fear God and hate sin.

   "Michal, the daughter of Saul" (v. 8) should be "Michal's sister," or
   else, the two sons were adopted and brought up by her though born of
   her sister.

   6. An Epoch Reached, 21:15-22.

   David is beginning to feel his years and, in this war, he might have
   lost his life but for the interference of a stronger hand (vv. 15-17).
   He must no more go out to battle. He, as king, is the "light," of
   Israel, and must not run into danger lest he be quenched.

   Philistia was prolific in giants, but the Lord was with His people to
   overcome them (vv. 18-22).

   Questions.

   1. What late historic character does Joab suggest?

   2. How does David seek ineffectually to rid himself of Joab?

   3. Quote Acts 1:11 and connect it with this lesson.

   4. What arouses Israel's jealousy of Judah?

   5. What were the natural relations of Joab to Amasa and Abishai?

   6. Relate the story of the first part of chapter 21 in your own words.

   7. What lessons does it teach?

   8. What epoch, physical and historical, has David reached?

   MINGLED EXPERIENCES

   Chapters 22-24

   1. The Grateful Retrospect, c. 22.

   The title of this section is that which Spurgeon gives the psalm which
   constitutes it. The psalm is numbered 18 in the book of Psalms, and
   will be found to contain variations in the text. A common explanation
   of these is that David sung it, or caused it to be sung, often, and
   hence revised it for final use in the tabernacle.

   The second and forty-ninth verses of the psalm are quoted in the New
   Testament as the words of Jesus Christ (Rom. 15:9 and Heb. 2:13), which
   gives it a right to be classed as a Messianic psalm. Such psalms are
   those in which the psalmist is either referring to the Messiah, or in
   which the latter, by His Spirit, is speaking in the first person
   through the psalmist. There is a sense, therefore, in which all through
   this psalm we may think of Jesus as referring to His own sorrows while
   on the earth, His deliverance from His enemies, and His triumphs over
   opposition.

   To speak of the psalm more in detail, verse 1 gives its occasion;
   verses 2 and 4, its theme; 5 to 19 speak poetically of the deliverances
   obtained through the power of God; 20 to 28, the reason for them as
   based on the psalmist's righteousness; 29 to 43, the preparation and
   girding the psalmist himself received; and 44 to 51 mingle praise for
   the past and prophecy for the future.

   It is the fourth division, 20 to 28 more than any other, that makes it
   difficult to apply the psalm to David except in a highly poetical
   sense, and which gives it a Messianic significance.

   2. The Last Words, 23:1-7.

   What is meant by the first sentence of this chapter is difficult to
   say. It reads like a note of some editor and may mean that the verses
   following, although poetical, are not part of the preceding song.

   The whole section is reminiscent and expressive of trust in God. The
   second verse is a strong testimony to the divine inspiration of David's
   words.

   David's house had not been what it should have been (v. 5), yet God's
   covenant was sure, and for His own Name's sake it would be carried
   forward until the Messiah should sit upon the throne. He was David's
   desire and salvation.

   3. A Catalogue of the Mighty, 23:8-39.

   David's great human helpers are here designated and short sketches
   given of them. Space will not permit any enlarged commentary on the
   text, nor is it necessary. But note the supernatural character of their
   achievements -- "the Lord wrought a great victory" (v. 12).

   There were three classes of these men. The first consisted of the first
   three named, verses 8 to 17; the second, of the next three, Abishai,
   Benaiah and Asahel, apparently, 18 to 24; and the third of the last
   thirty, of whom, it would appear, Asahel was chief.

   4. Numbering the People, 24:1-9.

   When this took place is not easy to determine, but it is disappointing
   to note that it was a testing of David's character in which he failed.

   "He" before "moved" in verse 1, refers to Satan, as will be seen from 1
   Chronicles 21:3, and shows that although God does not tempt any man
   (Jas. 1:13), yet, sometimes He permits the adversary of souls to do it
   In this case He withdrew His supporting grace and the king fell (vv. 3,
   4).

   How long did it take to obtain this census, and what was its report
   (vv. 8, 9)?

   There is an apparent discrepancy between the record here and 1
   Chronicles 21, which, however, can be explained.

   Samuel says, "there were in Israel 800,000 valiant men"; while
   Chronicles says, "And all they of Israel were a thousand thousand and
   an hundred thousand men that drew sword" -- 300,000 more. The words in
   the second case, "all they of Israel," suggests the key to the
   difficulty. Chronicles gives the full number of the military belonging
   to Israel, while Samuel omits the special guards of the king and the
   princes who were in actual service as militia, and which were just
   300,000.

   In like manner, Samuel says, "The men of Judah were 500,000 men," while
   Chronicles records that "Judah was 470,000 that drew sword." The
   difference is explained by the army of observation on the frontiers of
   Philistia (2 Sam. 6:1, 2) which were not included by the author of
   Chronicles, though they were by the author of Samuel. In this case the
   first-named does not say "all they of Judah," as he had of Israel.

   5. A Choice of Chastisement, vv. 10-25.

   God graciously leads David to repentance (v. 10), but He can by no
   means clear the guilty (vv. 11, 12), yet mercy mingles with justice
   (vv. 13, 14).

   Note the difference between David's spirit in verse 17, and that of
   Saul in corresponding circumstances (1 Sam. 15:15). And do not overlook
   Araunah's kingly generosity on the one hand (v. 23), or David's
   conscientiousness on the other (v. 24). Of course, "Ornan" in
   Chronicles is only another pronunciation of Araunah in Samuel.

   Observe from 1 Chronicles 21:28-22:5, that the threshing floor
   subsequently became the site of Solomon's temple.

   Questions.

   1. In what part of the Bible are the contents of chapter 22 again
   found?

   2. How may the variations be explained?

   3. What are "Messianic" psalms?

   4. Give a proof of verbal inspiration in this lesson.

   5. What shows the supernatural character of the David's worthies?

   6. Quote James 1:13.

   7. How might the discrepancy in the achievements of census be
   explained?

   8. How famous did Araunah's threshing-floor become?
     __________________________________________________________________

FIRST KINGS

   THE CORONATION OF SOLOMON

   Chapters 1-2

   1. The Occasion for it, 1:10.

   The incident in the first four verses is recorded not for itself, but
   because of what grew out of it in Adonijah's case (2:13-25). It was a
   custom in the Orient, and still is, to do this for hygienic reasons on
   the supposition "that the inhalation of young breath will give new
   vigor to a worn-out frame." The event shows that Abishag was made a
   concubine or secondary wife to the king (2:22).

   Adonijah, doubtless, felt some justification for his conduct in that he
   was now the eldest son of David (2 Sam. 3:4), and no public intimation
   had been made as to the successor on the throne. Moreover, his father
   seems to have indulged him in certain liberties (v. 6).

   For the history of Zadok and Benaiah see 2 Samuel, 8:17; 15:24; 21:53
   and 8:18; 20:23. With Nathan we have met (2 Sam. 7). There was
   something ominous in the omission of these men from Adonijah's feast
   (v. 10).

   2. The Way of Procedure, 1:11-40.

   Bathsheba was a capable woman, for it is inferred from verse 17 that
   she had great influence with the king. Nathan must have known of the
   promise spoken of and been aware of its harmony with the divine will to
   explain his action (vv. 11-27).

   3. The Earliest Results, 1:41-2:46.

   (4) Adonijah (1:50-53, 2:13-25). The four corners of the altar of burnt
   offering to which sacrifices were bound, were symbols of salvation and
   considered as a sanctuary for all except certain classes of offenders
   (Ex. 21:14). Adonijah's offense was rebellion, but he is spared on the
   conditions named. Unhappily, however, he violates them and, apparently
   instigated by Joab and Abiathar (v. 22), adopts a course which,
   according to eastern ideas, was of dangerous consequence to the state.

   (2) Abiathar (vv. 26, 27). The punishment of the priest follows that of
   the usurper. (Note the fulfillment of 1 Samuel 2:30).

   (3) Joab (vv. 28-34). The crimes of this military leader merited death,
   according to the divine law (Num. 35:22) which would have been visited
   upon him earlier, no doubt, had it not been for his power with the
   army. Compare David's words in 2 Samuel 3:28, 29.

   (4) Shimei (vv. 36-46). By the death of this man all the leaders of
   factions inimical to Solomon were cut off, which explains the last
   sentence of the chapter.

   Questions.

   1. What relation presumably did Abishag sustain to David?

   2. Had Adonijah any apparent ground for his action?

   3. What shows a plot in his case?

   4. How does chapter 1:15-31 indicate the dignity associated with the
   human sovereignty of Israel at this time?

   5. How did Adonijah show his heart unchanged?

   6. In what line of the priesthood did Abiathar come?

   7. In what sense did Solomon's kingdom come to be established at this
   period?

   SOLOMON'S GREATNESS AND WISDOM

   Chapters 3-5

   1. His Egyptian Alliance, c. 3:1.

   It is disappointing at the beginning to speak of that which betokens
   neither greatness nor wisdom on Solomon's part, looking at it from the
   highest point of view. This marriage with a heathen wife was contrary
   to the law of God (Ex. 34: 16); and while it was entered into for
   political reasons, and to strengthen Israel's hands, yet in the end it
   weakened them, as Israel came to trust in Pharaoh more than Jehovah.

   And yet Solomon loved the Lord, and served Him with the limitations
   named in these verses, and the Lord was longsuffering toward him as
   with his father David.

   Some think that since Solomon was not divinely rebuked for marrying
   this princess, as he was later for marrying other foreigners, she may
   have consented to become a proselyte to the Jewish religion. It is
   interesting also that the Song of Songs and the 45th Psalm were
   probably composed in her honor, although both, in the mind of the Holy
   Spirit, had a typical reference to the relation of Jehovah to Israel,
   or Christ to His Church, or both. The "high places" in verse 2, were
   altars erected on natural or artificial eminences, on the theory that
   the worshipper was thus brought nearer the Deity. They had been
   prohibited by Moses because of their association with idolatry (Lev.
   17:3, 4. etc.); but, as the temple was not yet built in Israel and the
   tabernacle was moved about from place to place, they seem to have been
   tolerated without special rebuke from God.

   2. His Noble Request, vv. 5-15.

   Observe that the wisdom Solomon desired was not of the heavenly but the
   earthly kind (v. 9). Noble it was, and yet Solomon might have had
   something still more worth while had he sought it. How does God's
   answer illustrate Ephesians 3 :20?

   Solomon's expression "I am but a little child" (v. 7) is not to be
   taken in the sense of years but experience. He was probably twenty at
   this period.

   3. His State and Retinue, c. 4:1-28.

   How do verses 11 and 15 indicate that this chapter is dealing with a
   later period in Solomon's reign?

   Observe the development of the kingdom at this time as indicated by
   these officials. The word "priest" (v. 2), it is thought, should be
   rendered "prince," so that Azariah was probably prime minister; then
   follow three secretaries of state (?), a historiographer, a military
   commander in chief, a high priest, provincial governors (?), a
   confidential adviser, a steward or chamberlain, a state treasurer or
   collector of customs, etc. (vv. 2-6).

   Afterward local revenue officers are named, for the taxes raised were
   in the products of the soil rather than money. These were put in store
   cities in the different localities until required at the palace (w.
   7-21). Compare chapter 9:19.

   The "provision" in verses 22 and 23 refers to the tables of the king's
   concubines, courtiers, guests, etc., as well as his private board.

   4. His Fame, w. 28-34.

   This exceeded that of the Chaldeans or Persians, or Egyptians, renowned
   as the last named were for all kinds of learning (v. 30). There were
   none of his contemporaries he did not excel (v. 31). He was author of
   wise sayings and songs by the thousands (v. 32). He was a master of
   forestry and arboriculture, of zoology, and ornithology and ichthology,
   so that kings as well as lesser people came to listen to and confer
   with him.

   5. His Friends, c. 5.

   Among the kings who came to pay court was Hiram of Tyre, who, whether
   he was the Hiram of David's time, or his son or grandson, it is
   difficult to say. This results in a contract for the building of the
   temple, in which the skilled workmen of Tyre are yoked with the
   commoner laborers of Israel (v. 6). Advantages are to be reciprocated
   (v. 9). Compare chapter 9:20, also 2 Chronicles 2:17, 18 and 8:7-9 from
   which we gather who were the laborers Solomon laid tribute upon for
   this work. The stones in verses 17 and 18 are still seen in the lower
   foundations of the site of the ancient temple.

   Questions.

   1. Have you read the 45th Psalm?

   2. What does the Song of Songs typify?

   3. Why were altars built on high places?

   4. Quote Ephesians 3:30.

   5. Name from memory the offices in Solomon's kingdom.

   6. Name some of the branches of Solomon's learning.

   7. For what arts or trades were the Phoenicians (or Tyrians) noted?

   8. What do you recall of the dealings between Hiram and David?

   BUILDING THE TEMPLE

   Chapters 6, 7

   1. The Work in Outline, c. 6:1-14.

   Note the particularities as to date, dimensions and general appearance
   (vv. 1-4), on which space will not permit extended comment. As to the
   size of the cubit, the question as to whether the elevation is external
   or internal, the description and purpose of the windows, for example,
   students must be referred to Bible dictionaries.

   The chambers (vv. 5-10) on three sides of the temple seem to have been
   three stories high, each wider than that beneath it, with a winding
   stairway on the interior leading to the middle and upper stories.

   Travelers speak of a quarry near Jerusalem from which the stones are
   likely to have come. There is evidence too, that they were dressed
   there as the text says (v. 7), for other stones like them in size and
   substance are found in the remains.

   The communication of the Lord to Solomon is significant of
   encouragement and warning. When He speaks of dwelling among His people
   it has the same meaning as when He used the words in the wilderness.
   The visible glory resting over the mercy seat in the most holy place
   was the token of His presence. It remained there while the nation
   served Him, and this meant that He was protecting and blessing them.

   2. The Details, vv. 15-38.

   Verse 15 reveals that the walls were sheathed with cedar and the floor
   planked with fir or cypress; thus the stone was entirely hidden. The
   walls were carved in relief with foliage and flowers (v. 18) and
   cherubim and palm trees (v. 29). But the whole was overlaid with gold
   (v. 22).

   Comparing the first and last verses of the chapter, how long was the
   temple in building? In round numbers how does the last verse reckon it?

   3. Solomon's Own Palace, c. 7:1-12.

   Perhaps the longer time occupied in building this is explained by the
   fact that its completion was not so urgent or important as the temple,
   and that the same preparation for it had not been made in advance (v.
   1).

   In the Revised Version verse 2 begins: "For he built the house of the
   forest of Lebanon." This indicates that it is still his own house which
   is referred to, the material for which came from the same locality as
   that for the temple.

   The edifice seems to have been oblong (v. 2), with a front porch used
   as a judgment hall (vv. 6, 7). There was also a large hall in the
   center, on one side of which were the king's apartments and on the
   other those of the queen (v. 8). Compare Esth. 2:3, 9.

   The phrase in verse 12, "the inner court of the house of the Lord,"
   should read as in the Revised Version, "like as the inner court," etc.
   The meaning is that, in the palace as in the temple, the same rows of
   hewn stones and cedar beams formed the wall.

   4. The Foreign Craftsman and His Work, vv. 13-51.

   This "Hiram" was not the king of Tyre, but another man of that country
   by the same name, and evidently a genius in mental work (v. 14).

   Tyrians and other Phoenicians were not only great workers in timber (v.
   6), but renowned the world over for the art in which he so greatly
   excelled.

   But Hiram had Jewish blood in him too (v. 14). Here he is said to be of
   the tribe of Naphtali on his mother's side, while 2 Chronicles 2:14
   speaks of her as of Dan; but she may have belonged to the first named
   while living in Dan.

   Hiram's work, consisted, first, of the pillars of the temple and their
   capitols, the latter beautifully ornamented, and which were named as
   they were set up. For the meaning of these names see the margin of your
   Bible (vv. 15-22).

   Next came the "molten sea," (vv. 23-26), which was not the same as the
   brazen laver of the tabernacle, as will be seen by comparing 2
   Chronicles 4:1-6, especially verse 6.

   Then "the ten bases of brass," (vv. 27-39), which, according to verse
   38, were for the support of the brazen lavers. And these in turn were
   for the washing of the sacrifices (see 2 Chronicles 1, as above).

   Hiram also made what other things (v. 40)? What locality was selected
   for the furnaces, and why? (For answer to the last half of this
   question compare the margin with the text of the verse). The reference
   here is to bronze rather than what we know as brass.

   Observe in verse 51 that in addition to the furnishings which Solomon
   made for the temple and which were modeled after those in the
   tabernacle of the wilderness, he also deposited therein the sacred
   articles "which David his father had dedicated," though they probably
   were not used.

   Questions.

   1. What archaeological evidence is borne to the historical character of
   this narrative?

   2. How does God encourage and warn Solomon?

   3. Why may a longer period have been taken in building the palace than
   the temple?

   4. For what were the people on the north of Palestine noted?

   5. How would you harmonize verse 14 with the corresponding reference in
   2 Chronicles?

   6. What do the words "Jachin" and "Boaz" mean?

   7. For what use was "the molten sea"?

   DEDICATION OF THE TEMPLE

   Chapters 8, 9

   1. The Time, 8:1, 2.

   Since the temple was completed in the eighth month of the previous year
   (6:38) and not dedicated until the seventh of the following, how shall
   we explain the interval? The reason usually assigned is that the king
   waited for the feast of tabernacles in the fall when one of the
   greatest assemblies took place, and for this purpose the most
   appropriate.

   2. The Grand Procession, vv. 3-9.

   Observe who were the leading actors (v. 3). Also what articles they
   carried (v. 4). The "tabernacle" means the old tabernacle of the
   wilderness, which had been located at Gibeon and was now to be
   preserved in the temple at Jerusalem.

   Notice the sacrificing on the march (v. 5). Notice that it was the
   original ark of the covenant that was placed in the most holy place of
   the temple (v. 6). "The wings of the cherubim" mean those that Solomon
   caused to be placed there, and larger than those of Moses' time which
   were firmly attached to the ark itself (Ex. 37:7, 8). The staves at the
   end of the ark were drawn out to be seen in the holy place, but not
   beyond it (v. 8). This was to guide the high priest on the day of
   atonement, that he might be able to enter the most holy place in the
   thick darkness (Ex. 25:15).

   Note what the ark contained (v. 9), and compare Hebrew 9:4. This last
   Scripture should be understood as teaching that the things it names
   were placed by and not in the ark. (See Ex. 16:33; Num. 17:10).

   3. The Divine Acceptance of the Work, vv. 10, 11.

   It is only necessary to compare these verses with Exodus 40:34, to see
   the significance of this act of Jehovah. He thus established Himself in
   Israel and took His seat on the throne of His glory. What satisfaction
   it must have brought to Solomon, and indeed all the faithful in Israel.
   What a reward for their endeavors! Oh, if they had only been faithful
   thereafter, that the Lord might never have departed from them! What a
   different story this world would have had to tell.

   But how glad we should be that that glory is coming back to Israel, and
   the world is at length to be blessed thereby. Let us pray for the peace
   of Jerusalem. They shall prosper that love her (Psa. 122:6).

   4. Solomon's Blessing, vv. 12-21.

   Just what is meant by the "thick darkness" (v. 12) is not easy to
   determine unless it is the cloud and pillar of fire of earlier days
   which indicated Jehovah's presence. The rest of the words of Solomon's
   blessing, however, are plain.

   5. The Prayer and Benediction, vv. 22-61.

   For the place where the king stood and knelt see 2 Chronicles 6:13.

   How strange that the king should have thus ministered and not the high
   priest? But it was lawful for him to minister about holy things though
   he might not minister in them.

   After the ascription of praise to Jehovah (vv. 22-30), the prayer
   contains seven petitions or references to as many occasions when His
   interposing mercy might be required. Let the student discover them (vv.
   31-53).

   The chapter closes with an account of the surpassing number of
   sacrifices presented and the rejoicings of the people for the goodness
   of God.

   6. Jehovah's Response, 9:1-9.

   If the words of this vision are studied carefully they will be found to
   contain an answer to all Solomon's petitions.

   Verses 7-9, however, are a prophecy finding a sad fulfillment in our
   time because of Israel's unfaithfulness. Their location in the record
   at this point leads up to the story of the king's worldly ambitions
   which were the beginning of the nation's decline.

   7. The Compensation of the King of Tyre, vv. 10-14.

   For the twenty years that Hiram the king aided Solomon (v. 10), the
   latter gave him twenty cities, a city a year. Doubtless they were
   adjacent to his territory and were those which never had been conquered
   by Israel and were still inhabited by Canaanites.

   These cities being unacceptable to him (w. 12, 13), he was recompensed
   in some other way, and Solomon took control of them in his own hands
   and peopled them with Israelites (2 Chron. 8:2).

   8. The Levy, vv. 15-25.

   The dedication of the temple seems to close at verse 25, for which
   reason the preceding verses about the levy are included in this lesson,
   though their exact bearing upon it may not appear at first sight.
   Perhaps the connection is discovered by going back to chapter 5:13 and
   the following verses.

   However, the reason for the levy of both men and money is clear from
   the many great works Solomon undertook as indicated in this chapter.
   Observe that the people levied upon (vv. 20-22) were the Canaanites who
   had not been subdued or exterminated at the conquest. (See 2 Chron.
   2:18.) As prisoners of war they did the drudgery, while the men of
   Israel had the more honorable employment.

   Questions.

   1. At what period of the year did this ceremony occur?

   2. What evidence have we that the Mosaic tabernacle had been preserved
   all this time?

   3. Have you read Hebrews 9:4, and if so, how would you explain it?

   4. How did God indicate His acceptance of the work?

   5. Memorize Psalm 122.

   6. How would you explain the ministering of the king on this occasion?

   7. Name the subjects of the seven petitions of Solomon's prayer.

   8. Why did Solomon make levies of men and money at this time?

   9. Who were especially levied upon, and why?

   10. With what general statement of Solomon's religious spirit does the
   lesson close?

   CLOSE OF SOLOMON'S REIGN

   Chapters 9:26-11:43

   1. Wisdom and Wealth, 9:26-10:29.

   A look at map No. 5, at the back of your Bible, will identify the
   locality of verse 26, whence Solomon, with the assistance of Hiram,
   extended his influence by sea. "Ophir" (v. 28) has been regarded as a
   general name for all the territory on the south and in the neighborhood
   of the inland seas. A "talent" is not easy to estimate but, on the
   supposition of some that a talent of gold represented about $30,000, we
   have here a contribution of between $12,000,000 and $14,000,000. In our
   day not so much, but in that day a tremendous fortune.

   One result of expansion by the sea was the visitors it brought, as
   illustrated by the queen of Sheba, whose country cannot be identified
   except in a general way as indicated by our Lord (Matt. 12:42, Luke
   11:31). A query arises as to whether verse 9 means that she was really
   converted to Jehovah as the result of what she saw and heard.

   The "targets" or shields of verse 16, usually made of wood and covered
   with leather, were weapons of defense for the palace. (See 14:26.)

   "Tarshish" (v. 22) is a general term for the west, as Ophir was for the
   south, and points to Solomon's commercial ventures across the
   Mediterranean.

   Verse 26 shows him departing from the commandment of God about horses
   and chariots (Deut. 17:16), and at a wholesale rate, judging by verses
   28 and 29 in the Revised Version.

   2. Voluptuousness and Idolatry, 11:1-8.

   What had become of Solomon's wisdom? The answer is, that the wisdom he
   had was of the earthly rather than the heavenly kind. It was sufficient
   to keep the city but not to keep his heart. It helped him rule the
   kingdom but not his own spirit. Was Solomon really regenerated, who can
   tell? (Compare Pro v. 31:1-3 and Eccles. 4:13.)

   The princesses were daughters of tributary kings taken as hostages
   perhaps, or to strengthen Solomon's hands in the political sense; but
   the concubines were secondary wives not having the same recognition in
   the kingdom.

   Compare 2 Kings 23:13 for the name given to that part of Olivet on
   which Solomon built the temples for the false gods. These he had been
   induced to worship through the influence of his harem. God alone knows
   what loathsome wickedness this may have introduced into Israel.

   3. Chastisement and Sorrow, 11:9-43.

   What aggravated Solomon's offence (vv. 9, 10)? What judgment is
   threatened (v. 11)? But what mercy is shown and why (v. 12)? To what
   extent was the kingdom to be rent from Solomon (v. 13)? The
   significance of this is that in the line of David that "greater than
   Solomon" was to come of whom we learned in 2 Samuel 11. (Compare also
   vv. 35 and 36.) We shall see later that not only was Judah left to
   Solomon's son, but Benjamin and Levi as well, three tribes, although
   here named as one. Many individuals and families in the other tribes in
   addition stayed with him for religious reasons. (See 12:17 and 2 Chron.
   11:12, 13.)

   Who was the first rod of God's anger raised against Solomon (v. 14)?
   And the second (vv. 23-25)? And the third (v. 26)?

   This last was the most formidable because of the internal commotion he
   aroused. He came first into notice as a mechanical engineer in charge
   of some of Solomon's many works (vv. 27, 28); but God had chosen him
   for a higher task, the knowledge of which seems to have turned his head
   (vv. 29-31). He could not wait patiently for God to remove Solomon as
   David did in the case of Saul, but began to take matters into his own
   hand with the consequences in verse 40.

   Observe the name of the book of record from which the inspired compiler
   of 1 Kings may have obtained his data (v. 41), and compare with it the
   statement in 2 Chronicles. 9:29.

   Questions.

   1. Has your Bible any maps?

   2. What can you recall of Hiram's history?

   3. What two geographic names having a general application are given
   here?

   4. How much value may have been represented by a talent of gold?

   5. Have you a copy of the Revised Version?

   6. How would you discriminate in the case of Solomon's wisdom?

   7. Have you compared the Scripture references in this lesson?

   8. What name was given that part of Olivet on which Solomon built the
   idol temples?

   9. Name the three tribes that remained loyal to the house of David?

   10. Name the three human scourges of Solomon towards the close of his
   life?

   11. What prophet is named in this lesson?

   12. What data may the compiler of Kings have had to draw upon?

   EARLY DAYS OF THE TWO KINGDOMS

   Chapters 12-14

   1. Cause of the Division, 12:1-25.

   Verses 2-4 look as though there were a preconcerted purpose to revolt,
   and yet who can tell what a different history might have followed had
   the new king heeded wiser counsel?

   Note the reason of the protest, which was not Solomon's idolatry and
   the heathenism he introduced, but their pecuniary burdens; their civil
   oppression, rather than their religious wrongs. It is still so, and
   political reform looks only on the surface and never takes into account
   the root of difficulties. Had Solomon kept true to God the people would
   not have been oppressed; but the latter were blinded as to this because
   they had become partakers of his sins. They, too, loved the heathen
   worship and only murmured at its cost.

   And yet there was an overruling cause why Rehoboam hearkened to the
   younger men, for God had intended to inflict punishment (v. 15).

   Rehoboam seems to have been incredulous as to the reality of the
   revolt; but if so, what event opened his eyes (v. 18)? What action is
   now taken by him (v. 21), and why is it brought to a standstill (vv.
   23-25).

   2. Jeroboam's Folly, w. 26-33.

   To "build" Shechem and Penuel meant probably to fortify them as
   protection from attack (v. 25.)

   Had Jeroboam ground for thinking as is recorded in verses 26 and 27
   (Compare 11:37, 38.) He had become familiar with calf worship in Egypt
   (v. 28), but in any event Solomon himself had prepared the people thus
   to be led astray.

   Notice that it was for political reasons Jeroboam did this (v. 27). He
   had no intention of throwing off the yoke of Jehovah altogether, but
   was foolish enough to think He could be worshipped in one way as well
   as another. Why was he compelled to make priests "from among all the
   people" (Revised Version)? (Compare again 2 Chron. 11:12, 13). What
   change did he make as to the time of the feast of tabernacles? (Compare
   v. 32 with Lev. 23:33, 34.) Where did he get the idea (v. 33)?

   3. A Preliminary Warning, c. 13.

   The story of this chapter, although containing supernatural wonders, is
   in the recital and meaning very plain. Jeroboam has his chance to
   repent and turn to the Lord if he will, but his heart is set to do
   evil.

   No one knows the name of the prophet (v. 1) who, although a "man of
   God," acted so unworthily as to be denied the honor of its record. Note
   the prophecy he uttered and compare its fulfillment, over 300 years
   later, in 2 Kings 23:15, 16. This has been cited as one of the most
   remarkable prophecies in Holy Writ, "whose definiteness and minuteness
   stand in marked contrast to the obscure oracles of the heathen." What
   sign was given to its ultimate fulfillment (v. 3)? What personal
   judgment fell on the king and why (v. 4)? Do you think he was genuine
   in his invitation (v. 7)?

   And the prophet referred to in the subsequent verses, if he were ever a
   servant of the Lord, surely he was a castaway now (1 Cor. 9:27)? What a
   warning his conduct brings before Christian workers today! Could his
   motive have been to curry favor with the King? How many supernatural
   events can be counted in verses 20-29? (Compare 2 Kings 23:15-18.)

   4. A Final Judgment, 14:1-20.

   Taking verses 1 and 2 together, how do they reveal Jeroboam's
   hypocrisy, political caution, fear and ignorance?

   The Lord's commendation of David as contrasted with Jeroboam (v. 8) is
   to be considered in the light of the pure worship the former maintained
   in accordance with the divine law. It does not mean that David never
   sinned, although, of course, even in that he differed from Jeroboam
   because he repented of his sin. The phrase in verse 10 refers to "a man
   child" and is so rendered in the Revised Version.

   What "good" was found in Abijah (v. 13) is not stated, but doubtless he
   was not in sympathy with all his father's wickedness and idolatry.

   Note the earliest prediction of the captivity of Israel by the
   Assyrians as it subsequently came to pass (v. 15 compared with 2 Kings
   17:6).

   5. Rehoboam's Iniquity and its Result, vv. 21-31.

   What allusion in verse 21 furnishes a hint as to the reason of
   Rehoboam's apostasy (vv. 22-24? What judgment falls on him and his
   people (vv. 25, 26)?

   We should not misunderstand "the book of the chronicles" (v. 29), as
   meaning the book of the Old Testament bearing that name, but only one
   of the customary records of the kings. Neither should we imagine verse
   30 to be a contradiction of chapter 12:21-24, as the former (v. 30) may
   refer to skirmishes in contrast with an aggressive war of conquest.

   Questions.

   1. Were the people of Israel anymore religious and God-fearing than
   their first king?

   2. Rehearse the story of God's relation to the division of the kingdom.

   3. Did Jeroboam outwardly break the first or second commandment?

   4. What king of Judah was named by the Lord over 300 years before his
   birth?

   5. Quote 1 Corinthians 9:27.

   ASA OF JUDAH TO AHAB OP ISRAEL

   Chapters 15-16

   1. Abijam's Brief Reign in Judah, 15:1-8.

   This commentary will permit but the briefest treatment of the less
   important reigns of Judah and Israel, that more attention may be given
   to the others.

   "Abijam" is called "Abijah" in 2 Chronicles 12:16.

   Verse 5, referring to David, is to be taken in the comparative sense
   spoken of in the lesson preceding.

   Verse 6 is a mistake, as some copies of the text read "Abijam" for
   "Rehoboam."

   Since Abijam began to reign in the eighteenth year of Jeroboam (v. 1),
   and was succeeded by Asa in the twentieth (v. 9), how could it be that
   he reigned three years (v. 2)? The answer is that parts of years among
   the Hebrews were counted as whole years.

   2. Asa's Long Reign, vv. 9-24.

   It would appear by comparing verse 10 with verse 2 that "Maachah" was
   really the grandmother of this king who, for some reason, is named
   instead of his immediate ancestress. She seems to have been the queen
   dowager (v. 13).

   Asa's character, good in the main (vv. 11-15), suffers a decline later
   as indicated in his alliance with Ben-hadad of Syria against Baasha of
   Israel (vv. 17-21). Why not trust God instead? Had the lessons of the
   past been lost upon him?

   The student is reminded of the necessity of studying the history of
   these kings in the light of 2 Chronicles. Much interest is added to the
   story of Asa by the parallel places in chapters 14-16 of that book.

   3. Nadab's Brief Reign, vv. 25-31.

   There is little said of this king, but verses 27-30 should be noted as
   a fulfillment of the prediction of chapter 14:10, 11.

   4. Baasha's Long Reign, v. 33-16:6.

   Note the name of the prophet here (16:1), who must not be confused with
   a king of the same name who appears subsequently. Note that God exalted
   Baasha over Israel (v. 2), though from the human side he appeared to
   take the kingdom by his own force. Note that God still calls Israel His
   "people" (v. 2), though they have dealt so wickedly towards Him. There
   were still faithful worshippers among them, and He is still sending
   prophets to them and working miracles on their behalf. Oh, the
   long-suffering of God! Note finally, that, although God had decreed the
   death of Jeroboam's house, He had not authorized Baasha as His
   executive, and hence the latter is punished for murder (v. 7).

   5. Zimri the Suicide, vv. 8-20.

   Of Elah, the immediate successor of Baasba, nothing need be said except
   that his death begins to fulfill the prediction of verse 3 which
   culminated as recorded in verses 12 and 13. It was a time of revelry
   and bloodshed; the army, as is usual in such periods, dictated its own
   terms (v. 16).

   6. Omri and the New Capitol, vv. 21-28.

   After four years of civil war Omri is established on the throne and,
   the royal residence at Tirzah having been destroyed by fire, he selects
   Samaria for a new capital (v 24). Observe why it was called by that
   name. Dean Stanley, speaks of the admirable position of this city as
   paralleled nowhere in the country for "strength, beauty and fertility."
   Locate it on the map.

   7. The Wicked Ahab, w. 29-34.

   Note the iniquitous distinction of this man (v. 30). If Jeroboam broke
   the second commandment which forbade images, Ahab went further and
   broke the rest by throwing off even the outward semblance of
   worshipping Jehovah (v. 31).

   The beginning of his gross offence was his marriage. Ethbaal, the
   father of Jezebel, was originally the priest of the heathen goddess
   Ashtaroth, or Astarte, whose worship was loathsome in its
   licentiousness. By murdering the king of the Zidonians (Tyre) he seized
   the throne and thus became a successor of the noted Hiram.

   The worship of Baal and of Astarte were practically one and the same,
   Baal representing the male principle in the cult and Astarte the
   female.

   In reading verse 31 refresh the mind by a reference to the curse
   against Jericho in Judges 6:26. Jericho is referred to prior to this
   time, i. e. in David's day (2 Sam. 10:5) as though it were inhabited,
   which makes these verses the more difficult to understand. But some
   think that the curse of Joshua referred not so much to dwelling in the
   city as to the rebuilding of its walls for defense.

   Questions.

   1. How did the Hebrews sometimes count years?

   2. What book should be read in connection with 2 Kings?

   3. How does this lesson show God's patience towards Israel?

   4. What city had been the capital of Israel prior to Omri's time?

   5. How did Ahab's wickedness exceed that of Jeroboam?

   6. What was the relation between the worship of Baal and that of
   Ashtaroth?

   7. Tell the story of the cursing of Jericho by Joshua.

   ELIJAH AND AHAB

   Chapters 17-19

   1. Elijah in Hiding, 17:1-24.

   Nothing is known of Elijah's previous history, not even why he is
   called the "Tishbite" (v. 1) except, as suggested in the Septuagint
   translation, that the town of Tishbeh is meant, which was in the Gilead
   region east of the Jordan. A comparison of Deuteronomy 11:16, 17 shows
   that the judgment he announces (v. 1) was threatened by Jehovah for
   such iniquity as that now prevailing; but of course the divine impulse
   must have come upon him to apply it in this instance.

   His hiding "by the brook Cherith" (v. 3) was necessary to preserve him
   from the wrath of Ahab when his words were fulfilled. His being fed by
   "the ravens" (v. 4) will raise no question in the minds of any who
   accept the supernatural in the Bible, and for those who do not this
   commentary can have little value. The theory of some that the Hebrew
   word translated "ravens" might be rendered "Arabians," and that he was
   normally provided for by passing merchants of that region, is not
   generally accepted by evangelical scholars and would be only less a
   miracle than the accepted text.

   Zarephath, or Sarepta, was in the country whence Jezebel had come, and
   which was visited by the famine also. The cause for Elijah's removal
   there is stated in verses 7-9, but there was a deeper reason in the new
   testings that were to come to him for the strengthening of his faith in
   view of the climax later on. Nevertheless, we are not to forget the
   lesson God had to teach the widow also, and to us through her. See
   Christ's testimony in Luke 4:25, 26.

   2. Meeting with Ahab, 18:1-46.

   "The third year" is spoken of here, while James says (v. 17) "three
   years and six months," a discrepancy which may be explained by saying
   that the drought had been experienced six months (the time between the
   early and latter rains in March and October respectively) before Ahab
   realized the situation and became incensed against the prophet.

   Fire was the element over which Baal was supposed to preside, which
   explains verse 24. Observe the simplicity and faith of Elijah's prayer
   (vv. 36, 37). His command (v. 40) was justified as a magistrate of God
   (Deut. 13:51 and 18:20).

   Description of Mt. Carmel.

   "The natural features of Mt. Carmel exactly correspond with the details
   of this narrative. The conspicuous summit, 1,635 feet above the sea,
   presents an esplanade spacious enough for the king and the priests of
   Baal to stand on the one side, and Elijah on the other.

   "It is a rocky soil, on which there is abundance of loose stones to
   furnish the twelve of which the altar was built -- a bed of thick earth
   in which a trench could be dug; and yet the earth not so loose that the
   water poured into it would be absorbed.

   "Two hundred and fifty feet beneath the plateau there is a perennial
   fountain which might not have been accessible to the people, and
   whence, therefore, even in that season of drought, Elijah could procure
   those supplies of water which he poured over the altar.

   "The distance between this spring and the site of the altar is so short
   as to make it perfectly possible to go thrice thither and back again:
   whereas, it must have been impossible once in an afternoon, to fetch
   water from the sea.

   "The summit is 1,000 feet above the Kishon, which nowhere runs from the
   sea so close to the base of the mount as just beneath El-Mohhraka; so
   that the priests of Baal could, in a few minutes, be taken down "to the
   brook and slain there." -- Jamieson, Faussett and Brown.

   3. The Results Following, 19:1-21.

   There seems to be no explanation of Elijah's flight (vv. 1-4) except
   the natural one of great depression following great spiritual
   exaltation. God could have preserved him from this had He so willed,
   but it is good for all of us to know that we are but flesh (Jas. 5:17)
   and "that we have this treasure in earthen vessels" (2 Cor. 4:7).

   We are impressed with the condescension of God in the supernatural
   provision for Elijah's physical needs of which he himself had thought
   nothing (vv. 5-8); and the no less condescension in instructing and
   continuing to use him as indicated in the subsequent verses.

   The exhibition of divine power (vv. 11-13) had the effect of restoring
   the prophet to a spiritual equilibrium where he could listen to further
   commands (vv. 15-17) and receive the rebuke his conduct merited (v.
   18). It is notable that the three persons he is to anoint are all to be
   employed, though in different ways, as God's instruments of judgment
   upon idolatrous Israel. The 7,000 mentioned is not to be taken
   literally, but as meaning a certain complete number of faithful ones of
   whom God was cognizant though the prophet was not.

   Elisha was one of these (v. 19) who had doubtless been educated in the
   schools of the prophets of which we shall hear more, and who recognized
   the falling of his master's mantle upon him as his divine call.

   When Elijah says: "What have I done to thee" (v. 20)? he seems to mean:
   "Do not disregard it. Bid thy loved ones farewell, but remain faithful
   to thy call."

   Questions.

   1. Have you read Deuteronomy 11:16, 17?

   2. Have you located Zarephath?

   3. Can you give the context of Luke 4:25, 26?

   4. Can you quote Elijah's prayer on Mt. Carmel?

   5. Name seven particulars in which the natural features of Mt. Carmel
   correspond with this narrative.

   6. How shall we explain God's actings towards Elijah at Horeb?

   7. How explain the 7,000?

   8. How does verse 15 show God's power over heathen nations as well as
   Israel?

   CLOSE OF AHAB'S REIGN

   Chapters 20-22

   1. His Dealing with Ben-hadad, c. 20.

   Among the remarkable chapters of this book the present stands out
   distinctively, but we shall be unable to give it the consideration it
   should have if we forget God's purpose in dealing with Israel. It has
   been reiterated that He is using that people as an instrument in the
   redemption of mankind, and especially as a witness to Himself before
   the nations. This explains everything in their history, and to ignore
   it is to make that history like a tale of the Arabian nights. We should
   remember also that what is written is ofttimes the barest outline of
   what was said and done, and while we are by no means to fill in what we
   please, yet the omissions should have a qualifying influence in our
   understanding of the record.

   "Ben-hadad" means the son of Hadad, and is a general title for the
   kings of Syria of that period, like the Pharaohs of Egypt or the
   Caesars of Rome. He was a descendant of the king met with in Baasha's
   reign (15:20). The thirty-two kings with him (v. 1) were petty
   tributary princes, rulers over cities in his neighborhood.

   His claim for tribute (v. 3) would have been acceded to had he not
   over-reached himself, (vv. 5, 6), and had not frightened Ahab been
   encouraged by his subjects (vv. 7-11).

   What an evidence we have of God's goodness and providential purpose in
   Israel in verse 13! Wine and panic explain the victory from the human
   side, but God's interposition from the divine side (vv. 19-21).

   If this victory was great, that of the succeeding year was greater (vv.
   22-30). Note the relative size of the armies (v. 27), and the giving
   way of the walls under the weight of those who there made a stand
   against Israel.

   Ahab's clemency to Ben-hadad (vv. 31-34) was a repetition of Saul's
   disloyalty to God in the case of Agag (1 Sam. 15) and explains the
   circumstance following (vv. 35-43). The parabolic manner of the prophet
   in announcing Ahab's judgment suggests Nathan's dealing with David (2
   Sam. 12).

   2. His Dealings with Naboth, c. 21.

   Note that Naboth's refusal to Ahab was not disregard for him, nor for
   selfish reasons, but from obedience to God. (Compare verse 3 with Lev.
   25:23, Num. 36:78.) "Sons of Belial" (v. 10) means "ungodly men."

   For the fulfillment of verse 19 compare the next chapter, verses 37 and
   38. The phrase, "sold thyself to work evil" means that he allowed evil
   to get the mastery over him. (Compare Rom. 7:11). For the fulfillment
   of verse 23 compare 2 Kings 9:30-37. Note God's mercy to the penitent
   (vv. 27-29) and compare 2 Kings 9:21-26.

   3. His Dealings with Jehoshaphat, c. 22.

   Verse 3 indicates that Ben-hadad had not fulfilled the covenant with
   Ahab he had been so ready to make (compare 20:34).

   Jehoshaphat, king of Judah, has not been met with before, but a history
   of his reign is found in the concluding verses of the chapter. He is a
   striking Old Testament type of the New Testament Christian who forms
   entangling alliances with the world, but more is said concerning him in
   2 Chronicles 18.

   Note the piety of Jehoshaphat (v. 15), and observe that a good man is
   sometimes found voluntarily in bad company.

   Micaiah (v. 9) was in prison because of his faithful testimony to God
   against Ahab. Zedekiah was one of the false prophets (v. 11), but what
   worship he represented, now that Baalism had been discredited, is
   difficult to say; but certainly not that of Jehovah.

   Observe the temptation placed before Micaiah and the manner in which he
   met it (vv. 13, 14). His words in verse 15 are ironical, but those of
   verse 17 are a prediction of the defeat that followed. It is he who
   speaks in verses 19-23, for a commentary on which see 1 Samuel 18, and
   also the first two chapters of Job. With verses 24 and 25 compare
   Jeremiah 20:1-6.

   Observe that Jehoshaphat's "unholy alliance" nearly cost him his life
   (vv. 30-33), but it taught him a lesson (v. 49).

   Questions.

   1. In what light are we to interpret the marvelous transactions in this
   book?

   2. Who was Ben-hadad?

   3. How does this lesson illustrate the cowardice and the courage of
   Ahab?

   4. How does it illustrate the goodness and mercy of God?

   5. How many of the marginal references have you examined?

   6. What is the meaning of "son" of Belial"?

   7. Of what is Jehoshaphat a type, and why?

   8. With what prophet may Micaiah be compared?
     __________________________________________________________________

SECOND KINGS

   ELIJAH'S TRANSLATION

   Chapters 1-2

   1. His Last Commission, c. 1.

   The story of Ahaziah's reign in the last chapter of First Kings, and he
   first verse of this lesson is a close link between the two books. It
   indicates that the death of Ahab and the accession of his son gave
   occasion to the Moabites for this uprising, the first since their
   conquest by David (2 Sam. 8:2).

   "Baalzebub" (v. 2) "the lord of the fly" was the name under which the
   sun-god Baal was worshipped at Ekron, the city of the Philistines lying
   nearest to Ahaziah's capitol, Samaria. Probably the name comes from the
   supposition that he produced the flies and was consequently able to
   protect against them as a pest. The name is not to be confounded with
   "Beelzebub" of Matthew 10, although there may be a relation between the
   two. Observe the phrase at the beginning of verse 3, and recall what we
   have learnt about the Christophanies of the Old Testament.

   In verses 9-12 Elijah, as the representative of God, is speaking in
   judgment against malefactors, for such the soldiers and the king behind
   them must be regarded. Had Elijah been apprehended of them it would
   have meant his death and a victory of the kingdom of darkness over the
   kingdom of light. How the fire came down and consumed the soldiers is
   not stated.

   2. His Last Journey, 2:1-11.

   The localities in the first five verses -- Gilgal, Bethel, Jericho,
   were doubtless where schools of the prophets had been established, as
   far back as Samuel's time, (1 Sam. 7:15-17.) These schools were for the
   training of godly youth in the law of God and the experience of a holy
   life. Elisha seems to have been among them while Elijah was their head
   at this period (v. 3). The awesome event about to transpire seems to
   have been revealed to them to some extent, explaining their
   communications to Elisha as well as his determination not to separate
   from Elijah till the end. The latter's indisposition to have himself
   accompanied is difficult to explain, some attributing it to his purpose
   of testing the fidelity of Elisha as qualifying him for his succession.

   Of what earlier events does verse 8 remind you? How would you interpret
   Elisha's request in verse 9? Shall we say that it refers to Deuteronomy
   21:17, where the law of the first-born is recorded? Elisha would have
   Elijah regard him as a first-born son, and give him, as compared with
   the other sons of the prophets, a richer measure of his prophetic
   spirit. He did not ask twice as much of the Holy Spirit as Elijah had
   which even on natural grounds Elijah could not have granted him. It is
   as a prophet that Elijah replies in verse 10. The translation in verse
   11 suggests that of Enoch, that of Christ Himself, and that of the
   Church yet to occur. (Gen. 6:24; Heb. 11:5; Acts 1:9; 1 Thess. 4:17.)

   3. His Last Token, vv. 12-18.

   Elisha's expression (v. 12) means that Elijah had been the true defense
   of Israel rather than its military strength in chariots and horsemen.
   That defense was seen in his combating of idolatry which was Israel's
   real and only enemy. How otherwise does Elisha express his grief in
   this verse?

   Compare the reference to Elijah's mantle (v. 13) 1 Kings 19:19, and
   observe that its possession by Elisha is a token that his petition is
   answered and he has been endued for the prophetic office.

   Is his question (v. 14) an expression of doubt or a prayer of faith?
   What does the result show (v. 15)?

   The desire of the sons of the prophets (v. 16) is difficult to explain
   on the supposition that they had any clear idea that Elijah had gone
   into heaven. "Into heaven," might be rendered "toward heaven," and it
   may be questioned whether the prophet really went into heaven. "In My
   Father's house are many mansions," and Elijah, for the time being, may
   have been located at some other happy stopping place.

   4. His Successor's Inaugural, vv. 19-25.

   The concluding verses furnish two other tokens of Elisha's official
   character and power which may be considered in this lesson.

   Of course it was neither the new cruse nor the salt that healed the
   water and made it usable and fructifying to the ground (vv. 19-21), but
   the power of God. They were symbols. The new cruse was necessary
   because every vessel used for a religious act in the service of Jehovah
   must be as yet unused, i. e. uncontaminated. The salt was a type of the
   purifying and restoring power which God would put forth on the spring.

   The second evidence of Elisha's power (vv. 23-24), has its
   difficulties. "Little children" in the margin of the Revised Version is
   "young lads," and there is good authority for so considering it.

   In Lange it is suggested that the young people recognized him as a
   prophet and opponent of the popular idolatrous worship whose principal
   seat was at Bethel. Therefore they called to him in mockery, "What dost
   thou want here among us?"

   The epithet "bald head" was a standing insult for old or reverend
   people whether they were bald or not. It was not so much scorn of
   Elisha as of Jehovah Himself. (Compare Exodus 16:8, Acts 5:4, etc.)

   She-bears are ravenous, but how two could tear forty-two young people
   must remain a mystery for the present.

   Questions.

   1. What is the meaning of "Baalzebub"?

   2. Who commissioned Elijah in this case?

   3. How many illustrations of swift judgment on sin does this lesson
   contain?

   4. What may be understood by "the schools of the prophets"?

   5. How has Elijah's desire to be alone been interpreted?

   6. How do you understand Elisha's request of Elijah?

   7. Of how many "translations" does the Bible speak?

   8. What is the meaning of the "chariots of Israel and the horsemen
   thereof"?

   9. Why did Elisha use means in healing the waters?

   10. How would you try to explain the cursing of the children?

   ELISHA'S MINISTRY BEGINS

   Chapters 3-5

   1. Maneuvering an Army, c. 3.

   The incident about Mesha (vv. 4, 5) is interesting from the point of
   view of Biblical criticism. This is the only time he is mentioned in
   Sacred Writ and his name does not appear in profane history. For this
   cause objectors to the Bible have demanded proof of his existence at
   the time named. Also, was Moab noted for its wool? Was it tributary to
   Israel at this period? Did this rebellion occur? etc.

   It was impossible to answer these questions outside of the Bible until
   about forty years ago when the "Moabite Stone" was discovered, on which
   an inscription by Mesha recorded all these facts.

   What earlier alliance does this between Judah and Israel recall (v. 7)?
   What earlier situation does Jehoshaphat's inquiry recall (v. 11)? Note
   the outward respect, at least, which the three kings pay to Jehovah's
   prophet (v. 12).

   Why Elisha calls for the minstrel (v. is) is not clear, except as a way
   of quieting his mind in the midst of turbulent scenes of battle, and so
   preparing him in the physical sense, to listen to God's voice. In our
   own experience we see the value of worshipful hymns as we approach the
   throne of grace.

   How water came "by the way of Edom" (v. 20), may be explained by a
   shower or cloudburst. The water was reddened by flowing through the red
   earth of Edom, an effect heightened by the red light of the morning sun
   (v. 22).

   The act of the king of Moab (v. 27) was not exceptional, but his
   thought in presenting the sacrifice upon the wall was probably that the
   besiegers beholding it might fear the heathen divinity to whom it was
   offered. He would now be appeased, presumptively in favor of his
   subjects, and it would go hard with their opponents. The meaning of
   "indignation against Israel" is obscure. Some understand it as
   indignation the Israelites themselves felt at this act so abominable in
   their sight, and which made them prefer to renounce further possession
   of Moab than to pursue the conflict. Or it may mean that God's wrath
   fell upon them for returning home with their work of judgment half
   done.

   2. Ministering to Individuals, c. 4.

   Notice the contrast between a poor woman (vv. 1-7) and a rich one in
   the verses following. Both have needs which only God can supply, and He
   is as ready to show His power in the one case as in the other, and His
   prophet makes no distinction between them in his ministry.

   In the story of the Shumanite notice that out of modesty and respect,
   when the prophet calls her (v. 15), "She stood in the door." "It is
   well" (vv. 23, 26), is not to be understood as prevaricating, but as
   wishing to be let alone for the present.

   The prophet's staff (v. 29) was the badge of prophetic office. Recall
   Moses' rod which was the symbol of divine power. It seems an error for
   Elisha to have dispatched his servant on this commission, but prophets
   are not infallible except where they speak or write by inspiration of
   God. (Compare Nathan in 2 Samuel 7.) In his desire to hasten matters,
   hoping the child was not quite dead, he hurries his servant hence; but
   he has to learn that he can not delegate God's grace and power
   according to his own will.

   How does Elisha's action (vv. 33-35) compare with Elijah's under
   similar circumstances? The miracle that follows corresponds closely
   with that in chapter 2, verses 19 to 22, and may be understood in the
   same way. The concluding miracles of the chapter suggest Christ's
   multiplication of the loaves and fishes; but the difference is that
   here there was no multiplication, but the men were satisfied with the
   little each received. It was a miracle wrought on the men rather than
   the food.

   3. Magnifying His Office, c. 5.

   That is a noticeable phrase in verse 1, "by him the Lord had given
   deliverance unto Syria," which shows that the inspired annalist regards
   Jehovah as the God of the whole earth without whose providence even the
   heathen nations gained no victories.

   Observe God using "the weak things of the world" in the case of the
   little maid (v. 2), whose testimony influences the general, and the
   kings of Syria and Israel, to say nothing of the prophet, and is handed
   down as a force for righteousness and truth for thirty centuries!

   Both kings misunderstood the situation, however, he of Israel being
   without excuse. It is this that gives Elisha the opportunity to magnify
   his office (v. 8), which he does again in the case of Naaman (v. 10).
   The Syrian's greatness made no difference, he must be healed like any
   other leper, solely by the power and grace of God. The prophet's
   humility and disinterestedness are established by his reply in verses
   15 and 16.

   Naaman's request for earth (v. 17) was not superstition but reverence.
   His request in verse 18 indicates a tender conscience rather than a
   compromising spirit, or the prophet could hardly have bidden him "go in
   peace."

   Questions.

   1. Give the story of Mesha and its value as evidence of the truth of
   the Bible.

   2. What three kings were in this combination against Moab?

   3. Why, probably, was the king's son offered on the wall of the city?

   4. What lessons may be drawn from Elisha's treatment of the two women?

   5. What lesson was Elisha to learn from Gehazi's failure?

   6. How does the miracle of the food differ from that in the gospels?

   7. How does Elisha magnify his office in the case of Naaman?

   8. In what two ways is Naaman's conversion established?

   ELISHA AND THE SYRIAN INVASION

   Chapters 6-8

   1. The Stratagem at Dothan, 6:8-23.

   The incident in verses 1 to 7 seems an interpolation; and some think it
   belongs at chapter 4:38 in connection with the two miracles, having a
   somewhat similar occasion. "Swim" (v. 6") is in the Hebrew the same as
   "float, ' and the idea seems to be that by throwing the stick into the
   water the iron was caused to come to the surface where the young man
   could get it.

   It is difficult to say when the event of verse 8 occurred, but it is
   assumed in the reign of Jehoram, with which we have been dealing since
   Elisha's ministry began. At a time when the Syrians were intending to
   encamp at a particular spot, and attack the Israelites as they passed
   by, the prophet gave warning to Jehoram, which enabled the latter to
   station troops in the threatened position and frustrate their plans
   (vv. 8-10). (Lange.)

   This disconcerted the Syrian king, and, learning the truth of the
   matter, he tried to get hold of Elisha (vv. 11-14).

   The "servant" of verse 15, is not Gehazi. To "open the eyes" (v. 17)
   meant to give that soul-vision which the bodily members can never
   behold. The "horses and chariots of fire" were the symbols of Jehovah's
   presence and might. "Blindness" (v. 18) is not absolute loss of sight,
   but an inability to recognize the prophet.

   Elisha's words (v. 19) are not an untruth, as his real residence was
   Samaria; and in the end he led them to himself, not to harm them, but
   repay evil with good (vv. 21-23). His inquiry of the king (v. 22)
   presents difficulty, but probably means "could'st thou be justified in
   slaying with sword and bow these whom thou hast taken captive?" (See
   Deut. 20:10-13.)

   2. The Famine in Samaria, 6:24-7:20.

   An interval of some time must be considered since the close of verse
   23. The famine caused by the siege was intense as gathered by the price
   paid for the meanest food (v. 25). "Dove's dung" is understood by some
   as an insignificant species of pease resembling it.

   The king's putting the blame on the prophet (vv. 30, 31) recalls what
   episode in Elijah's time? Had Elisha advised against the surrender of
   the city, or did the king think he might have put an end to the
   distress in some other way? Verse 33 suggests that the king, who had
   doubtless followed his messengers, had repented of his threat against
   Elisha, but nevertheless had lost hope in Jehovah.

   This brings forth the new promise of 8:1, 2. The remainder of the
   chapter presents no difficulties, but we should note the fulfilled
   prediction in verses 19 and 20.

   3. The End of Ben-hadad's Reign, 8:1-15.

   The event referred to (vv. 1-6) doubtless took place sometime before
   this, as the records of Elisha's ministry are not arranged
   chronologically. Compare 4:38 for the period. Gehazi's appearance (vv.
   4, 5) further strengthens the thought that it was before his offence
   and punishment by leprosy.

   The event that follows is tragical indeed (vv. 7-15). Hazael, though
   not related to Ben-hadad, had been the divine choice as his successor
   (1 Kings 19:15). When Elisha says the king may recover, yet he shall
   surely die, he is telling the exact truth, as verse 15 portrays. Had
   Hazael not murdered him he would have lived. It was Elisha who looked
   at Hazael until the latter was ashamed, as he might well have been (v.
   11).

   Questions.

   1. Give in your words the story leading up to the event at Dothan.

   2. How would you harmonize the prophet's words to the Syrian soldiers?

   3. What striking prediction is fulfilled in this lesson?

   4. What allusion in 4:38 leads to the supposition that the opening of
   this lesson refers to that period?

   5. How would you harmonize Elisha's words about Ben-hadad?

   THE OVER-ZEALOUS JEHU

   Chapters 8:25-9:37

   1. Preliminary Events, 8:25-29.

   The last lesson should have spoken of the chronological difficulties in
   the history of the kings of this period. (Compare especially 8:16 with
   1:17.) But all our space will permit is to say that all such
   difficulties are satisfactorily solved, without doing violence to the
   text, in "The Romance of Chronology," by Anstey; who in turn quotes Dr.
   John Lightfoot, of the 17th Century, Beecher's Dated Events of the Old
   Testament, and The Companion Bible, published by the Oxford Press.

   The story of blood and awful judgment from God begins at 8:25, where
   Ahaziah succeeds Jehoram as king of Israel. This is not the earlier
   Ahaziah of Israel (1 Kings 22:51) any more than the two Jorams or
   Jehorams were the same persons, of whom we studied in the last lesson.
   He is called Jehoahaz in 2 Chronicles 21:17, and in 22:2, he is said to
   have been forty-two when he began to reign. This, is an intentional
   variation intended to teach a divine truth. On its face it makes him 2
   years older than his father, but it should read, "a son of 42 years was
   Ahaziah when he began to reign, * * * and his mother's name was
   Athaliah, the daughter of Omri."

   To quote Anstey "The Holy Spirit will not have him for a son of David.
   He is an imp of the house of wicked Omri, and as such a son of 42
   years, which was exactly the age of that dynasty." Compare Ps.
   109:13-15. Note, too, that this interpretation is confirmed by Matthew
   (1:8), who omits him from the Kings of Judah, saying that Jehoram his
   father begat Uzziah, his great, great grandson, the fourth in the
   direct line of descent. Compare here Exod. 20:5.

   Like his father, he was a wicked man (9:16-18), and the fruit of his
   grandfather, Jehoshaphat's, compromising attitude towards Israel.
   (Compare 9: 18.) The reference to his mother (v. 26) is not
   contradictory, as "daughter" may sometimes be rendered "granddaughter"
   in translating the Hebrew. He was closely affiliated with his uncle,
   king of Israel (vv. 28, 29), and this led ultimately to his unnatural
   death in the next chapter.

   2. Jehu Anointed and Proclaimed King, 9:1-13.

   Elijah received the commission from God to anoint Jehu (1 Kings 19:16),
   but he was fulfilling it in his successor, as the latter was doing so
   in the representative of the school of the prophets whom he sent on the
   divine errand (vv. 1, 2). Jehu's father is not the Jehoshaphat of Judah
   (1 Kings 22:4).

   This Jehu is a military commander in Israel, perhaps next to the king
   and, as the sequel shows, a bold and popular one. He is now in the
   company of his fellow-captains near the scene of battle where Joram
   left them when he went to Jezreel wounded. These captains recognize the
   validity of his anointing and by laying their garments on the steps for
   him to mount on, do him obeisance as they sound the trumpets of
   proclamation (vv. 11-13).

   3. His Conspiracy Against Joram, vv. 14-16.

   The army is not informed of what is transpiring (v. 15), but Jehu and a
   few followers advance upon Jezreel and the king (v. 16). The latter
   thinks he is bringing news of the battle after he had left (vv. 17-21),
   but he is soon undeceived (vv. 22-23). "The whoredoms of thy mother"
   (Jezebel) doubtless meant her idolatry with Baal. "The Lord laid this
   burden upon him" (v. 25), means "the Lord uttered this prophecy against
   him." (See 1 Kings 21.) Be not deceived by the thought that Jehu is
   doing all this out of zeal for God, as the sequel shows that zeal for
   Jehu was the stronger motive.

   4. The Murder of Ahaziah and Jezebel, vv. 27-37.

   2 Chronicles 22:8 gives other details of Ahaziah's death which, for
   want of light, are difficult to reconcile with the record, and which
   therefore must be passed over. Another difficulty is the discrepancy as
   to the date when he began to reign, whether it was the eleventh year to
   Joram (v. 29) or the twelfth as stated previously (8:25); but the
   explanation may be that he reigned with his father for one year before
   the latter's death. The probable reason for this is in 2 Chronicles 21,
   the last verse.

   For the significance of Jezebel's challenge to Jehu (v. 31) see 1 Kings
   16:9.

   5. The Slaughter of the Families of Ahab and Ahaziah, 10:1-14.

   The "70 sons" of Ahab (v. 1) mean doubtless his grandsons and all who
   might have any pretense to the throne. Jehu asks the men in authority
   at the capital (Samaria) and the summer palace (Jezreel) to place any
   of these on the throne, and rally to his support if they chose (vv. 2,
   3); but they are afraid to do so, and instead surrender to Jehu (vv. 4,
   5), Then he bids them go further (vv. 6, 7); and subsequently uses
   their deed as an argument before the people that the leaders are on his
   side, and that the word of the Lord is fulfilled in his accession (vv.
   8-10). The slaughter of the relatives of Ahaziah follows (vv. 12-14).

   6. The Destruction of the Prophets of Baal, vv. 15-28.

   Of Jehonadab we read in Jeremiah 34. He seems to have been an honorable
   man in Israel, a worshipper of the true God, whose presence with Jehu
   contributed to the latter's influence with the people (vv. 15, 16).
   This part of our story shows that, although Baal's worship received a
   serious setback in the days of Elijah, yet it had been restored to
   practically its former power in the kingdom (vv. 18-28).

   Jehu's real character is shown in verse 29, in the face of which one is
   astonished to read verse 30. But God was dealing with him as one who
   was hired for what he did. Had his heart been right with God his
   kingdom might have been established for generations, but as it was he
   could not complain.

   God now begins His final work in Israel (vv. 32-33). The time is coming
   when the axe will fall at the root of the tree and the whole nation be
   carried away for its iniquity; but intimations of this are sent to warn
   and, if possible, bring them to repentance.

   Questions.

   1. Can the chronological difficulties be solved in the history of the
   Kings of Judah?

   2. How would you explain the difficulty as to the age of Ahaziah?

   3. What kings of similar names are met with in Israel and Judah?

   4. What have you learned of Jehu's history?

   5. What are the circumstances under which he is proclaimed king?

   6. What prophecies are fulfilled in this lesson?

   7. What are some of the difficulties found in it?

   8. What record has Jehonadab in Jeremiah?

   9. How is Jehu's real character revealed?

   ANOTHER CENTURY OF ISRAEL AND JUDAH

   Chapters 11-14

   1. Joash of Judah, Chapters 11 and 12.

   The chief events of this reign are the rescue of the infant king from
   the murderous grandmother (11:1-3); the coup d'etat of the high priest
   by which he was raised to the throne (vv. 4-16); the reforms of the
   high priest as regent of the kingdom (vv. 17-21); the repairing of the
   temple by the king (12:1-16); the surrender to the Syrians (vv. 17,
   18), and the king's assassination (vv. 19-21).

   Be careful to read the parallel chapters in 2 Chronicles (22-24), which
   add details, though at this distance it may be impossible to reconcile
   all the minor differences.

   2. Jehoahaz of Israel, 13:1-9.

   This reign is notable not for what man did but what God did, as
   indicated in verse four. That His compassion was awakened towards such
   a people commands the wonder even of the spiritually enlightened -- a
   wonder which the sacred narrator Himself expresses in the parenthetic
   verses (vv. 5, 6). "Saviour" or delivered is used in a military sense,
   as in Judges. He did not appear in Jehoahaz's time but in that of his
   successors Jehoash and Jeroboam II.

   3. Jehoash of Israel, vv. 10-25.

   We need not speak further of the chronological difficulty here (v. 10
   compared with v. 1), which we can not solve, but pass on to the
   preliminary fulfillment of the promised "saviour" (v. 5), found in
   verses 14 to 25.

   Jehoash, or Joash (v. 14), is in sore distress by reason of the
   affliction in verse three, and sufficiently penitent to implore Jehovah
   through His prophet (v. 14). The symbolism of the subsequent verses
   (15-19) is plain. "Take bow and arrows" means, arm thyself for war
   against the Syrians. "The arrow of the Lord's deliverance" means that
   the victory would come from God. The second part of the action was an
   enhancement of it, and showed the king to lack that zeal and
   persevering trust in God that would have brought the complete
   destruction of his enemy (Note verse 25).

   The extraordinary event in verse 21 is to be accepted just as it is,
   but it is useless to speculate on the cause or the object of it.

   4. Amaziah of Judah, 14:1-20.

   An interesting event is the challenge Amaziah sends to Jehoash, the
   manner in which it is received, and the outcome of it (vv. 8-14). It is
   worthy of remark that he met death in the same way as his father whose
   murder he had been so prompt to avenge (vv. 19, 20).

   5. Jeroboam II of Israel, vv. 23-29.

   Now God fully redeems His promise to give a "saviour" to Israel (13:5).

   Observe the long reign of this king -- the longest in the annals of
   Israel (v. 23). Observe his remarkable victories (v. 25). Observe the
   reference to Jonah who seems in succession to Elisha, and lived
   probably contemporaneously with Jehoash or even Jehoahaz. It may have
   been through him that God gave the promise to that king to which we
   have made reference. The close of his reign marks about a century from
   the beginning of that of Joash of Judah.

   Another circumstance of interest is that Amos and Hosea both lived and
   prophesied in this reign (see the opening verses of their prophecies).

   Questions.

   1. Name the first reigning queen of Judah.

   2. Name the high priest who placed Joash on the throne.

   3. How old was Joash when he began to reign?

   4. What good work marked his reign?

   5. Under what circumstances did he die?

   6. Who was the "saviour" intended, 13:5?

   7. In whose reign did Elisha die?

   8. What nation wag the constant enemy of Israel in those days?

   9. Name some events making the reign of Jeroboam II the "golden age" of
   Israel.

   10. Name three prophets of his period whose written works have come
   down to us.

   THE ASSYRIAN CAPTIVITY

   Chapters 15-17

   1. Azariah of Judah, 15:1-7.

   This king is called "Uzziah" in verses 13 and 30, and in 2 Chronicles
   26. Read the last-named chapter for an enlargement of his history and
   an explanation of certain features not given here. Note his long reign,
   his generally good character, the cause of his failure, and the
   circumstance that his son reigned with him jointly for a short period.

   2. Israel's New Enemy, vv. 8-31.

   Zachariah is the last of the line of Jehu, in whom the prophecy of
   10:30 is fulfilled (v. 12). Shallum is a usurper only permitted to
   reign how long (v. 13)? Menahem comes into power in the same way as he,
   although he reigned a reasonably long period (v. 17). It was in his
   time that the new enemy of Israel appeared in Assyria, a strong nation
   of the East reaching out after world dominion (vv. 19, 20).

   Pekahiah, his son and successor, reigns but briefly (vv. 23-26), when
   another conspiracy costs him his life. Pekah's reign is prolonged for
   twenty years (v. 27), but Israel's days as a nation are numbered, and
   Assyria is weakening her on every side. The first deportation of her
   people takes place in this reign (v. 29).

   3. Jotham and Ahaz of Judah, v. 32-16:20.

   Jotham was in the main a good king, but like all his predecessors since
   Solomon, either unwilling or unable to uproot idolatry (v. 35) or cause
   the nation to serve Jehovah with a perfect heart. How ominous in
   consequence, the words of verse 37.

   But no king of Judah thus far had the preeminence in wickedness of
   Jotham's successor (16:3, 4). And yet God bore with him for the sake of
   His promise to the fathers. For a commentary on verses 5 to 9 read the
   contemporaneous prophet Isaiah, chapter seven.

   Ahaz need not have turned for aid to Assyria had he trusted God; but
   now that he has done so, that nation had obtained a hold on Judah which
   practically is never loosed.

   Note verses 10-18 and Ahaz's interest in the idolatry practiced among
   the Assyrians. This is the first time it comes into view, as it will be
   recalled that the worship of Baal and Ashtoreth was introduced by
   Jezebel from the Phoenicians or Zidonians. Something of what it meant
   may be gathered from the horrible reference in verse three, the actual
   significance of which it is difficult to determine. Is it possible that
   children were burned alive as offerings to the gods? There are those
   who maintain such to have been the case.

   4. The End of Israel, c. 17.

   The first half of this chapter is a sad review of Israel's iniquity and
   the justification of the divine punishment (vv. 6-23). It was surer and
   safer for their conqueror to carry them away (v. 6), than to place
   governors over them in their own land. These latter they might not
   obey, or they might refuse to pay tribute to them, involving ceaseless
   war to keep them in subjection. Moreover the policy had the advantage
   that other conquered peoples could be transplanted to the vacated
   territory with like results (v. 24).

   With these foreigners in the land of Israel begins the history of the
   "Samaritans," of whom we hear in the gospels (see John 4). Note the
   character of their religion (vv. 33-41).

   It was not promised that Israel, as a separate kingdom would be
   restored again, and therefore God permitted her cities to be occupied
   with other peoples, but it was not so with Judah and for a good reason,
   as we shall see later. Of course when Judah was restored after the
   Babylonian captivity many Israelites returned with her, but these did
   not constitute the kingdom of Israel. Finally, in the last days when
   the Jews shall once more occupy and control Palestine, they will not
   represent two kingdoms, but one united people (Isa. 11:11-16; Hos.
   1:10, 11).

   This lesson should not close without mentioning the importance of
   knowing something about Assyria, with which great people many of the
   following lessons deal. Any Outline History of the World will furnish
   some information, and encyclopedic articles are valuable, but
   Rawlinson's "Five Great Monarchies of the Ancient World" or Lenormant's
   "Manual of the Ancient History of the East" are recommended to those
   who can lay their hands upon them. Local librarians will give further
   help.

   Questions.

   1. By what other name is Azariah known?

   2. Why was he smitten with leprosy?

   3. Locate Assyria on the map.

   4. Name the wickedest king of Judah thus far.

   5. What prophet whose written words have come down to us was
   contemporaneous with him?

   6. What evil religious distinction is associated with his name?

   7. How is it shown that the fall of Israel came as a judgment of God?

   8. Is it right therefore to measure the history of Israel by the
   standard of any other ancient people?

   9. What was Assyria's object in their deportation?

   10. Do you suppose "lions" were purposely sent in to slay the
   Samaritans (v. 25), or may they have increased in number and boldness
   while the land was for a while desolate?

   11. Nevertheless, if the latter be true, was not the circumstance a
   divine punishment?

   12. How does this lesson show that the heathen nations believed in
   localized gods?

   13. From what we know of the worship of Israel before the captivity,
   what is the probability that any returned "priest" could teach the
   Samaritans about the true God (v. 27)?

   JUDAH UNDER HEZEKIAH

   Chapters 18-20

   1. A Summary of the Reign, 18:1-8.

   For a more extensive history of this good reign compare not only 2
   Chronicles 29-32, but also Isaiah 36-39. In the first eight verses we
   have the usual summary like that of Ahaz (16:1-4), after which follows
   in detail the chief events of the reign. The summary contains the age
   and period of the king (vv. 1, 2); his attitude toward the true worship
   (vv. 3, 4); a reference to the spirit animating his life and conduct
   (vv. 5, 6), and in consequence the successes attained over foreign
   enemies (vv. 7, 8).

   Note his enviable distinction (v. 5) and the cause of it (v. 4).

   2. Sennacherib's Invasion, vv. 13-35.

   The intervening verses (9-12) recapitulating Israel's captivity are
   inserted doubtless for the sake of contrast. Had the kings of Israel
   been as faithful to Jehovah as this king of Judah was, that calamity
   would not have overtaken them as it did not overtake him.

   Sennacherib is on a tour of conquest against Egypt, Assyria's great
   rival for world dominion, and takes in Jerusalem en route. At first
   Hezekiah is disposed to make terms (vv. 13-16), which Sennacherib
   accepts and then wantonly disregards. While he proceeds on Egypt he
   detaches a force to attack Jerusalem (v. 17).

   The language of Rabshakeh is insulting throughout. His claim to be
   acting for Jehovah (v. 25) is pure assumption as the event shows.
   Eliakim's protest (v. 26) was a blunder in that it encouraged him to
   greater boldness in seeking to influence the rank and file (vv. 28-35).

   3. The Appeal to Jehovah, 19:1-37.

   Rabshakeh did not commence the siege immediately, but joined the main
   army again at Libnah (v. 18), to which place Sennacherib retired on the
   approach of the Egyptian king (v. 9).

   Another attempt is made to move Hezekiah by a letter, but as before he
   had appealed to Jehovah through the prophet, he now does so directly
   through his own prayer (vv. 14-19), and is answered through the prophet
   (vv. 20-34).

   This answer contains (1), a rebuke of Sennacherib's boast (vv. 21-24);
   (2), a refutation of his self-assertion (vv. 25-28); (3), an
   encouragement to Judah and Hezekiah (vv. 29-31); and (4), the divine
   decree in regard to the crisis (vv. 32-34).

   The execution of the decree brings to mind such modern parallels as the
   destruction of the Spanish armada by the storm, and the breaking up of
   the French army before Moscow when in one memorable night, 20,000
   horses perished of frost. -- Lange.

   4. Hezekiah's Sickness and Recovery, 20:1-11.

   It seemed to the king that he must have displeased God to be cut off in
   early manhood (see Prov. 10:27), hence his words (v. 3).

   Figs were the ordinary remedy for boils (v. 7) but the prophet did not
   order their application until he was assured of the divine help. It was
   God, and not the figs that healed, just as is always the case in every
   remedy for bodily ills.

   It does not seem wrong for Hezekiah to ask a sign in view of Isaiah's
   words to Ahaz (Isa. 7:11).

   The reversal of the shadow on the sundial (v. 11) only can be regarded
   either as a miracle or myth, and as far as the true believer in the
   Bible is concerned, the former is accepted without seeking impossible
   explanations.

   5. An Unholy Alliance, vv. 12-21.

   Babylon at this time was trying to free herself from Assyrian
   supremacy, and when Sennacherib suffered so serious a calamity seemed
   an opportune moment for a forward movement. This doubtless reveals the
   reason for this embassy to Hezekiah with whom it was hoped to form an
   alliance. It also explains the latter's object in showing them his
   riches and strength

   (v. 13), which was not only a political blunder but an act of unbelief
   towards God. Hence the rebuke (vv. 16-18). Instead of help from Babylon
   that nation would at length prove Judah's ruin. This would not be on
   account of Hezekiah's fault alone, but because the whole nation had
   incurred guilt similar to his, and would continue to do so even in a
   greater degree.

   Questions.

   1. Have you read the parallel Scriptures in this case?

   2. Rehearse the four outline facts constituting the summary of this
   reign.

   3. What special form of idolatry is here mentioned?

   4. What two strong nations were rivals for world-dominion at this time?

   5. Analyze Jehovah's answer to Sennacherib's boast.

   6. What practical lessons are here taught about divine healing?

   7. Give what appears to be the true reason for the Babylonian embassy.

   JUDAH UNDER JOSIAH

   Chapters 21-23

   1. His Immediate Predecessors, 21:1-26.

   Manasseh's history shows that a good father does not always make a good
   son. The summary of his reign (vv. 1-9) ranks him with Ahaz, as the two
   wickedest kings Judah had known. Note that the same punishment which
   had fallen on Israel is soon to overtake Judah (v. 13), and this
   notwithstanding Manasseh's "humbleness," as indicated in 2 Chronicles
   33:11-19.

   The brief reign of Amon (vv. 19-26) was in character a continuation of
   that of his father, and marks the lowest period in the history of the
   nation until that time.

   2. His Restoration of the True Worship, c. 22.

   The youth of Josiah suggests that he may have been under a regency at
   first as in the case of Joash (12:3) though there is no mention of it.
   The temple had not been repaired since that king, 250 years before,
   which explains certain things in this chapter, especially when the
   wickedness and idolatry of some of the intervening reigns are
   considered.

   "The book of the law" (v. 8) is regarded by scholars as the Pentateuch,
   which during the apostasy had been lost to public knowledge except as a
   tradition. Some of the older rabbis held that it was the original
   manuscript of Moses. Another theory is that Manasseh had ordered all
   copies to be destroyed, but that some faithful priest had concealed
   this copy until now.

   Jeremiah and Zephaniah were prophets contemporaneous with Josiah, but
   the reason Huldah was inquired of, and not they, is probably because
   she "dwelt in Jerusalem" (v. 14), where the others may not have been at
   this time.

   3. His Extension of the Reform Movement, c. 23.

   It will be noticed that after the king had put an end to all illegal
   worship in Judah, he extended the reform, or the revival, to the former
   kingdom of Israel, where that worship had originally arisen (23:15-20).

   Observe from verses 26 and 27 that God has not changed His purpose
   concerning the removal of Judah, which proves that, although in this
   reign the law was kept externally, yet the nation was by no means
   converted.

   4. His Death and the Succession, vv. 29-37.

   The story of Josiah's death (vv. 29, 30) is more fully related in 2
   Chronicles. One reason he marched against Pharaoh was that although the
   latter's objective was Assyria, yet he was trespassing on Jewish soil
   to attain it.Jehoahaz, whom the people preferred as his successor (v.
   30), was a younger son, but he was soon deposed by the Egyptians, who
   placed his brother on the throne, making him their vassal (vv. 34,
   35).Questions.

   1. How long did Manasseh reign?

   2. What chastisement befell him during his lifetime, and why?

   3. What effect had this upon his spirit?

   4. What decree is now uttered against Judah?

   5. What earlier king of Judah does Josiah suggest?

   6. Name two or three parallel incidents in their histories.

   7. How would you explain the loss of the book of the law?

   8. With what is this book identified?

   9. What two prophets, whose books have come down to us, were
   contemporaneous with this reign?

   10. Did Josiah die a natural death?

   THE BABYLONIAN CAPTIVITY

   Chapters 24-25

   1. The Last of the Kings, c. 24.

   In the previous lesson we left Judah tributary to Egypt, which had been
   victorious at Megiddo. This lasted, five years, when Babylon, now
   master of her old-time enemy Assyria, and eager to cross swords with
   Egypt for world-supremacy, came up against her, and compelled
   allegiance.

   After three years Jehoiakim revolted (v. 1), and for the remainder of
   his reign was harassed by bands of enemies (v. 2) perhaps incited by
   the king of Babylon, himself too much occupied in other directions to
   attack Judah in person.

   After he has defeated Egypt, however (v. 7), he turns his attention to
   Judah. Jehoiakim is dead, and his son, Jehoiachin, is on the throne (v.
   8). The latter is taken captive, and with him many of the best people
   of the land (vv. 12-16), among them Ezekiel, as we learn from the book
   bearing his name. (The prophet Daniel, with others, had been carried
   away by the same king on an earlier advance against Jehoiakim.)

   Nebuchadnezzar shows the same consideration as the king of Egypt in
   placing another of the royal family instead of a stranger on the throne
   (v. 17), but his confidence is misplaced and the end comes. The whole
   situation is of God, and the execution of His judgment upon the unholy
   people (v. 20).

   2. The Death Agony, 25:1-21.

   For a comment on this chapter, read Jeremiah and Ezekiel. Jeremiah 21,
   27, 22, 34, 27, 40 and 41 cover this period pretty thoroughly and also
   the first twenty-four chapters of Ezekiel.

   3. The Remnant Left in the Land, vv. 22-26.

   Gedaliah, whom the king of Babylon made governor over the few people
   remaining, was, like his father, a friend of Jeremiah and joined with
   him in advising Zedekiah to surrender. Had this counsel prevailed,
   Judah would not have been plucked up out of her land. All this will be
   seen when Jeremiah is reached. This was known to Nebuchadnezzar,
   however, and explains his choice of Gedaliah, as well as the treachery
   of the people towards him, notwithstanding his oath (vv. 24, 25). Read
   Jeremiah 40 to 44.

   4. The Favored Captive, vv. 27-30.

   This closing incident carries its explanation on its face. The
   Babylonian king was the son and successor of Nebuchadnezzar. The grace
   bestowed on Jehoiachin is difficult to account for, except on some
   personal ground, especially as he is preferred before the other captive
   kings, who were retained at the court to enhance its triumph and glory.

   In conclusion let it again be emphasized that the fall of Judah was
   God's judgment upon her faithlessness as a witness to Him. All the
   prophets testify to this. But, let it also be noted that it was His
   purpose that Judah should be restored after a period (70 years,
   Jeremiah 25:12). Her land was not populated by other peoples, a
   striking fulfillment of prophecy in itself. She must needs give birth
   to the Messiah there as the prophets had foretold, and so, when her
   captivity brought her in her senses she repented, and returned to
   Jehovah with a sincerity she had not before.

   Questions.

   1. In whose reign was Judah tributary, first to Egypt and then to
   Babylon?

   2. What two later kings of Judah reigned but three months each?

   3. In whose reigns were Ezekiel and Daniel taken captive?

   4. What additional light on the period have you gathered from Jeremiah?

   5. In what respect does Judah's captivity differ from that of Israel?
     __________________________________________________________________

FIRST CHRONICLES

   GENEALOGIES AND PEDIGREES

   Chapters 1-9

   1. Introductory.

   With this begins the study of those historical books of the Old
   Testament written shortly after the return from the Babylonian
   captivity, the remainder of the series including 2 Chronicles, Ezra,
   Nehemiah, and Esther.

   "Chronicles" means "diaries" or "journals," and the books give a
   recapitulation of sacred history from the time of Adam, in which the
   earlier books of the Old Testament are drawn upon and occasionally
   supplemented. The Holy Spirit, who is the real Author, has a right to
   do this when the occasion calls for it.

   The closest relation exists between the Chronicles and Kings. The
   last-named were written, it is thought, by Jeremiah, and the
   first-named by a priest or Levite. Kings must have been compiled
   shortly after the people went into exile, Chronicles after their
   return. Kings deal more with the inner spiritual condition of things.
   Chronicles with the external modes of worship.

   There are differences in the two records here and there. Not only are
   genealogies differently grouped, but names of places are changed,
   speeches of persons are presented from dissimilar aspects, religious
   festivals have more than one description given them, and things of that
   kind; but there is no contradiction not explainable by the changes
   incident to time, the later writer's point of view, the object in mind,
   negligent transcribing and the like.

   Why Chronicles were written is difficult to say, but there must have
   been some good reason for going over the ground again, "some new aspect
   of the history to signalize, and some new lesson to convey to the
   people of God on returning from the captivity." What these things may
   be must appear as we proceed.

   2. Subdivisions.

   The first nine chapters contain the genealogies of the patriarchs, the
   twelve tribes, and the inhabitants of Jerusalem till the beginning of
   the kingdom, the purpose being to connect David, the great forerunner
   of the Messiah, as well as the priests and Levites of his time with the
   antediluvian patriarchs. They have been subdivided as follows:

   (1) The Patriarchs from Adam to Jacob and Esau, with the descendants of
   the latter till the era of the Edomite kings, c. 1.

   At first these names may not seem of importance to us, but we remember
   that the Holy Spirit caused them to be written and that is enough. And
   "when we know how to awaken them from their sleep, they do not remain
   so dead as they at first appear, but revive the most important
   traditions of the ancient nations and families, like the petrifactions
   and mountain strata of the earth, which rightly questioned, tell the
   history of long vanished ages."

   {2) The Sons of Jacob, or the Generations of Judah till David, with the
   Latter's Posterity till Elioenai and His Seven Sons, 2:1-4:23.

   In this we discover a biographic gem in the story of Jabez and his
   prayer (c. 4:9, 10) of whom we are told nothing further. Verse 10 has
   homiletic value in the three things for which Jabez prayed and which he
   received -- prosperity, power, and protection.

   Another homiletic suggestion is in the words, "There they dwelt with
   the king for his work" (v. 23). These potters "that dwelt among plants
   and hedges," may have been artistic craftsmen adjacent to the royal
   gardens at Jerusalem, not merely in the reign of one king but all of
   them. Remains of these potteries have been found in recent times.

   (3) The Descendants of Simeon and the Tribes East of the Jordan till
   the Assyrian Captivity, 4:24-5:26.

   This division is interesting, as it records two conquests or migrations
   of the Simeonites (4:38-43), and corroborates what we learned earner
   about the small size of this tribe (compare 5:27 with Numbers 1-4 and
   Joshua 19:1-9.) In the same way compare the reference to Reuben, Joseph
   and Judah, chapter 5:1, 2, with the earlier account in Genesis 49. Nor
   should we permit such an inspired comment as chapter 5:20 to escape us.

   (4) The Levites and Their Locations, 6:1-81.

   This division may be broken up, thus: The sons of Levi (vv. 1-3); the
   priests down to the captivity (vv. 4-15); the families of Gershom,
   Merari and Kohath (vv. 16-48); the office of Aaron and his line unto
   Ahimaaz (vv. 49-53); the cities of the priests and the Levites (vv.
   54-81).

   (5) The Remaining Tribes, cc. 7-8.

   These tribes include Issachar (7:1-5); Benjamin (vv. 6-12); Naphtali
   (v. 13); Manasseh (vv. 14-19); Ephraim (vv. 20-29); Asher (vv. 30-40);
   the chief men of Benjamin (8:1-32); the house of Saul (vv. 33-40).

   Two tribes are omitted, Dan and Zebulon, but why, no one can determine.
   In the case of Dan, perhaps, it is judicial punishment because of their
   early and almost total fall into idolatry. They are omitted again in
   the list of Revelation 8. Zebulon's omission is more difficult to
   explain. It was a small tribe, especially just before and after the
   exile, but it was the tribe whose territory included Nazareth where
   Jesus dwelt.

   (6) The Inhabitants of Jerusalem Till the Times of the Kings, c. 9.

   Questions.

   1. Name the post-exilian historical books.

   2. Give the scope and general contents of the books of Chronicles.

   3. Contrast Kings and Chronicles as to their history and character.

   4. What are some of the points of difference between Kings and
   Chronicles, and how are they explained?

   5. Give the contents of 1 Chronicles 1-9 in outline.

   6. What can you recall of the history of Jabez?

   7. Which two tribes are altogether omitted from these genealogies?

   DAVID'S REIGN

   Chapters 10-29

   1. The Downfall of Saul, c. 10.

   In reading this chapter with whose general contents we became familiar
   in 1 Samuel 31, it is important to note the inspired comment at its
   close (vv.

   13, 14).

   2. David's Heroes, cc. 11, 12.

   In the history of David in this book, the writer dwells chiefly on its
   prosperous side, passing over the rest as lightly as possible. His
   anointing at Hebron (vv. 1-3), reveals nothing of what we learned
   earlier of the rival kingdom of the house of Saul, and the seven years
   before his exaltation over all Israel. Again, in the list of warriors
   (11:10-47), there is an omission of Joab's treachery and barbarous
   conduct in the cases of Abner, Uriah and Absalom.

   Chapter 12 contains a supplemental list of braves who attached
   themselves to David earlier, and during the days of Saul, and of whom
   we have no record until now.

   3. David's Victories and Festivals, cc. 13-16.

   These begin with the bringing up of the ark as far as the house of
   Obed-edom (c. 13). Then follows the account of battles with the
   Philistines (c. 14), which occupies a different position from that in 2
   Samuel 5, the reason for which can only be conjectured. After this the
   ark is brought up to Jerusalem (cc. 15, 16), the record being more
   detailed than in Samuel. Note, for example, the preparation and act of
   transfer. A tent is erected, (15:1) possibly in the vicinity of the
   palace, after the model of the old tabernacle. Then a consultation is
   held (v. 2), the representative men are assembled (v. 3), the bearers
   chosen (vv. 12-15), the singers appointed (vv. 16-24). Then the act
   itself, with its rejoicings, sacrifices and distribution of gifts
   (15:25-16:3). Then the initial service and the psalm of thanksgiving
   (vv. 4-36).

   Another thus analyzes the eight strophes of this psalm: The first,
   summons to praise (vv. 8-11); the second, to think on the wonders and
   judgments of the Lord (vv. 12-14); the third, to think of the covenant
   made with the fathers (vv. 15-18); the fourth, gives the reasons to
   remember this covenant (vv. 19-22); the fifth, affirms that all the
   world shall concur in the greatness and glory of God (vv. 23-27); the
   sixth, all nations shall worship Him (vv. 28-30); the seventh, the
   inanimate creation will exult before Him (vv. 31-33); the eighth,
   closes with a repeated summons to praise and prayer (vv. 34-36).

   4. David and The Temple, cc. 17-22.

   Except as to its location the record in chapter 17 is in substance the
   same as in 2 Samuel 7. The "group of war reports," cc. 18-20, runs
   parallel to four sections in 2 Samuel which in that case are separated
   from one another by other matters. The story of the plague following
   the census (c. 21), contains some deviations from that in Samuel, as
   for example, its position in the record, the fact that the offence was
   instigated by Satan, that Benjamin and Levi were not numbered, and that
   the threshing-floor was thereafter the constant place of sacrifice by
   David. These things are additions and not contradictions. As to the
   last named, the words in verse 28, "At that time * * * he sacrificed
   there," have been rendered by Luther and others, "was wont to offer
   there," meaning that he did it repeatedly, frequently. In an earlier
   lesson it was stated that this threshing-floor subsequently became the
   site of Solomon's temple.

   After the episode represented by these chapters the author returns to
   the subject of the temple (c. 22), speaking of David's preparation of
   the materials (vv. 1-5), his charge to Solomon (vv. 6-16), and finally
   his appeal to the princes to assist (vv. 17-19).

   6. The Temple and Military Officers, cc. 23-27.

   The opening comment of this section gives the reason for what follows.
   David was old and felt the need of putting things in readiness for his
   son (v. 1). There are two things that concern him chiefly, the worship
   of God and the strengthening of the kingdom, and it is significant that
   the worship of God receives attention first.

   The chapters arrange themselves thus: Chapter 23 deals with the
   Levites, their number and classification for work; 24 does the same for
   the priests, except that the closing verses refer again to the Levites;
   25 speaks of the singers; 26 of the porters, treasurers and other
   business officers; and 27 of the army, including its divisions and
   commanders.

   7. David's Last Directions and Death, cc, 28, 29.

   The last directions of David concern the building of the temple where
   all the princes, the captains, the courtiers and the heroes are
   addressed (vv. 1, 2), and Solomon in their presence is invested with
   power and authority as his successor (w. 5-21).

   Note the words in verse 12. "And the pattern of all that he had by the
   Spirit." We use a capital "S" believing the Holy Spirit to be intended,
   and that the words should be read in the light of verse 19, "All this,
   the Lord made me understand in writing by His hand upon me, even all
   the works of this pattern." Are we not to understand, difficult as the
   words may be, that as God revealed the original of the temple to Moses
   in the wilderness when He revealed the tabernacle, so now also He
   controlled and directed David when the time came for the actual
   erection of the temple?

   Do not pass chapter 29 carelessly. Note David's example of giving (vv.
   3-5), and the lever it affords to make an appeal to others. See the
   working of the Spirit of God among the people in the gladness of it all
   (v. 9), a fact David recognizes and for which he praises God, verse 10
   and the following.

   When it says "they made Solomon king the second time" (v. 22), it is in
   contrast with 23:1. In that case the first proclamation was made, but
   now the actual anointing took place. (Compare 1 Kings 1:32 and the
   following verses.)

   Questions.

   1. What book gives the fuller history of Saul?

   2. How would you compare the history of David's reign in 1 Chronicles
   with that in the earlier books?

   3. What explains the successful transfer of the ark in this instance,
   as compared with the earlier attempt?

   4. Have you read the psalm contained in this lesson, and noted its
   analysis?

   5. What evidence of the personality of Satan does this lesson contain?

   6. How does it show David's loyalty to God?

   7. What may explain David's particularity as to the details of the
   temple?
     __________________________________________________________________

SECOND CHRONICLES

   SOLOMON'S REIGN

   Chapters 1-9

   1. His Prayer and Its Answer, 1:1-3.

   With verses three and four compare 1 Chronicles 16, and especially
   verses 37-40. The tabernacle at Gibeon was the legal place for worship,
   but the threshing-floor on Mt. Moriah was chosen by David for the
   reason given (1 Chron. 21:29). A comparison with the corresponding
   place in 1 Kings will show how this account is abbreviated as the
   matter was not necessary to the author's purpose.

   2. His Power and Wealth, 1:14-17.

   This record is given in Kings near the close of the reign, but inserted
   here as a proof of the instant fulfillment of God's promise.

   3. His Erection and Dedication of the Temple, cc. 2-7.

   "Huram" is the same with whom we have previously met. The two houses
   (2:1) are the temple and Solomon's palace. The description of the
   temple here differs in several particulars from that in Kings. For
   example, this is more particular as to the plan of the building but
   less so as to the time when it began; this speaks of the arrangement of
   the building and its furnishings in an unbroken narrative, but that has
   two interruptions; this arranges the objects differently and describes
   with more fullness in some cases, etc. But remember what has been said
   about the Holy Spirit as the real author of Scripture, and His right to
   use such liberty to emphasize certain facts or impress certain lessons
   as He desires. This does not take into account errors of copyists to
   which reference also has been made.

   Here the location of the temple is named for the first time (3:1),
   (compare Gen. 22:2). "Moriah" means "land of the appearing of the
   Lord." Note the reference to the brazen scaffold (4:13) not given in
   Kings, the additional words at the close of Solomon's prayer (vv.
   40-42), and the fuller account of the divine acceptance of the temple
   (7:1-10).

   The large number of oxen and sheep offered in sacrifice is astounding
   (7:5), but Josephus in his "Wars of the Jews" says that even in Roman
   times, 256,000 passover lambs were slain at Jerusalem within a few
   hours. A current commentator reminds us that these colossal offerings
   and festivals are no more astonishing to us than the magnitude of our
   steam or railway trade, or of modern warfare would be astonishing to
   the ancients.

   4. His Earthly End, cc. 8, 9.

   In the first of these chapters we have brief notes of events recorded
   more at length in 1 Kings, for example: the building of certain cities,
   the palace for the daughter of the Egyptian king, the navigation to
   Ophir, etc. The comments upon these in that book occupy as much space
   as seems relatively necessary.

   In the next chapter the story of the Queen of Sheba is very much as in
   1 Kings.

   Questions.

   1. Where was the tabernacle of Moses at this period?

   2. Who is the real author of this book, and how does that fact bear on
   the differences in its record as compared with 1 Kings?

   3. How may other differences be explained?

   4. Tell what you know of the history of Mt. Moriah?

   5. Give a later parallel to the large number of sacrifices at the
   dedication of the temple.

   REHOBOAM AND JEHOSHAPHAT

   Chapters 10-20

   1. Rehoboam, cc. 10-12.

   The story of the rejected counsel of the older men and what came of it
   (c. 10) is practically as in 1 Kings 12, and furnishes an illustration
   of the relation of divine sovereignty to human free agency.

   The fortification of Judah's cities against Israel (c. 11) was dwelt
   upon in the earlier books, as well as the return of the priests and
   Levites to Jerusalem.

   Rehoboam's "wise" action (v. 23) is to be taken in the political sense.
   He thus gave his sons and grandsons something to do, each having a
   measure of independence, and being kept sufficiently apart from the
   others to lessen the likelihood of a cabal against the heir to the
   kingdom.

   How long did Rehoboam remain faithful to God (11:17 and 12:1)? What
   punishment was inflicted for his infidelity (vv. 2-4)? How is God's
   goodness shown to him (v. 5), and with what result (vv. 6-8)? Note
   verse eight carefully. How much better to serve God than His enemies,
   but what bitter experience is necessary to teach this lesson (vv.
   9-12). Note the reference to the heathen mother of Rehoboam (v. 13),
   and the reason for its record (v. 14), as showing her baneful influence
   on her son.

   Speaking of the punishment which befell Rehoboam and Judah from Egypt,
   it is interesting that its record is found to-day on the walls of the
   Egyptian palace at Karnak. Carved nearly three millenniums ago, it is
   there still an impressive corroboration of Holy Writ.

   2. Abijah and Asa, cc. 13-16.

   These kings may be coupled, as the record of the first-named is brief.
   Verse two of chapter 13 does not contradict verse 20 of chapter 11,
   since "Michaiah" and "Maachah" are the same, and as "the daughter of
   Uriel," she was the grand-daughter of Absalom. Such general statements
   are common in the Hebrew text, and it is impossible to consider each of
   them.

   The numbers in verse three are immense, but compare 1 Chronicles 21:5.
   The harangue of Abijah (vv. 4-12), except in its character and terms,
   suggests that of the Assyrian commander before Jerusalem (2 Kings 18),
   and seems to have been a custom in ancient warfare. What advantage is
   taken of this delay (vv. 13, 14)? What prevented a rout of Judah (v.
   15)? How terrific was Israel's punishment (v. 17)? What was its effect
   in the subsequent history of Abijah's reign (v. 20)?

   How far did this victory show its effects in Asa's reign (14:1)? What
   was his religious character (vv. 2-5)? For certain qualifications of
   these words compare the latter half of chapter 16. The statement in
   verse eight is to be taken in our sense of militia rather than a
   standing army. Great as was this force, what could it have accomplished
   against the Ethiopians (v. 9) but for God (vv. 11-14)? Which of his
   successors does Asa, in his faith, suggest? How is he further
   encouraged (15:1, 2)?

   Note the story of a typical revival. Its need appears in verses 3-6, a
   people without God in the sense that they were without the teaching of
   His Word in power (v. 3), and therefore without peace (v. 5) and in
   affliction (v. 6). Its progress is set before us in verse eight --
   courage, repentance, prayer. Its results, (vv. 9-15) -- the gathering
   of the people (vv. 9, 10), their offerings (v. 11), renewal of their
   covenant (v. 12), separation from the world (v. 13), joy and peace (v.
   15). Its cause is revealed in the opening of the chapter as (1) the
   Spirit of God, (2) the man of God, (3) the Word of God, (4) the work of
   God (vv. 1, 2 and 7). O, that history would repeat itself in our day;
   or rather that God would once more pour out His Holy Spirit upon some
   prophet through whom His word would have potency as of old!

   It is a mystery that Asa with such an experience should act as in
   chapter 16, except as we recognize the same inconsistency in ourselves.
   Sin makes fools of us all. As there is some confusion in the chronology
   here, however, it is uncertain just when this event occurred. (Compare
   verse one with 1 Kings 5:33.)

   It is not a sin in itself to seek a physician's aid (v. 12), but an
   Egyptian physician such as Asa consulted doubtless used demoniacal
   charms and incantations forbidden by the law of God. It is the same
   now. An honest physician who heals in accordance with the well
   understood principles of therapy may be consulted by any Christian
   without sin; but it is different with a "New Thought" healer, a
   palmist, a hypnotist, a spiritualist, a Christian Scientist, or other
   practitioner whose underlying philosophy is paganish and contrary to
   the Gospel.

   The "very great burning" (v. 14) is supposed to refer to the cremation
   of the corpse, a custom which prevailed at that time among the Hebrews
   (compare 21:19, also 1 Samuel 31:12, Jer. 34:5 and Amos 6:10).

   3. Jehoshaphat, cc. 17-20.

   The story of this reign opens with the customary characterization of
   the king, which as we know from the book of Kings, was commendable,
   resulting in the divine blessing (17: -6). But in verses 7 to 11
   something of special interest is recorded. The word "to" before each of
   the names should be omitted, for it was the princes themselves who were
   sent on this godly mission -- "the first practical measure adopted by
   any of the kings for the religious instruction of the people." No
   wonder such consequences should have resulted (vv. 10, 11). Here is the
   secret for a revival, viz: the instruction of the people in the Bible
   by the best men in the church. This is worth tons of sermons on civic
   righteousness and reforms, and no end of so-called evangelistic
   "campaigns," and religious "movements," which have so much of man in
   them and so little of God.

   Verses 12-19 show that no monarch since Solomon equaled Jehoshaphat "in
   the extent of his revenue, the strength of his fortifications and the
   number of his troops." It pays to serve God.

   Chapter 18 is the same as 1 Kings 22, which we considered in its place,
   commenting on the lapse it indicates. This lapse met its rebuke (19:2)
   and its punishment (c. 20). Note in the meantime 19:4, comparing again
   17:7-11. And do not overlook 19:5-7. Judicial courts had been
   established earlier but here they are localized in the fenced cities.
   What a charge to the judges! It will be heard again when He comes who
   shall judge the people righteously! Verses 8-1 1 refer to a kind of
   supreme court established at Jerusalem.

   Chapter 20 brings us face to face with a crisis in Judah (vv. 1, 2).
   How is it met by this pious king (vv. 3, 4)? Study the prayer,
   observing its argumentative character ending in an appeal (vv. 5-12).
   God loves to be thus argued with on the ground of His promises. Many
   such instances will be found later in the prophets. Compare Abraham
   (Gen, 18), and Moses (Exod. 32).

   Questions.

   1. How does chapter 10 illustrate the dogma referred to in the lesson?

   2. Why did Rehoboam deal with his sons as recorded?

   3. How may we account, humanly speaking, for Rehoboam's infidelity?

   4. How does archaeological research corroborate the truth of any part
   of this lesson?

   5. What, in general terms, was the character of Asa's reign?

   6. How would you explain 16:12?

   7. What religious instruction was adopted by Jehoshaphat, and what has
   it to teach us?

   8. How does Jehoshaphat's reign show that it pays to serve God?

   9. What lessons in prayer may be gathered from it?

   JEHORAM TO HEZEKIAH

   Chapters 21-32

   1. Jehoram, c. 21.

   Jehoshaphat followed Rehoboam's example in arranging for his sons (v.
   3), but without the hoped-for result (v. 4). Such a brother as Jehoram
   proved might be expected to act in his kingly capacity as verses five
   to seven testify. "Elijah" (v. 12) may be mistaken of the transcribers
   for "Elisha," as the former died earlier (2 Kings 2); unless we take
   the view in the margin that this was a "writing" he left behind him.
   For the fulfillment of this "writing" read the rest of the chapter. We
   had a much fuller account of this reign in 2 Kings.

   2. Ahaziah, c. 22.

   This king is called "Jehoahaz" in the preceding chapter (v. 17). The
   peculiarity in the figures {22:2) was noticed in 2 Kings 8:26, and the
   fact that his mother was the grand-daughter of Omri (v. 2). Note her
   influence (v. 3) like that of the mother of what other king recently
   considered?

   In the story of verses five to nine, it is of interest to know that
   archaeological research has found the names of Hazael and Jehu on the
   Assyrian sculptures.

   Athaliah's motive (v. 10) may have been inspired partly by anger at the
   destruction of her own house of Ahab, partly by the necessity of
   self-defense against Jehu, and partly by pride and ambition, since if
   any of the young princes became king his mother would supersede her in
   power and dignity.

   Verse 12 means that the priests and their families, some of them at
   least, were privileged to dwell in the buildings in the outer wall of
   the temple.

   3. Joash, cc. 23, 24.

   "Chief of the fathers of Israel" (23:2), means Judah and Benjamin only,
   the name usually employed in this book for all that remained of Israel.
   2 Chronicles 24: 15-22 has no parallel in Kings. It mentions the honor
   shown Jehoiada. Burial in cities, except Jerusalem, was prohibited, and
   in that case only allowed to kings. What request did the princes make
   to the king after the death of the faithful priest (v. 17)? Does the
   next verse indicate its character? And was the king himself guilty (v.
   21)? Compare Matt. 23:29-35. In this last passage Christ speaks of the
   slain prophet as the son of Barachias instead of Jehoiada, but possibly
   he was the latter's grandson. In his death the prophet said: "The Lord
   shall see and require" (v. 22), and for the fulfillment of the warning
   read the chapter to the end.

   4. Amaziah, c. 25.

   This history is divided into three parts: (1) the general account of
   the reign, and its spirit, especially at the beginning (vv. 1-4); (2)
   the conquest of the Edomites (vv, 5-13); (3) the idolatry of the king
   and its punishment at the hands of Israel (vv. 14-28). The second of
   these events is given with detail not found in the earlier record, and
   is valuable for the reply of God's servant to the king (v. 9), the
   lesson of which should not be disregarded. The third event also
   contains new matter (vv. 14-16), which explains why the calamity of the
   following verses was permitted.

   5. Uzziah, c. 26.

   Two periods suggest themselves in this case, early obedience and
   prosperity (vv. 1-15), and then pride and punishment (vv. 16-23). A
   comparison of the record of the first period with 2 Kings 14 and 15
   shows new matter illustrating Uzziah's prosperity, who is there called
   "Azariah." This latter name is that of the Assyrian inscriptions also.
   Do not let verse five escape. "He sought God in the days of Zechariah,
   who had understanding in the visions of God." How valuable the prophets
   in the history of God's people, and especially those who understand the
   visions of God! There is a difference in prophets. Some understand what
   others do not. How necessary, therefore, that the Scripture interpreter
   should fear the Lord that he may possess his secrets.

   Uzziah desired to exercise regal and sacerdotal functions at the same
   time, as in the case of pagan kings and emperors, but which was
   contrary to the divine law (Ex, 30, Num. 18). For the sin, compare 1
   Samuel 13, and the punishment, Numbers 12, 2 Kings 5.

   6. Jotham and Ahaz, cc. 27, 28.

   Of Jotham's reign little need be said except to call attention to the
   lesson in verse six. The story of Ahaz is divided into four parts: (1)
   his general character and reign (vv. 1-5); (2) the invasions by Syria
   and Israel (vv. 6-15); (3) the alliance with Assyria (vv. 16-21); (4)
   the summary (vv. 22-27).

   There is much that is new as compared with Kings, but the prophetic
   intercession for Judah with their brethren of Israel is particularly
   interesting (vv. 9-15). Was it their power, or God's judicial sentence
   that caused Israel to be victorious (v. 9)? How had they abused their
   opportunity? What should make them cautious and merciful (v. 10)?
   Verses 12-15 accord with the parable of the Good Samaritan (Luke 10),
   and Christ may have drawn upon this episode.

   Ahaz's alliance with Assyria is attested by the Assyrian monuments. In
   the summary of the close of his reign, what language (v. 24) indicates
   the suspension of the worship of God in his time?

   7. Hezekiah, cc. 29-32.

   After the beginning of Hezekiah's history, we have, in chapter 29, the
   cleansing and consecration of the temple. In 30, the great passover. In
   31, the religious reforms following. In 32, Sennacherib's expedition,
   and Hezekiah's sickness and the close of the reign. In Kings the
   military and political side of the reign is given more fully, but not
   the inner religious and theocratic side, as we see by comparing
   chapters 29-31 with the introductory verses of 2 Kings 18.

   Noting a few outstanding points, "all the uncleanness" (29:16) means
   probably the sacrificial vessels formerly employed in idolatry, and
   possibly the remains of idolatrous offerings. "Ye have filled your hand
   unto the Lord" (v. 31 margin), means they had consecrated themselves to
   God (Ex. 28:41) after offering the expiatory sacrifices which preceded
   such consecration. Keep in mind that God accepts nothing from us as
   either gift or service until He accepts us. And we can be accepted only
   on the ground of the expiatory sacrifice of Christ. Note the last word
   of this chapter in the light of its context. That is the way a revival
   comes. O, that God would now surprise us with one!

   Why could they not keep the passover in the appointed first month
   (30:2-4)? Was a change ever permissible (Num. 9:6-13)? Note the breadth
   of the invitation (vv. 5-9), and the reception it met from Israel (vv.
   10, 11). See the difficulty in the case of Judah and the cause of it
   (v. 12). "Healed the people" (v. 20) means forgave their guilt. "That
   they might be encouraged (steadfast) in the law of the Lord" (31:4),
   means that they might live care-free while performing their official
   duties.

   Note that Hezekiah was a man of prayer and faith, who did not neglect
   means (32:1-8). To understand "he repaid not, etc.," (v. 25), compare 2
   Kings 20:12, etc. How disappointing this is in so good a man, and what
   a lesson it teaches as to the need of prayer and watchfulness to the
   end of our lives (v. 31).

   Questions.

   1. Count the fulfillments of prophecy in this lesson.

   2. What warning for mothers is found in it?

   3. How is it corroborated by archaeology?

   4. How may Athaliah's conduct be explained?

   5. Recite the story of the reign of Joash.

   6. Name the divisions of chapter 25.

   7. What was Uzziah's sin?

   8. Where is the parable of the Good Samaritan suggested here?

   9. What comes first in the divine order, salvation or consecration?

   10. What lesson is taught by the latter part of Hezekiah's life?

   MANASSEH TO THE CAPTIVITY

   Chapters 30-36

   1. Manasseh and Amon, c. 33.

   The history of the first-named is divided into three parts: (1) the
   outline of his character and reign down to the crisis of his punishment
   (vv. 1-10); (2) his affliction and repentance in Babylon (vv. 11-13);
   (3) his later career and death (vv. 14-20). The first part was
   considered in Kings. For the reference to "groves" and "the host of
   heaven," compare Deut. 16:21 and 17:3. It was in such groves, and on
   the high hills, and under the trees, that the heathen were guilty of
   their idolatrous practices. As a comment on verse six turn to Deut.
   18:9, etc. Verse seven is a forerunner of what we read of the
   Antichrist in Daniel 7-9. Matt. 24, 2 Thess. 2, Rev. 13, etc.

   God is merciful and long-suffering, but without avail (v. 10). The
   Assyrian king was Esarhaddon, son and successor to Sennacherib. "Among
   thorns" may mean that Manasseh was hiding in such a thicket, but some
   version have another Hebrew expression translated "among the living,"
   as intended to show only that he was taken alive. His condition was
   humiliating indeed, hands manacled and ankles fastened together with
   rings and a bar.

   Observe the process of his repentance -- affliction, supplication,
   humility, mercy, spiritual apprehension, restoration, reformation,
   zeal, prosperity, (vv. 12-16). Here is a good outline for an expository
   discourse. It was some political motive that induced the Assyrian to
   restore him to his kingdom, perhaps to use him as an ally against
   Egypt, "but God overruled the measure for higher purposes."

   The story of Amon calls for no comment.

   2. Josiah, cc. 34, 35.

   The first ten years of this reign (vv. 1-7) are distinguished by a
   reformation and revival more thorough than that of Manasseh, and
   suggesting the one under Hezekiah. The exact chronological order is not
   followed but the great facts are the same as in Kings. That a king of
   Judah should have such influence among the tribes of Israel, is
   explained by the fact that the captivity of the latter had taken place,
   and the remnant remaining in the land kept in touch with Judah as their
   protector (v. 6). "Mattocks" has been translated "deserts" and may mean
   the deserted localities or suburbs of these tribes.

   The remainder of this chapter has been alluded to sufficiently in
   Kings.

   The first half of 35 is the account of the great passover, the origin
   of which was treated in Exodus 12, but a few features call for
   attention here. For example, "the holy place" in this case, (v. 5),
   means the court of the priests where the animals for sacrifice were
   slain, and the people were admitted according to their families,
   several households at a time. The Levites stood in rows from the
   slaughtering places to the altar, passing the blood and fat from one to
   another of the officiating priests. -- Bible Commentary. The Levites,
   both here and at Hezekiah's passover, did more than the law, strictly
   interpreted, authorized them to do, but the peculiar conditions in each
   case justified the liberty. The singers (v. 15) were chanting Psalms
   113-118, and doubtless repeating them over and over as each group
   entered the holy place. The comparison with Samuel's passover (v. 18)
   suggests that of Hezekiah's, and Solomon's (30:26), the distinction
   being found in the terms on which the comparisons are based. One
   perhaps on the grandeur of the ceremonies, and the other on the ardor
   of the people.

   In the story of Josiah's death (vv. 20-27), we repeat what was said in
   Kings. Egypt and Assyria are rivals for world power, and Palestine is
   the buffer between them. Judah is Assyria's vassal, and it is Josiah's
   duty to oppose her enemy's advances. The "valley of Megiddo" is
   identical with the plain of Esdraelon of which we shall hear later.
   Necho's reference to God's command (v. 21) may not mean Jehovah, but
   some false god of Egypt, and yet verse 22 raises a doubt about it. For
   this reason, some think Jeremiah, who was a contemporaneous prophet in
   Judah, may have communicated such a revelation to the Egyptian king. If
   so, it adds a new cause for Josiah's death, for if the prophet revealed
   it to Necho, he would hardly have kept it a secret from Josiah.

   Jeremiah's lamentation is not recorded (v. 25) except as it may be
   found unidentified in his book of Lamentations. The event is thought to
   be again referred to in Zechariah 12:11.

   3. Jehoahaz, c. 36:1-4.

   This was the popular choice to succeed Josiah, but being his younger
   son, there was a question of its legitimacy, which may explain, in
   part, his removal by the king of Egypt and the substitution of his
   older brother. His reign was short, and as we learn from 2 Kings 23:32,
   it was also wicked.

   4. Jehoiakim, vv. 5-8.

   His brother was no improvement (compare Jer. 22:13-19). At first the
   vassal of Egypt, he subsequently sustained the same relationship to
   Babylon, which had now become the head of the Assyrian empire, and had
   finally driven the Egyptians out of Asia. Rebelling against Babylon
   later on, the latter punished him (vv. 6, 7). Daniel was taken captive
   at this time (Dan. 1:1-6). Jehoiakim himself was not taken prisoner
   however, although that seems to have been Nebuchadnezzar's original
   intention. (Compare with verse six, 2 Kings 24:2-7}, Jeremiah as above,
   and also 36:30.)

   5. Jehoiachin, vv. 9, 10.

   This king is "Coniah" and "Jeconiah" in Jeremiah (cc. 22, 23), and
   according to 2 Kings 24:8, was eighteen years old instead of eight when
   he began to reign. This age seems corroborated by what our lesson says
   of him (v. 9). Compare also Ezekiel 19:1-9. "When the year was expired"
   (v. 10), means when the spring had come, and its opportunity for
   military campaigning.

   6. Zedekiah, vv. 11-21

   As we know from Kings, Zedekiah was not the brother, but the uncle of
   his predecessor, but called the first-named in accordance with the
   Hebrew latitude in speaking of family relationships. Note the
   distinction given a prophet of God, implying both inspiration and
   authority (v. 12). Note carefully verse 21. We learnt in the Pentateuch
   that every seventh year in Israel was to be a sacred rest unto the
   Lord, the land itself was to lie fallow. But the greed of the people
   had disregarded this law, and now they were to pay the penalty as per
   Leviticus 26:33-35- Judah, providentially, was not colonized by other
   peoples, as was Israel, so that at the close of seventy years there
   might be a return (Jer. 25:12, 13).

   This book concludes with an account of that return (vv. 22, 23),
   showing, in so far, that it was written after that event. The story of
   the return comes before us in detail in Ezra.

   Questions.

   1. Give in outline Manasseh's history.

   2. How does he become a type of the Antichrist?

   3. Who succeeded Sennacherib in Assyria?

   4. How do you explain Josiah's influence in Israel as well as Judah?

   5. What are the Passover psalms?

   6. Name four great passovers of the people after entering Canaan.

   7. What testifies to the people's love for Josiah?

   8. Name Judah's kings, and give their relationship, from Manasseh to
   the captivity.

   9. What hint is given in this book that it was written after that
   event?
     __________________________________________________________________

EZRA

   BACK TO THE HOMELAND

   Chapters 1-6

   1. Cyrus' Proclamation, c. 1.

   Babylon has had its day, and with its downfall has come that of the
   Assyrian Empire. The Medes and Persians, with Cyrus at their head, are
   now in power, and in the providence of God, Daniel, the Jewish prophet
   and statesman, has influence at his court, as in that of
   Nebuchadnezzar. By a study of the earlier prophets, especially
   Jeremiah, he has become aware that the time is nigh for the captivity
   of Judah to end and his people to return to their land (Dan, 9:1, 2;
   Jer. 25:12-14). He knows, also, that two hundred years earlier, Isaiah
   had, by the Holy Spirit, mentioned Cyrus as the monarch by whose ukase
   this return would be brought about (Isa. cc. 44, 45).

   Doubtless he told these things to Cyrus, who issues this proclamation
   (v. 1) not from any intelligent desire to please Jehovah, but for
   political reasons. Nevertheless, thus is fulfilled again Romans 8:28.
   The words of Cyrus, (v. 2) are not merely oriental hyperbole, as we may
   judge by Jeremiah 27 and Daniel 2. It is anticipating too much to enter
   on these prophets now, further than to say that the dominion they speak
   of as divinely entrusted to Nebuchadnezzar and Babylon, was to be
   transferred to their successors down to the end of this age. Of these
   successors Cyrus and the Persians were the first.

   "Sheshbazzar" (v. 8) is the Persian name for Zerubbabel (3:8; 5-16),
   who, though born in exile, was recognized as heir to the throne of
   Judah.

   2. Zerubbabel's Company, c. 2.

   "Province" (v. 1) refers to Judah, and indicates that it is no longer
   an independent kingdom, but a dependency of Persia. "Children" is not
   to be taken in the sense of little ones, but that of descendants or
   posterity. "Tirshatha" (v. 63) means "Governor."

   Verse 64 says: "The whole congregation, together, was forty-two
   thousand three hundred and threescore." This amount is 12,000 more than
   the numbers when added together. Reckoning up the smaller numbers we
   find they amount to 29,818, in this chapter, and to 31,089 in the
   parallel chapter of Nehemiah. Ezra also mentions 494 persons omitted by
   Nehemiah, and Nehemiah mentions 1,765 not noticed by Ezra. If,
   therefore, Ezra's surplus be added to Nehemiah, and Nehemiah's to Ezra,
   they will both become 31,583. Subtracting this from 42,360, there will
   be a deficiency of 10,777. These are omitted because they did not
   belong to Judah and Benjamin or to the priests, but to the other
   tribes. The servants and singers are reckoned separately (v. 65), so
   that putting all these items together, the number of all who went with
   Zerubbabel amounted to 50,000 with 8,000 beasts of burden. [Davidson.]

   3. The Altar and the Temple, c. 3.

   The seventh month (v. 1) corresponds to our Sept. 15-Oct. 15, and was
   the time of the Feast of Tabernacles (Lev. 23). Jeshua (v. 2) was the
   hereditary high priest. "His (or its) bases" (v. 3) means the old
   foundations of the altar. After the altar which was necessary to be
   built first in order to sacrifice unto the Lord, the foundations of the
   temple begin to be laid (vv. 8-11). The sorrow of the older men (v. 12)
   was caused by the contrast between the prosperous circumstances under
   which Solomon's temple had been built, and those of the present. This
   second temple would be inferior in size and costliness, and destitute
   of the Ark, the Shekinah, the Urim and Thummim, and other features
   which contributed to the glory of the first temple. Read Haggai in this
   connection.

   4. Adversaries, c. 4.

   In verse one "Judah and Benjamin," and "the children of the captivity"
   are identical. "The adversaries," were the people settled in the land
   of Israel by the Assyrians after the captivity of the ten tribes. They
   intermarried with the Israelites who had been left behind, and their
   offspring went under the general name of Samaritans. Originally they
   were idolaters, but having received some instruction in the knowledge
   of the true God they claimed to be worshipping Him, though of course,
   in an ignorant and superstitious way. (Compare 2 Kings 17:24-41).

   The refusal of their co-operation by the Jews was proper, but it
   brought serious and prolonged trouble to them (vv. 4, 5). (Compare John
   4:9).

   The nature of this trouble is shown in verse six, where "Ahasuerus" as
   commonly understood, is another name for the famous Xerxes, king of
   Persia, although Anstey maintains that he is identical with Darius
   Hystaspes. The conspirators continued in the next reign also (vv.
   7-16). "The great and noble Asnapper" (v. 10) is another name for
   Esar-Haddon, met with before, who transported these foreigners into the
   waste cities of Samaria after the captivity of Israel. The result of
   their efforts is shown in verses 23 and 24. "Darius" is sometimes known
   as "Darius Hystaspes," and was the second of that name since Cyrus. The
   work ceased for about fifteen years.

   5. Renewal of the Work, cc. 5, 6.

   Do not omit to read Zechariah at this point, and observe the effect of
   his words, heaven-endued, upon the leaders (vv. 1, 2). The men of verse
   three, like those of chapter four, verses seven and eight, were satraps
   or viceroys of Persia set over provinces in proximity to Judah, who
   felt it their duty thus to inquire and protest. Verse four seems a
   mistranslation, and probably means that they inquired of the Jews
   instead of the reverse (see v. 10).

   The Darius of chapter five acted differently from any of his
   predecessors. "Achmetha" (v. 2) is better known as "Ecbatana," the
   summer residence of the early kings of Persia. The work of the temple
   may proceed (v. 7), the Persian satraps are to assist (vv. 8-10),
   penalties are to follow interference (vv. 11, 12), and henceforth the
   turbulent Samaritans had better take care!

   The work is ended (v. 15). Dr. Lightfoot says the foundation was laid
   April, 536 B. C, and the completion accomplished February 21, 515 B. C.
   The dedicatory feast is held with joy. Note the explanatory reason (v.
   22). God receives the glory.

   Questions.

   1. What world-empire succeeded the Assyrian or Babylonian?

   2. What prophet is used of God for the return of His people to
   Palestine?

   3. Have you read Isaiah 44 and 45?

   4. Are you familiar with Daniel 2?

   5. What distinction belonged to Zerubbabel?

   6. How many people of all classes returned in the first company?

   7. What was the first religious work they set about?

   8. What prophets, whose written works have come down to us, belong to
   this period?

   9. Give the history of the Samaritans, so-called.

   10. How many kings of Persia were named "Darius"?

   EZRA AND HIS REFORMS

   Chapters 7-10

   1. The Commission and Its Execution, cc. 7, 8.

   The first of these chapters tells who Ezra was (vv. 1-6), the date and
   object of his journey to Jerusalem (vv. 7-10), the nature and extent of
   his commission from the king (vv. 11-26), and his feelings in the
   premises (vv. 27, 28). The second, gives the number and genealogic
   record of the Jews who accompanied him (vv. 1-20), the spirit in which
   they entered upon the pilgrimage (vv. 21-23), the arrangements for
   guarding and delivering the treasurer in their keeping (vv. 24-30),
   their arrival and the fulfillment of their commission (vv. 31-36).

   To consider chapter seven in detail, the Artaxerxes of verse one is
   considered as identical with the Ahasuerus of Esther's time, and Anstey
   regards him as identical also with the Darius Hystaspes named above.
   Ezra was a priest as well as a scribe (vv. 1-5). The "Seraiah" whose
   son (great grandson perhaps) he was, was the high priest slain by
   Nebuchadnezzar (2 Kings 25:18). Jeshua, with whom we got acquainted in
   the last lesson, was also his grandson, but probably in another branch
   of the family. "Scribe" is the same as doctor, teacher, or rabbi, one
   learned in the law of Moses and Jewish traditions and customs (v. 10).

   How this Persian king came to be so interested is not known, unless, as
   some think, Esther had already become his queen, which would explain
   it. Others believe that after the death of the leaders of the earlier
   company, Zerubbabel and his associates, matters became so disordered in
   the province that leading Jews in Persia pleaded with the king to
   appoint this reform commission.

   Observe the power granted Ezra to study conditions, as we now say (v.
   14), to collect funds (vv. 15, 16), levy tribute (vv. 21, 22), appoint
   magistrates and judges (v. 25), and execute penalties (v. 26).

   As to chapter 8, the number of male adults accompanying Ezra was but
   1,754, but there should be added women, children and servants, making
   perhaps three or four times that number. Attention is called to verses
   21 and 23. The danger of such caravans from the marauding Arabs was so
   great as to make a military escort necessary. But Ezra's sensitive
   regard for God's honor before the heathen would not permit his asking
   for one. It was a strong test of faith to which he and his companions
   were equal, and which God honored. May the principle of its lesson not
   to be lost upon the reader.

   2. Internal Conditions and How They Were Changed, cc. 9, 10.

   This moral corruption (9:1, 2) is not inconceivable to those who know
   their own hearts and the nature of sin, but its effect on Ezra was what
   might have been expected under the circumstances (v. 3). His outward
   signs of grief were oriental. There is contagion in such grief which
   communicates itself to others animated by a like spirit (v. 4). It is
   thus a revival spreads. One soul is awakened, and he awakens another.
   And if he be a pastor or leader of the Lord's hosts, like Ezra, the
   people gather round him, and results follow (9:4; 10:1-44.)

   Study the prayer carefully (vv. 5-15). The suppliant's attitude (v. 5),
   his sense of shame (v. 6), his unqualified confession (v. 7), his
   gratitude (vv. 8, 9), his deep conviction of sin (vv. 10-14), and his
   dependency only on divine mercy (v. 15).

   Observe how God answered the prayer by graciously working on the
   people's hearts, the leaders first, and then the people generally.
   Shecanaiah (10:2), was a brave man in the attitude he took, for while
   his name does not appear in the subsequent list of offenders, yet those
   of his near relatives do (v. 26). Note the phrase (v. 2): "There is
   hope in Israel concerning this thing." Hope only, however, along the
   line of thorough repentance. Here is a text and subject-matter for a
   revival sermon.

   Note the radical step taken by the leaders (v. 6-8), and its prompt
   result (v. 9). Also the judicious method of procedure as necessitated
   by the circumstances (vv. 10-17). This justifies the belief that
   provision was made for the unlawful wives and children that were put
   away.

   Questions.

   1. Have you familiarized yourself with the Persian kings of this
   period?

   2. Who was Ezra?

   3. What is a "scribe"?

   4. How many were in Ezra's company of returning exiles?

   5. How was their strong faith shown?

   6. What illustration of the progress of a revival is found in this
   lesson?

   7. What feature of Ezra's prayer most impresses you?
     __________________________________________________________________

NEHEMIAH

   BUILDING THE WALLS

   Chapters 1-6

   1. Prayer and Its Answer, cc. 1-2:8.

   In this book it is to be kept in mind that the previous commissions to
   Zerubbabel and Ezra concerned only the repair of the temple at
   Jerusalem, and certain internal arrangements for the moral and material
   well-being of the people in their home towns. The walls and gates of
   the city, however, were still in the ruined condition in which they
   were left by Nebuchadnezzar after the siege. The consequences of this
   were detrimental to the people's peace, for such protection was
   practically their only defence against assaulting enemies.

   Chislev was an early winter month. Shushan was the winter, as Ecbatana
   was the summer palace, of the Persian monarchs. Hanani may have been
   simply a relative, as we have seen how loosely these kinships are
   referred to (1:1.2).

   Nehemiah, though nothing more is stated of him, is likely to have been,
   like Zerubbabel, of the royal family of David, and certainly he was a
   great patriot. Study his prayer carefully (vv. 4-11). Notice its deep
   earnestness (v. 4), unselfishness (v. 6), humility (vv. 6, 7), faith
   (vv. 8, 9) and definiteness (v. 11). A cup-bearer to an oriental
   potentate (v. 12) held a confidential and influential office, affording
   him frequent access to his presence. At the meal he presented the cup
   of wine to the king, and since the likelihood of its being poisoned was
   ever present, he must be one in whom the greatest trust was reposed.
   Not infrequently, as a precautionary measure, the cup-bearer must first
   taste the wine in the king's presence before presenting it.

   Four months elapsed between chapters one and two, though the cause is
   unknown. Nisan (2:1) was in the Spring. It awakened suspicion to appear
   before majesty with a sad countenance (v. 2), but in this case it gave
   Nehemiah his opportunity (vv. 3-8).

   The queen may have been Esther, though it is uncertain. God receives
   the glory (v. 8).

   2. Progress of the Work, cc. 2:9-3:32.

   "Beyond the river" means east of the Euphrates. "Governors" were in
   charge of the Persian dependencies in proximity to Judah (v. 9).
   "Horonite" seems to refer to a Moabitish town of that name. The Amonite
   "Tobiah the servant" may mean that he was a freed slave elevated to
   official dignity. Nehemiah enters on his task by a night survey of the
   ruins (vv. 12-16). Then he addresses the leaders, stirring them by his
   example and information about the king's commission (vv. 17, 18). The
   opponents (v. 19) were doubtless supporters or leaders of the
   Samaritans, met with in Ezra.

   The priests take the lead in the work (3:1). The residents of Jericho
   have a section assigned them (v. 2), and other great families follow to
   the end of the chapter. Their names are recorded because the work was
   one not only of patriotism, but godly devotion, calling for faith,
   courage, and self-sacrifice.

   3. Hindrances, cc. 4-6.

   Ridicule was the first form the hindrances took (vv. 1-6), but Nehemiah
   made his appeal to God and continued the work until the wall was built
   "half the height" (R. V.). If his language in prayer seems harsh,
   recall what we have learned about Israel's position as God's witness
   and instrument in blessing the world. To frustrate her is to frustrate
   God, and work the sorest injury to human kind. These enemies are not
   personal to Nehemiah, but the enemies of God and of all the earth.
   Moreover, Nehemiah himself is not undertaking to visit punishment upon
   them, but committing them to God who doeth righteously.

   Physical force was the next form of hindrance (vv. 7-23), but Nehemiah
   provided against it by day and night watches (v. 9), by arming the
   workmen (v. 13), and by detaining them all in Jerusalem (v. 22).

   The hindrance of chapter five was not the same as the others, and did
   not arise from the outside, but it was a hindrance, nevertheless, that
   must have greatly weakened their hands (vv. 1-5. Nehemiah's action was
   bold and efficient. An assembly was called (v. 7), his own example
   cited (vv. 8-10), an appeal made (v. 11), a solemn agreement effected
   (vv. 12, 13). The verses following testify to the wealth of Nehemiah as
   well as his unselfish patriotism. Not only declining the emoluments of
   his office, he maintained an expensive establishment for the public
   good, and this for twelve years (v. 14). He appears self-righteous (v.
   19), but he was not living in the Gospel dispensation.

   In chapter six the external enemies once more come into view, whose
   policy has changed from ridicule and force to crafty diplomacy (vv.
   1-4) with threats superadded (w. 5-9). Nor are there wanting traitors
   within his own camp who seek Nehemiah's ruin, but in vain (vv. 10-15).
   Notice the intended disrespect in the "open" letter, which, in the case
   of so distinguished an official as Nehemiah (v. 5), should have been
   sealed, after the Persian custom. These were indeed "troublous times"
   (Dan. 9:25), but the man for the times had arrived.

   Questions.

   1. What material feature distinguishes the periods of the two books,
   Ezra and Nehemiah?

   2. What is the meaning of "cup-bearer"?

   3. What outstanding features mark the character of Nehemiah?

   4. What is the geographical designation of the enemies of Judah?

   5. Name the three classes of hindrances emanating from them.

   6. What were the hindrances of an internal character?

   7. How long was the work in progress?

   INTERNAL REGULATIONS

   Chapters 7-13

   1. A New Genealogical Record, c. 7.

   The need for this assignment of duty to the two men named (v. 2), is
   not apparent unless Nehemiah contemplated a return to Persia. Later it
   will be seen that such return took place, but whether at this time or
   not, is not clear. To "fear God above many." as Hananiah did, is a
   great commendation. It was customary to open the gates of a city at
   sunrise, but to do so in this case before the inhabitants were well
   awake and stirring, might put them at a disadvantage before their
   enemies (v. 3). The new walls were built on the old foundations, but
   the city they enclosed did not as yet hold the old population, which
   explains verse four.

   The genealogical record (v. 5) was doubtless that of Zerubbabel's day
   recorded in the book of Ezra, and if some differences are discovered
   between this and that, they may be accounted for by the different
   circumstances in the two cases. The first was prepared at Babylon and
   this in Judea, with almost a century intervening. Of course a
   particular object of this record was the purification of the priestly
   and Levitical line with reference to the temple service.

   2. A Spiritual Revival, cc. 8-10.

   It was in the seventh month (7:73), at the feast of tabernacles, that
   the stirring event of this chapter occurred. Ezra is in Jerusalem
   still, though during Nehemiah's governorship he has not been at the
   forefront. It may be that his time has been spent in preparing that
   edition of the Old Testament which has been associated with his name.
   His great usefulness is seen at this juncture (vv. 1-8). Here is a
   great open-air meeting, and the Word of God has the place of honor. It
   is simply read and explained to the people, but as usual with mighty
   results. Behold the blessing which comes to a people when to a faithful
   ministry is added a godly ruler (vv. 8-15). Pastors will appreciate a
   good text for Thanksgiving Day in verse 10. There is nothing which
   brings such joy to people as a knowledge of God's Word, and nothing
   that makes them so practically mindful of others.

   This feast proves a "protracted meeting" and is followed by a fast and
   other evidences of repentance (v. 9). Between the morning and evening
   sacrifices they devoted three hours to the Scriptures and three hours
   to prayer. Read the prayer carefully, which seems to have been uttered
   by the Levites on the "stairs," or pulpits, erected for the purpose, in
   the open. Perhaps we have here only the substance of the prayers, or it
   may be that Ezra prepared a general prayer for all to use. Notice the
   pathos of verses 36 and 37, and the covenant in which the proceeding
   ended (v. 38 and 10:1-39).

   The points of this covenant are interesting. They bind themselves to
   abstain from heathen marriages (v. 30), to observe the Sabbath, to give
   the land its seventh year rest, and remit debts in that year (v. 31),
   maintain the temple service and support the priests (vv. 32-39).

   3. A Patriotic Precaution, cc. 11, 12.

   This measure (vv. 1, 2) was necessary to insure a proper guard for the
   capital. And as it involved danger and self-sacrifice on the part of
   the drafted ones they merited the public gratitude. Their names follow,
   and include the "Nethinim," a designation difficult to determine, but
   supposed to mean the descendants of the Gibeonites of Joshua's time,
   who were constrained to be hewers of wood and drawers of water. In any
   event they were men of humble rank in the service of the sanctuary.
   Various editorial comments occur in this chapter whose elucidation, in
   the lapse of time, is not easy. Some of these are the "second over the
   city" (v. 9), "ruler of the house of God" (v. 11), "the outward
   business" (v. 16), "the principal to begin," etc. (v. 17), referring in
   general terms to assistants of the priests, collectors of provisions,
   leaders of the choirs, etc.

   We may include in this division the dedication of the wall (12:27-47),
   in which the leaders, accompanied by the singers and people from all
   parts of the land marched around it, pausing at different points for
   praise and prayer, and the presentation of sacrifices. Some idea of the
   religious hilarity of the occasion may be gathered from verse 43. The
   explanation of verse 45 seems to be that the officials named saw that
   no persons ceremonially unclean entered the temple. This was the duty
   of the porters ordinarily (2 Chron. 23:19), but on special occasions
   singers were called on to assist.

   4. A Moral House-Cleaning, c. 13.

   Nehemiah has reported at the Persian court and again, after an unknown
   period, returned to Jerusalem (v. 6), and finding there great laxity in
   regard to the temple service. Sabbath observance, and heathen
   marriages, all of which he vigorously reforms. Eliashib's offense is
   the more reprehensible because of his sacred office (vv. 4, 5) --
   turning the house of God into a palace for the entertainment of his
   heathen relatives. It was to be expected that such conduct of the high
   priest would affect the people as shown in the verses following
   (10-14). When, however, the worship of God is neglected, his laws are
   generally dishonored (vv. 15-18). Note Nehemiah's decisive action in
   this case (vv. 19-22), and the pattern is affords for modern
   executives. There is this difference, however, that Nehemiah was an
   official over a people who had a fear of God in their hearts. Our
   executives serve a democracy where the people themselves are esteemed
   as the highest authority. "How far will the people sustain us?" is the
   question before their eyes in the performance of duty, and the
   execution of the laws. No wonder that their actions are often marked by
   timidity and insincerity. It will be only in the millennial age, which
   may God hasten, that conditions will produce and maintain governors of
   Nehemiah's type. Verse 25 shows that he was not influenced by the
   sentimentalism of these times to substitute reformatory measures in the
   place of punishment for wrong-doing.

   Questions.

   1. What was the commendation of Hananiah?

   2. What explains the particularity as to genealogical records?

   3. What may have been Ezra's great task at this period

   4. Tell the story of the revival of this period in your own words.

   5. Who probably, were the Nethinim?

   6. What three reforms are entered upon after Nehemiah's return from
   Persia?

   7. What hinders executives such as he, today?
     __________________________________________________________________

ESTHER

   THE JEWS IMPERILLED

   Chapters 1-7

   The events of this book belong chronologically after Zerubbabel's
   company have gone up to Jerusalem, and before the commissions of Ezra
   and Nehemiah. The scene is laid in Persia. Cyrus and Darius I have
   passed away, and Ahasuerus, son of the last named, and identified by
   some with Xerxes, and by others with Darius Hystaspes, is on the
   throne. He is a sensual, fickle, cruel despot. It was his great fleet
   that was defeated by the much smaller one of Greece at Salamis, about
   480 B. C. He is mentioned in Ezra 4:6. He was succeeded by his son
   Artaxerxes, who figures in the later chapters of Ezra and Nehemiah.

   The story of the book is well known, and may be divided as follows:

   Queen Vashti's Fall, 1:1-22.

   Esther's Exaltation, 2:1-23.

   Haman's Conspiracy, 3:1-15.

   Esther's Intervention, 4:1-7:10.

   Haman's Judgment, 8:1-9:19.

   The Commemorative Feast, 9:20-32.

   The Epilog, 10:1-3.

   1. Queen Vashti's Fall, c. 1:1-22.

   Some think this feast (v. 3) was the occasion when the great campaign
   against Greece was determined upon. If a half-year seems long (v. 4),
   perhaps the time was extended to allow the different nobles and princes
   to "make their appearance at the court successively." The climax was
   the "garden party" of a week (vv. 5-7), although it should be
   understood that only men were present (v. 9). Verse eight seems to mean
   that in contrast with the customary excessive drinking, any were free
   to remain sober if they would. "Knew the times" (v. 13) is equivalent
   to "Skilled in the law."

   2. Esther Exalted, c. 2:1-23.

   When sober, the king rued his action (v. 1), but had he changed his
   mind and restored Vashti, the consequences would have been serious to
   his advisers, hence their present counsel (vv. 2-4). "Things for
   purification" (v. 3) mean the oils for cleansing and anointing (v. 12).
   "She required nothing, etc." (v. 15), points to a desire of the virgins
   on similar occasions to bedeck themselves with ornaments, but Esther
   acted differently on the chamberlains advice, and with good results (v.
   17). Note the expiration of four years between 1:3 and 2:7, which some
   think was occupied by the expedition against Greece, and for which
   secular history gives some justification. The incident of verses 21-23
   is recorded here to explain that which follows later.

   3. Haman's Conspiracy, c. 3:1-15.

   The casting of the lot (Hebrew "Pur", v. 7), was for the purpose of
   selecting the most propitious day for the murderous undertaking Haman
   had in mind. While in western nations such an idea as in verses six and
   nine would never occur to a revengeful man, it was different in the
   East. Massacres of a race, or a class, have at all times been among the
   incidents of history there. A great massacre of the Magi occurred only
   about fifty years before this, and a massacre of the Scythians fifty
   years before that again. The 10,000 talents (v. 9), or as some
   calculate it $12,500,000 of our money, was to be obtained by the
   confiscation of the Jews' property.

   4. Esther's Intervention, c. 4:1-7:10.

   It would appear by a comparison of verses 12 and 13 of the preceding
   chapter, that the Jews were for a whole year harassed because of their
   impending fate. This explains the opening verses of the present chapter
   (4:1-3). Observe Mordecai's reliance on the promises of God concerning
   Israel (v. 14). They can not all be destroyed. God would not permit it,
   for it would defeat His purpose concerning the Messiah, the Redeemer of
   the world, and all else that was included in that purpose. Esther's
   request to fast is a call to repentance and a request for prayer
   (compare 1 Kings 21:27-29, Joel 1:14, and Jonah 3:5). Her boldness is
   seen in the following: She proposed to go to the king without being
   called; to make request for the change of a law which, according to
   Persian custom, could not be done; to reveal herself as a Jew; to place
   herself in opposition to the all-powerful favorite, Haman.

   Rawlinson says the usual situation of the throne in the throne-room of
   an oriental palace, is one from which the monarch can see into the
   court through the doorway opposite to him (v. 1). Esther's tactful
   delay in making known her request (vv. 7, 8), was doubtless to further
   impress the king, or possibly to evolve her plan, which may not yet
   have been clear in her own mind.

   God's hand is seen clearly in 6:1, which, compare with 2:23. The
   dramatic incidents of the chapter tell their own story as they swiftly
   pass before us. In 7:3, Esther's words are to be understood as offering
   her own life in the place of the people. The loss of the people would
   be a great damage to the king (v. 4). In the East at banquets they
   recline on couches (v. 8).

   Questions.

   1. What chronological place is occupied by this book?

   2. Give some historical data of the king.

   3. What great historical event may have intervened between the fall of
   the one queen and the exaltation of the other?

   4. What does "Pur" mean?

   5. Name some great massacres of this general period.

   6. What shows Mordecai's faith?

   7. What shows Esther's courage?

   8. Give an illustration of the special providence of God in this
   lesson.

   DELIVERANCE COMES

   Chapter 8-10

   1. The King's Decree, c. 8.

   The "house" of Haman meant his possessions (8:1). His death, however,
   and Mordecai's distinction did not mean that the decree against the
   Jews had been annulled, which, indeed, could not be annulled, according
   to Persian law. This is the problem, now before Esther and Mordecai
   (vv. 3-6), and which the king solves by granting permission to the Jews
   to arm themselves against their executioners (vv. 8-11).

   The effect of this measure on the Jews was what might have been
   expected (vv. 15-17). The meaning of the last sentence of the chapter
   is illuminated by Exodus 15:16 and Deuteronomy 11:25. The Persians felt
   that the God of the Jews was ruling over their destiny in a peculiar
   way.

   2. The Heathen Massacre, c. 9:1-15.

   The first part of this chapter records the successful stand made by the
   Jews against those who ventured to oppose them, and demonstrates that
   the God of their fathers was still their God. It reads like a chapter
   in Judges or Kings.

   Rawlinson calls attention to the importance of verse three as bearing
   on verse 16. That the Jews should have been allowed to slay 75,000
   Persians has been pronounced incredible, but it is not so when we see
   that the leaders of the nation took their side. The probability is,
   however that the slain were people of other, subject nations, for whom
   the Persians did not particularly care.

   How does verse 10 show that the Jews' motive was not avarice but
   self-defense? The king's inquiry and Esther's reply (vv. 12, 13)
   indicate that danger still threatened the Jews in Shushan at least,
   unless further measures were taken. Haman's sons were to be hanged
   after death. "Hanged" here really means "crucified," which was the
   Hebrew and Persian custom.

   3. The Feast of Purim, vv. 16-32.

   It seems that the Jews outside of Shushan celebrated on the fourteenth
   of Adar, but those within could not do so for obvious reasons till the
   fifteenth. This gave rise to different memorial days until Mordecai
   settled the matter as in verse 21. The whole writing of Mordecai here
   spoken of (vv. 20-25) may have included the substance of the book we
   are considering. Nevertheless a second document by Esther herself seems
   to have been necessary to finally determine the perpetuity of the feast
   (vv. 28-32). The feast is still kept by the Jews, proving the
   authenticity of this book.

   4. Mordecai's Greatness, c. 10.

   The greatness of the Persian king (v. 1) reflects on Mordecai (v. 2),
   who is recognized even in the kingly chronicles, and whose exalted
   privilege becomes a benefit to all his race in Persia (v. 3).

   Questions.

   1. To what tribe and family did Mordecai belong (2:5)?

   2. What is Haman called (3:5)?

   3. What correspondence do you see between the above and what is
   recorded in 1 Samuel 15?

   4. Have you compared the passages of the Pentateuch named in this
   lesson?

   5. Why is the feast called "Purim"?

   6. Who may have been the author of this hook?

   7. How is its authenticity attested?
     __________________________________________________________________

JOB

   THEME AND OUTLINE OF THE BOOK

   Chapters 1-3

   The theme of Job seems to be the meaning and object of evil and
   suffering under the government of a holy, wise and merciful God, and
   may be outlined thus:

   1. The prologue, 1-2 (in prose).

   2. The dialogue, 3-31 (in poetry).

   3. The words of Elihu, 32-37 (in poetry).

   4. The words of the Almighty, 38-41 (in poetry).

   5. The response of Job, 42:1-6 (in poetry).

   6. The epilogue, 42:7-17 (in prose).

   The Key to the Book.

   The key to the book is found in the first chapter, which, after an
   introductory testimony to Job, translates the reader to heavenly scenes
   (verse 6).

   The "sons of God" are angelic beings bringing in their reports to God,
   the mystery being that Satan is found "also among them." How the prince
   of darkness is granted access to God is a question these lessons cannot
   discuss; but we accept the fact and draw certain inferences therefrom.

   He is seen here in his scriptural attitude of the accuser of the
   brethren; and when God taunts him, if one may so say, with the
   uprightness of Job whom he has been unable to corrupt, he at once
   charges him with a mercenary spirit, and declares that if God were to
   take his temporal blessings away from him he would be as bad as the
   rest.

   God accepts the challenge and puts. His servant into the hands of Satan
   for a period, and for the exercise of a terrible but limited power,
   that it may be seen if the charge be true.

   In other words, it is not Job so much who is on trial as God. It is not
   a question of Job's loyalty so much as one of God's power. Is the grace
   of God able to keep one of His servants faithful to Him, though he be
   stripped of everything which men count dear?

   The outcome was victory for God, and discomfiture for Satan, under
   circumstances calculated to prove a great comfort to God's people in
   every generation. This thought is suggested by the prologue, and which,
   kept in mind, lightens up the whole book.

   The Discussion.

   The dialogue proceeds on the question whether great suffering such as
   Job's be not an evidence of great sin, Eliphaz, Bildad and Zophar
   affirming and Job denying. The dispute is carried on in a series of
   three acts, each containing three arguments of the "friends" and as
   many defenses by Job, until the last, when Zophar is silenced, and Job
   apparently triumphs.

   Job's defense is based on two grounds, (1) the admitted prosperity of
   the wicked, chapter 21, and (2) his own personal righteousness,
   chapters 29 and 31.

   It would seem at first that his friends intended to comfort him, but
   were driven to accusation by the caustic character of his replies,
   caused no doubt, by his intense suffering. Whether his friends were
   sincere or insincere at the beginning must be determined by the view
   taken of chapter four. It can be so read as to suggest either view.

   The words of Elihu also suggest a series of three acts, out of which we
   gather that he rebuked both parties to the debate, the friends for
   their accusations, which were unwarranted in great measure, and Job for
   his self-righteousness, equally unwarranted (32:1-3). His philosophy of
   the sufferings differs from the others in that he believes they were
   sent for the good of the sufferer, see chapter 33:28-30. The first part
   of his speech is addressed to Job, chapters 32 and 33; the second to
   the three friends, chapter 34; and the last to Job, again, chapters
   35-37. As he closes a thunder storm is gathering, whose description
   forms a grand climax to his address, and out of which The Voice of the
   Almighty is heard.

   The discussion thus far had been confined to the mystery of evil, and
   the balance is now restored by considering the mystery of good which
   the Almighty reveals. It is notable that He gives no explanation of
   Job's suffering, renders no decision on the subject in debate, and
   offers no hint of compensation to His servant for what he has endured.

   The pervading idea of His revelation is that of power, absolute
   sovereignty, as though His design were to overwhelm Job and effect his
   unconditional surrender. The crisis in Job's life was like that of
   Moses as he stood in the cleft of the rock (Exod. 33, 34), or Elijah at
   Horeb (1 Kings 19), or Paul on his way to Damascus (Acts 9), and the
   result in Job's case is not unlike that in their cases.

   Meditation on the book leads to the conclusion that such experiences as
   those of Job, and they come to every true child of God, may be for
   discipline and to teach submission so vital to be learned, but also to
   serve a purpose far exceeding human knowledge, in the superhuman world.
   Compare John 9:3; 1 Cor. 4:9; Eph. 3:10; 1 Pet. 1:12. What a dignity
   such a thought adds to the suffering for righteousness' sake!

   Questions.

   1. What is the theme of Job?

   2. What is its outline?

   3. What seems to be the key of the book?

   4. How does Elihu's philosophy of suffering differ from that of the
   others?

   5. For what three purposes may such affliction come on any saint of
   God?

   6. Concerning the last purpose named, have you examined the Scripture
   passages indicated?

   LITERARY STYLE OF THE BOOK

   We have spoken of Job as in the poetic style, and something should be
   said about that style as applying not only to Job, but to the other
   poetical books of the Old Testament like Psalms, Proverbs, Song of
   Solomon and Lamentations.

   While these books are poetical, to English readers neither the sound of
   the words nor the form in which they are printed in the King James
   Version, would suggest that idea.

   As to the form, the Revised Version is an improvement, though it leaves
   much to be desired. As to the sound, the rhythm of Hebrew poetry is not
   found in it but in the recurrence of the thought. "Thought may be
   rhythmic as well as sound or language, and the full force of Scripture
   is not grasped by one who does not feel how thoughts can be emphasized
   by being differently re-stated."

   Literary Parallelisms.

   The grand peculiarity of Hebrew poetry, however, is the parallelism, a
   form of composition somewhat artificial, but which consists in the
   repetition of the main thought, usually with some modification of it.

   These parallelisms are of three classes -- the synonymous, the
   antithetic and the synthetic.

   In the synonymous parallelism the second clause is scarcely more than a
   repetition of the first, although there are many varieties of it so far
   as the length of the members is concerned. A good illustration of this
   parallelism is found in Job 6:5 --

   Doth the wild ass bray over his grass?

   Doth the ox low over his fodder?

   The antithetic parallelism is one in which the idea in the second
   clause is the converse of that in the first, a simple form of which is
   Proverbs 10:1 --

   A wise son rejoiceth his father;

   But a foolish son is the heaviness of his mother.

   In the synthetic parallelism the poet instead of echoing the former
   sentiment or placing it in contrast, enforces his thought by accessory
   ideas and modifications. For example, a general proposition is stated
   and the sentiment is then dwelt upon in detail. A specimen is found in
   Job 3:3-5:

   O that the day might have perished in which I was born.

   And the night which said, "A male child is conceived,"

   Let that day be darkness,

   Let not God inquire after it from on high

   Yea, let not the light shine upon it!

   Let darkness and the shadow of death stain it;

   Let a cloud dwell upon it,

   Let whatever darkens the day terrify it!

   Questions.

   1. In what is the rhythm of Hebrew poetry?

   2. What is meant by a literary parallelism?

   3. Name and define the three leading classes of parallelisms.

   FIRST SERIES OF THE DEBATE

   Chapters 4-14

   The first series of the debate may be outlined as follows:*

   (1) With Eliphaz, 4-7.

   (a) Speech of Eliphaz, 4, 5.

   (b) Reply of Job, 6, 7.

   (2) With Bildad, 8-10.

   (a) Speech of Bildad, 8.

   (b) Reply of Job, 9, 10.

   (3) With Zophar, 11-14.

   (a) Speech of Zophar, 11.

   (b) Reply of Job, 12-14.

   It is thought the debate may have occupied several days, by which
   supposition some of the difficulties of the book are removed. In the
   first place, this leads to the opinion that the addresses were not
   impromptu, but that each speaker had time for the composition of his
   finished utterances in reply to the one who went before him.

   In the second place, it throws light on the authorship of the book,
   because all the author had to do was to prepare the introductory and
   concluding historical statements, and then collect and arrange the
   speeches that had been actually made. These speeches would be preserved
   in the memory, and the work of the editor would be rather that of a
   compiler than an original author, although he may have been as inspired
   for the one work as for the other.

   The debate is occasioned by the complaints of Job recorded in chapter
   3, and up to which time his friends had been silent.

   Eliphaz and Job.

   Eliphaz commences with delicacy and candor, showing the inconsistency
   of a good man's repining under discipline, and advances the position
   that the truly righteous are never overthrown, while the wicked are
   always dealt with according to their sins. He establishes his position
   by a vision, and while he does not apply all he has said to Job, he yet
   leaves no doubt that it was intended for him, advising him to turn to
   God that he may find happiness and come to an honored old age.

   Job replies, justifying himself for complaining. He wishes he might
   die. His friends have disappointed him. They are a deceitful brook, but
   if they would use reasonable arguments he would listen to them. He
   describes his sufferings as one pursued of God, exhibiting much
   impatience.

   Bildad and Job.

   Bildad, who is provokingly severe, replies in chapter 8. Job is wicked
   and his children have been cut off for their wickedness. He exhorts him
   to repent and enforces his exhortations by the opinions of other men.

   Job's reply covers chapters 9 and 10, and being calm at first he
   acknowledges God's supremacy and admits his own imperfection. The
   arguments of his friends, however, cannot be defended. He refers to his
   sorrows again and complains that God treats him as if he were a guilty
   man. His excitement grows until he again expresses the desire for
   death.

   Zophar and Job.

   Zophar, like Bildad, is somewhat violent. In his eyes Job has no sense,
   whom he rebukes for seeking to maintain innocence before God. Zophar's
   language is magnificent when he treats of the supremacy of God, but
   like the previous speakers, he exhorts Job to acknowledge his sins that
   he may find prosperity and peace.

   The debate is closed by Job, who groups his opponents and answers them
   as a whole. He is sarcastic. He follows their example in quoting a
   number of proverbial sayings. He attacks their motives. Their arguments
   were unsound. They were mocking God by defending His government in such
   a way as they had done. They had cause for fear and trembling in
   consequence of this. He wishes that he might present his case directly
   before God rather than the tribunal of man. He would ask of God only
   two things, that He would withdraw His hand from him and not overawe
   him by His great power. His calamities are overwhelming, and he
   concludes with a pathetic description of the frailty and uncertainty of
   human life.

   Note to Teachers.

   To those using these lessons in classes, the author recommends that
   they employ each reference to any of the speeches as a basis for a
   question or questions on the text of the chapter as follows:

   1. How does Eliphaz show delicacy of speech ? How does he allude to the
   inconsistency of repining under discipline in the case of a good man?
   In which verses does he advance the position that the righteous are
   never overthrown? In which does he teach the opposite to this
   concerning the wicked? Can you give the details of his vision? Name the
   verses in chapter 5 in which he exhorts Job to turn to God. Name the
   verses in which he encourages him to do this.

   2. How does Job express his desire for death in chapter 6? In what
   language does he express his feelings towards his friends? How is his
   impatience with God illustrated?

   3. Give some illustrations of Bildad's severity. In what verses of
   chapter 8 does be draw comparisons from earlier authorities?

   4. Give some illustrations of God's supremacy in chapter 9.

   5. Give some illustrations of Job's sense of imperfection. Give some
   illustrations of his increased excitement towards the close of chapter
   10.

   6. Why should Zophar be described as violent? Give two or three
   illustrations of Zophar's magnificent description of God. In what
   language does he exhort Job to acknowledge his sins?

   7. Indicate Job's sarcasm in chapter 12. How does he attack the motives
   of his opponents and the unsoundness of their arguments? In what
   language does he warn them? Give the verse in chapter 13 where he
   appeals directly to God. What language in chapter 14 justifies the last
   sentence in the text of our lesson?

   *For this outline and the following credit is due to Dr. Albert Barnes.

   SECOND SERIES OF THE DEBATE

   Chapters 15-21

   (1) With Eliphaz, 15-17.

   (a) Speech of Eliphaz, 15.

   (b) Reply of Job, 16, 17.

   (2) With Bildad, 18, 19.

   (a) Speech of Bildad, 18.

   (b) Reply of Job, 19.

   (3) With Zophar, 20, 21.

   (a) Speech of Zophar, 20.

   (b) Reply of Job, 21.

   The second series of the debate is in the same order as the first, and
   with the same question in view.

   Eliphaz and Job.

   Eliphaz opens in chapter 15. Job is accused of vehemence and vanity; of
   casting off fear and restraining prayer; of arrogance and presumption.

   God is vindicated by him, and the observation of the sages are quoted.
   A number of pithy and instructive sayings are used to show that wicked
   men are subject to sudden alarms and unhappy experiences.

   Job replies, renewing his complaint of the way his friends have treated
   him, and of the intensity and injustice of his sufferings. His appeal
   is to God before whom his eyes pour out tears. In chapter 17 he
   prophecies that his trials will yet be a subject of amazement to good
   men.

   Bildad and Job.

   Bildad speaks in chapter 18 repeating the former accusation. In his
   estimation the laws of God's administration are fixed and it is an
   established principle that the wicked shall be punished in this life,
   which he illustrates by a number of maxims or proverbs. The student
   should enumerate these and distinguish between them.

   There is nothing new in what Bildad says, but he is enforcing what he
   has previously advanced with greater emphasis.

   In chapter 19 Job speaks more pathetically, exhibiting his character in
   a beautiful light. His language is sorrowful, his spirit tender and
   subdued. How long will his friends vex and crush him with their
   remarks? God has overthrown him, fenced up his way, put away his
   friends. Even his wife and children are estranged from him.

   Then, as Barnes says, there follows the most noble declaration in the
   book. "Conscious of the importance of what he is about to say, he asks
   that his words might be engraved on the eternal rock, and then
   professes his confidence in God and his assurance that he would yet
   appear and vindicate his character. Though now consumed by disease, and
   though this process should go on till all his flesh was wasted away,
   yet he had the conviction that God would appear on the earth to deliver
   him, and that with renovated flesh and in prosperity, he would be
   permitted to see God for himself."

   Zophar and Job.

   Zophar recapitulates the old arguments under a new form, and Job
   replies, closing the second series of the debate. All his strength is
   collected for this argument as though resolved to answer them once for
   all. He appeals to facts. The wicked live, grow old, become mighty in
   power, etc. They openly cast off God and prosper in an irreligious
   life, although, as he admits, there are some exceptions. They are
   reserved, however, for the day of destruction and a future retribution
   they cannot escape.

   Questions.

   For questions, teachers are referred to what was said under "Note to
   Teachers" at the close of the preceding lesson. Examine the text of the
   chapters by the help of the various sentences and clauses of the
   lesson.

   Ask yourself or your classes for example:

   In what language does Eliphaz accuse Job of vehemence and vanity?

   How many verses are taken up with these accusations?

   To how many sages of ancient times does he refer, or how many of their
   observations does he quote?

   Point out the literary beauty of some of these observations.

   Discover the verse of verses in which Job prophesies the acquaintance
   of later generations with the story of his trial.

   Count and distinguish between the maxims or proverbs of Bildad.

   Memorize 19:25 to 27.

   How many indisputable facts does Job refer to in chapter 21?

   THIRD SERIES OF THE DEBATE

   Chapters 22-31

   (1) With Eliphaz, 22-24.

   (a) Speech of Eliphaz, 22.

   (b) Reply of Job, 23, 24.

   (2) With Bildad, 25, 26.

   (a) Speech of Bildad, 2$.

   (b) Reply of Job, 26.

   (3) With Zophar, 27-31.

   (a) * * * * * *

   (b) Continuation of the reply of Job, 27-31.

   The last speech Eliphaz makes, chapter 22, is a grand effort to refute
   Job based upon the latter's appeal to facts. There is more severity in
   it than he has shown before. He charges Job with cruelty, oppression
   and injustice as a magistrate. Therefore, no wonder such calamities had
   come upon him. Using the deluge as an illustration, he shows how God
   must deal with the wicked according to their deserts. Job is exhorted
   to acquaint himself with God and be at peace with Him, and all might
   yet be well.

   Job replies pathetically. He has no human help, but turns to God. O,
   that he might come before Him! He cannot seem to find Him, yet he has
   confidence in Him. His own integrity is once more asserted. It was not
   true that God always dealt with men on earth in accordance with their
   character. The wicked often have long prosperity, though he admits they
   will ultimately be cut off.

   Bildad attempts a reply in chapter 25, and yet he seems to realize that
   the controversy is decided, for he contents himself simply with a
   description of the power, wisdom and majesty of God, closing with the
   sentiment expressed before concerning the comparative impurity and
   insignificance of man. Bildad has, in fact, yielded the argument and
   retires from the field.

   Job speaks in chapter 26 in a strain of irony. His friends have not
   enlightened him very much. His own views of the greatness of God are
   superior to those of Bildad. Notice the sublime description of the
   divine majesty which follows.

   Zophar should have replied, but his lips are closed, and Job himself
   proceeds more calmly in chapters 27 to 31. Once more he refers to the
   government of God, giving, as Barnes expresses it, "a most beautiful
   description of the search for wisdom, detailing the discoveries of
   science in his time, and saying that none of them could disclose it,
   and concluding that true wisdom can only be found in the fear of the
   Lord. Once more he maintains his integrity, and concludes that if God
   would come forth and pronounce a just judgment on him, he would take
   the decision and bind it on his head as a diadem, and march forth with
   it in triumph."

   Questions.

   1. What illustrates the greater severity of Eliphaz?

   2. How is Job's magisterial function referred to?

   3. In what verses is the deluge spoken of?

   4. Under what terms does Job affirm his integrity?

   5. Quote some of the irony of Job.

   6. Name some of the scientific discoveries of Job's day.

   7. How beautifully is the search for wisdom described?

   WORDS OF ELIHU AND THE ADDRESS OF THE ALMIGHTY

   Chapters 32-41

   Elihu now comes forward with apparent modesty, and yet great
   pretensions. Young and inexperienced, he is nevertheless indignant at
   the manner in which the friends of Job have sought to reply to him.
   Professing that his views have been revealed from above, he undertakes
   to clear up all the difficulties in the case. Afflictions are for the
   good of the sufferer is his dictum, a thought which he exhibits in
   various lights.

   He, too, reflects upon Job for his rashness and presumption, leaning
   rather to the side of his friends.

   Chapter 32 is introductory, but in the following chapter he fully
   enters upon his argument. If Job had wished to bring his cause before
   God, let him now present it to him, i. e., Elihu, who assumed to take
   God's place. Job could not be correct in the claims he made for himself
   because God must be more righteous than man. God speaks to man in
   various ways to withdraw him from his purpose and save him from sin.

   Job is not disposed to reply, although Elihu gives him an opportunity,
   and therefore the latter continues in chapter 34 to examine his case
   more particularly. Job had shown a spirit of irreverence which is
   rebuked. God's government is administered on principles of equity, and
   therefore Job must be a wicked man who is called upon to confess that
   his chastisement was just and to resolve to offend no more. In chapter
   35, assuming that Job claimed to be more righteous than God, he
   examines the position, demonstrating its impossibility.

   Having undertaken thus to vindicate the divine character, he proceeds
   in chapters 36 and 37 to state some of the principles of the divine
   government, illustrating, his views and showing the necessity of man's
   submission to God by a sublime description of the greatness of the
   latter, especially as manifested in the storm. To quote Barnes again,
   "There is in this description every indication that a storm is rising
   and a tempest gathering. In the midst of this tempest the address of
   Elihu is broken off and the Almighty appears and closes the debate."

   The Address of the Almighty.

   The address of the Almighty covers chapters 38 to 41, and is
   represented as from the midst of the tempest. Its principle object
   appears to be to assert God's greatness and majesty and the duty of
   profound submission to the dispensations of his government. He appeals
   to His works, showing that man could explain little, and that,
   therefore, it was to be expected that in His moral government there
   would be much also above human capacity to understand.

   Job is subdued and awed, and confesses his vileness in chapter 40:3-5.
   To produce, however, a more overpowering impression, and secure a
   deeper prostration before Him, the Almighty described two of the most
   remarkable animals He had made, with which description His sublime
   address concludes.

   We agree with Barnes and others, that the general impression sought by
   this address is that of awe, reverence and submission. That God has a
   right to do, and that it is presumptuous in man to sit in judgment upon
   His doings. It is remarkable that God does not refer to the main point
   in the controversy at all. He does not seek to vindicate His government
   from the charges brought against it of inequality, nor does He refer to
   the future state as a place where all these apparent inequalities will
   be adjusted.

   Job is humbled and penitent, chapter 42. His confession is accepted,
   and his general course approved. His three friends are reprimanded for
   the severity of their judgment upon him, while he is directed to
   intercede for them. His calamities are ended and he is restored to
   double his former prosperity.

   Thus God shows Himself the friend of the righteous, and the object of
   the trial is secured by showing that there is true virtue which is not
   based on selfishness, and real piety that will bear any trial to which
   it may be subjected.

   It shows that God is able to keep the feet of His saints, and that His
   grace is sufficient for them who put their trust in Him. We speak of
   Job as triumphant, but the more vital truth is that God is triumphant
   in the lives of His saints above the power of the evil one.

   Questions.

   1. Illustrate Elihu's modesty.

   2. Do the same for his pretensions.

   3. Show his indignation at the other friends.

   4. What is his dictum?

   5. How does he reflect on Job?

   6. What principles of the divine government does he state?

   7. How does he close his speech?

   8. What is the chief object of the words of God?

   9. How is Job affected by them?

   10. For what omissions is God's address remarkable?

   11. How is the matter concluded as to Job?

   12. How about his friends?
     __________________________________________________________________

THE PSALMS

   INTRODUCTORY

   1. Their Authors.

   The Book of Psalms has sometimes been classified according to authors.
   For example, the titles indicate that seventy-three were written by
   David; fifty are anonymous twelve have the name of Asaph, and ten that
   of Korah, or the sons of Korah; two are associated with Solomon and one
   each with Moses, Heman and Ethan.

   A comparison of Acts 4:25 and Hebrews 4:7 shows that Psalms 2 and 95
   respectively, were also written by David, though not ascribed to him in
   the book, and the question arises whether he may not have been the
   author of a still larger number of the anonymous Psalms. As some with
   the name of the sons of Korah were evidently written for them, may he
   have been their author as well? The same query arises about the 72d
   Psalm, one of the two to which Solomon's name is attached. It might be
   added here that the titles of the Psalms are regarded by many as of
   equal authority with the text, and hence if we can ascertain what the
   title means, we may venture to build conclusions upon it.

   2. Their Subjects.

   The book again, has been classified according to subjects. Angus, in
   his Bible Handbook, has a convenient classification, giving the
   subject, and in each case the numbers of a few Psalms illustrating it.
   For example, there are Psalms of

   Instruction, like 1, 19, 39.

   Praise, 8, 29, 93, 100.

   Thanksgiving, 30, 65, 103, 107, 116.

   Penitence, 6, 32, 38, 51, 143.

   Trust, 3, 2.-], 31, 46, 56, 62, 86.

   Distress and Sorrow, 4, 13, 55, 64, 88.

   Aspiration, 42, 63, 80, 84, 137.

   History, 78, 105, 106.

   Prophecy (Messianic), 2, 16, 22, 24, 40, 45, 68, 69, T2, 97, no, 118.

   3. Their Books.

   It may seem strange to speak of the "Books" of the Psalms, but that
   expresses another kind of classification. The whole book has been
   divided into five books, each ending with a similar doxology, as
   follows:

   Book I, Psalms 1-41.

   Book II, Psalms 42-72.

   Book III, Psalms 73-89.

   Book IV, Psalms 90-106.

   Book V, Psalms 107-150.

   Notice the close of each of these books for the doxology.

   There are those who question the value of this division, however, on
   the ground, first, that the title of the book itself in the Hebrew,
   (Sepher Tehillim), is singular rather than plural. It is not the
   "books" but the book of Psalms. Second, the numbers of the Psalms
   continue unbroken from the beginning to the end of the book. Third,
   there are other doxologies than those especially referred to, e. g.,
   Psalms 117 and 134.

   4. Their Unity.

   The view of others, therefore, is that the Psalms comprise but one book
   with an order and unity throughout, the key to which is found in its
   final application to the millennial age and establishment of the
   kingdom of God on the earth. According to these, this explains what are
   known as the imprecatory or cursing Psalms. These have puzzled many,
   but when we consider them as terminating on that period when the era of
   mercy for the Gentile nations closes, and the time of their judgment
   begins, it lightens their problem very much.

   In the same connection we should remember that the author is speaking
   in the prophetic spirit, and that the enemies are enemies of God whose
   permanent rejection of Him is implied. This view, moreover, explains
   those like the 91st Psalm which promise exemption from such things as
   pestilence and war. This Psalm was written doubtless on the occasion of
   Israel's deliverance from Egypt, but its language seems to indicate
   that it is a type of their greater and permanent deliverance in the
   time to come. This is strengthened if we conceive of the preceding
   Psalm as a picture of Israel today.

   The opinion which sees the key to the Psalms in their millennial
   application also furnishes an explanation of the frequent references to
   Christ found in the Psalms.

   Urquhart, who maintains the above view, regards the whole book as
   formed of a combination of twelve sections. Each of these contains a
   continuous recurring story of the establishment of God's kingdom on
   earth, in which Psalms of complaint and pleading on Israel's part are
   followed by those of jubilation for deliverance. In some of these
   jubilations the whole earth is seen to join. These twelve sections are
   indicated to him by the following jubilant Psalms: 10, 18, 24, 30, 48,
   68, 76, 85, 100, 118, 136, 150. "In the first cycle of ten there is
   progress from the announcement of judgment (1), and manifestation of
   Christ (2), through His rejection (3-7), suffering and ascension (8),
   the waiting and persecution of His people (9), to the consummation of
   all things (10")." This analysis will not commend itself to all, but it
   is interesting and may lead to further thought.

   5. The Messianic Psalms.

   These are Psalms in which not only is the Messiah referred to, but in
   which He Himself in the Spirit is heard to speak. It is His feelings
   and experiences that are expressed rather than those of the human
   author. To know David it is necessary to study the Psalms as well as
   the historical books that refer to him, but this is even more necessary
   in the case of Jesus. In the Gospels we read what He said and did, and
   what was said and done to Him: in other words, we obtain a view of the
   outside of His life, but in the Psalms we see the inner side, and learn
   how He felt and how He lived in the presence of His God and Father.

   Questions.

   1. How many Psalms, according to their titles, were written by David?

   2. Classify the Psalms according to subjects.

   3. Into how many books would some divide the Psalms? Give the Psalms in
   each.

   4. What, in the judgment of others, is the key that unifies the Psalms?

   5. What lightens the problem of the imprecatory Psalms?

   6. How would you define a Messianic Psalm?

   7. What is their value as applied to the Messiah Himself?

   PSALMS 1-6

   Psalm 1.

   True happiness is the theme of this Psalm, whose author is unnamed. The
   negative side of true happiness is stated (v. 1), and then the positive
   (v. 2). Its reward follows (v. 3). Its nature and value are emphasized
   by a sharp contrast. Such a man is godly, his opposite ungodly (v. 4).
   The first is marked by stability, the second by instability (v. 4). The
   first has endless fruitfulness and blessing, the second has nothing and
   worse than nothing (v. 5), for he can not be acquitted at the judgment
   day. The secret of it all is found in Jehovah (v. 6). The Psalm is a
   summary of the whole book, and is appropriately placed at the beginning
   as a sort of preface.

   Psalm 2.

   Is prophetic and Messianic in one (see introductory lesson). It had a
   partial fulfillment at the first advent of Christ (Acts 4:25; 13:33),
   but a complete one is to follow at the second advent, as will be seen
   in the study of the prophets. The nations will rage and the kings of
   the earth again set themselves against Jehovah and His Christ under the
   lead of the Antichrist (vv. 1-3), but they will be regarded with
   contempt and terrified by divine judgments (vv. 4, 5). God's purpose
   will not be altered, which is to establish His Son upon His kingdom in
   the earth at Jerusalem (v. 6).

   The Son Himself speaks at verse seven, the last clause of which refers
   to His inauguration as Mediatorial King, and does not in any way impugn
   His Deity. The Gentile nations are to be His in that day (v. 8), and
   although it will be the millennial day, yet its peace and righteousness
   will be secured through judgments and by the firmness of its Holy Ruler
   (v. 9). Kings and princes are warned to prepare themselves for its
   coming (vv. 10-12). "Kiss the Son" means submit to His authority, "lest
   He be angry and ye perish in the way, for His wrath will soon be
   kindled" (R. V.).

   Psalm 3.

   As its title indicates, should be read in connection with 2 Samuel 15.
   In his distress to whom does David appeal (v. 1)? Not only had men
   turned their backs upon him but it was charged that God had done so.
   Remember the possible reason for this suspicion in David's sin with
   Bath-sheba, preceding this rebellion of Absalom. Does David still
   retain his faith in God's promises notwithstanding (v. 3)? What is the
   ground of his confidence (v. 4)? And its expression (vv. 5, 6)? What is
   the nature of his further appeal (v. 7)? "Cheek-bone" and "teeth"
   represent his enemies as wild beasts ready to devour him. By faith he
   already sees these enemies overcome, and praises God as his deliverer
   (v. 8).

   The word "Selah" at the close of verse two is obscure, and may denote a
   pause or rest, in the singing, or an emphasis to be laid on the
   particular sentiment expressed.

   Psalm 4.

   A cry of distress is this, composed by David, it may have been, on the
   same occasion as the last. He is not trusting in his own righteousness,
   but God's righteousness (v. 1). The doctrine of imputed righteousness
   was apprehended by the spiritually enlightened in Old Testament, as
   well as in New Testament, times. For a further illustration of this in
   David compare the opening verses of Psalm 32, with Paul's application
   of them in Romans 4.

   David is encouraged to utter this cry by past mercies -- "Thou hast
   enlarged me," and I trust Thee again. Verse 2 shows the source of his
   trouble. His "glory" may refer to his kingly dignity now dishonored by
   exile. But the schemes of his enemies were "vanity," and brought about
   by lying "leasing").

   His confidence was in the divine purpose towards him (v. 3), and they
   who are against him are cautioned to repent and turn to the Lord (vv.
   4, 5). In the midst of his afflictions he values the divine favor (v.
   6), which brings more experimental joy to him than the husbandman knows
   at harvest time (vv. 7, 8).

   "To the chief musician on Neginoth," indicates the purpose for which it
   was set apart as a musical composition. "Neginoth" were the stringed
   instruments used in the Levitical service, and the "chief musician" was
   the leader of that part of the choir.

   Psalm 5.

   Is a morning prayer (v. 3). The words "look up" are rendered "keep
   watch" in the Revised Version. The psalmist would keep watch on
   himself, that his life and conduct might be such as to insure the
   answer to his prayer (v. 4-7). The need of the prayer is indicated in
   verse eight. The enemies referred to are then described (v. 9), and
   their judgment committed into God's hands who defends the righteous
   (vv. 11, 12). "Nehiloth," means flutes or wind instruments.

   Psalm 6.

   Represents David in deeper distress of soul than we have found him
   hitherto. Conviction of sin is upon him. Those who have studied 2
   Samuel will not need to be reminded of occasions for this experience,
   though the connection with Bath-sheba will first suggest itself. He
   feels the justness of the divine rebuke (v. 1), but pleads for mercy
   (v. 2). The time of spiritual darkness has been long extended (vv. 3,
   4). Will it end in death (v. 5)? He is heartbroken (vv. 6, 7). Enemies
   are rejoicing in his sorrow, but their glee is short-lived (vv. 7, 8).
   Light breaks, the morning dawn, tears are wiped away, for the Lord hath
   heard him! Begone, mine enemies, be ashamed and turn back (vv. 9, 10)!

   Verse five need not be interpreted as expressing doubt of a future
   state, but may be simply a contrast between this scene of life and the
   unseen world of the dead symbolized by the "grave" (Heb. "sheol").
   "Sheminith" means the "eighth," and perhaps this was a Psalm for the
   eighth key, or the bass of the stringed instruments.

   Questions.

   1. Memorize Psalm 1.

   2. What is an appropriate theme for it?

   3. State the two-fold application of Psalm 2.

   4. Will the millennium represent only peace and cheerful obedience to
   God and His Son?

   5. Did you re-read 2 Samuel 15?

   6. On what ground might God have forsaken David according to Psalm 3?

   7. What may "Selah" mean?

   8. What great Gospel doctrine finds illustration in the Psalms of
   David?

   9. Define "Neginoth" and "Nehiloth."

   10. What is the Hebrew for "grave"?

   PSALMS 7-10

   The length of our lessons in this book are determined rather
   arbitrarily by the length of the different Psalms, or the special
   interest found in them. We have in mind weekly classes wishing to study
   the whole Bible in a connected way, and yet avoid tediousness in the
   process. The six Psalms included in the last lesson might easily be
   read by the class in a week; and on the Lord's Day, the teacher with
   the assistance of the questions, would have little difficulty in
   fastening the facts and their application on their minds in a way both
   interesting and profitable.

   At the same time the average person, independent of any class
   preparation, reading a Psalm a day for private meditation, will
   probably find the brief comments and questions upon it as much as he
   will be able to assimilate.

   Psalm 7.

   We commence this new lesson with this Psalm because it offers a point
   of beginning in the title. This, however, is rather obscure since it is
   not clear who may be meant by "Cush." The margin of the King James
   Version identifies him with "Shimei" of 2 Samuel 16:5-14, which story
   it would be well to peruse again, although there are several incidents
   in Saul's persecution of David which would fit about as well. The word
   "Shiggaion" in the title means "a plaintive song or elegy."

   David is persecuted (vv. 1, 2), and charged with wrong-doing to one at
   peace with him (vv. 3, 4). The charge is so false that he can safely
   offer the challenge in verse five. Jehovah is appealed to, and asked to
   sit in judgment on this matter: "Return, Thou on high" (v. 7). "My
   righteousness" (vv. 8-10) means his innocence of this particular
   charge. A warning is uttered against the wicked (vv. 11-13), whose
   folly is described in serious wit (vv. 14-16). David's experience
   illustrates these concluding verses more than once.

   Psalm 8.

   If the whole book of Psalms be considered a mountain range of poetic
   prophecy, then this is one of the highest peaks. Observe in the margin
   how frequently it is quoted in the New Testament, and applied to Jesus
   Christ. Read Hebrews 2:5-9 especially.

   "O LORD, our Lord," gives better sense as "O Jehovah, our Lord." His
   glory is in the Heavens as we see in verse three, and yet it is "above
   the heavens," both in kind and in degree. So great is His glory that He
   uses "the weak things of the world to confound the things which are
   mighty." (Compare v. 2 with Matt. 11:25; 21:15, 16, and 1 Cor. 1:27).

   Verses 4-8 find a partial fulfillment in man as created in the first
   Adam, but their complete fulfillment is seen only in redeemed and
   regenerated man in the Second Adam. The passage in Hebrews shows this,
   and particularly alongside of 1 Corinthians 15:22-28.

   "Upon Gittith" is "set to the Gittith" (R. V.), which, some think,
   means a tune of a joyous character.

   Psalm 9.

   Is one of the cursing or imprecatory Psalms which, as stated in the
   introductory lesson, find their key in the millennial age and the
   events introductory thereto.

   It opens with rejoicing (vv. 1, 2). This rejoicing is for victory over
   enemies (v. 3), but they are God's enemies rather than the psalmist's.
   It is His coming (presence) that has overcome them. Moreover, they are
   nations rather than individuals. ("Heathen" in verse five, is "nations"
   in the R. V.) Their cities are destroyed (v. 6).

   At the same time the Lord is seen sitting as King (v. 7, R. V.),
   judging the world in righteousness, comforting the oppressed, dwelling
   in Zion (vv. 9-12). All these are millennial figures. Israel is lifted
   from the gates of death (v. 13), and the great tribulation is over. She
   is praising God in Zion for the deliverance from the Gentile nations
   which are sunk in the pit they had digged for her (vv. 13-16). And so
   on to the end of the Psalm.

   "Muth-labbed" may refer like "Gittith" to the name or character of the
   tune.

   Psalm 10.

   Seems allied in thought with that preceding, and the two may have been
   one, originally. The psalmist is not referring to personal experiences,
   but to those which are more general. It seems as though the poor and
   oppressed of the nation and the whole world were uttering their
   complaint through him.

   Because God seems far away, the wicked are flourishing (vv. 1, 2). It
   would not be out of place to conceive of the wicked in this Psalm as
   personified in the Antichrist at the end of this age, when, as we shall
   learn later, he will be persecuting Israel as God's witness in the
   earth. This is not to say that, in no sense, the Psalm is applicable to
   an earlier period in the history of that people, but that in its fuller
   sense, it is for the time to come.

   The wicked one is described as boastful, covetous, proud, atheistic,
   self-opinionated, bold, deceitful, oppressive, and cunning (vv. 3-11,
   R. V.). The "poor" means, as is customary in the Psalms, "the poor in
   spirit," described by Jesus in the Sermon on the Mount. They are sad
   and sorrowful sufferers for righteousness' sake, even though they may
   be rich in this world's goods. "Meek" would be a better word to
   describe them than "poor."

   The description of the wicked oppressor is followed by the usual appeal
   to God (vv. 12-15), who is represented as reigning over the millennial
   earth, punishing the wicked, establishing the meek, and judging the
   oppressed against "the man of the earth" who, as has been said, may
   well be taken for the Antichrist.

   Questions.

   1. What is the title or inscription of Psalm 7?

   2. What is the meaning of "Shiggaion" and "Gittith"?

   3. Have you read 1 Corinthians 15:22-28 and Hebrews 2:5-9?

   4. What is the key to the imprecatory Psalms?

   5. To what period does Psalm 10 seem to apply?

   6. Who are usually meant by the "poor" in these Psalms?

   7. What title is given to the wicked one in Psalm 10?

   PSALMS 11-17

   Psalm 11.

   A song of trust. The declaration of verse one, "In the Lord put I my
   trust," is buttressed by the reason in verse seven, while all between
   is descriptive of the condition in which David finds himself. Urged to
   flee from his enemies (v. 1), he shows the futility of the attempt (v.
   2). The moral foundations are being undermined (v. 3), and only Jehovah
   is able to discriminate and judge (vv. 4-6).

   Psalm 12.

   The evil speaker. The close relation between this and the preceding
   Psalm is easily discovered. David's enemy is the deceitful flatterer
   (vv. 1, 2). But his judgment is of the Lord (vv. 3-5), the sincerity of
   whose utterances are in contrast with those of the enemy (vv. 6-8).

   Psalm 13.

   Sorrow. The Lord seems long in coming to His servant's relief from the
   slanderers in the Psalms preceding (vv. 1, 2). Will He never come (vv.
   3, 4)? Yea, He cometh soon, and faith and hope rejoice (vv. 5, 6).

   Psalm 14.

   The whole world corrupt. All sinners are fools (v. 1) because they
   think and act contrary to right reason. First, they think wrong ("in
   his heart," Gen. 6:12), and then soon they act wrong (Prov. 23:7). This
   is true of the world generally (vv. 2-4). "Eat up My People" is a
   phrase denoting the "beastly fury" of the Gentile enemies of Israel.
   Verses 5 and 6 show their indifference rather than their ignorance of
   God. If the closing verse seems to refer to the period of the
   Babylonian captivity and therefore raises a question as to the Davidic
   authorship (see title), we should remember that the language is typical
   of any great evil, and that David may be speaking as in other
   instances, in the prophetic sense. In that case the Psalm takes on a
   millennial aspect.

   Psalm 15.

   Holiness and its reward. Here a question is asked, verse one, which
   finds its answer in the verses following, the whole dialogue being
   summed up in the last sentence. To abide in God's tabernacle, etc., is
   to hold fellowship with God and enjoy the blessings incident thereto.
   These are for the man whose conduct is right, who is truthful, sincere,
   separate from the ungodly, and uninfluenced by covetousness and
   bribery.

   Psalm 16.

   Sometimes called "The Psalm of the Resurrection," is one of the great
   Messianic Psalms (see introductory lesson). While it is interesting to
   consider David as uttering the prayer, for it is a prayer, how much
   more so to think of Christ! On some mountain side, in the night's
   darkness, He may have poured out these petitions and praises. (For its
   Messianic application compare verses 8-11 with Acts 2:25-31, and
   13:35). Observe the spirit of confidence (v. 1), loyalty to God (v. 2),
   love toward the saints (v. 3), separation from the world (v. 4),
   contentment (vv. 5, 6), obedience (vv, 7, 8), hope (vv. 9, 10),
   expectation (v. 11). The Revised Version throws light on the text.
   "Michtam" means "A Golden Psalm" (see margin) and such it is in its
   preciousness even above others.

   Psalm 17.

   Is a prayer in which vindication is desired. It makes such great claims
   that one thinks of it as Messianic also (vv. 1-4), and yet like Psalm
   7, the writer may have some specific transaction in mind as to which
   his hands are clean. Note the testimony to the power of God's word (v.
   4). What is asked is guidance (vv. 5, 6), and preservation (vv. 7, 8).
   The latter is desired from the wicked whose description follows as
   proud (vv. 9, 10), treacherous (vv. 11, 12), and yet prosperous in
   worldly things (v. 14). This prosperity is transient in comparison with
   his own expectation (v. 15). Have the Revised Version convenient in
   reading these Psalms, for the interpretation it casts on some obscure
   passages.

   Questions.

   1. What is the leading thought of Psalm 11?

   2. Against what class of enemies are the psalmist's words frequently
   directed?

   3. Why are sinners called "fools"?

   4. Which of the Psalms of this lesson are millennial and messianic?

   5. Have you compared the passages in Acts?

   6. What does "Michtam" mean?

   PSALMS 18-24

   Psalm 18.

   A song of victory. It opens with ejaculatory expressions of triumph for
   deliverance. All nature is described as convulsed when the Almighty
   presses to the rescue. The next division is meditation on the
   principles involved, the whole closing with a further outburst of
   triumph and confidence. 2 Samuel 22 is a copy of this ode saving a few
   variations, and the student is referred to our treatment of it at that
   place.

   Psalm 19.

   God's revelation in the world and in the Word. We have a contrast
   between these two in this Psalm. In verses one to six there is the
   general revelation of the heavens, "wordless but extending their sphere
   over the whole earth," which then specializes to the sun as the chief
   figure of it all. But in 7-14, the law is celebrated, whose function is
   to warn against sin, and by conformity to which only can our thought
   and conduct become acceptable to God.

   Observe the literary beauty as well as the spiritual teaching in the
   description of the law --- six names, six epithets and six effects. The
   clearer our apprehension of the law, so the Psalm teaches, the clearer
   is our view of sin, and the more evident that grace only can cleanse
   and keep us from it.

   Psalms 20 and 21.

   Are coupled in The Modern Reader's Bible, and called "An Antiphonal War
   Anthem." The first gives the prayers of the king and the people before
   the battle, and the second the thanksgiving after the victory.

   As to the first, we hear the people (vv. 1-5), the king (v. 6), and
   then the people to the end. As to the second, the king is first (vv.
   1-7), and then the people to the end. While this may be the historical
   setting of these Psalms, yet we are at liberty to apply their
   utterances in the spiritual scene to the experiences of believers in
   the Christian Church.

   Psalm 22.

   The Psalm of the Cross. Is this one of the great Messianic Psalms?
   Christ uttered the first verse on the cross (Matt. 27:46), and there is
   reason to think the words of the last were also heard. "He hath done
   it" (R. V.), in the Hebrew, corresponds closely to, "It is finished"
   (John 19:30). If this were so, may we suppose that the whole Psalm was
   the language of the divine sufferer as He bare our sins on the cross?

   There are three strophes, or great poetical divisions, each associated
   with the phrase, "Far from me." The first covers verses 1 to 10, the
   second 11 to 18, the third 19 to 31. In the first, we have a cry of
   distress (vv. 1, 2), an expression of confidence (vv. 3-5), a
   description of the enemies (vv. 6-8), and a second expression of
   confidence (vv. 9-10). In the second, we have two descriptions, the
   surrounding enemies (vv. 11-13), and the sufferer's experiences (vv.
   14-18). In the third the whole tone is changed to a note of victory
   (vv. 19-21), a testimony of praise (vv. 22-26), and a prophecy of
   resurrection glory (vv. 27-31).

   The Psalm gives a graphic picture of death by crucifixion with
   circumstances precisely fulfilled at Calvary. As that form of death
   penalty was Roman rather than Jewish, we agree with the Scofield
   Reference Bible that the "proof of inspiration is irresistible." At
   verse 22 the Psalm breaks from crucifixion to resurrection (compare
   John 20:17).

   Psalm 23.

   The Shepherd Psalm is such a favorite with all as to make an attempted
   exposition almost an offence. Did David compose it as a youth tending
   his father's sheep? If not, it must have been when occupied in
   reminiscences of those early days.

   Note the possessive, "my shepherd," and the future, "shall not want."
   Because the Lord is my Shepherd I am

   Feeding on the Word -- "pastures"

   Fellowshipping the Spirit -- "waters*

   Being renewed -- "restoreth"

   Surrendered in will -- "leadeth"

   Trusting the promises -- "fear no evil"

   Enjoying security -- "a table"

   Doing service -- "runneth over"

   Possessing hope -- "forever."

   Psalm 24.

   Is frequently defined as the Ascension Psalm. The Scofield Bible speaks
   of these last three Psalms, however, 22, 23 and 24, as a trilogy. In
   the first, the good Shepherd gives His life for the sheep (John 10:11),
   in the second, the great Shepherd "brought again from the dead through
   the blood of the everlasting covenant," tenderly cares for His sheep
   (Heb. 13:20), and in the last, the chief Shepherd appears as king of
   glory to own and reward the sheep (1 Pet. 5:4).

   From this point of view the order is: (a), the declaration of title,
   "The earth is the Lord's" (vv. 1, 2); (b), the challenge (vv. 3-6), it
   is a question of worthiness and no one is worthy but the Lamb (compare
   Dan. 7:13, 14; Rev. 5:3-10); (c), the king takes the throne (vv. 7-10),
   (compare Matt. 25:31).

   Questions.

   1. Where have we met earlier with the contents of Psalm 18?

   2. What theme would you assign to Psalm 19?

   3. Give the names, epithets and effects of the law.

   4. What is the historical setting of Psalms 20 and 21?

   5. How does John 19:30 suggest the last verse of Psalm 22?

   6. Of what is this Psalm a picture?

   7. What proof of inspiration does it contain?

   8. By what name has Psalm 24 been called?

   9. How may the last three Psalms be classified?

   10. Amplify this last idea.

   11. From this point of view, what is the order of Psalm 24?

   12. What may have been the historical origin of the Psalm last named?

   PSALMS 25-37

   Psalm 25.

   In the Hebrew this prayer is arranged as an acrostic, i. e., the first
   word of each verse begins with a letter in alphabetical order from A to
   Z.

   Hereafter we shall not give as much attention to every Psalm as we have
   thus far, but trust the reader to do the analyzing after the examples
   given.

   The purpose of the Commentary is not so much textual explanation as a
   stimulus to Bible study in a broader sense, and it is assumed that the
   reader has been studying the Bible side by side with the Commentary
   from the beginning.

   The more difficult Psalms, some of the more familiar and popular, and
   those distinctively Messianic and millennial may be treated more at
   length, but others must be passed over.

   In the present instance the prayer is for defence (vv. 1-3), guidance
   (vv. 4, 5), forgiveness (vv. 6-11), etc., intermingled with testimony
   to the divine goodness (vv. 12-15).

   Psalm 26.

   Is another appeal to God on the basis of avowed integrity and innocence
   of the charges of enemies. Note the features of righteous character of
   which the psalmist speaks, as well as the description of his enemies.
   The Modern Reader's Bible names this Psalm, "Searchings of heart before
   worship."

   Psalm 27.

   Is called by the volume named above "An Anthem of Deliverance," and
   throughout it exhibits confidence, hope and joy, in God's worship, with
   prayer for help and guidance in danger. The secret of the psalmist's
   confidence is given in verse four as his delight in divine fellowship
   expressed in worshiping in God's tabernacle. God will protect and
   deliver him (vv. 5, 6). He will be more to him than earthly parents (v.
   10). All he craves is guidance (v. 11). He concludes with counsel to
   others in a like case (vv. 13, 14).

   Psalm 29.

   "The Song of the Thunderstorm," encourages confidence in God by the
   celebration of His power in His dominion over the natural world.
   "Discovereth the forests" (v. 9) means "stripping them bare." In the
   midst of this sublimity God's worshipers cry, "Glory!" (R. V.)

   Psalm 30.

   States its occasion in the title, the reference being to David's own
   house or palace (compare Deut. 20:5); 2 Sam. 5:11; 7:2).

   Psalm 31.

   Is a cry of one in distress, which some have referred to as the period
   of David's persecution by Saul at Keilah. Read 1 Samuel 23:1-15, and
   then note in the Psalm, verses 4, 8, 10-15, 20-22.

   Psalm 32.

   Reads like "David's Spiritual Biography." It is thought to have been
   written after his sin with Bath-sheba (2 Sam. 11, 12). He has been
   brought to repentance for that sin and forgiven (Psalm 51), and now is
   praising God for that forgiveness, and telling what led up to it. It
   opens with a general declaration of his blessedness and why (vv. 1, 2).
   This is followed by his experience before forgiveness and when he was
   undergoing conviction of sin (vv. 3, 4). Confession brought forgiveness
   (v. 5). Let others act similarly in the same circumstances (v. 6). See
   what God is to him now (v. 7). The Psalm takes the form of a dialogue
   at this point, and God speaks at verses eight and nine, which should be
   read in the Revised Version. The whole concludes with a warning and
   exhortation (vv. 10, 11).

   Psalm 33.

   Is one of praise. It opens with a general chorus (vv. 1-3). This is
   followed by a semi-chorus (vv. 4-11), a second semi-chorus (vv. 12-19),
   and a final chorus (vv. 20-22). To follow this division suggested by
   the Modern Reader's Bible, is to obtain a good idea of the several
   subjects.

   Psalm 34.

   Has its occasion indicated in the title which refers to 1 Samuel 21:13.
   The name there is Achish, but some think Abimelech was the general name
   given the sovereigns of Gath at that time (Gen. 20:2). This is also an
   acrostic, and from a musical point of view consists of an introduction
   (vv. 1, 2), solos and choruses. For one solo, see verses 3-6, and for
   another 11-14.

   Psalm 35.

   May be read in connection with 1 Samuel 24, which some regard as its
   occasion. A comparison of that chapter will throw light on the meaning
   of several of its expressions.

   Psalm 37.

   Is one of the most popular of the Psalms of trust and confidence, whose
   contents are illustrated in David's personal history. It is an
   acrostic, which requires little in the way of explanation to any heart
   who really knows God through Jesus Christ. The theme is the prosperity
   of the wicked with counsel as to how the child of God should act in
   regard to it.

   Questions.

   1. What is an acrostic Psalm?

   2. What earlier Psalm is suggested by the theme of Psalm 26?

   3. Point out the poetic descriptions of a thunderstorm in Psalm 29.

   4. What experience is Psalm 31 thought to describe?

   5. Have you again read 1 Samuel 23:1-15?

   6. Give a title of Psalm 32, and a reason for it.

   7. What idea is conveyed by "semi-chorus"?

   8. Memorize Psalm 37:1-9.

   PSALMS 38-51

   Psalm 38.

   Is an appeal to God from chastisement because of iniquity (vv. 1-4).
   The mental anguish is described in figures of physical disease, and yet
   it is not impossible that such disease may have been part of the
   chastisement (vv. 5-8). The desertion of friends and the opposition of
   enemies also entered into it (vv. 10-17). There are verses susceptible
   of an application to Christ, but others would prevent its application
   as a whole to Him.

   Psalm 40.

   Is Messianic (cf. Hebrews 10:5 and the following verses). To quote the
   Scofield Bible: "It opens with the joy of Christ in resurrection (vv.
   1, 2). Verses 3 to 5 give His resurrection testimony. The others are
   retrospective." "Mine iniquities" (v. 12) may mean "penal afflictions."
   This meaning is common (Psalm 31:11; 38:4); (cf. Gen. 4:13; Gen. 19:15;
   1 Sam. 28:10; also 2 Sam. 16:12; Job 19:29; Isaiah 5:18; 53:11). It is
   also favoured by the clause "taken hold of me," which can be said
   appropriately of sufferings, but not of sins (cf. Job 27:20; Psalm
   69:24). Thus, the difficulties, in referring this Psalm to Christ, are
   removed.

   The language of verses 14 and 15 is not imprecatory, but a confident
   expectation (Psalm 5:11). though the former sense is not inconsistent
   with Christ's prayer for His murderers, as their confusion and shame
   might be to prepare them for seeking forgiveness (cf. Acts 2-37).

   Psalm 41.

   Closes "Book 1" of the Psalms (see introductory lesson). It celebrates
   the blessedness of compassionating the poor (vv. 1-3) which the
   psalmist contrasts with the treatment he received both from avowed
   enemies and professed friends.

   Psalms 42 and 43.

   Afford a good opportunity to speak of Hebrew poetry as illustrated in
   the Psalms. The rhythm of Hebrew poetry is not in the sound but in the
   recurrence of the thought. "Thought may be rhythmic as well as sound,
   and the full meaning of Scripture is not grasped by one who does not
   feel how thoughts can be emphasized by being differently re-stated." In
   this we see the wisdom of God as applied to the Scripture, for the
   poetry of the Bible can be translated into any tongue without serious
   loss to the thought, while of other poetry, depending as it does on the
   sound, this can not be said. The first of the two Psalms expresses the
   feelings of an exile from the altar of his God, and the spirit of the
   whole lyric is summed up in its refrain, a struggle between hope and
   despair:

   Why art thou cast down, O my soul?

   And why art thou disquieted within me?

   Hope thou in God:

   For I shall yet praise Him,

   Who is the health of my countenance

   And my God!

   Quoting The Literary Study of the Bible: "This refrain is found to
   unify into a single poem Psalms 42 and 43; and the whole falls into
   "three strophies." Instead of "three strophies and a refrain,"
   substitute "three verses and a chorus," and we have a more popular idea
   of the poetical form of the two Psalms.

   Psalm 44.

   The section of Psalms now entered upon introduces "The Sons of Korah,"
   but whether they were written by them. Or for them, as a class of the
   Levitical singers, is difficult to say. The present Psalm was penned
   with reference to a national calamity, just when, or what, is not
   known. But the psalmist recounts past deliverances in such crises as a
   ground of confidence and hope now.

   Psalm 45.

   Is Messianic, for the proof of which, see the marginal references to
   the New Testament. The divisions are: The beauty of the King (vv. 1,
   2); His coming in glory (vv. 4, 5); His Deity and the character of His
   reign (vv. 6, 7); the Church as associated with Him in His earthly
   reign (vv. 9-13); Her virgin companions (The Jewish remnant?) (vv. 14,
   15); the whole concluding with an illusion to His earthly fame (vv. 16,
   17).

   The Scofield Bible thinks this Psalm might be classed with the two
   following, as all three look "forward to the advent in glory." The same
   might be said of all down to and including Psalm 50, with the possible
   exception of 49.

   To speak of Psalm 46 particularly: Israel is seen in great trouble but
   firmly trusting in God (vv. 1-5). The cause is the gathering of the
   nations against her. (v. 6). But God is with her and overcomes the
   nations, visiting them with judgment (vv. 7, 8). Following these
   judgments there is peace over all the earth (vv. 9-1 1). This is
   clearly millennial in its ultimate application.

   Psalm 47.

   Is of the same character. Psalm 52 also can hardly be read by anyone
   familiar with the later revelations of the Bible concerning the
   Antichrist without thinking of that arch-despot. He is overcome by the
   Lord (v. 5), and exalted over by the righteous (vv. 6, 7), whose trust
   in the mercy of God has not been in vain (vv. 8, 9).

   Psalm 51.

   Is historical again, and grounded on the sad event in David's life
   dwelt upon in Second Samuel. The Scofield Bible characterizes it in its
   successive steps as "The mould of the experience of a sinning saint,
   who comes back to full communion and service." (1) Sin is judged before
   God, verses 1-6; (2) forgiveness and cleansing are secured through the
   blood, verses 7-19; (3) the restored one is now filled with the Holy
   Spirit for joy, power, service and worship, verses 11-17; and is at
   last seen in fellowship with God, not about self, but Zion (vv. 18,
   19). "Personally, while it was David's pathway to restored communion,
   dispensationally, it will be that of returning Israel at the end of
   this age (Deut. 30:1-10).

   The other Psalms in this lesson give their historical setting in their
   titles, and the student of those preceding will interpret them with
   little difficulty.

   Questions.

   1. What verses of Psalm 38 would seem to prevent its Messianic
   application entire?

   2. What Messianic Psalms are noted in this lesson?

   3. In what does the rhythm of Hebrew poetry consist?

   4. What advantage does this give the poetry of Scripture?

   5. Repeat the "chorus" of Psalms 42 and 43.

   6. Which Psalms of this lesson look forward to the millennial age?

   7. On what historical event is Psalm 51 grounded?

   8. What dispensational application is possible in its case?

   PSALMS 67-78

   The first half dozen of these Psalms form a group millennial and
   Messianic. The first is millennial. It is Israel who speaks, and the
   Psalm cannot be appreciated except as the word "us" in verse 1 is so
   applied. When God has mercy upon and blesses Israel in the latter days,
   His way will begin to be known upon earth, and His saving health unto
   all nations (v. 2). In other words, the present age is one of
   out-gathering, but the age to come (millennial) will be one of
   in-gathering. God is now calling out a people for His Name from all the
   nations to form the Church, the body of Christ; but then He will be
   gathering all the nations to Him through the witness and ministry of
   Israel. This is the age of the evangelism of the nations, that the age
   of their conversion.

   Why will the people be praising God in that day? Let verse 4 answer. It
   will, however, not only be a day of righteous governing, but one of
   great material prosperity (v. 6). The cause of it all is again
   expressed (v. 7).

   The Scofield Bible teaches that Psalm 68, which some think to have been
   composed at the bringing up of the ark, is from the prophetic view,
   entirely pervaded by the joy of Israel in the Kingdom, but a strict
   order of events begins with verse 18 which in Ephesians 4:7-16 is
   quoted of Christ's ascension ministry. Verses 21-23 refer to the
   regathering of Israel and the destruction of the Anti-christ and his
   armies, while verses 24-35 describe the universal Kingdom blessing.

   Psalm 69.

   Is Messianic as judged by the New Testament quotations indicated in the
   margin. It is the Psalm of Christ's humiliation and rejection (vv. 4,
   7, 8, 10-12). Verses 14-20 point to Gethsemane, and verse 21 to the
   cross. The imprecatory verses 22-28, may refer to the present judicial
   blindness of Israel, verse 25 having special reference to Judas (Acts
   1:20), who is typical of his generation which shared his guilt.

   Psalm 72.

   Is also Messianic. Whether composed by, or for, Solomon (see title), "a
   greater than Solomon is here." Millennial expressions prevail
   throughout, for it is a Psalm of the King when He comes in His kingdom.
   The difference in the imagery between this and Psalm 2 will be
   observed, but both conditions as thus outlined will prevail in the
   millennial age. That of Psalm 2 precedes that of this Psalm and makes
   this possible. There is difficulty in applying verse 15 to Christ as it
   speaks of prayer being "made for him," unless we translate "for" by
   "to" as some have ventured to do, although without good authority.

   Book 2 ends at this point, the opening of Book 3 being marked by a
   number of Psalms ascribed to Asaph of whose history nothing is known,
   except as 2 Chronicles 35:15 and Ezra 2:41 enlighten us.

   The first of the Psalms of Asaph (73) is the most familiar, and
   suggests the language of Job and Jeremiah under similar circumstances
   (see Jer. 12:1-4). The psalmist is complaining of the prosperity of the
   wicked and the affliction of the righteous; but as his eye of faith is
   opened to the sudden and fearful ruin of the former his misgivings are
   removed; and in the reassurance of his heart he chides himself for his
   folly and praises God's love.

   The opening verse is the conclusion at which he arrives at the close,
   although it is stated first. He had nearly fallen into infidelity (v.
   2), the reasons for which are stated (vv. 3-12). It seemed as if there
   were no use in being good (vv. 13, 14). He wisely kept his complainings
   to himself however (v. 15); and when he came to know God better, which
   is the meaning of verse 16, he understood the enigma (vv. 1820). His
   confession of the sin of unbelief follows (vv. 21, 22), and then the
   renewal of his faith and confidence to the end.

   Some think Psalms 75 and 76 belong together, the one anticipating what
   the other commemorates, viz., the divine deliverance of Israel from
   their enemies on some signal occasion. Possibly 2 Kings 19:35 and
   Isaiah Z7 throw light upon them.

   Psalm 78.

   Is applied by some, to the removal of the sanctuary from Shiloh in the
   tribe of Ephraim to Zion, of Judah; and consequently, the transfer of
   eminence from the former to the latter tribe. Though this transfer was
   God's purpose from the beginning, yet the psalmist shows it to have
   been a divine judgment on Ephraim under whose leadership the people had
   shown the sinful and rebellious character that had distinguished their
   ancestors in Egypt. Read in this light, the Psalm becomes doubly
   interesting and instructive.

   Questions.

   1. How would you characterize several of the Psalms of this lesson?

   2. How is Psalm 67 to be interpreted?

   3. On the question of salvation how may this age be compared with the
   one to follow?

   4. When, presumably, was Psalm 68 composed?

   5. What is its prophetic application?

   6. Have you read Ephesians 4?

   7. How is Psalm 69 characterized?

   8. Which of the disciples is referred to prophetically in this Psalm?

   9. Which is the great Messianic Psalm of the lesson?

   10. What is the theme of Psalm 73?

   PSALMS 79-108

   The first Psalm in this lesson suggests Psalm 74 on which we did not
   dwell, but both of which depict the desolations of Judah by the
   Babylonians (cf. Jer. 52:12-24), On this supposition their date would
   be that of the captivity, and their author a later Asaph than the Asaph
   mentioned in David's time.

   Psalm 80.

   Has captivity features also, and some would say it relates to the ten
   tribes, as the preceding Psalm does to Judah, The next several Psalms
   are much alike in this respect and may easily be interpreted from that
   point of view.

   Psalm 86.

   Attributed to David, constitutes a break in the series, and is a prayer
   which we pause to analyze. Observe the touching picture in verse 1, a
   child with his arms round his father's neck. Observe the five requests
   for: preservation, joy, instruction, strength and encouragement, in
   verses 2, 4, 11, 16 and 17 respectively. Observe the grounds from the
   human side on which an answer is expected, his need, importunity
   (margin), trust, relationship to God (margin), verses 1, 3, 4 and 2.
   From the divine side he expected it because of God's goodness,
   greatness and grace, verses, 5, 10, 13.

   Of the authors of Psalms 88 and 89 we know nothing save that their
   names are among David's singers (1 Chron. 6:18,33; 15:17). There is
   little to show the occasion when they were written, but the last-named
   has been assigned to Absalom's rebellion. From that point of view it
   may be a contrast between the promised prosperity of David's throne (2
   Sam. 7), and what now threatens its downfall; but in any event it is
   full of helpfulness in spiritual application.

   Psalms 90 and 91 (especially the latter).

   Rank with 37, 51 and 103 in popular favor, being quoted almost as
   frequently. The first is a contrast between man's frailty and God's
   eternity, and the second, an outburst, of confidence in the presence of
   physical peril. Many a foreign missionary has found this last "a very
   present help in time of trouble"! The two Psalms are also capable of a
   dispensational application, the first referring to Israel's day of
   sorrow and repentance, and the second to her deliverance and protection
   from the tribulation to come. Satan's use of 91:11, 12, in the
   temptation of our Lord, will not be forgotten (Matt. 4:6).

   Psalms 93-100.

   Were applied by the Jews to the times of the Messiah, who had in mind
   His first advent only; but we in the light of subsequent events see
   their application to His second advent. In Psalm 93 He is entering on
   His reign; in 94 He is appealed to for judgment on the evil-doers; in
   95 Israel is exhorted to praise Him, and warned against unbelief. The
   substance of the next four is found in 1 Chronicles 16, which was used
   by David's direction at the dedication of the tabernacle on Mt. Zion,
   which typified the dispensation of the Messiah.

   A break appears at Psalm 101, where David is once more named, and is
   making a vow of consecration corresponding to Psalm 15. In Psalm 102 he
   is pouring out a deep complaint, prophetic of Israel's hour of
   tribulation and her deliverance therefrom (vv. 13-22). Observe that
   when the kingdoms of the earth are serving the Lord, men will be
   declaring His name in Zion and praising Him in Jerusalem. As we have
   seen earlier, that sacred city will be the centre of things in the
   millennial age.

   Psalms 103-108.

   Are all of praise. In the first, David rises from a thankful
   acknowledgment of personal blessings (vv. 1-5) to a celebration of
   God's attributes. In the next God is praised for His works of creation
   and providence. In the next Israel's special reasons for praise are
   enumerated, the thought being carried forward into the two succeeding
   Psalms, although the second of the two broadens out again into a
   celebration of God's mercy to all men in their various emergencies. It
   is one of the most beautiful of the Psalms and its structure affords
   another good opportunity to illustrate Hebrew poetry.

   Questions.

   1. To what period of Israel's history may Psalms 74 and 79 apply?

   2. What other Psalms may here be included?

   3. Have you studied Psalm 86 with the aid of the outline in the lesson?

   4. Memorize Psalm 91.

   5. To what period does the group 93-100 probably belong?

   6. How would you designate the next group?

   7. What is the refrain of Psalm 107?

   PSALMS 109-119

   The first psalm in this lesson is one of the imprecatory or cursing
   psalms, in the interpretation of which we should keep in mind the
   principles already stated, (1) that the writer speaks as a prophet;
   (2), that the enemies are not merely personal to him but enemies of
   God; (3), that they are not individuals so much as nations; and (4),
   that they are considered at a time when the incorrigible condition has
   been reached, and they have become permanently fixed in opposition to
   the Most High. The allusion to Judas (v. 8), suggests a symbolical
   character for the whole, and it would not be difficult to discover
   under the surface the lineaments of the Antichrist.

   Psalm 110.

   "The explicit application of this psalm to the Saviour, by Himself
   (Matt. 22:42-45), and by the apostles (Acts 2:34; 1 Cor. 15:25; Heb.
   1:13), and their frequent reference to its language and purport (Eph.
   1:20-22; Phil. 2:9-11; Heb. 10:12, 13), leaves no doubt of its
   prophetic character.

   "Not only was there nothing in the position or character of David to
   justify a reference to either, but the utter severance from the royal
   office of all priestly functions (so clearly assigned the subject of
   this psalm) positively forbids such a reference.

   "The psalm celebrates the exaltation of Christ to the throne of an
   eternal and increasing kingdom, and a perpetual priesthood (Zech.
   6:13), involving the subjugation of His enemies and the multiplication
   of His subjects, and rendered infallibly certain by the word and oath
   of Almighty God." [Jamieson, Faussett and Brown.]

   Psalms 111, 112.

   Are frequently interpreted together, the first celebrating God's
   gracious dealings with His people, and the second carrying on the
   thought as an exposition of its last verse. Using that verse as a text,
   the whole of Psalm 112 becomes illuminative of it.

   Psalms 113-118.

   Of these psalms it may be said that the Jews used them on their great
   festivals, calling them the Greater Hallel, which means hymn. They
   contrast God's majesty with His condescension (113), they celebrate His
   former care of His people (114), they beseech Him to vindicate His
   glory over the vanity of idols (115), they praise Him for deliverance
   from peril (116), etc.

   The last-named (116), is a particularly beautiful psalm, noting three
   distinct experiences of the Psalmist: love (vv. 1-6); rest (vv. 7-11)
   and gratitude (vv. 12-19). Love because God heard him, rest even when
   men are false to him, and gratitude expressed both with the lips and
   life.

   Psalm 119.

   Has several peculiarities. "It is divided into twenty-two parts, or
   stanzas, denoted by the twenty-two letters of the Hebrew alphabet. Each
   stanza contains eight verses, and the first letter of each verse gives
   name to the stanza.

   Its contents are mainly praises of God's word, exhortation of its
   perusal, and reverence for it; prayers for its proper influence, and
   complaints of the wicked despising it. There are but two verses (vv.
   122, 132) which do not contain some term or description of God's word.
   These terms are of various derivations, but used, for the most part,
   synonymously, though the variety seems designed to express better the
   several aspects in which our relations to the Word are presented.

   The psalm does not appear to have relation to any special occasion of
   the Jewish nation, but was evidently "intended as a manual of pious
   thoughts, especially for instructing the young, and its artificial
   structure was probably to aid the memory." [Jamieson, Faussett and
   Brown.]

   Questions.

   1. On what principles are the imprecatory psalms to be interpreted?

   2. What New Testament character is typically referred to in Psalm 109?

   3. What proves the prophetic character of Psalm 110?

   4. What does that psalm celebrate?

   5. What designation has been given to Psalms 113 to 118, and when and
   by whom are they used?

   6. Name six peculiarities of Psalm 119.

   PSALMS 120-134

   This group is differentiated by the title attached to each, "A Song of
   Degrees," or "A Song of Ascents." The title seems derived from the
   going up of the people to Jerusalem at the great festivals which came
   three times a year. (Compare Deut. 16:16; 1 Kings 12:27, 28, etc.); the
   thought being that they chanted the psalms at different stages in their
   journey.

   The pertinency of this application of these psalms is more apparent in
   some than others. For example. Psalm 121 represents the pilgrim looking
   towards the goal of his journey, and inspired by its contemplation to
   apply the thought of the strength of its hills to the care of God for
   His people, and especially His care for them on their journey, by night
   or day (vv. 3-6). The spiritual application is easily suggestive.
   Psalms 124, 126, 129 and 130, suggest the Babylonian captivity. Psalm
   134 represents the companies arriving at the sanctuary and calling on
   the priests to unite in praising God on their behalf, to which the
   priests reply in the language of the Mosaic blessing which they only
   could pronounce (v. 3).

   Of the whole group Psalm 132 is the most important in some respects.
   May Solomon have been its author? It opens with a declaration of his
   father David's zeal for the building of the temple (vv. 1-7).
   "Ephratah" (v. 6) is another name for Bethlehem (Gen. 48:7). "The
   fields of the wood" stands for "Jair" or "Kirjath-jearim" whence the
   ark was brought up by David to Jerusalem. The psalm next pleads with
   God for fulfillment of His promises to David concerning the temple (vv.
   8-18). The Solomonic application is clear in verses 10-12, and yet, it
   has a typical reference to the Kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ.

   Questions.

   1. How is this group of psalms designated?

   2. What is the probable sense of that designation?

   3. At what period may some of the group have been composed?

   4. Show their pertinency, by the analysis of one or more of the group.

   5. State the probable history of Psalm 132.

   6. Interpret Psalm 134.

   PSALMS 135-150

   Psalm 135.

   Praises God for choosing Jacob (vv. 1-4), extols His power in the
   natural world (vv. 5-7), and in the deliverance of His people from
   Egypt (vv. 8, 9) and bringing them into the promised land (vv. 10-12).
   All this is in contrast to the vanity pf idols (vv. 13-18).

   Psalm 136.

   Is of the same character as the preceding, but is notable for the
   chorus attached to each verse -- a chorus with which we have become
   familiar in other psalms (106:1; 118:1-4), and which may have been used
   by the people somewhat like the "Amen."

   Psalm 137.

   Is plainly identified as to its period and design.

   Psalm 139.

   Is perhaps the most sublime declaration of the omnipresence of God
   found in the Holy Scriptures. In the light of that attribute the
   Psalmist is willing to submit himself to the closest scrutinizing (v.
   23), and for the reason indicated at the close. Who will follow in his
   train?

   We have now reached another group of David's psalms (138-140) whose
   structure and style are like some of the earlier ones -- complaint,
   prayer, hope, praise.

   Psalm 142.

   Is unique in the historical note attached to it. The "cave" spoken of
   may have been Adullam (1 Sam. 22:1), or Engedi (1 Sam. 24:3), but it is
   not necessary to believe that the psalm was composed while David was in
   the cave. It may have been written later when his experience in the
   cave furnished a good illustration of his present need and an argument
   for his relief.

   Psalms 147-150.

   Are thought to especially celebrate the rebuilding of Jerusalem, and
   correspond to the conditions in Nehemiah 6:16; 12:27 and other places,
   although their millennial application is not far to seek.

   The last psalm is a fitting close to the book, "reciting the place,
   theme, mode and extent of Jehovah's exalted praise."

   Questions.

   1. What is a familiar chorus to the psalms?

   2. What is the period and design of Psalm 137?

   3. What divine attribute is the theme of Psalm 139?

   4. What group of psalms is contained in this lesson?

   5. What gives a historic touch to Psalm 142?

   6. Of what period are the last four Psalms commonly interpreted?
     __________________________________________________________________

PROVERBS

   INTRODUCTION

   That Solomon was the principle author of Proverbs is indicated by
   chapters 1:1, and 25:1, compared with 1 Kings 4:29-32. The last two
   chapters were the work of other authors to whom reference is made. See
   also chapters 25-29.

   Their Character.

   In Solomon's day there was a class of leaders in the eastern nations
   known as "teachers of wisdom," of which he was the most conspicuous; a
   supposition which gives countenance to the thought that the address,
   "My son," is not that of a father to a child, but a teacher to a pupil.

   Most of the proverbs seem based merely on considerations of worldly
   prudence, which was quite like Solomon; but considering the Holy Spirit
   as the real author, we must believe that faith is the underlying motive
   productive of the conduct to which the reader is exhorted. Indeed, this
   is expressed in 1:7; 5:21; 15:11; 23:17-19; 26:10.

   Luther called Proverbs "a book of good works"; Coleridge, "the best
   statesman's manual"; Dean Stanley, "the philosophy of practical life."
   Angus says, "It is for practical ethics what the psalms are for
   devotion;" Bridges says "that while other Scriptures show us the glory
   of our high calling this instructs us minutely how to walk in it;"
   Oetinger says, "The proverbs exhibit Jesus with unusual clearness." In
   the millennial kingdom doubtless it will constitute, with a portion of
   the Levitical ordinances and the Sermon on the Mount, the basis of the
   laws governing its citizens.

   Their Literary Style.

   Proverbs is classed with the poetical books of the Bible, but we must
   content ourselves with a single illustration of the poetic form taken
   from The Literary Study of the Bible.

   In 4:10 we have a poem on The Two Paths. Its strophe and antistrophe
   consist of ten-line figures, varying between longer and shorter lines;
   the conclusion is a quatrain. This form is a reflex of the thought of
   the poem; the strophe describes the path of the just, the antistrophe
   the path of the wicked; the conclusion then blends the two ideas in a
   common image, as follows:

   Hear, O my son, and receive my sayings;

   And the years of thy life shall be many.

   I have taught thee in the way of wisdom;

   I have led thee in paths of uprightness.

   When thou goest, thy steps shall not be straitened;

   And if thou runnest, thou shalt not stumble.

   Take fast hold of instruction;

   Let her not go:

   Keep her;

   For she is thy life.

   Enter not into the path of the wicked,

   And walk not in the way of evil men.

   Avoid it.

   Pass not by it;

   Turn from it,

   And pass on.

   For they sleep not, except they have done mischief;

   And their sleep is taken away, unless they cause some to fall.

   For they eat the bread of wickedness.

   And drink the wine of violence.

   But the path of the righteous is as the light of dawn,

   That shineth more and more unto the perfect day.

   The way of the wicked is as darkness;

   They know not at what they stumble.

   Questions.

   1. What scriptures point to Solomon as the principal author of this
   book?

   2. What scriptures indicate additional authors?

   3. What may have been the origin of the book?

   4. Is it, on the whole, a book of creed or conduct?

   5. Compare it with the psalms.

   6. Is it likely to have a future application? If so, when?

   7. What is the literary form of the book?

   8. Where is the poem on "The Two Paths" found?

   Chapters 1-3

   The nature of this book makes divisions of its chapters rather
   arbitrary, and ours may not always be the best, but it is hoped it may
   prove useful in some degree. The opening of chapter four suggests a new
   beginning, for which reason we conclude this lesson at the close of
   chapter three.

   It begins with an advertisement (1:1-6), in which mention is made of
   the author (v. 1), the object of the book (vv. 2, 3), and its great
   value (vv. 4-6).

   Then follows its theme, "The fear of the Lord is the beginning of
   knowledge" (v. 7), of which the remainder of the lesson is a
   development or exposition. "Beginning" is rendered in the margin of the
   Revised Version "chief part." "The fear of the Lord" means a right
   state of heart towards God as opposed to the condition of an
   unconverted man. Put the two ideas together, and we learn that the
   chief part of all knowledge is to be right with God. In working out of
   the thought:

   1. The teacher exhorts his "son" or pupil, to avoid vice (1:8-19).

   2. He shows the ruinous conduct of the unwise, a warning placed on the
   lips of wisdom personified (1:20-33).

   3. This warning is accentuated by contrasting the consequences of
   obedience and a striving after wisdom (2:1-3).

   4. The Lord is shown as the protector of those who are wise in this
   sense

   (3:19-26).

   5. The division concludes with an admonition to charity and justice (3:
   27-35).

   Practical and Doctrinal Remarks.

   In this part of the lesson we call attention to particular verses for
   explanation or application, acknowledging indebtedness to Arnot's "Laws
   From Heaven for Life on Earth."

   1:23 is a text for a revival sermon, containing a command and a promise
   joined, like Philippians 2:12. It teaches in one sentence those two
   seemingly contradictory doctrines, the sovereignty of God, and the free
   agency of man. It is when we turn at God's reproof that He pours out
   His Spirit; though it be also true that unless His Spirit is poured out
   we can not turn.

   1:24-32 offers an opportunity to preach on God's mercy to a rebellious
   people. He calls, stretches out His hands, counsels, and administers
   reproof. On the other hand men refuse, disregard, set at nought,
   reject. The natural consequence follows; sowing disobedience they reap
   judgment. That judgment consists in calling on God and getting no
   answer, seeking diligently and not finding Him. The passage closes with
   a promise to them that hearken -- deliverance from death at last and
   freedom from fear now.

   2:1-9 suggests Christ's words in Luke 11:9, "Seek, and ye shall find."
   The seeking is in verses 1-4, the finding in verses 5-9.

   2:10-22 is an outline of "the way of evil" (v. 12, R. V.). The first
   step is "speaking froward things"; the second, leaving "the paths of
   uprightness," the feet soon follow the tongue (v. 13); the third,
   walking "in the ways of darkness" (v. 13); the fourth, rejoicing "to do
   evil" (v. 14); fifth, delighting "in the frowardness of the wicked," we
   can not take pleasure in doing wickedness without finding pleasure in
   seeing others do it; sixth, to complete the picture, the evil person
   here particularly in mind is seen to be a woman (vv. 16-22).

   3:5, 6 presents one of the strongest promises of the Bible -- the first
   text from which the author of this commentary ever preached. Note how
   we are to trust, "with all thine heart." God complains as much of a
   divided allegiance as of none. Note the extent of our trust, "in all
   thy ways." "Few will refuse to acknowledge a superintending providence
   at certain times, and in certain operations that are counted great,"
   but God wants us to confide in Him in the little, close, and kindly
   things.

   3:11, 12 is quoted in Hebrews 12:5, 6. Note there how the inspired
   writer interprets the phrase, "My son." The speaker in Proverbs may
   have been addressing a pupil merely, but the Holy Spirit through him,
   "speaketh unto you as unto sons."

   "Despise not," means do not make light of chastening or cast it aside
   as if it had no meaning for you; "faint not" touches the opposite
   extreme, do not be driven to despair by the experience. "The middle way
   is the path of safety."

   3:13-20 is a description and appreciation of wisdom, which throughout
   this book means piety or godliness. In Ecclestiastes it is science. And
   yet piety or godliness hardly expresses it in the highest sense in
   which it is sometimes found, where as for example in these verses, it
   suggests Christ. He is the wisdom of God as we learn in the New
   Testament, who, by the Holy Spirit through the holy Scriptures is made
   unto us wisdom (1 Cor. 2). Such wisdom can not be planned, much less
   created by us, but must be "found" or "gotten" (v. 13).

   Observe the figures describing it. It is precious merchandise (vv. 14,
   15). It is a way of honor, pleasantness and peace (vv. 16, 17). It is a
   tree of life (v. 18).

   Questions.

   1. What is the chief part of all knowledge?

   2. Give the five general divisions of this lesson.

   3. Quote and give the doctrinal teaching of 1:23.

   4. Quote and give the spiritual significance of 1:33; 3:5, 6; 3:11, 12.

   5. What does "wisdom" mean in this book?

   Chapters 4-7

   These chapters begin with reminiscence. A father is reciting to a son
   the precepts taught him by his father in his youth, and which cover
   chapter four. Chapter five is a warning against the evil woman. Chapter
   six deals with suretyship, indolence, malice and violence, while
   chapter seven returns to the theme of chapter five.

   In the first-named chapter occurs the beautiful illustration of Hebrew
   rhythm to which attention was called in Lesson 1; and following it we
   find in verses 18 and 23, two of as oft-quoted texts as are in the
   whole book.

   The "just" man, as usual in the Bible, is he who is justified by faith
   and walks with God in a holy obedience. On him the Sun of Righteousness
   shines. His new life is at first like the morning light, a struggle
   between the darkness and the dawn. Ere long the doubt vanishes, and
   morning is unequivocally declared. The counterpart is fitted to overawe
   the boldest heart, "The way of the wicked is as darkness, they know not
   at what they stumble." The thought is that the darkness is in them and
   they carry it, an evil heart of unbelief, wherever they go.

   As to the other text, notice the fountain -- the heart (v. 23), and
   then the stream -- the mouth, the eyes, the feet (vv. 24-27). The heart
   is kept by prayer and the Word of God, and then the life issuing from
   it is what it ought to be. The speech is pure, and true and potent.
   There are no secret longings and side glances after forbidden things,
   and the steps in matters of business, society, and the home are all
   ordered of the Lord. (Compare Christ's words. Matt. 15:18-20).

   Family Joys.

   We have spoken of chapter five as a warning against the evil woman,
   which is true of its first half; but the reader will observe how the
   warning is accentuated by the contrast of the pure and happy home life
   in the second half, beginning at verse 15. The former is a dark back
   ground to bring out the latter's beauty. The keynote of the first half
   is "remove far from her." She is deceitful (vv. 3, 4), unstable (v. 6)
   and cruel (v. 9). To associate with her means waste of property and
   health (vv. 8, 9), and at the last remorse (vv. 12-14).

   The home in comparison is a pure and well-guarded well (v. 15). Read
   verses 16 and 17 in the Revised Version, and observe a husband's duty
   toward his wife (v. 18). Let him avoid biting words, neglect,
   unnecessary absences and the like. And as Paul says (Eph. 5:33), let
   "the wife see that she reverence her husband."

   The suretyship against which we are warned (6:1-5) is of the
   inconsiderate kind. "That imprudent assumption of such obligations
   leaving out of account the moral unreliableness of the man involved."
   The advice is to get the quickest release possible (vv. 3-5). It does
   not mean that we should not kindly and prudently help a neighbor in
   financial need, if we can.

   The "mother" of verses 20-24 must be one who knows God, for it is the
   instilling of His Word only in the heart of her child that can produce
   the results indicated. Observe it is a grown son here referred to as
   keeping his mother's law.

   Questions.

   1. What are the general subjects treated in these chapters?

   2. Quote and explain 6:18.

   3. What possible evidence is there in this lesson of our Lord's
   acquaintance with Proverbs?

   4. What does this lesson teach about conjugal love? About parental
   authority? About suretyship?

   Chapters 8-9

   In these chapters we have a public discourse of Wisdom (personified)
   (c. 8), and what Lange describes as an allegorical exhibition of the
   call of men to a choice of wisdom or folly, (c. 9).

   It is really our Lord Jesus Christ putting forth this voice (8:1), and
   crying unto men at the gates of the city (vv. 4, 5). It is He who
   speaks the excellent things (v. 6), and on whose lips wickedness is an
   abomination (v. 7). Of Him alone can it be predicted that there is
   nothing crooked (froward) in His mouth (v. 8), or to be desired in
   comparison with Him (vv. 10-18). It is He whose fruit is better than
   gold and who fills our treasuries (vv. 19-21). Were there any doubt of
   this identity would it not be removed by the remainder of the chapter?
   Who was set up from everlasting (v. 23)? Or, who was daily God's
   delight (v. 30)? And of whom can it be said that to find Him finds life
   (v. 35)?

   The Redeemer Anticipating Redemption.

   The heading of this paragraph expresses Arnot's conception of the
   latter part of the chapter, who says that, "if the terms are not
   applied to Christ they must be strained at every turn." Of course in a
   book written by Solomon it could not be said that Jesus was born in
   Bethlehem and died upon the cross, but if the Holy Spirit wished to
   make known something of the personal history of Christ before His
   coming, how could He have done so in plainer terms than these?

   Quoting the same in verses 30 and 31: "These three things are set in
   the order of the everlasting covenant: (1), the Father well pleased
   with His Beloved, 'I was daily His delight;' (2), the Son delighting in
   the Father's presence, 'rejoicing always before Him;' (3), the Son
   looking with prospective delight to the scene and subjects of His
   redemptive work, 'rejoicing in the habitable part of His earth; and my
   delights were with the sons of men.'"

   The Marriage Supper in the Old Testament.

   Arnot gives the foregoing title to the opening verses of chapter 9,
   where Wisdom, personifying the Son of God, has now come nigh unto men,
   having His habitation among them. Here we have the house, the prepared
   feast, the messengers, the invited guests, and the argument by which
   the invitation is supported. The positive side of that argument is:
   "Come, eat of my bread, and drink of the wine which I have mingled."
   The negative is: "Forsake the foolish, and live."

   The closing of this chapter exhibits Christ's "great rival standing in
   the same wide thoroughfare of the world and bidding for the youth who
   thronged it." "All that is contrary to Christ and dangerous to souls,
   is gathered up and individualized in the person of an abandoned woman
   lying in wait for unwary passengers, baiting her hook with sin and
   dragging her victims down the incline to hell."

   The reader will see how Proverbs may be fruitfully utilized in
   preaching the gospel.

   Questions.

   1. What have we in these chapters?

   2. Who really is speaking here?

   3. What proves it?

   4. Analyze verses 30 and 31 from the New Testament point of view.

   5. What parable of Christ is suggested in chapter 9?

   Chapters 10-15

   Some regard the division now entered upon as the original nucleus of
   the whole collection of proverbs (see the first sentence of verse one).
   The division extends really to the close of chapter 22, and contains
   "maxims, precepts and admonitions with respect to the most diverse
   relations of life," In so much of it as is covered by the present
   lesson we have a contrast "between the godly and the ungodly, and their
   respective lots in life."

   Following Zockler's outline in Lange we have this contrast set before
   us, first in general terms (c. 10), and after that, to the end of the
   lesson, in detail, as follows:

   (1) As to the just and unjust, and good and bad conduct towards one's
   neighbor, chapter 11.

   (2) As to the domestic and public associations, chapter 12.

   (3) As to the use of temporal good, and of the Word of God as the
   highest good, chapter 13.

   (4) As to the relation between the wise and the foolish, the rich and
   the poor, masters and servants, chapter 14.

   (s) As to the various other relations and callings in life, especially
   within the sphere of religion, chapter 15.

   Memory Verses and Choice Texts.

   This lesson is not suggestive of questions, but contains verses it
   would be well to memorize. For example, in chapter 10, verses 7, 9, 14,
   22, 25; chapter 11, verses 1, 2, 13, 24, 25, 26, 30; chapter 13, verses
   7, 15, 24; chapter 14, verses 10, 12, 25, 27, 32, 34; chapter 15,
   verses 1, 3, 8.

   In Arnot's "Laws from Heaven for Life on Earth," there are helpful
   discourses on several of these texts, the titles of which will be
   appreciated by young preachers: "Posthumous Fame," 10:7; "The Center of
   Gravity," 10:9; "The Passing Whirlwind and the Sure Foundation," 10:25;
   "Assorted Pairs," 11:2; "Virtue Its Own Reward," 11:17; "Scattering to
   Keep, and Keeping to Scatter," 11:24; "Raising the Market," 11:26; "The
   Wisdom of Winning Souls," 11:30; "Man Responsible for His Belief,"
   14:12; "The Two Departures -- The Hopeful and the Hopeless," 14:32.

   Chapters 16-24

   In these chapters we have a series of exhortations to a life of
   godliness expressed in general terms about as follows:

   (1) Confidence in God as a wise ruler, chapter 16.

   (2) A disposition of peacefulness and contentment, chapter 17.

   (3) The virtues of affability, fidelity, and others of a social nature,
   chapter 18.

   (4) Humility and meekness, chapter 19.

   (5) Sobriety, diligence and kindness, chapter 21.

   (6) Justice, patience, submission, chapter 21.

   (7) The attainment and preservation of a good name, chapter 22.

   (8) Warnings against avarice, licentiousness, and similar vices,
   chapter 23.

   (9) Warnings against ungodly companionship, chapter 24.

   Chapters 25-29

   This division of the book is introduced in the first verse of chapter
   25, as the "proverbs of Solomon, which the men of Hezekiah, king of
   Judah, copied out." What these words mean it is difficult to say,
   except in the general sense that the teachers of Hezekiah's period
   selected and gathered together wise sayings that had been written, or
   handed down orally in previous generations. They may have been those of
   Solomon only, and yet his name may be attached to them simply because
   they were now made part of his general collection. They contain
   admonitions to the fear of God and righteousness, addressed partly to
   kings, and yet also to their subjects. They also contain warnings
   against evil conduct of various kinds, (c. 26); against conceit and
   arrogance (c. 27); against unlawful dealings, especially of the rich
   with the poor (c. 28); and against stubbornness and insubordination,
   (c. 29).

   Chapter 30-31

   The last division consists of two supplements, one of the words of Agur
   (c. 30), and the other or Lemuel (c. 31).

   Agur's words begin with an exaltation of the Word of God (vv. 1-6),
   followed by short and pithy maxims with reference to the rich and the
   poor, pride and greed, etc.

   Lemuel's words open with a philosophical statement, applying chiefly to
   kings, followed by his well-known poem in praise of the virtuous woman.
     __________________________________________________________________

ECCLESIASTES

   INTRODUCTION

   The ground for ascribing Ecclesiastes to Solomon is four-fold: (1) The
   indirect claim of the book as gathered from chapter 1, verses 1 and 12;
   (2) the general opinion of Jews and Christians from the earliest time;
   (3) the fitness of Solomon to write it; (4) the lack of agreement among
   critics as to any other author or period.

   There are different plans or theories of the book, but to the compiler
   of this commentary it is a kind of biography of Solomon's life, and yet
   one in which he not only records, but re-enacts his search for
   happiness, making of it a kind of dramatic biography.

   In other words, Solomon rehearses the various phases of his former
   self, having fits of study, luxury, misanthropy, etc., all ending in
   disappointment. It is important to note that "wisdom" in Ecclesiastes
   means "science," while in Proverbs it means "piety." In the same
   connection, "vanity" here means not merely foolish pride, but "the
   emptiness of the final result of life apart from God" (Rom. 8:20-22).

   They who hold this conception of the book are well represented by W. J.
   Erdman, in his concise work, entitled "Ecclesiastes," on which we have
   permission to draw for what follows. He calls it "The Book of the
   Natural Man," by which he means man as he is "under the sun," compared
   with the man of Paul, whose "citizenship is in heaven."

   The first proof is that the only divine name in the book is the
   "natural" name, God (Elohim), the significance of which all will
   recognize from our reference to it in Genesis. Jehovah, the name
   associated with the covenant of redemption, is not once employed; hence
   man is seeking what is best "under the sun," but not seeking Him who is
   above the sun.

   A second proof is the frequent use of "under the sun." "Man is looking
   up, no knowing what is beyond, except judgment."

   A third proof is that all the experiences and observations of the book
   are bound together by the one question: "What is the chief good?" "Is
   life worth living?" While the answer is sought amidst general failure,
   contradictions, and half-truths, because man is out of Christ, and yet
   face to face with the mysteries of God and nature.

   A fourth proof is what the book styles "the conclusion of the whole
   matter" (12:13, 14), which is that of the natural man only. "To fear
   God and keep His commandments," is right, but the author of
   Ecclesiastes confessedly has not done so, and yet he sees judgment in
   the distance and has no preparation to meet it.

   "Where man ends therefore, God begins." The book of the natural man
   concludes where that of the spiritual man begins. The all-in-all of man
   under the sun convicts him of failure and guilt in order to lead him to
   the all-in-all of the man above the sun, the second Adam, who bare our
   guilt in His own body on the tree.

   Is the Book Inspired?

   This conception of the book explains why some of its conclusions are
   only partially true and others altogether false, such as 2:16; 3:19;
   9:2; etc.

   And if it be asked, How then can the book be inspired? the answer is
   that in the inspiration of the Bible we do not claim the inspiration of
   the men, but the writings; while in the latter case it is not meant
   that every word thus written is true, and in that sense God's Word, but
   that the record of it is true. That is, God caused it to be written
   that this or that man felt this or that way, and said thus and so, and
   hence the record of how he felt and what he said is God's record, and
   in that sense true and in that sense inspired.

   Chapters 1-2

   1. The Prologue 1:1-11,

   including (1) the general result of the whole search for good on earth,
   the record of which is to follow (vv. 1-3); (2) a symbolic illustration
   from nature of the monotony of human existence (vv. 4-7); (3) a plain
   statement of the facts in the case (vv. 8-11).

   2. The Introduction vv. 12-18,

   describing the seeker (v. 12); his method of search (v. 13), and the
   result in general (vv. 14, 15), and in particular (vv. 16-18).

   3. Various Vanities

   and the conclusions drawn from them (2:2-26). The lust of the flesh
   (vv. 1-3); the lust of the eyes (vv. 4-6); pride of life (vv. 7, 8);
   conclusion (vv. 9-11). The vanity of wisdom (vv. 12-17); the vanity of
   work (vv. 18-23); conclusion (vv. 24-26).

   Chapter 3-4

   1. Man's Times 3:1-11.

   These are orderly and seasonable, but bring no permanent profit,
   because man is still ignorant of God's purpose in them all. He does not
   know how to fit his work into God's work. The conclusion follows (vv.
   12-15).

   2. God's Time (vv. 16-22).

   There is a suggestion in verse 17 that this is long. It will be a time,
   too, of judgment and manifestation (w. 17, 18), and yet, and perhaps
   because of this, man's death is not different from the beast (w.
   19-21); conclusion (v. 22).

   3. Sundry Wrongs and Vanities (4:1-16).

   Oppression (vv. 1-3); envy (4:4-6); the lonely miser (vv. 7-12);
   political disappointment (vv. 13-16).

   Chapters 5-6

   1. Varieties in Worship, 5:1-7.

   On these verses the writer seems to muse on the relation of the unseen
   Being to the act of man in worship. "Mindful of man's jaunty liberalism
   and superstition, rash vows and wordy prayers, dreamy and unreal,
   because full of intruding vanities and worldly businesses, the preacher
   earnestly exhorts to few words and solemn steps." But even then it is
   the natural man only who is speaking in the exhortation, not the
   regenerate man, because he speaks "only of a God who is far away and
   looks upon sinful man on earth with cold, judicial eye, ready to
   destroy the work of man in wrath."

   2. Vanities of Wealth, vv. 8-20.

   Oppression of the poor by the rich (vv. 8, 9); dissatisfaction with
   mere abundance (vv. 10-12); hoarded riches an evil (vv. 13-17)
   conclusion (vv. 18-20).

   3. Contradictions c. 6.

   This chapter is a contradiction of the conclusion reached at the close
   of the preceding one. He thought it was "good and comely for one to
   eat, and drink and enjoy the good of all his labor," but now he is
   startled by discovering as a "common" experience that there are men of
   wealth and honor from whom God withheld this enjoyment (vv. 1, 2).

   "Having begun his descent from the sunny slopes of a natural piety he
   sinks at last into the deepest melancholy." To be blessed with wealth,
   offspring, long life, and yet not have the "good" he once thought he
   had, were worse than never to have been. Before the mystery of it all
   he is dumb (vv. 11, 12).

   Chapters 7-9:12

   The interval between this chapter and the preceding represents a pause
   in the writer's thought, and now he seems to "set out on a new quest
   for the chief good" in life. He will seek it in wise conduct. He will
   renounce feasting and trying the opposite (7:1-6); he will avoid
   extremes (7:15-18); no one is perfectly righteous (7:19-22); the worst
   thing he has found is woman (7:23-26) ; the conclusion is that man is
   indeed a fallen creature (7:27-29). "Inventions" in this last verse is
   to be taken in the sense of "tricks, evil artifices, and conceits."

   The wise conduct which the preacher now proposes is to be exercised
   against temptations to disloyalty and rebellion in national and civic
   relations (8:1-8); and against the oppressions of tyrants and other
   injustices (8:9-13); and yet after considering it all, in his
   accustomed despair he reports to his favorite conclusion that there is
   "nothing in it," and he had better enjoy himself anyway (8:14-17).

   This idea is carried over into chapter nine. The providence of God in
   human affairs is inscrutable (vv. 1-3), therefore the only thing to do
   is to enjoy this life cheerfully, and use it as profitably as possible
   (vv. 7-12).

   Chapters 9:13-12:14

   Erdman makes a new division here, and while others do not agree with
   him, yet there is that which suggests it, surely. To quote him, the
   preacher here seems to have returned to "the placid, philosophic mood
   again, in the cautious praise of wisdom (9:13-18). This praise is
   followed by a number of proverbs of natural wisdom and prudence (see
   chapter 10, especially verses 16-20).

   In chapters 11 and 12 we have "the final sum and forecast," which is,
   that however pleasant at times life under the sun may be, everything
   that is to come, like everything that has been, will contain times of
   darkness. The whole period of life from childhood to old age is vanity
   (17:7, 8).

   Therefore special exhortations to childhood and youth follow (11:9,
   10). Rejoice if you will, but judgment follows.

   These exhortations are accompanied by warnings against the evils and
   miseries of old age -- the old age of a vainly spent life (12:1-8). And
   these lead to the epilogue .of the book the mournful repetition of the
   monotonous refrain, "vanity of vanities, all is vanity" (12:8), and the
   great conclusion of man under the sun, "Fear God and keep His
   commandments" (12:13, 14). And why? Because judgment is coming, and yet
   no salvation is seen!

   Summary.

   "Thus in abrupt endings and sudden returns to the one great question of
   the book, the preacher keeps showing man to himself. Debating between
   the vanities of life and the gloom of the grave; the contentment of
   ignorance and the worth of wisdom; the vexations of riches and the
   miseries of poverty; the orderly 'times' of man and the 'eternity' of
   God; the wrongs which are not righted and the dead that can no longer
   be oppressed; a distant God and a becoming worship; the wonder that
   women worth the name are so scarce, and the reason that things are as
   they are; the pride and fragrant joys of family life and the event of
   death that comes to all; the lifelong possession of all manner of
   earthly good and the final lack of imposing obsequies and an honorable
   grave; the problem of the proper conduct of life and the mystery of the
   divine purpose and plan; between such, and manifold more earthly things
   like these, and others too high for mortal men, the preacher keeps
   moving on to the discouraging conclusion."

   That conclusion is the truth underlying all natural religions, the
   utterance of the universal conscience, namely, "Fear God; do right; thy
   judgment day is coming." It is some relief, amidst the wrongs and
   perplexities of the world, to look for a day of judgment to righten and
   clear up all, but, as has been said, there is no personal salvation in
   it.

   Where man ends, however, God begins. The book of the natural man closes
   that the gospel of the Son of God may open.

   An Alternative Outline.

   As some may find the preceding outline difficult to grasp, the
   following is added as suggested in part by the headings of the chapters
   in the Scofield Reference Bible:

   1. The Theme (1:1-3).

   2. The Theme Proved (1:4-3:22).

   (a) The transitoriness of all things (1:4-11).

   (b) The fruitlessness of power, wisdom or knowledge, to counteract evil
   (1:12-18).

   (c) The emptiness of pleasure, (2:1-3).

   (d) The emptiness of wealth and great works (2:4-11).

   (e) The limitations of wisdom (2:12-26).

   (f) The weariness of life (3:1-22).

   3. The Theme Developed (4:1-10:20).

   (a) In the light of the oppressions and iniquities of life (4:1-16).

   (b) In the light of riches and poverty (5:1-26).

   (c) In the light of man's inevitable end (6:1-12).

   (d) In the light of incurable evil (7:1-29).

   (e) In the light of the mysteries of providence (8:1-17).

   (f) In the light of the world's wrong standards of values (9:1-18).

   (g) In the light of the anarchy of the world (10:1-20).

   4. The best thing possible to man apart from God (11:1-12:12).

   5. The best thing possible to man under the law (12:13, 14).
     __________________________________________________________________

SONG OF SOLOMON

   INTRODUCTORY

   Internal evidence confirms the voice of antiquity that Solomon wrote
   this book (See 1 Kings 4:32). As it is called the Song of Songs, the
   title carries the idea that it is the best of all his songs. Moreover,
   although it is not quoted in the New Testament, yet it always formed
   part of the Old as far as we have record, and was in the canon of
   sacred Scripture which Jesus and His apostles recognized as such.

   When it was written is not known, but its imagery seems drawn from the
   marriage of Solomon either with Pharoah's daughter, or some native of
   Palestine espoused some years later of noble birth, though inferior to
   her husband. For the first idea compare 1 Kings 3:1; 7:8; 9:24, with
   chapters 1:9, and 6:12 of the Song, and for the second, look at the
   Song, 2:1; 7:1; 1:6.

   There are two characters who speak and act throughout, Shelomoh, a
   masculine name, meaning "peaceful," and Shulamith, a feminine form of
   the same name. See 1:6; 3:11; 6:13; 8:12. There is also a chorus of
   virgins, daughters of Jerusalem, 2:7; 3:5; 5:8, 9.

   Towards the close two brothers of Shulamith appear (8:8, 9). See also
   (1:6). As in most Hebrew poetry, and indeed all ancient poems, there
   are no breaks to indicate change of scene or speakers, which is
   determined partly by the sense, but chiefly by the use of the original
   of the feminine and masculine pronouns.

   The book is a description of wedded love; and yet, of course, it has a
   higher aim. It is noticeable that there is a sudden change from the
   singular to the plural in 1:4, which seems to indicate in the judgment
   of Angus, that Shulamith must be taken collectively; a fact which, put
   with others gives credence to the idea that the story should be applied
   to the history of God's chosen people and their relation to Him. Every
   reader of the Bible knows that the union of Jehovah with Israel, and
   that of Christ and His church are presented under the same figure of
   marriage. (See such passages as Psalm 45; Isaiah 54:5; 6; Jeremiah 2:2;
   Hosea 2:14-23; Matthew 9:15; John 3:29; Ephesians 5:23-27, etc.)

   Outline of the Book.

   The following is from Angus' Bible Hand-book:

   1. Shulamith speaks, 1:2-6; then in dialogue with Shelomoh; Shul. 1:7;
   Shel. 1:8-11; Shul. 1:12-14; Shel. 1:15; Shul. 1:16-2:1; Shel. 2:2;
   Shul. 2:3.

   2. Shulamith now rests, sleeps and dreams (Shelomoh addressing the
   daughters of Jerusalem and charging them not to wake her, 2:7; 3:5;
   2:4-6; 8-3:4).

   3. The daughters of Jerusalem see a nuptial procession approaching
   3:6-11.

   4. Dialogue between Shelomoh and Shulamith. Shelomoh speaks 4:1-16; (as
   far as "flow out") Shul. 4:16; Shel. 5:1.

   5. A night scene; Shulamith seeking for Shelomoh; meets and converses
   with the daughters of Jerusalem; Shul. 5:2-8; daughters of Jerusalem,
   5-9; Shul. 5:10-16; daughters of Jerusalem, 6:1; Shul. 6:2, 3.

   6. Morning scene; Shelomoh visits his garden early, and meets
   Shulamith; Shel. 6:4-10; Shul. 6:11, 12; the dialogue continuing to
   8:8.

   7. The brothers of Shulamith are introduced; the brothers speak 8:8, 9;
   Shulamith answers them, 8:10-12; Shelomoh speaks, 8:13; and Shulamith
   answers, closing the scene, 8:14.

   Chapters 1-2

   For the following we are indebted to "An Exposition and Vindication of
   Solomon's Song" by James Strong, S. T. D., who combines the literal and
   allegorical modes of interpretation -- the idea that the poem
   celebrates the royal marriage, and is also symbolic of the relation of
   Jehovah and His people in both dispensations. The details apply to the
   former, while the spiritual conceptions are foreshadowed in the latter.

   Hebrew wedding festivities usually lasted a week, the marriage being
   consummated at the close of the first day, but here the nuptials seemed
   to have been postponed till the last day. The description, therefore,
   is not that of the honeymoon, but the wooing.

   Strong distributes the drama into six acts corresponding to as many
   days -- not extending into the Sabbath -- and subdivides each into two
   scenes, morning and evening.

   Act I. Scene 1.

   This sub-section comprises verses 2-8 of chapter 1. The bride is an
   Egyptian princess, whose train of attendants has reached the royal
   portico at Jerusalem, and is met by the Israelitish maids of honor. Her
   thoughts are busy with anticipation of the greeting from her intended,
   and she expresses them, almost unconsciously, in the words, "Let him
   kiss me with the kisses of his mouth" (1-2). The ladies respond to the
   close of verse 3.

   The bride orders the attendants to proceed. She being carried in a
   palanquin, a covered conveyance borne on the shoulders of men, and she
   exclaims, "Draw me," or "Bear me forward." The ladies respond, "We will
   run after thee!" Passing within the palace, she says, "The king hath
   brought me into his chambers" (his courts), and the ladies respond, to
   the close of verse 4.

   The bride disparages her charms in verse 5, and a dialogue ensues
   between her and the ladies to the end of verse 8, where she is left
   awaiting the bridegroom in an ante-room.

   If we seek the spiritual application of this, it is found in the
   expectant desire of true believers for the: second coming of Christ.

   Act I. Scene 2.

   This scene runs from 1:9 to 2:6, and describes the introduction of the
   lovers to each other, in one of the interior reception chambers, in
   presence of the attendants.

   The bridegroom expresses his admiration of the bride (verses 9 and 10),
   and the attendants respond, verse 11. Probably the bride speaks
   (12-14), her observations inspired by a glimpse of the nosegay
   ("spikenard") at her bosom. Compliments are passed between her and the
   bridegroom (1:15-2:3), and probably the symbolic language is suggested
   by the garden and its fountains that lie before them.

   The bridegroom and his attendants retire, but the bride continues
   addressing the ladies (4-6). Overpowered with emotion at her lover's
   favor toward her, she begs restoratives from them, although she sighs
   for his personal support to keep her from sinking.

   The scene is emblematic of the church's rapturous contemplation of her
   glorified state with Christ. And there is that in it which suggests the
   declaration of John the Baptist: "He that hath the bride is the
   bridegroom; but the friend of the bridegroom which standeth and
   heareth, rejoiceth greatly because of the bridegroom's voice" (John
   3:29).

   Act II. Scene 1.

   This scene (2:7-17) opens on the next morning, and represents the royal
   lover starting on a hunting trip. He serenades his sweetheart beneath
   her chamber window, urging her maidens not to awaken her (7). Her quick
   ear detects his voice, and she calls to her maidens concerning him
   (8-10), and repeats his song (10-14). A rougher voice, that of the
   gardener, is heard (15). Meanwhile the bride, having finished her
   toilet, is at the window acknowledging the song (16, 17).

   Chapters 3-5

   Act II. Scene 2.

   This scene embraces the first four verses of chapter 2, and is a
   soliloquy of the bride in the nature of a troubled dream -- troubled
   because of anxiety for her lover's safety in the chase. It is
   emblematical of the temporary interruption experienced in the
   fellowship of Christ's people with their Lord.

   Act III. Scene 1.

   We are here dealing with the events of verses 5-11 of this same
   chapter, and which are supposed to have occurred on the third morning.
   The royal procession advances, bearing the spoils of the preceding
   day's excursion. Solomon again sends a caution to the bride's maids
   against breaking her slumber (5). She is alert, however, and exclaims
   to her attendants as in verse 6, who reply in verses 7 and 8, She
   recognizes the palanquin (q), and the maidens tell her of its
   construction (10). The latter are then permitted by her to make a
   closer inspection (11).

   Act III. Scene 2.

   We are now in the fourth chapter to which may be added the first verse
   of chapter five. Solomon has left the palanquin, and approaching the
   window of his bride, sings the praises of her person, which a partly
   drawn veil discloses (1-7). "His thoughts running upon his favorite
   rural haunts, he proposes future excursions to these spots, especially
   his garden, with which he compares his beloved in her gorgeous and
   perfumed attire" (8-16). She receives these encomiums with modest
   silence, and then suggests that he do not wait for her to share his
   enchanting retreat. This observation he turns into another compliment
   that she herself, her presence, is his garden, whereupon, turning to
   his companions, he bids them share with him the luxury of the moment
   (v. 1).

   There is a term occurring (1:2, 4; 4:10; 7:12) which Strong translates
   "loves" or "love tokens," and which, he says, can not mean kisses, or
   other found endearments as some have interpreted them; but as the
   contexts show, the cosmetic odors, perhaps from a lovecharm casket
   which the bride may have worn on the occasion. That no erotic sentiment
   is couched under the figures of this scene is shown by the closing
   invitation of the lover to his companions. From which we may conclude
   that no double meaning is intended by the similar metaphors in chapter
   7, verses 7-9, following.

   Compare corresponding passages of the Bible which express God's favor
   for His people and the love they should show towards Him (Isa. 62:5;
   Ezek. 16:10-13; Zeph. 3:14, 17; Eph. 5:25-27).

   Act IV. Scene 1.

   The morning scene of the fourth day (5:2-6:3) contains the recital of a
   nightmare illusion of the bride addressed to the ladies in her private
   apartment. In the opinion of Strong, verse 15 is to be interpreted of
   the snowy linen leggings, in contrast with the gilt sandals worn by
   Solomon. His knocking at the door for admission is borrowed in the
   Saviour's address to the church of Laodicea (Rev. 3:20). The
   description of the bridegroom's person is in keeping with the
   manifestations of the Redeemer in both Testaments (Ezek. 1:26, 27; Dan.
   10:5, 6; Rev. 1:13-15).

   Chapters 6-8

   Act IV. Scene 2.

   This sub-section corresponds to the afternoon of the fourth day, and
   carries us through chapter 6. The occasion looks like a formal visit of
   the bridegroom, with his courtiers, to the bride and her maids of
   honor. The place is a room in her future palace. Solomon begins his
   praises, 6:4-12, when the bride rises to retire, but the courtiers beg
   her to remain (13). The ladies inquire, "What will ye see in the
   Shulamite?" or, "Why do ye desire her to tarry longer?"

   Act V. Scene 1.

   On this, the morning of the fifth day, the bridesmaids are describing
   the nuptial wardrobe as they assist the bride in her toilet (7:1-6).
   Compare the wardrobe in Isaiah 3:16-24. See also a parallel in Psalm
   45.

   Act V. Scene 2.

   The afternoon of the same day (7:7-8:3), is a representation of a more
   private interview between the two, when they avow their attachment for
   each other. As the week advances they are thus gradually brought into
   closer acquaintance with one another, and their affection increases.
   The bridegroom begins the conversation (7:7-9), and the bride responds
   in an undertone (10), but subsequently "reverts to the rural haunts of
   her maternal home," whither she would invite him (12, 13 and continuing
   into the next chapter).

   The warmth of these expressions seem to many too amatory for spiritual
   interpretation, but following Strong, we keep two considerations before
   us (1), it is the bride who speaks in the most ardent terms, not the
   bridegroom, and it is only right to assume a pure and refined nature
   behind them appropriate to her sex and innocence; (2), it is no cold
   "platonic" love which the Bible employs as the emblem of Christ's
   feeling for His church, but something very different. See Ephesians
   5:28-33.

   Act VI. Scene 1.

   This is the wedding day. Chapter 8, verses 4 to 7, may be taken as
   corresponding to the formal espousal in the presence of witnesses after
   the manner of the Hebrews.

   Solomon arrives early (4), but the bride soon joins him, and then the
   guests are represented as asking the question in verse 5.

   The bride is pointing out to the bridegroom the scene of their earliest
   acquaintance (5-7). (See the Revised Version for an improved rendering
   of this and other passages referred to.) Compare Jeremiah 2:2 for
   Jehovah's reference to the warmth of the early zeal of His people
   toward Him.

   Act VI. Scene 2.

   This synchronizes with the afternoon of the sixth day, and gives an
   account of the dower portion of the bride. "The matter is negotiated by
   her brothers, who, in their deliberations aside, speak depreciatingly
   of her as they had been accustomed to do ever since her tender age." It
   is they who speak in verse 8. When they say: "If she be a wall" (9),
   they refer to her external appearance suggesting to them the blank and
   unadorned structure facing the street in oriental houses.

   The bride overhears, and interrupts indignantly in verse 10, reminding
   them that she has found favor in the eyes of her beloved. She then
   takes the negotiation into her own hands, settling "the income of her
   private estate upon the bridegroom" (11, 12).

   The bridegroom now calls to her in verse 14 and she responds in the
   closing verse, which has been compared with the final invocation of the
   Apocalypse to the Lord Jesus, "Even so, come!"

   Answers to Criticisms and Objections.

   At the close of Strong's exposition there follows his vindication of
   the book in which he deals with criticisms and objections, some of the
   answers to which are here in a condensed form.

   1. There are those who speak of the song as indecent, but this is
   explained by ignorance of the plot and its language. Even the bare
   outline of the former largely disproves this, to say nothing of the
   better translation which accompanies it and which our space would not
   permit us to give except in a word here and there. There is a profound
   and hallowed instinct at the foundation of the marriage state, and
   where no sin is, it may be alluded to by lips of purity.

   2. Some object that it is purely a love-song, nothing more, and
   therefore unworthy a place in holy writ; but Jews and Christians in all
   the ages have maintained its spiritual interpretation. They may have
   differed in the details of its application, but they have seen in it a
   foreshadowing of the relation of Jehovah to Israel, or Christ to His
   church.

   Of course, a love-scene is the ground of the song, but its final import
   is of a higher significance. Figurative language has a two-fold
   application, the literal and the symbolic, a present physical scene
   which is the type of a distant event or a spiritual principle. The
   physical is usually depicted with particularity, but it is not proper
   to pursue the parallel into all the minuteness of the application. To
   quote an authority on hermeneutics, "A parable does not run on all
   fours."

   3. A third class have considered the book irreverent, and deprecated
   addressing God in such familiar intimacy as its dialogues involve when
   considered symbolically. But the answer is first, that the language is
   not thought of as used by individuals in their personal capacity, but
   by the Jewish nation collectively, or the church considered as the
   bride of Christ. Charles Wesley, and other hymn-writers, employ the
   same sentiments in their lyrics intended for public worship. Secondly,
   the bridegroom typified here, is not God in His sovereign capacity, but
   the Redeemer in His revealed relation as partaker of our human nature.
   Moreover, the bride is not the church in her present weak and defective
   life and experience, but as presented unto Him, "not having spot, or
   wrinkle or any such thing" (Eph. 5:27).

   4. A fourth class speak of the book as unedifying, which they think is
   justified by the fact that it is so little used. But there are other
   parts of the Bible of which the same might be said, and yet they are
   inspired, and "profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction,
   for instruction in righteousness" (2 Tim. 3:16), even though not as
   much so as other Scriptures. Strong maintains that the fault in this
   case lies largely in our poor version of the Song -- poor not only in
   translation but arrangement. This is true not only of the King James'
   version but of more modern ones in English. The foregoing exposition
   furnishes a hint as to the possibilities in the book, did it have a
   better literary form.
     __________________________________________________________________

ISAIAH

   INTRODUCTION TO THE PROPHETIC SCRIPTURES

   None of the prophets from the time of Solomon to the period when they
   began to write their prophecies, that is for two centuries, make any
   mention of the Messiah or His kingdom. The reason is that during that
   period the Messiah could not have been the object of hope to either
   kingdom taken as a whole, because the moral conditions were lacking.
   The promises respecting Him appealed to faith, and the prophets could
   not speak of future spiritual blessings to those who had no ear to
   hear. Their mission during that period was to convince the people of
   sin and seek to bring them to repentance, which was never expressed in
   any national sense. There were individuals who appreciated the
   Messianic hope, as our study of the Psalms showed, but this was not
   true of either Kingdom as such.

   Why Prophecy Came to Be Written.

   It was about the eighth or ninth century before Christ when the
   prophets began to record their prophecies. Before that time, God was
   present with His people in the theocratic sense, and communicated His
   will to them as need existed, by means of the Shekinah (Ex. 25:22), and
   the words spoken by the prophets (Deut. 18:18-22). These spoken words
   were for that time and generation in which the prophets lived, and were
   not necessary to be written down. When, however, this necessity arose,
   it spoke of the future withdrawal of God's presence and the consequent
   cessation of prophetic utterances. This meant in turn, a delay or
   postponement of the Messianic kingdom (Compare Amos 8:11, 12 and
   Lamentations 2:9). The prophets' words now were preserved for future
   generations because it became evident that both the kingdoms of Israel
   and Judah were to be scattered, in punishment for their sins.

   The Mission of Written Prophecy.

   Written prophecy, therefore, had a two-fold mission, one for the
   immediate present, and the other the remote future. The written
   messages revolve around three points: (1) The temporal and spiritual
   blessings which God would give Israel and Judah, if faithful; (2) the
   judgments that would fall upon them if unfaithful; (3) the renewed
   grace to them when they should become penitent.

   There is variety in the detail with which the prophets write, but their
   points of agreement are as follows:

   (1) A day of retribution is coming on Judah and Israel, the end of
   which will bring repentance and prepare the way for the Messianic
   kingdom. While these judgments will affect Israel and Judah chiefly,
   yet they will fall also on the Gentile nations of the whole earth.

   (2) The tribes of Israel and Judah will be regathered to their own
   land, and a remnant purified by discipline will form the nucleus of the
   restored nation, where God will again dwell in temporal and spiritual
   blessing. (3) This restored nation will be the germ of the Messianic
   kingdom extending over the whole earth.

   Why the Gentiles Are Addressed.

   But written prophecy embraces God's words to Gentile peoples also.
   These words could not in the nature of the case always have been spoken
   to them, and even so, those peoples have long since ceased to exist as
   peoples.

   Why, then, written and preserved? Not simply that we of these latter
   days may see their fulfillment, and thus have our faith confirmed, for
   this fulfillment cannot in many cases be proved because of our
   historical ignorance. They were written rather because the purpose of
   God in the Jews as a people, both as wanderers and when restored and
   dwelling in their own land, brings them into continued relations to
   other peoples, and especially to those dwelling immediately around
   them. And although the earlier peoples, as Edom and Moab, Syria and
   Egypt, may cease to exist, yet other peoples arise and the same
   relations in substance continue.

   As His own chosen nation, through whom He will reveal Himself to the
   nations, the Jews hold through all time an official position and have a
   sacred character, and in the day of their restoration and of the
   judgment of the nations, the great question will be, how far have the
   other nations regarded them as His people, and so treated them?

   For the substance of the above, indebtedness is acknowledged to
   Andrews' "God's Revelation of Himself to Man."

   Questions.

   1. Indicate the period marked by the absence of written prophecies in
   Judah and Israel.

   2. Why was this true?

   3. At about what period did written prophecy begin?

   4. Prior to that time how had God communicated with His people?

   5. Was the change from spoken to written prophecy a hopeful one, or
   otherwise?

   6. State the two-fold mission of written prophecy.

   7. Around what three points does written prophecy revolve?

   8. On what three things do the prophets all agree?

   9. Why were the prophecies concerning the Gentile nations recorded?

   10. What kind of a position and character do the Jews hold through all
   time with reference to the Gentile nations?

   11. What will be the great criterion of judgment upon the Gentile
   nations in the day of the restoration of Israel?

   GENERAL DISCOURSES

   Chapters 1-5

   The first five chapters of Isaiah form a natural division, to which,
   for want of a better title, we give that of General Discourses, or
   messages. The first is limited to chapter 1, the second covers chapters
   2-4, and the third chapter 5.

   But first notice the introduction, verse 1. By what word is the whole
   book described? What genealogy of the prophet is given? To which
   kingdom was he commissioned, Israel or Judah? In whose reigns did be
   prophesy?

   Examine 2 Kings, chapters 15-20, and the parallel passage in 2
   Chronicles for the history of this period. It will be seen later that
   the prophet received his vision in the last year of Uzziah, so that few
   of his messages belong to that reign. In the days of Jotham and Ahaz
   Judah was menaced by Syria and Israel, and shortly after Ahaz came to
   the throne he made an alliance with Assyria against them. This was
   contrary to the divine will and gives occasion for much of Isaiah's
   prophecy, especially in the early part of the book. Assyria at first a
   friend, afterwards became the enemy of Judah, to the latter's serious
   loss. When Hezekiah came to the throne, however, he placed his trust in
   Jehovah and was able to resist the further inroads of Assyria.
   Familiarity with these facts is necessary to understand the allusions
   in Isaiah.

   First Discourse. Chapter 1:2-31.

   This discourse opens with an indictment against the people for their
   sin (2-4), ingratitude and sinful ignorance being emphasized. The name
   of Israel is these verses is to be taken in a generic sense as
   including Judah. Now follows a description of the present consequences
   of their sin (5-9). Notice the figure of speech -- "a cottage in a
   vineyard." The cottage was the shelter of the keeper of the vineyard,
   but Judah's desolation at this time represented a vineyard without
   fruit, the cottage alone indicating that it was a vineyard. In other
   words Jerusalem "the daughter of Zion" and the capital of the kingdom
   was about all that remained to her at this time. A remonstrance follows
   (10-15). "Sodom" and "Gomorrah" are used metaphorically. The people
   were hypocritical in their religious worship, and God was weary of it.
   He appeals to them (16-20). The appeal is recognized as fruitless, and
   judgments must follow, out of which purification and redemption shall
   come (21-27). This period of judgment runs throughout the history of
   Judah down to the end of this age, as indicated by verses 26 and 27,
   which speak of a time not yet realized in her experience. In other
   words Jerusalem on this earth shall some day be known as "the city of
   righteousness." This will be when Zion, or the kingdom of Judah, shall
   have been redeemed with judgment. The discourse closes with a further
   note of warning (28-31).

   Second Discourse. Chapters 2-4.

   This discourse opens where the previous one ends, viz. "in the last
   days" (2). Then the kingdom shall have been restored to Judah, and that
   nation shall have become the head of the Gentile nations on the earth,
   for such is the meaning of chapter 2:2-4. The millennial age is brought
   into view, when the other peoples of the earth are learning of God
   through the converted Jew, and when peace is reigning among them. This
   vision of future blessing for Judah is followed by a repetition of the
   indictment against the people for their present sin (6-9). They have
   been affiliated with the Gentile nations, luxuriating in their wealth,
   and worshiping their idols. The coming penalty on Judah is predicted
   (2:10-4:1). In the course of these verses note the rebuke to the pride
   of the men of Judah and the luxury of the women. The details of the
   attire of the women (3:16-26) has had light thrown upon it recently by
   oriental exploration. Seventeen of the twenty-one ornaments spoken of
   were those worn by the heathen goddess Ishtar. The Babylonian women
   copied the dress of their favorite goddess, and the Jerusalem women
   adopted their fashions. The discourse closes with a repetition of the
   future blessing promised (4:2-6).

   The Third Discourse. Chapter 5.

   The vineyard spoken of, and of which such care was taken is Judah
   (1-3). How Judah repaid God for this care is shown (4). The penalty is
   indicated figuratively (5-7). The remainder of the chapter gives in
   plain language the details of Judah's sin, and the penalty to be
   inflicted upon her.

   Questions.

   1. How many discourses are in the section?

   2. Have you refreshed your memory by reading the chapters in Kings?

   3. Give in your own words an outline of the first discourse.

   4. How does the second discourse open and close?

   5. Under what figure is the story of God's goodness and Judah's
   unrighteousness repeated in chapter 5?

   PROPHET'S CALL

   Chapter 6

   This makes a short lesson but a distinctive one. The prophet is giving
   an account of himself, relating the circumstances under which he
   entered the prophetic office, and the authority by which he speaks.

   The story divides itself thus: the vision (1-4); the effect of the
   vision in producing conviction and confession of sin (5); his cleansing
   from sin (6, 7); his call to service (8); the dedication of himself to
   that service (8); the divine commission given him (9, 10). This
   commission is of a discouraging character. The people will hear his
   messages but fail to be influenced by them. They will become more and
   more blind and deaf to the divine warnings, and neither will be
   converted nor spiritually healed.

   This discouraging outlook brings the inquiry from the prophet (11), to
   which the Lord replies down to the end of the chapter. In other words,
   the people's blindness and sin will continue for a long while, but not
   forever. The oak tree retains its substance even after it is felled to
   the ground, and though Judah will be cast away, a remnant will be saved
   in the last day. This is the significance of the last clause of verse
   13, which speaks of the holy seed as the substance, or the stock of the
   kingdom. By "the last day" is meant the end of the present age, which
   will be a period of great tribulation for the Jewish people, but, out
   of which a remnant will be delivered to become the nucleus of the
   millennial kingdom.

   You have had attention called to the law of recurrence in earlier
   lessons, and will have noted its operation here. In each of the
   discourses in this book, and now in the story of the prophets' call,
   the same ground is being covered over and over again, only with added
   detail here and there. It is always, sin, penalty, repentance,
   restoration, deliverance, future blessing. What was said in the
   "Introduction to the Prophetic Scripture," is thus verified.

   Questions.

   1. What is the prophet doing in this chapter?

   2. Can you give its outline from memory?

   3. Have you been impressed with its value as a Bible reading or theme
   for exposition?

   4. What is the significance of "the last day?"

   5. Can you recall the definition of "the law of recurrence?"

   JUDAH'S ALLIANCE WITH ASSYRIA

   Chapters 7-9

   Syria and Israel menaced Judah through Jotham's reign but the situation
   has become acute now that Ahaz is on the throne (7:1, 2).

   The Promised Sign.

   The Lord, through Isaiah, counsels and encourages the king at a crisis
   of affairs (3-16). Notice where the prophet is to meet Ahaz (3), where
   he and his military engineers may be conferring as to the water supply
   during the expected siege. Notice who accompanies the prophet, and his
   name which means "a remnant shall return" (margin). The name was
   doubtless known to the king and his party and was intended to inspire
   hope, as it pointed to God's purpose of ultimate blessing for Judah.
   Notice the design of Syria and Israel to overthrow the throne of Judah
   and set up their choice in the place of Ahaz (6). Ahaz' unwillingness
   to ask a sign (12), was not piety but the opposite, since he was intent
   on his own plan to invite the aid of Assyria and cared nothing for
   Jehovah.

   The virgin is not identified, but within the period when she would
   become a wife and mother and her offspring old enough to discriminate
   between good and evil, a few years at the most, Ahaz' present enemies
   would be past the power to harm him.

   Such is the immediate application, but the Holy Spirit had in mind a
   grander and fuller application, as we know from Matthew 1:23. This
   gives occasion to speak of another principle in the interpretation of
   prophecy known as the law of double reference. That is, when the
   precise time of particular events is not revealed, the prophets
   sometimes speak of them as continuous, and sometimes blend two events
   in one. The birth of this child of the virgin, who .became married in
   Ahaz' time, is a foreshadowing of the birth of Jesus Christ who was
   conceived by the Holy Ghost and born of the virgin Mary, who remained a
   Virgin until after the birth of her first-born Son.

   Coming Judgments on Judah, 7:17-8:8.

   Ahaz' rejection of God, and his confidence in Assyria calls forth a
   prophecy of punishment (17) -- Assyria will ultimately become Judah's
   enemy, (18-20), and the land be desolate of population and laid waste
   (21-25). After a parenthesis, in which similar catastrophes are spoken
   of in the case of Syria and Israel (8:1-7), Judah is again alluded to
   (8). When the king of Assyria is passing through Israel, and leading
   her people into captivity, he will sweep down into Judah also, and
   spare only Jerusalem, the capital of the nation. This prophecy was
   fulfilled in the story of Sennacherib and Hezekiah with which the book
   of Kings has familiarized us.

   A Forecast of the End of the Age. vv. 9-22.

   The law of double reference finds another illustration in the verses
   following. From the immediate judgments falling on Judah, the Holy
   Spirit leads out the prophet to speak of those to come at the end of
   the age.

   Verse 9 is a picture of the Gentile nations federated under the man of
   sin, with whose character and work we have become partially acquainted.
   This federation will come to naught (10). The faithful remnant of
   Israel in that day are urged to make God their trust (11-18), while the
   nation as a whole will be walking in moral and spiritual darkness
   (19-22).

   The Second Coming of Christ 9:1-7.

   This darkness and gloom will not continue forever (9:1-3, R. V.). The
   day is coming when the Gentile yoke will be removed from Israel under
   miraculous conditions foreshadowed by Gideon's victory over the
   Midianites (4). It is the coming of the Messiah to reign that will
   effect this (6, 7). Notice the law of double reference in these verses,
   where the first and second advents of Christ are referred to as
   continuous, or blended together in one. The last verse shows
   conclusively that the mind of the Holy Spirit is resting upon the
   millennial age.

   Questions.

   1. What nations are Judah's enemies at this time?

   2. What was the design in Isaiah's being accompanied by his son?

   3. Quote Matthew 1:23.

   4. State the law of double reference.

   5. What is the interpretation of 8:8?

   6. To what period, presumably, does 8:9 apply?

   7. Explain 9:4.

   JUDGMENT ON ASSYRIA

   Chapters 10-12

   The verses intervening since the last lesson apply to Israel, and are
   comparatively unimportant; but at verse five of chapter ten begins a
   discourse concerning Assyria, running continuously to the close of
   chapter twelve. Assyria, which has been the ally of Judah, is to become
   her enemy, but the chastisement she is to inflict on Judah is in the
   divine purpose, up to a certain point (vv. 5, 6).

   Assyria's motive is not the divine glory, however, but her own
   aggrandizement, which leads her to go further in afflicting Judah than
   God intends. She cares nothing for Jehovah, and esteems the God of
   Jerusalem no greater than the idols of the surrounding nations which
   she has overcome (vv. 7-11). Therefore, her day of retribution is
   coming (vv. 12-19).

   But the day of her retribution is that of Israel's deliverance and
   triumph (vv. 20-34). "Israel" is used interchangeably with Judah when
   the history of that people at the end of the age is in mind. And that
   such is the case here is evident because Israel is found trusting no
   longer in any Gentile nation, but in Jehovah himself (v. 20). Also the
   saved remnant is spoken of (vv. 20, 21). Comforting language is used
   (vv. 24, 25). Israel's enemy shall be miraculously overcome, as were
   the Midianites under the Gideon (vv. 26, 27). Thus we have another
   illustration of the law of double reference, and two events wide apart
   in point of time are spoken of as though continuous.

   As strengthening the thought that the end of the age is referred to, we
   find the second coming of Christ indicated and blended with His first
   coming (11:1-5. Compare v. 4 with 2 Thess. 2:8). A description of
   millennial conditions follows (vv. 6-9). The Gentiles are seen
   fellowshipping Israel (v. 10), while the latter are being gathered
   "from the four corners of the earth," the ten tribes and the two once
   more united in a single kingdom (vv. 11-13). The section closes with a
   song of rejoicing which will be heard in Jerusalem in that day, as
   recorded in chapter twelve.

   Questions.

   1. To which kingdom does the last part of chapter 9 seem to refer?

   2. When is the name "Israel" used interchangeably with "Judah"?

   3. Give four reasons for believing the end of the age is referred to in
   verses 20-24?

   4. Quote 2 Thess. 2:8.

   5. To what period did verses 6-9 refer?

   6. When will the song of rejoicing (c. 12) be sung in Judah?

   JUDGMENT ON THE GENTILE NATIONS

   Chapters 13-27

   This is a long lesson to read, but the study put upon it need not be
   proportioned to its length. There is a sameness in the chapters, and
   their contents are not unlike what we reviewed in the preceding lesson.
   Note the names of the nations and their contiguity to God's chosen
   people. They have come in contact with their history again and again,
   for which reason they are singled out for special mention. It will be
   well here to review what was said about these Gentile nations in the
   "Introduction to the Prophetic Scriptures." Seven nations are named, a
   perfect number, indicating Gentilism as a whole, construed as the enemy
   of Israel. In their order we have Babylon (cc. 13-14); Moab (cc.
   15-16); Syria (17); Ethiopia (18); Egypt (19, 20); Medo-Persia (21,
   22); Tyre {21).

   Then follows a picture of judgment in which all the nations seem to be
   included; but following the judgments on the Gentile nations, Judah is
   seen redeemed from her iniquity, delivered from her tribulations, and
   restored to her land (cc. 25-27). This whole section of the book,
   therefore, is on an enlarged scale, that which has been set before us
   several times.

   For the purpose of the present study, therefore, and as a matter of
   convenience, these discourses might be grouped as one -- climaxing, as
   in the other instances, in the ultimate triumph of the chosen people.

   This idea, however, involves one of two things: Either these nations
   typify Gentile dominion in the earth at the end of this age, or else
   they themselves will be revived as nations with reference to the
   judgments of that day.

   The evidence for their revival, however, is not apparent except in one
   case, that of Babylon (cc. 13, 14). The chapters referring to the
   overthrow of Babylon by the Medes and Persians, seem not to have been
   fulfilled in that event, except in part; from which the conclusion is
   gathered that a later and completer fulfillment is in store. There are
   corresponding passages in other prophets indicating this, and the book
   of Revelation (c. 18) seems almost to require it.

   There are at least nine features of prophecy in these chapters not
   fulfilled in the earlier overthrow of Babylon referred to: The whole
   land was not then destroyed (13:5); the Day of the Lord did not then
   come (v. 6); the physical phenomena were not then seen (v. 10); the
   city itself was not then destroyed as Sodom, for the Persian victory
   was without blood, and the scepter passed gently into their hands.
   Moreover, the land still yields a princely income to its Turkish
   rulers, and a city and a village exist on the site of Babylon (vv.
   19-22); the Lord did not then visit Jacob with rest, nor has He done so
   as yet (14:1-3); the king of Babylon therein minutely described, has
   not yet arisen, and seems to point to a greater and more august being
   than the world has ever seen (4:22); the Assyrian was not then trodden
   down in the land of Judah, nor was the yoke then removed from her (v.
   25); finally, the divine purpose on the whole earth was not then
   fulfilled (v. 26).

   Questions.

   1. Have you examined the location of these seven Gentile nations on the
   map?

   2. How is the law of recurrence illustrated in this lesson?

   3. What two ideas about these nations are suggested in this lesson?

   4. Have you read chapter 18 of Revelation?

   5. What existing evidence is there that Babylon has not yet been
   destroyed as Sodom?

   6. What great person seems to be referred to in chapter 14:4-22?

   JUDAH AND EGYPT

   Chapters 28-35

   These chapters make a unit since, with the exception of the opening
   part of chapter 28, they chiefly deal with Judah's futile alliance with
   Egypt.

   Chapter 28.

   Israel, or the kingdom of the ten tribes, is addressed under the name
   of her leading tribe "Ephraim" (v. 1). Her great sin is strong drink.
   "The head of the fat valley" is Samaria the capitol, which is soon to
   be overthrown by the Assyrians (vv. 2-4). Observe, however, the usual
   forecast of the end of the age and the coming deliverance and triumph
   of the faithful remnant (v. 5). This is a parallel to what we have seen
   in so many instances hitherto.

   At verse 14, Jerusalem rather than Samaria, is addressed, Judah rather
   than Israel. The end of the age is in mind and the covenant with the
   Antichrist at that time (compare v. 15 with Dan. 9, especially v. 27).
   The Messiah is seen coming in judgment, and destroying the power of the
   Antichrist (compare 2 Thess. 2).

   Chapter 29.

   "Ariel," which means "the lion of God," is one of the names of
   Jerusalem (vv. 1-2). A siege is predicted (vv. 3-6), and while this may
   primarily refer either to that of the Assyrians under Sennacherib, or
   the Babylonians under Nebuchadnezzar, yet before the close of the
   chapter, the time of blessing portrayed for Judah shows a further
   fulfillment in the last siege of the united Gentile nations under the
   Antichrist. Again we find the parallel to earlier chapters, especially
   10, and an illustration of the law of recurrence. Read also Daniel 11,
   Micah 4:11; 5:4-15, and Zechariah, chapters 12-14.

   Chapter 30.

   When Jerusalem was besieged by Sennacherib, and later by
   Nebuchadnezzar, she sought aid from Egypt, her natural ally, because of
   her proximity, but also because Egypt was Assyria's and Babylon's
   natural rival for world power. This was contrary to the divine will,
   for Judah should have trusted in God. Egypt's aid on both occasions was
   to no purpose as other Scriptures show, and the whole circumstance is
   typical of the end of the age. When, in that day, Jerusalem for the
   last time shall be besieged by the Gentile nations, again will her hope
   turn to the world which Egypt represents, and in vain. All this is set
   before us in what follows. We have (1) the alliance and its failure
   (vv. 1-7); (2) the nation warned but to no purpose (vv. 8-17); (3) the
   customary encouragement to the faithful remnant (vv. 18-21); (4) all of
   which is to be accomplished by the return of the Lord (vv. 22-23).

   Chapter 31.

   The alliance with Egypt is again condemned (vv. 1-3), and is quite
   unnecessary in view of Jehovah's purpose towards His faithful people in
   that day (vv. 4-9). It must be clear that these latter verses refer to
   the future since no such defence of Jerusalem by Jehovah has yet taken
   place.

   Chapter 32.

   The connection with the preceding is close. There Jehovah, the second
   person of the Trinity, is seen interposing on behalf of Judah, and here
   He is seen actually reigning over her in the millennial period
   following. Jesus Christ is this King (v. 1). Millennial blessings are
   portrayed (vv. 2-5). The Holy Spirit is poured out, and peace ensues
   (vv. 15-20). Read Joel 2.

   Chapter 33.

   Practically the same ground is covered here as in the preceding
   chapters. Judgment is pronounced on the enemy (v. 1); the prayer of the
   faithful remnant is heard (vv. 2-6); the judgment is seen in execution
   (vv. 7-12); the faithful are dwelling in safety and beholding the King
   in His beauty (vv. 13-24).

   Chapter 34.

   This is a parallel to chapter 24, and one of the darkest chapters in
   the Bible, describing a judgment world-wide. The indignation of God is
   upon all the nations and their armies, an enlargement of that spoken of
   upon the Assyrian, and of which that was a type (compare 2 Thess.
   1:5-10).

   Chapter 35.

   After these judgments, blessing and glory are resting upon Judah.
   Evidently the millennium is once more pictured here.

   Questions.

   1. What central fact unifies these chapters?

   2. To which kingdom does the opening prophecy of chapter 28 apply?

   3. What specific sin is judged?

   4. How was Samaria located topographically?

   5. To what does 28:15 apply?

   6. Are you familiar with 2 Thess. 2?

   7. What does "Ariel" mean, and to what is the word applied?

   8. Why, naturally speaking, should Judah have sought aid from Egypt?

   9. What makes it clear that chapter 31 is future in its application?

   10. Are you familiar with Joel 2?

   11. Name two of the darkest chapters thus far met in the prophets.

   12. What are some of the millennial features foretold in the last
   chapter of this lesson?

   HISTORICAL PARENTHESIS

   Chapter 36-39

   These chapters are a dividing line between what may be called Parts 1
   and 2 of this book. They deal with Hezekiah's reign whose history has
   been considered in 2 Kings and 2 Chronicles.

   The chapters are not arranged chronologically, as the event of chapter
   38, Hezekiah's sickness and recovery, occurred prior to the siege of
   Sennacherib (cc. 36, 37).

   The prophecies preceding these chapters predict the rise of the
   Assyrian power as the enemy of Judah and God's rod of punishment for
   them, which were fulfilled in Hezekiah's time; while those following
   look upon the nation as in captivity to Babylon, the successor to
   Assyria. It is in connection with Hezekiah's pride (c. 39) that this
   captivity is first definitely announced.

   While the chapters following look upon the nation as already in
   Babylon, they do so chiefly for the purpose of assuring the faithful
   remnant of ultimate deliverance not only from the Babylonian captivity,
   but from all the nations whither the Lord has driven them, in the
   latter days.

   In brief, chapter 36 reveals the Assyrian army before Jerusalem, and
   the effect upon the Jewish people. Chapter 37 shows the king in
   supplication to Jehovah with the effect on the invaders.

   38 is the story of the king's sickness and healing, in which the
   prediction of the king's death alarms him because at this time he had
   no heir. Had he died thus, the messianic hope would have died with him.

   In chapter 39 we have the circumstance of Hezekiah's boasting to the
   Babylonian ambassadors -- exalting himself rather than Jehovah. It is
   in this connection that the prophecy of Babylonian supremacy is given.
   This is impressive, when we recall that Babylon had not yet risen into
   the place of power which was still held by Assyria. Only supernatural
   power could have revealed this to Isaiah. The reason why these
   Babylonians visited Jerusalem at this time may have been connected with
   their subsequent overthrow of that sacred city. Had the king glorified
   His God instead of himself might not the result have been different?

   Questions.

   1. To whose history does this parenthesis allude?

   2. What is the relation of these chapters to those preceding and
   following?

   3. Have you reviewed the chapters in Kings and Chronicles?

   4. Where is Judah supposed to be historically, in the latter part of
   Isaiah?

   5. Why do those later prophecies so regard Judah?

   6. Give a brief outline of each chapter of the lesson.

   7. What special cause of alarm was there is the announcement of the
   king's death?

   8. What is the supernatural feature about the prophecy of Babylon's
   supremacy?

   INTRODUCTORY TO PART II

   The chapters of Part 2 (cc. 40-46), are chiefly millennial, and so
   different from the prevailing themes preceding, as to raise a query
   whether they were not written by some other author -- a second, or
   deutero-Isaiah, as some call him. We do not hold that opinion, the
   reasons for which are briefly stated in the author's Primers of the
   Faith.

   In Synthetic Bible Studies, it was found convenient to treat this part
   as a single discourse -- though doubtless, such is not the case in
   fact. As such its theme may be discovered in verses 1 and 2 of chapter
   40 -- "Comfort." The prophet, through the Holy Spirit, sees the nation
   in the latter days, forgiven and at rest in Judea again. This is the
   "comfort" he is to minister to the faithful, and in the chapters
   following the elements of this comfort are explained. Or, to change the
   figure, on the assumption that the nation shall be forgiven and
   restored, these chapters reveal the factors or events leading up to
   that experience and that happy time.

   These are in brief, seven:

   1. God's providential care for the people of Judah during their
   scattered condition (see for example, the latter half of c. 40).

   2. The work of the Messiah on their behalf, suffering for them first,
   and triumphing for them afterwards (see cc. 42, 50, but especially 53).

   3. The outpouring of the Holy Spirit upon them (c. 44).

   4. The overthrow of Babylon and all Gentile power as opposed to them
   (cc. 45-48).

   5. Their recall to God's service (c. 49).

   6. The divine oath concerning their redemption (cc. 54-59).

   7. The predicted millennial glory (cc. 60-66).

   Another way to treat this part of the book is to sub-divide it again
   into three sections to which consideration will be given in the lessons
   following.

   Questions.

   1. What chapters are included in Part 2?

   2. What is the general character of the discourses of Part 2?

   3. To what question has Part 2 given rise?

   4. Is this opinion here entertained?

   5. How may these chapters be treated homiletically?

   6. What theme might be given them in such event?

   7. How would you explain or Justify this theme?

   8. What other figure of speech might be applied to the interpretation
   of these chapters.

   9. Can you name in their order the seven elements of comfort?

   10. How much of Isaiah 53 can you repeat from memory?

   DELIVERANCE THROUGH CYRUS

   Chapters 40-48

   In this lesson Israel is seen prophetically in Babylon, but about to be
   delivered and restored. Primarily, the reference is to her restoration
   after the seventy years captivity, in which Cyrus, King Persia, is the
   instrument.

   In chapter 40, the people are comforted (vv. 1-11), in the thought that
   God is so great they can not be forgotten (vv. 12-31). The first and
   second coming of Christ are blended in the first part of the chapter,
   and John the Baptist is the voice crying in the wilderness (Luke 3:1-6;
   John 1:23).

   In chapter 41, Cyrus and his plans are predicted (vv. 1-7, but Israel
   is seen as God's chosen servant, and comforted in the midst of the
   coming turmoil (vv. 8-20). Jehovah challenges all false gods to
   foretell things to come, as He does (vv. 21-29).

   Chapter 42 returns to the thought of the Servant of Jehovah, only now
   that Servant is the Lord Jesus Christ, rather than national Israel (vv.
   1-4, compare with Matt. 12:14-21). Observe His work among the Gentile
   nations which is still future (vv. 5-16) and the appeal to deaf and
   blind Israel which must be awakened before that work shall begin.

   Chapters 43-45 are connected, in which God is comforting Israel. See
   what he is and promises to be (43:1-7); How He will chastise their
   enemies (vv. 8-17); the good things to come (vv. 18-20); especially the
   forgiveness of their sin (vv. 22-28); accompanied by an outpouring of
   the Holy Spirit, producing a great revival (44:1-5). Idolatry is again
   rebuked (vv. 6-20), the faithful are called upon to rejoice (vv.
   21-23), and Cyrus is definitely named as their deliverer, between two
   and three hundred years before his birth (vv. 24-28). Josephus, the
   historian of the Jews, says, that when the attention of Cyrus was
   called to this fact, probably by Daniel, he was stirred to fulfill the
   prophecy. In chapter 45 Cyrus is first addressed (vv. 1-13), then
   Israel (vv. 14-17), and then the ends of the earth (vv. 18-25).

   Chapters 46-47 belong together, describing the fall of Babylon under
   Cyrus, and yet carrying us forward to her final destruction at the end
   of the age (see chapter 14). Her idols are carried by beasts (46:1, 2),
   while Jehovah carries His people (vv. 3-7). Chapter 47 shows its
   application on its face.

   Chapter 48 is a review of Jehovah's messages to Israel in the preceding
   chapters.

   Questions.

   1. What is the title of this lesson?

   2. Under what condition is Judah seen?

   3. What Gentile potentate is prominent?

   4. What is the means of "comfort," Chapter 40?

   5. What New Testament prophet is predicted?

   6. What two servants of Jehovah are referred to?

   7. Quote 44:3, 4.

   THE MESSIAH REVEALED

   Chapters 49-57

   The thirty-two chapters deal particularly with the Person and work of
   the Messiah. Isaiah has sometimes been called "the evangelical prophet"
   because of the large space he gives to that subject -- a circumstance
   the more notable because of the silence concerning it since Moses. The
   explanation of this silence is hinted at in the lesson on the
   introduction to the prophets.

   In chapter 49, the Messiah speaks of Himself and the failure of His
   mission in His rejection by His nation (vv. 1-4). This rejection works
   blessing to the Gentiles (vv. 5, 6) compare Romans 11). Ultimately
   Israel shall be brought to Him and indeed the whole earth (see the
   remainder of the chapter). Zion, i. e., Israel, may doubt this (v. 14),
   but is made assured of it in what follows.

   Chapter 50 is connected with the preceding verses 1-3 referring to
   Zion's restoration. But at verse 4 the Messiah bears witness to Himself
   again. His obedience, suffering and triumph down to the end of the
   chapter.

   These verses furnish rich material for a Bible reading or expository
   discourse on "The Training of Jesus." (1). His Teacher: "The Lord God
   hath given me the tongue of the learned"; (2), the object of His
   teaching: "That I should know how to speak a word in season," &c.; (3),
   the method of its impartations: "He wakeneth morning by morning"; (4),
   the spirit of the pupil: "I was not rebellious," &c.; (5), the
   encouragement He receives: "The Lord God will help me"; (6), the
   counsel He offers to others: "Who is among you that feareth the Lord"?
   (7), the warning to the disobedient: "Behold all ye that kindle a
   fire."

   In like manner 51 is linked to chapter 50, by the words of comfort to
   Zion which shall be brought to her through the Messiah's work on her
   behalf. Verses 9-11 are a prayer of faith of the faithful remnant which
   is answered in the remainder of that chapter and the following, down to
   and including verse 12.

   Chapters 52:13-53:12 are a unit in their Messianic character. Christ's
   personal suffering and glorious triumph are depicted in the closing
   verses of chapter 52. His rejection by Israel in 53:1-6; His
   submission, deliverance and reward (vv. 7-12).

   Chapter 54 exhibits the result of this in Israel's conversion,
   restoration and earthly glory in the millennium. Observe the divine
   oath that this shall be brought to pass (v. 9).

   Chapter 55 is the offer of this salvation to Israel, and requires no
   comment.

   Chapter 56 shows that when this offer is at last accepted and the
   salvation experienced by Israel, it will mean similar blessing to the
   whole earth (vv. 1-8).

   The rest of this chapter, and nearly the whole of the following one,
   describe the sad condition of Israel at present, but especially at the
   end period under the Antichrist (57:9). The section concludes with the
   customary promises to the faithful (57:15-19).

   Questions.

   1. What is the chief topic of this lesson?

   2. What name has Israel sometimes received, and why?

   3. Explain the silence about the Messiah until this period.

   4. Who speaks in chapter 49?

   5. Have you read Romans 11?

   6. Who speaks in chapter 50?

   7. Memorize Isaiah 53.

   8. State the connection between chapters 53 and 54.

   MEETING OF THE AGES

   Chapters 58-66

   We are drawing to the end of the present, and the opening of the
   Millennial age. The prophet's eye rests on the time when Israel is back
   in her land, the majority still unconverted to Christ and worshiping in
   a restored temple. There is a faithful remnant waiting for Him, though
   enduring the persecution of the false christ. This persecution may
   often be felt at the hands of their own brethren after the flesh. These
   facts must be assumed in the interpretation of these chanters, though
   they will not appear strange to any who have studied the preceding
   books in this commentary.

   Chapter 58 opens with a renewal of the prophetic commission, suggesting
   that at the time of the end there will be a special heralding of the
   Lord's Coming as there was at His first coming (Mal. 4:5-6). Indeed the
   whole chapter suggests the preaching of John the Baptist. Their
   complaint in verse 3 is answered in the verses that follow (vv. 4-7).
   Their blessing depends on obedience (vv. 8-14).

   Chapter 59 continues the thought, leading into a revelation of the
   divine purpose to interpose on their behalf in the person of the
   Redeemer. This interposition is for judgment (vv. 15-19), but to the
   penitent and believing it means forgiveness, sanctification and
   blessing forever (vv. 20-21).

   Chapter 60 carries on the description of the blessing. It has actually
   come. The rest of the world may yet be in darkness, but not Israel (vv.
   1, 2). Moreover, the latter has become light for all the rest.
   Millennial blessing pervades the whole earth (vv. 3-11). Israel is the
   arbiter of the Gentile nations (v. 12), and the latter are contributing
   to her greatness and benefit (vv. 14-16). Now the whole of Israel is
   converted and she has become great (vv. 21-22).

   Chapter 61 shows the cause of the foregoing to be the work of the
   Messiah on Israel's behalf (vv. 1-3). The first part of this prediction
   was fulfilled at the first coming of Christ (see Luke 4:16-20). The
   first part ended at the proclamation of "the acceptable year of the
   Lord" (v. 3), but the second part begins "at the day of vengeance of
   our God." This is the second coming. The rest of the chanter repeats
   what was said of the future blessings in the preceding one.

   Chapter 62 carries on the thought of 61. Help will be found by reading
   the Revised Version side by side with the King James, and especially by
   observing the marginal readings.

   Chapter 63 begins with the picture of judgment. The day of vengeance is
   ushered in by the coming of the Avenger, Christ, on behalf of His
   people against the oppressing Gentiles (vv. 1-6). The remainder of the
   chapter is identified with the following one, the two composing the
   intercessory prayer of penitent Israel in that day. Read and compare it
   with Nehemiah's prayer in the first chapter of his book and with that
   of Daniel 9. It also suggests many of the psalms. The closing two
   chapters are the answer to this prayer, and require no comment in the
   light of the principles of interpretation illustrated before.

   Questions.

   1. What period is in view here?

   2. Whose later work is suggested in chapter 58?

   3. How does chapter 60 show that the blessing on Israel is to precede
   that of the rest of the earth?

   4. Have you read Luke 4:16-20?

   5. What period is represented by the comma after the word "LORD," in
   Isa. 61:2?

   6. Are you careful to note the marginal renderings in your Bible?

   7. How would you designate the last part of chapter 63 and chapter 64?
     __________________________________________________________________

JEREMIAH

   THE PROPHET'S GENEALOGY AND CALL

   Chapter 1

   Introduction.

   As we approach the second prophet it is timely to remind the student
   that this work is not designed to comment on every chapter and verse of
   the Bible. To do so would call for a number of volumes of this size
   defeating the purpose in view. Nor does the study of the Bible from the
   standpoint of the average Christian worker require this. Particularly
   is this true of the prophets, which, like the psalms, repeat themselves
   continually. Their principal contents were outlined in the lesson
   entitled, "Introduction to the Prophets," and more clearly defined in
   the lessons on Isaiah; and one who has thoughtfully pondered that
   "Introduction" and pursued those lessons, should be fairly competent to
   interpret Jeremiah on his own account.

   There is this difference, however, between Isaiah and Jeremiah, in the
   latter, history is frequently blended with prophecy, particularly the
   history of the prophet himself. Moreover, the chapters are not arranged
   chronologically. For these reasons Jeremiah will be considered somewhat
   in detail, different lessons gathering round the leading events of his
   career.

   It is assumed that before entering on the prophets at all, the reader
   has familiarized himself with the historical books of the Old
   Testament, which are as necessary to the understanding of the prophets
   as the foundation of a building is to its upper stories.

   The first chapter of Jeremiah is full of interesting data, as for
   example --

   (1) His Genealogy and Period vv. 1-3.

   The "Hilkiah" named is another than he who found the law-book (2 Kings
   22:8), but since he was a priest, Jeremiah must have belonged to the
   tribe of Levi. Look up Anathoth on the map. Read 2 Kings 22-25 to
   refresh recollection of the period named in verses 2 and 3.

   About fifty years had elapsed since the close of Isaiah's ministry,
   during which the kings were Manasseh and Amon, and the prophets Nahum,
   Zephaniah and Habakkuk.

   (2) His Call vv. 4-10.

   It is interesting that this was prenatal (v. 5). The prophet's
   diffidence growing out of his youth and inexperience is overruled (vv.
   6, 7). He is assured of divine guardianship (v. 8) and entrusted with a
   divine message (v. 9). What a testimony to verbal inspiration is found
   in that verse! While distinctively a prophet to Judah, yet his ministry
   is wider (v. 10). It is mainly destructive in character or result, for
   while under four expressions judgment is set forth, only under two is a
   constructive task referred to.

   (3) His Earliest Commission vv. 11-16.

   Here two symbols are employed, and through the book the same form of
   teaching is used both for himself and the people. An "almond tree"
   blossoms early -- God's purposes are maturing fast. A "seething pot"
   means trouble -- the trouble is coming from the north.

   (4) His Enduement for Service vv. 17-19.

   Like Isaiah, the prophet's commission is discouraging, at least in the
   foreview. Enemies will oppose him -- kings, princes, priests and
   people. And no wonder, because his speech will seem so unpatriotic,
   since he must proclaim the subjugation of Judah to Babylon, on account
   of her sins. But God will be with him. Note the figures of speech
   descriptive of his protection (v. 18), as well as the assured promise
   (v. 19). But the warning is equally significant (v. 17). The prophet's
   hope of success lies in his courage, and his courage depends on his
   faith.

   Questions.

   1. What peculiarity do we find in the books of the prophets?

   2. How is the book of Jeremiah distinguished from Isaiah?

   3. On what plan will this book be studied?

   4. Name the four points in the outline of chapter 1.

   5. Have you discovered Anathoth?

   6. Have you read the historical chapters in 2 Kings?

   7. Name the prophets between Isaiah and Jeremiah.

   8. Quote verse nine of this lesson.

   9. What form of teaching is frequently found in Jeremiah?

   10. What is to be the burden of his message?

   PERSECUTED IN HIS HOME TOWN

   Chapters 2-12

   The length of this lesson may alarm, but preparation for it only
   requires the reading of the chapters two or three times. One who has
   gone through Isaiah will soon catch the drift of the Spirit's teaching
   and be able to break up the chapters into separate discourses and the
   discourses into their various themes. The main object of the lesson is
   to dwell on the prophet's personal experience in his home town which is
   reached in the closing chapters.

   It is thought that the discourses in this section were delivered prior
   to the finding of the law-book in 2 Kings, which explains their more
   moderate tone as compared with the later ones, but this is a feature
   not relevant to this work.

   Note in chapter 2 the divine expostulation (vv. 1-13); the reminder of
   the divine goodness (vv. 14-22); the vain excuses made by the nation
   (vv. 23-28); and the lamentation of the Lord over its condition (v.
   29-3:5).

   In chapter 3, beginning afresh at verse 6, we have God's complaint
   against Judah for learning nothing from "her treacherous sister," i.
   e., from Israel's experience (vv. 6-11); this is followed by a plea to
   that same Israel (now scattered through the north country by Assyria),
   to return if she would, and mercy would be shown her. In this
   connection the promise for the future is set before her (vv. 12-17);
   Judah and Israel will be re-united then, and so on to chapter 4:1-2.

   Chapter 4 and the following, indicate that a mere outward reformation
   is not sufficient to bring divine blessing. Judgment is coming from the
   north! "A lion out of his thicket!" "A stormwind!" The prophet laments.

   In chapter 7 there is a call to repentance and a spiritual religion. In
   chapters 8 and 9 coming judgment is again announced.

   The Treachery of Friends.

   Coming to chapter 11:18, we see the beginnings of the persecution that
   farther on became so bitter against the prophet as to make him a
   striking type of the suffering Saviour. It takes its rise among his
   neighbors and kinfolk in Anathoth. At first he is unsuspicious, but God
   reveals the plot to him. They would kill him, destroying the tree to be
   rid of the fruit. He appeals to God, whose answer is in the closing
   verses of the chapter. Anathoth was to suffer, but not immediately.

   In chapter 12 the prophet expresses his surprise at this in the spirit
   of Job, and that of Psalms 37 and 73. The divine comfort he receives is
   to be told that worse things will follow. His friend Josiah is now on
   the throne, but wait till he is gone and Jehoiakim and Zedekiah reign!
   Tie is now like a man running a race with men, but then it will be like
   running a race with horses! He is dwelling in a land of comparative
   peace now, but then he will be in "the swellings of Jordan."

   To understand this keep the politics of the period in mind. Judah is
   turning to Egypt for help against Babylon, the Gentile nation now in
   great power. But the divine purpose is that she shall submit herself to
   the yoke of Babylon. The prophet is proclaiming this against a strong
   party in the nation that will not have it so. They consider him a
   pessimist, a traitor to his country who must be silenced. And silenced
   he would have been if it were not for God.

   Questions.

   1. How should one prepare himself to get the results out of these
   lessons?

   2. When, presumably, was this series of discourses delivered, and how
   is that fact supposed to be exhibited in them?

   3. Name some of the leading features of these discourses.

   4. Of whom is Jeremiah a type, and in what aspect?

   5. Give the history of his earliest persecution.

   6. Who is the human author of Psalm 73?

   7. How does God "comfort' the prophet?

   8. What is the outward cause of his persecution?

   "IN THE SWELLING OF JORDAN"

   Chapters 13-20

   God told the prophet worse was to come. "The Swelling of Jordan" would
   be experienced later, and in the present lesson, especially towards the
   close, we have an illustration of it.

   There are things of interest to look at in the meantime, for example an
   illustration of that symbolic teaching mentioned earlier.

   1. In chapter 13 we have what two symbols? See verses 1-11 for the
   first and 12-14 for the second. The prophet acted these out before the
   people just as he was told. The significance of the first is apparent,
   the second means that the destruction of Jerusalem would be brought
   about by her own conduct. The evils in her would cause her to be filled
   with a rebellious spirit as with drunkenness. "Mutual self-seeking and
   distrust would produce a condition where God could not pity."

   2. Look at the prophet from the point of view of intercessor (cc. 14,
   15), nothing more affecting in the same line being found anywhere in
   the Bible. Note the occasion (14:1-6); the first supplication (vv.
   7-9); the divine reply (vv. 10-12); the renewal of the prayer and the
   excuse for Judah that is pleaded (v. 13); God's answer (vv. 14-19); the
   prophet's pleading and confession (vv 19-22); his final rejection
   (15:1-9). See the personal lament and inquiry that follow (vv. 10-18),
   and God's comfort and instruction to him (vv. 19-20).

   3. Chapter 16 has a peculiar interest as carrying out 1 Cor. 7:32, 33.
   The prophet's life must be an independent and separated one. He must be
   a celibate, and shun all social amusements (vv. 1-9). His attitude in
   these matters would be symbolic and give him further opportunity to
   instruct and warn the people (v. 17, and the following).

   4. Another symbol in chapters 18 and 19, and a lesson about the divine
   sovereignty. Judah was a vessel marred in the making, not through want
   of skill on the potter's part, but because of resisting elements in the
   clay. It is to be broken that a better vessel may be made.

   5. It is the use the prophet makes of this earthen vessel that brings
   on him the suffering recorded in the next chapter. Read chapters 19 and
   20 together. He is in the swelling of Jordan now (20:1-2 -- compare
   Luke 20:2). See how he meets his enemy and God's in the next verses
   (vv. 3-6), remembering as he does, the divine warning not to be
   "dismayed at their faces" (c. 1). But when the crisis is past and he is
   in his own chamber, how discouraged he appears (vv. 7-10). He complains
   that God had coerced him into this ministry. He would turn his back
   upon it if he could, but God will not permit him. He is between two
   fires, persecution without and the Holy Ghost within, and the latter
   being the hotter fire of the two he is compelled to the work again.

   In other words God gains the victory in him (vv. 11-13), and he is at
   length able to sing praises to His holy name.

   Questions.

   1. From what chapter and verse is the title of this lesson quoted?

   2. Name the two symbols in chapter 13.

   3. What does the second mean?

   4. What was the occasion of the prophet's intercession?

   5. What two earlier servants does God name as having great power in
   prayer?

   6. What is the general theme of 1 Corinthians 7?

   7. What great doctrine is illustrated in the symbol of chapter 18?

   8. Tell the story of the prophet's experience in chapter 20.

   MESSAGES IN ZEDEKIAH'S REIGN

   Chapters 21-24

   These chapters furnish a convenient unit, as they are apparently a
   group of discourses delivered in Zedekiah's reign -- the king of the
   captivity period.

   The first, and one of the most interesting, is that concerning the
   siege (c. 21). Note the occasion (vv. 1, 2) and observe that "Pashur"
   was not he of the last lesson. The siege of Jerusalem by Nebuchadnezzar
   had begun and the king of Judah hoped the prophet would have some
   encouraging word from God for him and the nation. But the opposite was
   the case (vv. 3-7). The message to the people (vv. 8-10), was the theme
   Jeremiah had to proclaim for the greater part of his ministry down
   until the event occurred.

   Chapter 22 is chiefly about the previous kings of Judah in Jeremiah's
   time. They need not weep for Josiah whom the Lord had taken to Himself
   (v. 10), but for Shallum (v. 11), another name for Jehoahaz (see
   margin), the son of Josiah who had been carried to Egypt as we saw in
   the book of Kings. They should not lament for Jehoiakim, now dead, for
   he was unworthy of it (vv. 13-19). "Coniah," the fourth king (vv.
   24-30), is another name for Jeconiah, the son of Jehoiakim, taken
   captive by the Babylonians, whose story we were made familiar with in 2
   Kings and 2 Chronicles.

   The twenty-third chapter contains one of those beautiful messages of
   the future redemption of Judah and Israel with which we have become
   acquainted in the Psalms and Isaiah (vv. 1-8). Observe the Messianic
   allusion in verses 5 and 6. And do not overlook God's testimony to His
   own Word that follows, coupled with the judgment pronounced on the
   false teachers who put their own word instead of it.

   Chapter 24, the type of the good figs and the bad, explains itself. The
   Jews carried into captivity earlier than Zedekiah's time would have an
   opportunity to return from Babylon after a while, but those now in the
   land and to be carried away later would not have such opportunity.

   Questions.

   1. What is the title of this lesson and why is it given?

   2. On what theme is the first discourse?

   3. State the circumstances.

   4. What four former kings of Judah are referred to?

   5. What name is given our Lord Jesus Christ in chapter 23?

   6. Can you tell the story of the good and bad figs?

   MESSAGES IN JEHOIAKIM'S REIGN

   Chapters 25, 26

   Having just considered discourses in Zedekiah's reign, and now
   returning to that of Jehoiakim (25:1), it can be seen that the chapters
   are not arranged chronologically.

   The first message is that of the seventy years captivity. We are
   familiar with that period as Judah's forced stay in Babylon, and it is
   interesting to see the place where it was definitely predicted (vv. 11,
   12).

   Note what leads up to the prediction, God's patience and faithfulness
   towards His people in their sin (vv. 3-7); and His choice of Babylon as
   the Gentile power, into whose hands he is pleased for the time being,
   in judgment on Judah, to commit the sovereignty of the earth (vv. 8,
   9). Note what follows. Babylon's motive is selfish, and her time of
   punishment will surely come (vv. 12-14). Practically all the nations
   are now included in the coming judgment (vv. 15, to the end). The
   complete fulfillment is at the end of the age.

   Some will be more interested in the next chapter, where the prophet
   because of his boldness (vv. 1-7) is arrested and threatened with death
   (vv. 8, 9). In this case the priests, the prophets and the people are
   against him, but not the princes (v, 10). This is the method God
   adopted in the execution of His original promise to Jeremiah (1:17-19).
   That is. He did not permit all of his enemies to be united against him
   at the same time.

   The prophet has a hearing (vv. 12-15). The princes express their
   opinion (v. 16). The elders give their judgment (vv. 17-19). A case is
   cited of a prophet who, unlike Micah, lost his life as the result of
   his fidelity (vv. 20-23). But happily that was not true of Jeremiah (v.
   24).

   Questions.

   1. What period does this lesson cover?

   2. Give the chapter of the seventy years captivity.

   3. What distinction is divinely given Babylon?

   4. How does God deliver Jeremiah from his enemies?

   5. Give the history of the prophet's trial.

   MESSAGES IN ZEDEKIAH'S REIGN -- SECOND SERIES

   Chapters 27-34

   In some respects the most important chapter here is the first, which
   deals with Babylon's supremacy, and reveals the beginning of "the times
   of the Gentiles," or "the fullness of the Gentiles" (Romans 11:25). The
   term refers to the period when Israel, because of her disobedience to
   God, has forfeited her place of power in the earth and is scattered
   among the nations. It begins when God transfers this power to the
   Gentiles as represented by Babylon, and continues until Christ comes a
   second time for the deliverance of Israel from the Gentiles at the end
   of this age. The occasion of the transfer is set forth here.

   Babylon is increasing in power, and threatening the smaller nations
   standing in the way of her mastery of the Mediterranean. These by their
   ambassadors are now in conclave in Jerusalem, presided over by
   Zedekiah, meditating the means of defense or opposition to the common
   enemy. God seizes the occasion to send the prophet to them with a
   revelation of His will in the premises (vv. 1-11).

   Verse one speaks of it as in Jehoiakim's reign, but the context shows
   that it is an error.

   With what symbolic action does the prophet introduce his message (vv.
   2, 3)? What nations are represented in the conclave? What is the divine
   declaration he makes (vv. 6, 7)? What penalty is attached to the
   failure to comply with God's will (v. 8)? What promise to submission
   (v. 11)? What special message is vouchsafed to the king of Judah (w.
   12-15)? What other classes in Judah are addressed (vv. 16-18)?

   When God calls Nebuchadnezzar his "servant" (v. 6), it does not mean
   that the king knows and consciously desires to please Him, but only
   that, like the king of Assyria before him, he is being used for the
   time being to execute God's purposes of chastisement on His people.

   Chapter 28 gives a fresh illustration of the persecution Jeremiah
   endured from the enemies of the truth. Read carefully it will explain
   itself. May its warnings and encouragements not be lost upon us.

   Chapter 29 recalls the earlier one on the good and bad figs. To the
   "good figs" the prophet sends this letter (v. 1), that is to the
   earlier captives (v. 2), who are to return after seventy years as the
   others are not (vv. 10-14). To what evil teaching were they exposed in
   the land of their captivity (vv. 8, 9, 15-19)? What were the names of
   the false prophets (vv. 21-23)? What man tried to stir up evil against
   Jeremiah by a letter (vv. 24-29)? What punishment would befall him (vv.
   30-32)?

   Chapters 30 and 31 speak again of the future redemption of Israel. What
   command comes to the prophet touching this testimony, and why (30:1-3)?
   What language shows that the end of the age is in mind (vv. 7-9)? Have
   these words yet been fulfilled in Israel a history? Compare also verses
   18-24, and indeed the whole of the next chapter.

   Chapters 32 and 3.3 cover the same ground as the preceding chapters,
   except that they are more picturesque because of the real estate
   transaction they record. What was the period, and what was the prophet
   enduring at the time, and why (32:1-5)? What is he called upon to do
   (vv. 6-8)? What care is taken about this purchase (vv. 9-15)? What
   shows his surprise and ignorance of its meaning (vv. 16-25)? What
   question does God put to the prophet (vv. 26, 27)? Does this demand on
   the prophet to purchase the field indicate any change of God's mind
   concerning Judah and Babylon (28-35)? What does it indicate for the
   future, however (vv. 36-44)? Point out at least ten reasons to show
   that all of these last verses point to the future. The theme is
   continued into the next chapter, and the Messiah once more referred to
   as the cause of the restoration and blessing (vv. 15, 16). What name is
   given Him? And what corresponding name is to be given Judah in that
   day?

   Chapter 34 is self-explanatory. A special offense on the part of the
   leaders brings a renewal of the prophecy of judgment.

   Questions.

   1. What chapter in this lesson is the most important, and why?

   2. What is the meaning of, "the time of the Gentiles"?

   3. Look up that phrase or its equivalent in your concordance.

   4. Describe the occasion of chapter 27.

   5. In whose reign did this take place?

   6. Why is Nebuchadnezzar called God's "servant"?

   7. Tell the story of chapter 28 in your own language.

   8. Name the chapter containing the type of the good and bad figs.

   MESSAGES IN JEHOIAKIM'S REIGN -- SECOND SERIES

   Chapters 35-36

   This lesson opens with the story of the Rechabites (c. 35). Verses 6,
   and 7 show the origin of their name and their "order," to quote a
   modern term. The principles of the latter were (1), abstinence from
   strong drink; (2), voluntary poverty; (3), a nomadic life. Verse 11
   gives the explanation of their presence in Jerusalem. Verses 12-17
   furnish the cause for Jeremiah's action in the premises, who is to use
   these followers of Rechab as a kind of object-lesson for Judah. Verses
   18 and 19 are a benediction on them for fidelity to their vows. These
   vows were severely tested in one particular at least, as we see in
   verses 3-6. By comparing 2 Kings 10:15 it will be seen that the founder
   of the Rechabites was prominent in Jehu's time, and a maintainer of the
   true worship who assisted in the overthrow of Ahab's power.

   Chapter 36 requires little explanation. Verses 1-4 are a witness to
   Jeremiah's authorship. Verse 5 shows him again a prisoner. At verse 9 a
   new section begins, in that Baruch who previously read the book in the
   court of the temple now has another opportunity to do so, the immediate
   outcome of which is stated in verses 11-15. From this incident grows
   another, viz., the interest of the princes both in the words of the
   book and the human author of them (vv. 16-19). At last their contents
   are set before the king (vv. 20-22), whose contemptuous treatment of
   them in the face of earnest protest is recorded (vv. 23-25). What
   divine judgment is pronounced against him (vv. 29-31)? And what is the
   further history of the words given to the prophet (vv. 27, 28, 32)?
   Note that in this new collection of writings we have more than a copy
   of the old, a much fuller record of Jehovah's revelations to the
   prophet. Note also the last clause of verse 26. How the Lord may have
   "hid them" is not revealed, but the fact recalls how Martin Luther was
   protected by God through the friendly and powerful Elector in the
   Wartburg.

   Questions.

   1. Give your recollection of the founder of the Rechabites as recorded
   in 2 Kings?

   2. What were the principles of their "order"?

   3. How did they happen to be in Jerusalem?

   4. Tell the story of Jeremiah's testing of them.

   5. What object had he in view?

   6. What lessons may be gathered from the story?

   7. Tell the story of chapter 36 in your own words.

   8. What lessons may be gathered from it?

   CLOSING EVENTS OF THE SIEGE

   Chapters 37-39

   We are again in Zedekiah's reign (v. 1), and the same disobedience as
   before marks the period (v. 2). We are astonished at the effrontery
   accompanying it, (v. 3). Note the occasion when this prayer is
   solicited (vv. 4, 5). Egypt has come up to help, and the Babylonians in
   consequence, have raised the siege in order to meet the approaching
   army. Is it not an indication that God has changed His mind about Judah
   after all? The answer is found in verses six to ten.

   Verses 11-15 tell their own sad story. Notice the vacillation of the
   king (vv. 16, 17). Why does this man thus play hot and cold, and fast
   and loose with heaven? If God is the Lord, why not serve Him, and if
   not, why be interested to inquire of Him? Has this type of man yet
   vanished from the earth? How does he now lighten the prophet's
   suffering (vv. 18-21) ? How does the last verse indicate the straitness
   of the siege?

   In chapter 38, what illustration have we of the political weakness and
   the moral meanness of Zedekiah (w. 1-6)? Whom does God now raise up to
   befriend His servant (vv. 7-13)? What further counsel of the king
   follows (vv. 14-23)? Is any change of the divine policy evident in
   this?

   Although the king urges on the prophet a subterfuge (vv. 24, 35), there
   is no reason to feel that the prophet employed it. He probably did not
   tell the princes all that transpired, nor was there obligation on him
   to do so, but that he deliberately lied, even to save his life, is
   beyond belief (vv. 26-28).

   In chapter 39 the end is reached. Compare verses 5, 6 with 32:4 and
   Ezekiel 12:13.

   Note that a remnant is left in Jerusalem though the bulk of the people
   are deported (v. 10). Note the deference paid the prophet by the
   besieging army (vv. 11-14), and the manner in which God promised
   kindness to Ebed-Melech (vv. 15-18).

   THE REMNANT AND THE PROPHET'S LAST MESSAGE

   Chapters 40-45

   Chapter 40 opens with an account of Nebuchadnezzar's kindness to
   Jeremiah, inspired by what he had known of the latter's advice to his
   countrymen (vv. 1-4). Jeremiah had been the friend of Babylon, but not
   necessarily the enemy of his own nation. His patriotism was
   unquestioned, but the highest expression of his patriotism was his
   counsel to Judah to obey the will of God and submit to Babylon.

   Jeremiah's choice of action is in verses five and six. The new governor
   is loyal and things promise well (vv. 7-12). But the Ammonites see an
   opportunity to get even with their old enemy and obtain control of
   their land through the treachery of an apostate Jew (vv. 13-16).

   Chapter 41 narrates how the plot is carried out (vv. 1-10), and the
   resultant fear on the part of the people (vv. 11-18). This fear leads
   them to plan an exodus from Judah into Egypt.

   Chapter 42 shows them consulting with the prophet before carrying out
   this plan, albeit they are determined to do it.

   Chapter 43 is a prophecy of Egypt's conquest by Babylon (vv. 8-13)
   delivered after Jeremiah's arrival there (vv. 4-7). Today the place
   indicated in verse nine is marked by a ruined column.

   Jeremiah's Last Message.

   The contents of chapter 44 may be regarded as the continuation of the
   preceding, though how long after the entrance into Egypt the prophecy
   was uttered is impossible to say. Some have surmised twenty-five years.
   Certainly the Jews had spread themselves considerably (v. 1). The
   prophecy opens with a retrospect (vv. 2-6); but present conditions are
   no improvement over the past (vv. 7-10); only doom can await them (vv.
   11-14). Opposition is aroused as of old (vv. 15-19), showing the former
   infatuation (v. 17). They had forgotten that God gave them these good
   things even when they were rebelling against him (Hosea Chap. 11). So
   men still trace misfortune to everything but the true cause, which is
   sin. Notice the prominence of women here, on whose regeneration that of
   society still depends. The prophecy concludes with the prediction of an
   awful judgment, the truth of which will be established by an appeal to
   history (vv. 20-30).

   Baruch Counselled.

   Chapter 45 is a word to Baruch, the prophet's amanuensis and friend,
   spoken doubtless at an earlier period than its position indicates, and
   some would say just after the events of chapter 36. Weighed down by
   responsibility and dismayed at the aspect of things, he is seeking
   better things for himself -- an easier lot dare we say? At all events
   he is warned of his moral danger at the same time that he is promised
   physical deliverance at least, in the dire hour coming on the land (v.
   5). He accompanied Jeremiah into Egypt, and to his labors doubtless, we
   trace the copies of these prophecies which have circulated in that
   country, and given rise to a Greek version of them (the Septuagint
   so-called).

   Questions.

   1. Explain Nebuchadnezzar's interest in Jeremiah.

   2. Did this interest compromise the prophet's character of a patriot in
   any way?

   3. What is Jeremiah's choice of a location, and with whom does he now
   take up his home?

   4. Give the history of Gedaliah's brief authority in your own words.

   5. Give the history of the people's dealings with Jeremiah at this
   crisis.

   6. Analyze the prophet's last message.

   7. Explain chapter 45.
     __________________________________________________________________

LAMENTATIONS

   "The touching significance of this book lies in the fact that it is the
   disclosure of the love and sorrow of Jehovah for the very people He is
   chastening -- a sorrow wrought by the Spirit in the heart of Jeremiah.
   Compare Jeremiah 13:7; Matthew 23:36-38: Romans 9:1-5." -- Scofield
   Reference Bible.

   "As regards its external structure, the composition of the book, both
   as a whole and in its several parts, is so artistic, that anything like
   it can hardly be found in any other book of Holy Scriptures." --
   Lange's Commentary.

   In the first place it contains just five songs, each limited to a
   single chapter. In the second place, there is a marked climax in the
   third song, with an ascent and a descent, a crescendo and decrescendo
   movement before and after it. About the middle of this song at verse
   eighteen, the prophet seems to have reached the deepest night of his
   misery, "but where the exigency is greatest, help is nearest. The night
   is succeeded by the morning (vv. 19-21), and with verse 22 breaks the
   full day."

   Each of the songs contains 22 verses according to the number of letters
   in the Hebrew alphabet; in other words, it is an acrostic -- a favorite
   form of Hebrew poetry. But In the third song each verse is divided into
   three members making in our English setting 66 verses. Other of its
   poetical features we can not dwell upon.

   Analysis of the Chapters.

   In chapter 1 the lament is over the ruin of Jerusalem and Judah, and is
   divided into two parts of equal length. The first is a description of
   the city, and the second the lamentation strictly considered. In both
   the speaker is the prophet himself (or an ideal person like the
   daughter of Zion, for example).

   In chapter 2, the lament is over the destruction of the city, which is
   described and attributed to Jehovah. This also is in two nearly even
   sections. Verses 1-10 describe the judgment; verses 12-22 is the
   lamentation proper.

   In chapter 3 is the climax where Israel's brighter day is contrasted
   with the gloomy night of sorrow experienced by the prophet himself.
   There are three parts in this chapter, divided as follows: Verses 1-18,
   19-42, 43-66.

   In chapter 4, Zion's guilt and punishment are described, the whole
   consisting of four parts which will be readily distinguished as verses
   1-6; 7-11; 12-16; 17-22.

   In chapter 5, the distress and hope of the prisoners and fugitives are
   expressed in the form of a prayer. Here the author lets the people
   speak, not as an ideal person but in the first person plural as a
   concrete multitude. There is an introduction (v. 1), two principal
   parts, verses 2-7 and 8-16, and a conclusion, verses 17-22.

   For the above analysis of the chapter we are indebted to Lange.

   Golden Texts.

   There are some richly laden verses in this beautiful book, full of
   comfort and instruction for the saint and of homiletic value to the
   preacher. We indicate a few: 1:12; 1:16; 2:13; 2:14; 3:21-26; 3:31-33;
   3:37; 3:39-41; 5:7; 5:16-17; 5:21.

   Questions.

   1. What fact gives this book peculiar significance?

   2. Have you read Romans 11:1-5?

   3. How does the literary structure of this book compare with other
   Scriptures?

   4. Describe the third song.

   5. What is an acrostic?

   6. Have you memorized any of the Golden Texts?
     __________________________________________________________________

EZEKIEL

   THE PROPHET'S CALL AND PREPARATION

   Chapters 1-3

   Ezekiel was carried to Babylon with King Jehoiachin, as we gather by
   comparing 1:1; 33:21; 40:1 with 2 Kings 24:11-16; and lived with the
   exiles on the river Chebar probably at Tel-abib (1:1, 3; 3:15). Unlike
   Jeremiah, he was married and had a stated residence (8:1; 24:1, 18).
   His ministry began in the fifth year of Jehoiachin's captivity, and
   seven before the capture of Jerusalem (1:1, 2), when he himself was
   thirty years old (v. 1). His prophetic activity extended over a period
   of at least twenty-two years (1:2; 29:17), during which time he was
   often consulted by the leaders in exile (8:1; 14:1; 20:1), though his
   advice was not always followed. The time and manner of his death are
   unknown. -- Davis' Bible Dictionary.

   Like Daniel and the Apostle John who, like himself, prophesied outside
   of Palestine, he follows the method of symbol and vision, or as we
   prefer to put it, God followed that method through him. And like them,
   his ministry was directed to "the whole house of Israel," the twelve
   tribes, rather than to either Judah or Israel distinctively, after the
   manner of the pre-exilic prophets. His purpose, was two-fold: (1) to
   keep before the exiles the national sins which had brought Israel so
   low; and (2) to sustain their faith by predictions of national
   restoration, the punishment of their enemies, and ultimate earthly
   glory.

   Scofield divides the book into seven great prophetic strains indicated
   by the expression, "The hand of the Lord was upon me" (1:3; 3:14, 22;
   8:1; 33:22; 37:1; 40:1), and seven minor divisions indicated by the
   formula, "And the word of the Lord came unto me." But although this is
   interesting and instructive, yet for our present purpose, we emphasize
   three main divisions only, as follows:

   1. Prophecies delivered before the siege of Jerusalem, foretelling its
   overthrow (cc. 1-24). These correspond to the general character of
   Jeremiah's messages with whom for a while Ezekiel was contemporary.

   2. Prophecies delivered during the period of the siege (cc. 25-32).
   These are chiefly about the Gentile nations.

   3. Prophecies after the downfall of the city (cc. 33-48). These deal
   with the restoration entirely.

   1. The Prophet Called.

   Give the time, place and circumstances as indicated in verses one and
   two. Look at the map and identify the Chebar. Give the details of
   Ezekiel's biography in verse three.

   Note the vision he beheld -- the whirlwind, cloud, fire, brightness,
   color (v. 4); the four living creatures (vv. 5-14); the wheels (vv.
   15-21); the firmament (vv. 22-23); the voice (vv. 24-25); the throne
   and the man above it (vv. 26-27); and finally, the definition of it all
   (v. 28). Note in the last verse that out of this glory the voice spake
   that directed the prophet. Freshen your recollection by comparing
   Exodus 3, 33 and 34; 1 Kings 19; Isaiah 6; Daniel 10; Acts 9;
   Revelation 1.

   The "living creatures" are doubtless identical with the cherubim of the
   garden of Eden, to which further reference will be made in the next
   lesson,

   2. Equipped and Commissioned.

   Note the address "Son of Man" (v. 1). It is used by Jesus Christ
   seventy-nine times in referring to Himself, and by Jehovah ninety-one
   times in speaking to Ezekiel, which suggests that the prophet is
   considered in a priestly and mediatorial capacity. Or, we may take the
   thought of Scofield that in the case of our Lord it is His racial name
   as the representative man in the sense of 1 Corinthians 15:45-47. If
   so, applying the idea here, it means that Jehovah, while not forsaking
   Israel even in her disobedience and hour of punishment, would yet
   remind that people that they are but a small part of the race for which
   He also cares.

   Note the relation in which the Holy Spirit comes to the prophet, and
   examine your concordance to see that "entering into him" is more of a
   New Testament than an Old Testament way of speaking of that relation.

   Note finally, that like other recipients of God's revelation the
   prophet heard the voice that spake to him and recognized the speaker.

   Now follow a description of the moral condition of the people to whom
   he is sent (vv. 3-5), and a warning to himself, corresponding to that
   in the case of Jeremiah (vv. 6-8). The demand for absolute obedience in
   the transmission of his message and his compliance therewith, are set
   forth symbolically in the figure of the book (2:9; 3:3), although the
   transaction itself is difficult to explain. Perhaps it took place in a
   vision. How does it show that only what God imparted to him was he to
   preach? How that he was to make it his own? How that in a spiritual
   sense he was to live on it? "Whatever its message, the Word of God is
   sweet to faith because it is the Word of God." (Compare Jer. 1:9;
   15:16; Rev. 10: 9, 10).

   Questions.

   1. When was Ezekiel made a captive?

   2. What do we learn of his domestic history?

   3. What method of teaching does he exemplify?

   4. What was its purpose?

   5. State the three main divisions of the book, with chapters.

   6. What other men had corresponding visions of glory?

   7. What, possibly, is the significance of the phrase "Son of Man?"

   8. How is the inspiration of Ezekiel's message symbolized?

   THE CHERUBIM

   In our last lesson we had the first description of the cherubim met
   with in Scripture, although the beings themselves were brought before
   us in Eden (Gen. 3), and their images, or figures, in the tabernacle.
   In the latter case two were in the Holy of Holies over the Ark of the
   Covenant and others wrought in needlework upon the curtains of the
   sanctuary and the veil (Exodus 25-27).

   Imperfect and erroneous conceptions of the cherubim have prevailed, as
   instanced in that they are almost always pictured as angels, which they
   are not, but rather the living embodiment of some important truth.

   Familiar to Israel.

   That they were familiar Israel is seen in that Moses gives no
   description of them either in Genesis or Exodus. Is this accounted for
   by the circumstance that they continued to exist in Eden guarding the
   approach to the tree of life, and visible to man, say, down to the time
   of the flood? If so, Shem, who was contemporaneous with Abraham for 150
   years, might easily have transmitted to him, and through him to his
   descendants, a knowledge of their appearance and of that which their
   presence was intended to teach.

   But their appearance is not revealed to us until we reach Ezekiel, when
   they are presented as having in general, a human form, but each with
   four faces and four wings -- one face of a man, another of a lion, a
   third of an ox, and a fourth of an eagle. Their motions were as swift
   as lightning, and the sound of their wings in flight as of great waters
   or a mighty host. A throne was in the firmament above them, and on the
   throne the divine glory in the likeness of a man. "This was the
   appearance of the likeness of the glory of the Lord," said the prophet,
   which shows the connection between it and our humanity in the person of
   Immanuel.

   Subsequently, at chapter 10, the prophet speaks of seeing these beings
   again in the temple at Jerusalem, and identifies them as "the
   cherubim."

   They are seen once more by John on Patmos (Rev. 4-5) where "they rest
   not day and night, saying. Holy, holy, holy, Lord God Almighty," and
   with the four and twenty elders they fall down before the Lamb and sing
   a new song -- a song of praise for the redemption of man. This is very
   significant.

   Type of Redeemed Humanity.

   That they are beings designed to set forth some great truth of
   redemption is thus evident, since they are introduced at its opening
   scene in Genesis, and in its closing scene in Revelation, and
   associated with it throughout.

   The symbolism of the faces of the cherubim considered together, gives
   us "the highest possible conception of life, with the noblest
   characteristics belonging to created intelligence."

   The face of the man sets forth the highest ideal of wisdom and
   knowledge; that of the lion adds majesty and power; that of the ox,
   creative or productive industry; and the eagle, dominion and
   irresistible might, for "the range of his vision and the power of his
   flight, as well as his boldness and courage, are unequaled."

   The other features, however, were equally striking. Eyes before and
   behind, show ceaseless vigilance and exalted capacities for knowledge;
   wings, denote a higher and wider sphere of service than simply the
   earth; going straight forward, never turning their bodies, as we must
   necessarily do, but with four faces always moving in the direct line of
   vision, points to a superior spiritual nature and undeviating integrity
   in God's service; their glorious appearance, also, like burning coals
   of fire, sparkling as burnished brass, has its significance.

   If now, according to the ordinary principles of symbolic
   interpretation, we ask for the realization of all this, we may find it
   in our redeemed humanity when delivered from the curse, and restored,
   and glorified through Jesus Christ. The cherubim would seem to be the
   embodiment of that glory to which our humanity is destined in the
   resurrection state -- that combination of powers and excellencies which
   shall be ours when our salvation is consummated in the life to come.

   The Embodiment of the Glorified Life.

   This is further corroborated by the fact that originally they stood
   within the prohibited bounds of paradise, and kept "the way of the tree
   of life;" i. e., they not only guarded it, but preserved the approach
   to it, as if until, in the fullness of time, redeemed humanity might
   have access to it again.

   The divine presence since the entrance of sin, had withdrawn Himself
   from all familiar intercourse with men, no longer walking with them as
   in their innocence in paradise. But He had not withdrawn Himself from
   earth or from men altogether, since He might still be approached, and
   His favor secured at the gateway to the tree of life. Here the cherubim
   dwelt with the flaming sword of the divine presence between them. So
   also in the Holy of Holies in the tabernacle, their privileged place
   lies over the mercy seat, while here in Ezekiel's vision above their
   heads in the crystal firmament, the glory of the God of Israel in human
   form was seated on the throne.

   Thomas Wicke, D. D., from whose "The Economy of the Ages" the above is
   an abridgment, regards the fact that the cherubim are always found in
   immediate connection with the surroundings of the divine presence, as
   declaring that those they represent have a right within the paradise of
   God -- the blessed promise held out to our redeemed humanity. Compare
   Revelation 5:9, where the cherubim unite with the four and twenty
   elders in the song of redemption itself -- the song of the Lamb.

   SECOND VISION OF GLORY AND ITS RESULT

   Chapters 4-7

   Remember that in the first part of this book, chapters 1-24, we are
   dealing with prophecies before the siege of Jerusalem and foretelling
   its overthrow.

   The present lesson begins at verse 22 of chapter 3. (Compare verse 23
   with 1:1, and verse 24 with 2:2 and Acts 2:4 and 4:31.) Verse 25 is to
   be taken figuratively. (Compare 2 Cor. 6:11, 12.) The same is true of
   verse 26, which means that as Israel had rejected the words of the
   prophets hitherto, the time had now come when God would deprive them of
   those words for the time being at least (1 Sam. 7:2; Amos 8:11, 12).

   The Sign of the Tile. Chapter 4.

   This sign (1-3) and those that follow immediately, were symbolic
   testimonies to the wickedness of the nation as well as prophetic of the
   coming siege. It is common to say that these things were performed in
   vision and not in external action, but we can hardly be sure of that.
   At all events the tile represents that God has set a wall of separation
   between Him and the nation, that can not be forced through. The second
   action, lying first on one side and then the other, (4-8) supplements
   the first. The third, eating the coarse and polluted bread, and by
   weight, is explained in the closing verses of the chapter (verses 16,
   17). (Compare Jer. 52:6.) As to verse 12, the Arabs use beasts' dung
   for fuel, as wood is scarce, but to use that of man implies the most
   awful need. As to do so was in violation of the Mosaic law (Deut. 14:3;
   23: 12-14), the command to the prophet, symbolized that now God's
   people were, as a judicial punishment, to be outwardly blended with the
   heathen (Deut. 28:68; Hos. 9:3).

   The Sign of the Hair. Chapters 5-7.

   This symbol (verses 1-4) is explained in the rest of the chapter. The
   "knife" or "razor" was the sword of the enemy which God would use. The
   whole hair being shaven was a sign of humiliation (2 Sam. 10:4, 5).
   "Balances" expresses God's discrimination in the coming judgments. The
   "hairs" are the people in this case. One third was to be killed,
   another destroyed by famine and pestilence, and the remainder scattered
   among the Gentiles. The few to escape were symbolized by the hairs
   bound in Ezekiel's skirts, and even of these some were to pass a
   further ordeal (verses 3, 4). Compare these last-named verses with the
   story of the remnant in Jerusalem in Jeremiah 40-44.

   Chapters 6 and 7 are a continuation of the subject of chapter 5, which
   our familiarity with the prophets preceding will simplify for us. The
   first of these may be divided into three parts. Verses 1-7 contain a
   message against Israel; verses 8-10, speak of that "remnant" which God
   always promised to spare because of their repentance, while the rest of
   the chapter, and the whole of chapter 7, is filled with the desolations
   God shall sent upon the land for its iniquity.

   Questions.

   1. What characterizes the prophecies of the first 24 chapters of this
   book? 2. Have you read 1 Samuel 7:2 and Amos 8:11, 12?

   3. To what do the symbols of chapter 5-7 witness?

   4. What is symbolized by the coarse bread eaten by weight?

   5. Give the interpretation of the symbol of the hair in your own words.

   6. Have you refreshed your recollection by re-reading Jeremiah 40-44?

   7. Analyze chapter 6.

   VISIONS OF IDOLATRY

   Chapters 8-11

   It is the general opinion that these chapters introduce a new stage of
   the prophecies, and that while those of the last lesson comprehended
   Judah and Israel, these refer more particularly to Jerusalem and the
   people of Judah under Zedekiah. The fuller story of this period was in
   Jeremiah.

   The prophet is seen in his own house by the Chebar, and the elders of
   Judah are before him for instruction (8:1). "Elders" we understand to
   mean some who are in captivity with the prophet.

   "The Visions of God to Jerusalem" (v. 3), concern the profanations of
   the temple and other wickedness of the people past and present, and
   because of which the partial captivity had befallen them which was
   speedily to be followed by a completer one.

   As another puts it, the prophet was showing these things to the present
   generation of Jews in Babylon to justify to them, the righteousness of
   God in their present chastening. There were some of the younger element
   who had been born in captivity and to whom these things presumably were
   unknown. The visions were so vivid to the prophet that it seems as if
   he were transferred back to Jerusalem at the time these things were
   occurring.

   1. The Third Vision of Glory. 8: 1-4.

   Verse 1 compared with 1:2, raises the presumption that the "lying on
   his sides" (vv. 5, 6), had been completed. Verse 2, refers to a further
   manifestation of the Messiah as the Angel of the Covenant, in whose
   person alone God manifests Himself. (John 1:18). Verse 3, "the image of
   jealousy" was a heathen image worshiped with licentious rites and
   provoking God's jealousy (Exod. 20:5). Verse 4, refers to the Shekinah
   which still rested over the temple and upon the mercy-seat.

   2. The Profanations of the Temple. 8:5-18.

   The idolatries named (v. 10) had been introduced from Egypt. "Chambers
   of his imagery," (v. 12) means his perverse imagination. "Tammuz" (v.
   14) the name of a heathen god, the Syrian form of Adonais. "The branch
   to the nose" (v. 17), refers to the sacred trees which were symbols in
   idol worship.

   3. Sealing the Faithful. 9:1-11.

   "Them that have charge over the city" (1) are doubtless angelic
   executioners of God's will as in Daniel 4:13, 17, 23, and elsewhere.
   The man with the ink horn (2) is thought to symbolize the Messiah, who
   is here marking His elect (v. 4, compare with Ex. 12:7, Rev. 7:3, and
   other places). The departure of the "glory of the God of Israel" (3) is
   significant, presaging His final departure from the nation which would
   be given over to its punishment. Quoting Scofield, "It is noteworthy
   that to Ezekiel, the priest, was given the vision of the glory
   departing from the cherubim to the threshold (9:3); then from the
   threshold (10:18); then from the temple and the city to the mountain on
   the east of Jerusalem (11:13), and finally returning again to the
   temple to abide permanently in the millennium (43:2-5).

   4. The Judgments Spreading. 10-11: 13.

   "The wrath of God is now about to burn the city, as His sword in the
   hand of Babylon, had slain its inhabitants." This is the story of
   chapter 10, but in 11 we have a separate prophecy of the punishment of
   the corrupt princes. Their wicked counsel is indicated in verse 3,
   which agrees with what we saw in Jeremiah. They were ever contending
   against that prophet that his word was not true, and that destruction
   by the Babylonians was not coming. They, therefore, because of their
   unbelief, were responsible for the slain of the city (vv. 6, 7). Their
   judgment was certain (vv. 8-13).

   5. Future Restoration Promised. 11:14-25.

   Ezekiel wonders if there shall be no salvation (v. 13), and he is told
   that those who have been carried away, and whom the remainder in the
   land despised and sneered at for that reason, will be watched over
   wherever they are (v. 16). This leads to that prophecy of the future
   repentance and restoration of the nation with which we have become
   familiar in other prophets. Verses 17-21, is a picture of the
   millennial period.

   Questions.

   1. To what do the prophecies of this lesson more particularly refer?

   2. What are the local circumstances under which they are delivered?

   3. What specifically, do "the visions of God" concern?

   4. Explain the difficult expressions in 8:1-4.

   5. What is the definition of "Tammuz"?

   6. How would you identify the man with the ink-horn?

   7. What four journeys of "the Glory of the Lord" are recorded in
   Ezekiel?

   8. To what period does 11:17-21 apply?

   DISTRIBUTING THE RESPONSIBILITY

   Chapters 12-15

   While these visions and prophecies may be new as to the particular
   occasions for them, yet they are in substance the same as the
   preceding.

   1. "The Prince in Jerusalem." (12: 1-16.)

   In chapter 10 we had a vision of the judgment upon the city of
   Jerusalem, in II, upon the princes, and in this upon the king himself
   (10). The explanation of the action commanded the prophet in verses 1-7
   is given in verses 8-16. It is thought that this was performed by him
   in vision only and not outwardly, but if so, its effect could hardly
   have been intended for those he was instructing but only for himself,
   which we doubt (v. 9). The whole thing typifies Zedekiah's flight by
   night. (Compare Jer. 39:4.) He went out furtively as digging through a
   wall, and covered his face so as not to be recognized.

   2. The Nearness of the Event. Verses 17-28.

   The infidels scoffingly said that because the threatened judgment was
   long in coming, it would never come (v. 22), but they are to be taught
   otherwise (vv. 23-25). As a matter of fact it was very near (vv.
   26-28).

   3. The Lying Prophets. 13:1-23.

   The city, the princes, the king have each been singled out for
   judgment, and now come the prophets. Note where they obtained their
   false messages (v. 2), and the ill effect of them on the people (v. 6).
   Note the judgments to fall on them (v. 9), which probably means that
   their names would be erased from the registers like those who had died
   for their crimes (Jer. 17:13; Rev. 3:5; Luke 10:20). Moreover, they
   never would return from captivity. As teachers they were like men
   building up a wall with untempered mortar and their work would come to
   naught (vv. 10-16). There were false prophetesses as well as prophets
   (vv. 17-23). They "sew pillows to all armholes" might be rendered "to
   elbows and wrists," and the reference is thought to be the cushions
   which the prophetesses made to lean upon as typifying the tranquility
   they foretold to them who consulted them. "Kerchiefs on the head of
   every stature" might be rendered on "men of every age," though its
   significance is doubtful. The prophetesses engaged in their wicked work
   for paltry fees (v. 19).

   4. The Hypocritical People. 14:1-11.

   The spirit in which some of the people sought the instruction of the
   prophet is shown in verses 1-5, and it is a judgment upon them that
   they shall listen to false prophets and be deceived. God will
   judicially darken the false prophets' mind to that end, or He will
   permit Satan to do it. The evil teaching of these false prophets, in
   other words, will serve the purposes of His just judgment. (Compare I
   Kings 22:23; 2 Thess. 2:11, 12).

   5. Intercession Useless. Verses 12-23.

   The inevitableness of the coming judgment on Jerusalem is shown in the
   discouragement of intercession on her behalf. Ezekiel had been
   pleading, but he might as well desist. Noah, Daniel and Job (vv. 14,
   23) had prevailed with God on former occasions, but even their
   petitions would now be helpless. The reference to Daniel is
   interesting, for although his prophecies were mostly later than
   Ezekiel, yet his fame for piety and wisdom was already established, and
   the events recorded in the early chapters of his book had already
   occurred. But even he, though the Jews may have had their hopes turned
   towards his influence either in the court of Babylon or that of heaven,
   could not avert the approaching calamity.

   6. The Burning Vine. 15.

   The point of this vision seems to be that as the vine is worthless as
   wood so the people of Jerusalem have ceased to have any value in His
   eyes. They were once His vine, but now they shall pass from fire to
   fire until they come to naught.

   Questions.

   1. How does this lesson illustrate its theme?

   2. What leads to the conviction that the prophets "removal" was acted
   outwardly?

   3. What did it typify, and how?

   4. What had become the proverb of the scoffers?

   5. What judgment would fall on the false prophets?

   6. Explain the figure of "untempered mortar."

   7. Can you quote 2 Thessalonians 2:11,12?

   8. Who have divine testimony borne to them as men of power in prayer?

   PARABLES AND RIDDLES

   Chapters 16-18

   The Unfaithful Wife. Chapter 16.

   The theme of chapter 16 is Jerusalem and her abominations (vv. 1, 2),
   but it is worked out in parabolic form, Jerusalem, or the nation of
   Israel, being personified as a female.

   There are four stages in the story: (1) Jehovah adopts her as an infant
   (vv. 1-7); when attained to marriageable age she becomes his wife (vv.
   8-14); as a wife she proves unfaithful (vv. 15-34); punishment follows
   (vv. 35-52); unexpected and unmerited restoration is promised (vv.
   53-63).

   Verse 7, first part, is corroborated by Exodus 12:37, 38. To spread a
   skirt (v. 8) was an oriental mode of espousal (Ruth 3:9). With verse 9
   compare Exodus 19:12, and similar allusions. Verses 11-13 refer to the
   customary marriage gifts of one who was to become a queen. Verses 15-36
   speak of her worship of idols after the manner of the surrounding
   nations, with which was accompanied gross sins of the flesh. Verses
   35-52 refer figuratively to the shame, suffering, and loss, entailed by
   the Babylonian siege and overthrow -- the enemy hurled stones at the
   siege and slew with the sword afterward (v. 40), and so on throughout.

   The restoration was to be brought about at the end, not on the ground
   of Israel's repentance even, but of God's own promise to the fathers
   (v. 60). It would be His returning to them that would result in their
   returning to Him (v. 61).

   2. The Eagles and the Vine. 17.

   The "eagle" (v. 2) was the symbol of the Assyrian god Nisroch, and is
   here applied to the king of Babylon. "Lebanon" means Jerusalem, and
   "the highest branch" its King, Jeconiah, or Jehoiachin, whom the
   Babylonians carried away some time previously (2 Kings 24:8-16). The
   "city of merchants" is Babylon. The "seed of the land planted" is
   Zedekiah placed on the throne of Judah by Babylon. Verse 6 means that
   at first Zedekiah was an obedient vassal to Babylon. The "eagle" of
   verse 7 is Egypt towards whom Judah turned in her heart, as a means of
   breaking the Babylonian yoke. But her scheme would not prosper (vv. 9,
   10), as the remainder of the chapter shows.

   3. Eating Sour Grapes. 18.

   Verse 2 shows the people were charging injustice upon God, and claiming
   that they were suffering not for their own sins but their fathers, but
   He proves that this is not so. How does the last clause of verse 4
   declare to the contrary? Note the following illustration of God's
   impartiality in a series of supposed cases:(a) a just man (vv. 5-9);
   (b) an unjust son of a just man (vv. 10-13); (c) a just son of a unjust
   man (vv. 14-18). "Righteousness," in verse 20 is not used as if any
   were absolutely righteous, which would contradict Scripture everywhere;
   but in the sense of seeking righteousness in God's way as far as that
   way had been revealed to them. In the light of the New Testament there
   is no ground of righteousness save that which is imputed for Christ's
   sake, and as the result of His atonement; but while this was not
   clearly understood by the Old Testament saints, yet it was the ground
   on which any righteousness of theirs could be accepted. This is brought
   out in verse 22, "in his righteousness that he hath done he shall
   live." Not "for," or "on account of" that righteousness, but "in" it.
   In the same manner, verse 31, shows not what man can do, but what he
   ought to do; and when he sees that he ought to make him a clean heart,
   and finds that he can not, he throws himself in his helplessness on
   God's mercy and receives it.

   Questions.

   1. Name the parables and riddles in this lesson.

   2. Name the four stages in the story of the faithless wife.

   3. On what final ground shall the future restoration of Israel be
   brought about?

   4. What nations did the two eagles symbolize?

   5. Tell this "riddle" and its interpretation in your own words.

   6. In what sense only can "righteousness" be understood in this lesson?

   7. What is the logic that causes man to cry out for mercy?

   CLOSE OF PART ONE

   Chapters 19-24

   Lack of space makes it necessary to crowd the remainder of Part 1 into
   a single lesson, but nothing vital to its general understanding will be
   lost, as the chapters are, to a certain extent, repetitions of the
   foregoing.

   1. Lamentations for the Princes. 19.

   The theme of this chapter is found in the first and last verses. The
   "princes" are the kings of Judah -- Jehoahaz, Jehoiachin and Zedekiah,
   whose histories were made familiar in the closing chapters of 2 Kings
   and 2 Chronicles. Judah is the lioness (2). Jehoahaz is the first of
   her young lions (3), and Jehoiachin the second (4-9). Zedekiah is
   probably in mind in verse 14.

   2. Rejection of the Elders. 20.

   Verse 1 gives the occasion for this message, which falls into two great
   parts. Verses 1-32 recite the peoples' rebellions against God during
   five distinct periods, i. e., in Egypt (2-9), in the wilderness
   (10-17), on the borders of Canaan (18-26), when a new generation arose
   in Canaan (27-29), and finally in the prophet's own time (30-32). The
   explanation of verses 25 and 26 seems to be that God chastised them, as
   in Numbers 25, by permitting Baal's worshippers to tempt them to
   idolatry, ending in judgment upon them. The easy success of the
   tempter's arts, showed how ready they were to be led astray (compare v.
   39).

   Verse 32 should not lightly be passed over. It was in the heart of
   these Jews to live like the heathen round about them, and so escape the
   odium of having a peculiar God and law of their own. Moreover, they
   seemed to be getting nothing for it but threats and calamities, whereas
   the heathen seemed to be prospering. But God said it "shall not be at
   all," and how literally this has been fulfilled is seen in the later
   history of the Jews down to our day. As the Bible Commentary says:
   "Though the Jews seem so likely to have blended with the rest of
   mankind and laid aside their distinctive peculiarities, yet they have
   remained for centuries dispersed among all nations and without a home,
   but still distinct."

   At verse 33, begins the second division of the prophecy. Lest the
   covenant people should abandon their distinctive hopes, and amalgamate
   with the surrounding heathen, God tells them that, as the wilderness
   journey from Egypt was made subservient to discipline, and also to the
   taking from among them the rebellious, so a severe discipline (such as
   the Jews for long have been actually undergoing) would be administered
   to them during the next exodus for the same purpose (v. 38), and to
   prepare them for the restored possession of their land (Hosea 2:14,
   15). This was only partially fulfilled at the return from Babylon; its
   full accomplishment is future.

   3. Three Messages of Judgment. 21.

   The three messages of this chapter explain themselves to those who have
   followed the lessons thus far. The first might be designated the
   parable of the sighing prophet (1-7), the second, that of the sword of
   God (8-17), while the third is notable for the prophecy that thereafter
   there should be no true king of Israel till the Messiah came (26, 27;
   Acts 15:14-17).

   4. Jerusalem's Present Sins. 22.

   The repetition of Jerusalem's sins as given here suggests chapter 20;
   but there they were stated in a historical review, emphasis resting on
   the past, while here it is on the present.

   5. Aholah and Aholibah. 23.

   Here we have a parabolic portrayal similar to the adulterous wife in
   chapter 16; only that in this case it is not idolatries which are
   emphasized as violating the marriage covenant, but their worldly
   spirit, their alliances with the heathen for safety rather than
   confiding in God.

   6. The Period of Silence Begins. 24.

   "Ezekiel proves his divine mission by announcing, though three hundred
   miles away, the very day of the beginning of the siege of Jerusalem by
   Nebuchadnezzar" (1, 2). "The ninth year" means that of Jehoiachin's
   captivity, which was also that of Ezekiel.

   There was a self-confident proverb among the people (11:3) expressed in
   the sentence: "This city is the caldron and we be the flesh." They
   meant that Jerusalem would prove "an iron caldron-like defense from the
   fire" of the Babylonian hosts around about them in the siege; but God
   tells them that their proverb would fit the case in a different way
   (3-14). Jerusalem should be a caldron set upon the fire, but the
   people, so many pieces of flesh subjected to boiling water within.

   At verse 15 a period of silence begins for the prophet, covering the
   three years of the siege (compare verses 1 and 27 of this chapter, with
   verses 21 and 22 of chapter 33). The opening of the period is marked by
   a personal calamity -- the death of the prophet's wife (16-18). Ezekiel
   is not forbidden sorrow, but only the loud expression of it after the
   oriental manner, that his countrymen might be moved to ask the question
   (19) whose answer constitutes the remainder of the chapter. When
   Jerusalem would be destroyed, the calamity would be so felt that the
   ordinary usages of mourning would be suspended, or perhaps it signified
   that they could not in their exile manifest their sorrow, but only
   "mourn one toward another." Thus the prophet was a sign unto them (24).

   Questions.

   1. What is the title of chapter 19, and to whom does it refer?

   2. What gives occasion for the rejection of the elders (v. 20)?

   3. Analyze the first part of this chapter.

   4. Explain verses 25 and 26 and 32.

   5. What Messianic promise is found in 21:27?

   6. How would you explain chapter 33?

   7. How does Ezekiel prove his inspiration in chapter 24?

   8. How is the proverb about the caldron understood?

   9. How long a period of silence is enjoined on the prophet?

   JUDGMENTS ON THE GENTILE NATIONS

   Chapters 25-32

   The prophet's "dumbness" enjoined in the last chapter, was only towards
   Hs own people, and the interval was employed in messages touching the
   Gentiles. These nations might have many charges laid against them but
   that which concerned a Prophet of Israel chiefly was their treatment of
   that nation -- see this borne out by the text. Their ruin was to be
   utter to the end while that of Israel was but temporary.

   Seven nations are denounced, "the perfect number, implying that God's
   judgments would visit not merely these but the whole round of the
   Gentile world." Babylon is excepted here because she is, for the
   present, viewed as the rod of God's justice against Israel.

   Use the marginal notes of your Bible for light on, the historical
   references, and the maps for geographical data. A Bible dictionary also
   would be of much assistance.

   "Men of the east" (24:4) means the nomadic tribes beyond the Jordan.

   The following from the Scofield Bible recalls earlier teachings. of
   this commentary: "The prophecies upon Gentile powers (in these
   chapters) have had partial fulfillments of which history bears witness,
   but the mention of the 'Day of the Lord' (30:3), makes it evident that
   a fulfillment in the final sense is still future. These countries are
   once more to be the battle-ground of the nations."

   Tyre. 26-28.

   In the first of these chapters we have Tyre's sin (1, 2), her doom and
   the instruments of its execution (3-14), and the effect of her downfall
   on the other nations (15-21). In the second, we have a lamentation over
   the loss of such earthly splendor, and in the third, an elegy addressed
   to the king on the humiliation of his sacrilegious pride. This last is
   the most important chapter of the three.

   As to the destruction of Tyre, secular history shows how accurately God
   s word has come to pass. Though thou be sought for, yet shall thou
   never be found again" (21). This is not to say that there should be no
   more a lyre, but that there should be no more the Tyre that once was.
   As a matter of fact there were two Tyres in Ezekiel's time, old Tyre
   and new Tyre, the first on the main land and the other out in the sea;
   and as to the first not a vestige of it was left.

   Passing over the "lamentation" attention is called to the description
   of the king of Tyre (28:1-19), which should be read in connection with
   that of the king of Babylon in Isaiah 14. The comment in that case fits
   this also, for although these verses are referring to the king of Tyre
   then reigning, Ithbaal II yet they have evidently an ulterior and
   fuller accomplishment in Satan, or in his earthly embodiment the beast,
   or the Antichrist, of Daniel 7:25, 11:36, 37; 2 Thessalonians 2:4, and
   Revelation 13:6. There are many expressions in the chapter which baffle
   our understanding at present.

   Egypt. 29-32.

   It should be remembered that "Pharaoh" was a common name of all the
   kings of Egypt, meaning, as some say "the sun," others, "a crocodile,
   which was an object of worship by Egyptians. That nation was very
   prosperous and proud at this period, and no human sagacity could have
   foreseen its downfall as Ezekiel describes it, and as it came to pass,
   God's instrument was Babylon (29:19; 30:10), whose work is figuratively
   set forth in verses 4-12, of which 6 and 7 refer to the false
   confidence Israel reposed in Egypt during the siege and which was
   recorded in Isaiah and Jeremiah. Note verses 13-15 in the light of the
   subsequent history of Egypt, and compare them with the promise to
   Israel (21). God's covenant with the latter holds good, notwithstanding
   for the present she is dealt with like the Gentiles. "In that day"
   means in the fullest sense, the coming Day of the Lord.

   Reaching chapter 30 we find two messages, the first (1-19), a
   repetition with details, of that in 29:1-16; and the second, a vision
   more particularly against Pharaoh himself.

   "Heathen" (3) should be "nations," from which it will be seen that "the
   judgment on Egypt is the beginning of a world-wide judgment on all the
   Gentile people considered as God's enemies." "No more a prince of the
   land of Egypt" (13), means, no more an independent prince ruling the
   whole country.

   Chapter 31 illustrates the overthrow of Egypt by that of Assyria, for
   although the former was not utterly to cease to be as in the case of
   the latter, yet it was to lose its prominence as an aspirant for
   world-dominion. Assyria was overthrown by the Chaldeans or Babylonians,
   and so Egypt would be.

   Chapter 32 includes two lamentations rather than one, a fortnight apart
   in time, and divided at verse 17. Verse 7 may refer figuratively to the
   political sky, and yet the thought of supernatural darkness as formerly
   in Exodus 10:21-23 is not excluded. The second lamentation accompanies
   Egypt in imagination to the unseen world where she shares the fate of
   other nations (18 et seq.).

   Questions.

   1. What were the limitations on the prophet's dumbness?

   2. Why were judgments pronounced against the Gentile nations?

   3. How many nations are named, and what is the symbolism of that
   number?

   4. Have these prophecies yet been entirely fulfilled?

   5. Briefly analyze chapters 26-28.

   6. What secondary, and yet complete application awaits the prophecy of
   28:11-19?

   7. How would you explain 30:13?

   BROKEN SILENCE

   Chapters 33-37

   Ezekiel's commission to his own countrymen is now renewed (21, 22), and
   evidences a new tone. "Heretofore his functions had been chiefly
   threatening, but now the evil having reached its worst in the overthrow
   of Jerusalem, the consolatory element preponderates." (See 22:11).

   Verses 23-29 of the same chapter, have reference to the handful left in
   Jerusalem after the siege, the best commentary on which is Jeremiah
   40-42. Verse 30 to the end describes conditions at Chebar. The last
   verse alludes to the news in verse 21. When they heard that report
   which took some time to reach them, they had reason to change their
   minds about the prophet and his work.

   Many False Shepherds and the One True One. 34.

   "The shepherds of Israel" (2), are not the prophets and priests so much
   (though they may be included), as the rulers -- kings, princes, judges.
   The indictment against them extends to verse 10, at which point
   encouragement and comfort is given to the scattered sheep, the people
   of Israel. The language corresponds with that of all the prophets, and
   points to the regathering of the nation in the latter times, and their
   restoration and blessing in the land again (11-22). This will
   synchronize with the second coming of the Messiah, here called "my
   servant David" (24) and "a plant of renown" (29). That millennial
   conditions are in mind is evidenced by verses 25-28. "Though a number
   of the people returned after the seventy years' captivity, and though
   they had a larger posterity in the land, yet they were continually
   under the Gentile yoke, until in A. D. 70, they were finally driven
   away again in a dispersion which still continues."

   Judgment on Mount Seir or Edom. 35.

   This is placed here by way of contrast with Israel's promised blessing.
   The Edomites, descendants of Esau, Jacob's brother, had treated their
   kin shamefully in the past (5), therefore, unlike them their
   desolations should be perpetual (9). Remember that it is only in their
   national character of foes to Israel that they are to be destroyed. God
   is always merciful to individuals who repent. "When the whole earth
   rejoices" (14), means Judah and the nations that submit themselves to
   her God.

   Moral Restoration. 36.

   It is always understood that the national restoration of Israel implies
   their moral restoration. They will repent and turn to the Lord before
   the promised blessings shall be poured out upon them. It is this moral
   restoration which is foretold here.

   We have first restoration of the land (1-15), and then the people
   (35:16, 37:28). Verses 19-22, like those that follow, are spoken
   anticipatively. Observe God's motive for restoring them {22, 23).
   Observe the symbolic allusion to their moral regeneration (25-27, and
   that afterwards comes the material blessing. Many will have been
   gathered back to their land before the moral cleansing takes place, but
   the blessing will be withheld till then (28-38).

   Valley of Dry Bones. 37.

   In this chapter we have in symbol what the preceding foretold in plain
   language -- in other words what the prophet saw in vision. Verse 11 is
   the key to the chapter. The "bones" are the whole house of Israel on
   the earth at the time to which the prophecy refers, which is the
   beginning of the millennial age. The "graves" are the Gentile nations
   among which they shall be scattered. They shall be gathered out from
   among these nations back to their land (12). This will result in their
   conversion (13), after which they will be filled with the Holy Spirit
   (14). The two sticks (16) are Israel and Judah which shall again become
   one (17-27). Following this is a blessing on the whole earth (28).
   Compare Acts 15:16, 17.

   Verse 8 indicates that the people will return to their land at first
   unconverted. "David my servant" (24) is generally understood of the
   Messiah. "The chapter, as a whole, presents a beautiful image of
   Christian faith, which believes in the coming general resurrection of
   the dead in the face of all appearances against it, because God has
   said it (John 5:21; Romans 4:17; 2 Corinthians 1:9)."

   Questions.

   1. Explain the title of this lesson.

   2. Quote 33:11.

   3. Who are the "shepherds" of chapter 34?

   4. What title is twice given the Messiah in this lesson?

   5. What explains the location of chapter 35?

   6. What precedes the national restoration of Israel?

   7. Explain Chapter 37.

   8. Tell the story of that chapter in your own words.

   9. What does verse 8 seem to show?

   10. Of what is the chapter a beautiful image?

   PROPHECY AGAINST GOG

   Chapters 28-39

   It is fitting that following the prediction of Israel's restoration and
   blessing, there should come another showing judgment upon her enemies.
   Only it is doubtful if these enemies are those spoken of hitherto.
   Those were contiguous to Israel, but this is a northeastern power which
   gathers its allies on the mountains of the Holy Land, here is reason to
   identify it with Russia. She and the northern powers allied with her
   have been the latest persecutors of dispersed Israel, "and it is
   congruous both with divine justice and God's covenants with Israel that
   destruction should fall at the climax of the last mad attempt to
   exterminate her in Jerusalem."

   Let not the similarity of names with Revelation 20:7, 8 lead to the
   supposition that the same event is in mind, as that takes place at the
   close of the millennium, and this near its beginning.

   Identification with Russia.

   "Gog" is probably a common name of the kings of the land like "Pharoah"
   in Egypt. "The chief prince" is more properly "Prince of Rosh" or
   "Russ," which suggests Russia, to say nothing of "Meshec" and "Tubal,"
   which are almost identical with Moscow and Tobolsk. It is more
   difficult to locate "Gomer" and "Togarmah," but the whole military
   combination never having been referred to prior to this time,
   strengthens the contention in favor of a Russian alliance of some sort.

   The Period and the Plan.

   Note the time and conditions in verse 8. "The latter years" -- the end
   of this age. Israel is "brought back," restored, and is dwelling
   "safely" (also verse 11). Note the enemy's motive or plan (10-13), and
   compare that of Jehovah in permitting this to come to pass (14-16). The
   closing verses show the punishment superhuman in character, and final
   in its result. No more fears for Israel until the muster of the nations
   at the close of the millennium.

   Thoroughness of the Judgment. 39.

   The prophecy is continued in this chapter, and verses 8-10 describe the
   going forth from the cities of Palestine to burn the arms of the foe.
   There is difficulty here, but "seven" is the sacred number (verse 9)
   indicating the completeness of the cleansing in Israel's zeal for
   purity. As Fairbairn says, "Nothing belonging to the enemy should be
   left to pollute the land. How different from the earlier times when
   Israel not only left the arms but the heathen themselves among them, to
   corrupt them."

   A Public Burial Ground.

   Where the enemy expected to take the land for a possession, he would
   find a grave. Verse 11 might be translated:

   "I will give unto Gog a place for burial in Israel, the valley of the
   passengers on the east of the Sea; and it shall stop the passengers;
   and there shall they bury Gog and all his multitude."

   The travelers shall not stop their noses because of the smell, but the
   great number of mounds in evidence shall stay their progress, and lead
   them to think upon the vengeance poured out. This is the sense of the
   passage.

   In other words these graves shall be in no obscure spot, but in the
   direct pathway of travelers.

   Verse 15 is striking as compared with the foregoing. In verse 13, "all
   the people of the land" are burying the dead for seven months. In verse
   14, at the end of that time, special men are employed to continue the
   task to a finish; while in verse 15, the passers-by are helping them by
   setting up a sign near and exposed bone to identify it until removed.

   Verses 17-20 describe the fowls and the beasts feasting on the slain --
   by rams, lambs, goats, etc., (18) being meant men of different ranks
   and callings.

   Questions.

   1. With what Gentile nation is this chapter probably dealing?

   2. State two or three reasons for your belief.

   3. What period of time is in mind?

   4. What shows the superhuman character of the punishment?

   5. What illustrates its thoroughness?

   THE MILLENNIAL TEMPLE

   Chapters 40-48

   These chapters give a picture of the restored temple at Jerusalem
   during the Millennium, and of the worship of the Messiah when He shall
   exercise sway from that center to the ends of the earth.

   Beginning with chapter 40:1-5, we have an introduction to the subject
   -- the date as usual (1), the location and the opening vision. (The
   vision is of a city on the south); (2), a man with a measuring rod;
   (3), a building surrounded by a wall (5). In verses 6-16 the
   measurement of the east gate, the threshold, posts, porches, chambers,
   entry, pillars, etc. Following this (7-23), the outer court, the north
   gate and details corresponding to the preceding. Then the south gate
   with its appurtenances, and so on to verse 38. In 38-43 we have a
   description of the cells and entrances, the tables of stone for slaying
   the offerings, the inner cells for the singers (44-47), and finally the
   measuring of the porch (48, 49).

   In chapter 41 the prophet views the house itself, and in 42 he sees the
   cells or chambers for the priests (1-12). This is followed by
   regulations as to eating, dressing of the priests (13, 14)1 the chapter
   closing with a general summary.

   In chapter 43 a more august sight presents itself, the Shekinah, the
   visible glory of Jehovah is seen returning to dwell in the midst of His
   people (1-5).

   Kelly says, "the force of this is clear enough. It is the sign of God's
   return to Israel which He had left since the time of their captivity in
   Babylon. When it left. Israel, or the Jews, ceased to be His recognized
   people, but when they are taken up again under the Messiah the glory
   comes back." (6-9.)

   Following this we have the measurement of the altar, and statutes for
   the offering of burnt-offerings and the sprinkling of blood (13-17).
   But why is this, if we are dealing with millennial conditions? To this
   the author quoted above replies, that while Israel is to return to the
   land, and be converted and blessed, it will be still as Israel, not as
   Christians. In the present dispensation all believers, both Jews and
   Gentiles, belong to Christ in heaven, where such differences are
   unknown, but when this prophecy is fulfilled, and Christ's reign begins
   on earth, the distinction will be again resumed, though now for
   blessing, and not for cursing, as of old. He quotes verses 18-27 as
   decisive of this, since in these verses we hear of priests and Levites
   and the seed of Zadok entrusted with the duties of the altar.

   Speaking of the offerings, they will be memorial, looking back to the
   cross, as under the old covenant they were anticipatory, looking
   forward to the cross. In neither case have animal sacrifices power to
   put away sin (Romans 3:25; Hebrews 10:4). -- Scofield.

   Five Views of Interpretation.

   There are five interpretations of these chapters:

   (1) Some think they describe the temple at Jerusalem prior to the
   Babylonian captivity, and are designed to preserve a memorial of it.
   But the objection is that such a memorial is unnecessary because of the
   records in Kings and Chronicles; while the description is untrue
   because in many particulars it does not agree with that in the books
   named.

   (2) Some think these chapters describe the temple in Jerusalem after
   the return from the seventy years in Babylon, but this can not be,
   because there are more marks of contrast than likeness between the
   temple here describe and that.

   (3) Some think they describe the ideal temple which the Jews should
   have built after the seventy years' return, and which they never
   realized. But this lowers the character of the divine Word. Why should
   this prophecy in Ezekiel have been given if it was never to be
   fulfilled?

   (4) Some think this temple in Ezekiel symbolizes the spiritual
   blessings of the church in the present age. But this appears unlikely,
   because even those who hold the theory can not explain the symbolism of
   which they speak. Moreover, even as symbolism it leaves out several
   important features of Christianity, such as the atonement and
   intercession of the high priest.

   (5) The last view is that in the preceding comments, that we have here
   a prediction of the temple that shall be built in the millennial age.
   This appears a fitting and intelligent sequel to the preceding
   prophecies. A strong objection to it exists in that sacrifices and
   feasts are referred to, which seem contradictory to Christianity. But
   it should be remembered that Christianity is not meant, but a new
   dispensation with Israel on the earth while the church is in the air
   with Christ. This involves changes of immense magnitude.

   An Architect's Testimony.

   While lecturing in Edinburgh, the author received a communication from
   G. S. Aitkin, Esq., an architect of that city, who had studied this
   vision of the temple from a technical standpoint, and made a plan of
   it, finding a place for every measurement referred to.

   The two points he settled were, first, as to the meaning of chapter
   40:14, which he found referred to a girth measurement. This fixed the
   position of the outer gates in relation to the enclosing walls, and so
   determined the position of all the other parts following. The second
   point, that the five hundred cubit or "reed" dimension (chapter 42:15,
   16) was also girth and not linear dimensions, as hitherto maintained.
   The following is an extract of a paper prepared by him on the subject
   for the "Transactions" of the Royal Institute of British Architects."

   ezekiel-temple-porch

   PLAN OF THE MILLENNIAL, TEMPLE AS REVEALED TO EZEKIEL, AND ENLARGED
   PLAN OF PORCH.

   "In the fourteenth verse of the fortieth chapter is mentioned the
   measurement that fixes the projections of the gate in relation to the
   enclosing walls; and as will be afterwards seen, the ultimate form and
   dimensions of the entire enclosure. Hitherto Ezekiel had been
   describing linear measurements, but now the expression 'Post of the
   court round about the gate' may be taken to imply that the prophet's
   companion made a girth measurement from the post of the court on one
   side right round the gate to the post of the court on the other side of
   60 cubits. By deducting the girth of the porch, which is 45 cubits (see
   author's plan from A to B) from this 60 cubits 15 remain, or 7 cubits
   for each shoulder.

   "The measurements of the buildings within the temple courts being
   completed, Ezekiel is brought through the eastern gate to the outside
   of the enclosing north, south, east and west wall, which are measured
   in his presence, and found to be 500 reeds, or, as corrected by the
   LXX, 500 cubits each.

   "To meet this statement, Hastings' Bible Dictionary represents the
   temple area as enclosed with a straight lined wall, which, unbroken in
   outline, necessarily leads to so large an internal area as to require a
   greater number of courts than the inspired record allows.

   "The author's plan, on the other hand, measuring around the broken
   outline which is obtained by adding the porches and the 'People's
   Sacrificial Kitchen,' 40 X 30 internally (chapter 46, verse 22), or
   (adding thickness of wall) 52 cubits by 42 cubits externally, secures
   the desired dimensions of 500 cubits for each side, the Priests'
   Kitchens (chapter 46, verses 19, 20) being substituted on the west side
   for the porches of the other three sides."

   If this exegesis is correct, it is a further confirmation that the
   vision was the result of divine inspiration. Mr. Aitken did not
   understand what the intrinsic meaning of the whole passage might be,
   but it occurred to him, after listening to an exposition of the book by
   the present author, that it might refer to the future rebuilding of the
   Jewish temple at Jerusalem.

   Questions.

   1. What picture is given in these chapters?

   2. How is 43:i-s to be explained?

   3. Explain verses 13-17 of the same chapter.

   4. Name the five views of the interpretation of the whole vision.

   5. What is the position taken by the architect quoted?

   CLOSE OF THE BOOK

   Chapters 44-48

   1. The Gate of the Prince. 44: 1-3.

   As the glory of Jehovah had entered this gate (48:4, 5) it must
   hereafter be closed for all but His representative -- the prince. This
   can not mean the Messiah, because the prince requires a sin-offering.
   (Remember that sin will be suppressed in that day, but not yet
   extirpated.) Doubtless this prince is a future prince of the house of
   David.

   2. The Future Priests and Levites. 44:9-31.

   Verses 9-14 show that the Levites who, in the earlier time had turned
   from God to idols, will be made to feel their shame since it is the
   days of the earthly kingdom that are here referred to, and
   righteousness (not grace) governs. The concluding verses of this
   chapter show conclusively, Kelly thinks, that they are dealing, not
   with Christian conditions, but with Israel again on the earth, and in
   covenant relations with God. 17-22, for example, is a repetition of the
   Levitical law for the priests, only with greater strictness. The
   priests' decisions are both for ceremonial and judicial matters (23,
   24). Death may be rare and exceptional on the earth in that day, but it
   will still take place (25-27).

   3. The Land and the Feasts. 45.

   Jehovah's portion of the land must be set aside in acknowledgment of
   His claim to the whole, but He applies it for the sanctuary and they
   who minister there (1-5). The portion of the prince comes next, and
   then that of the people (6-8). Note the prophecy, "My princes shall no
   more oppress the people" -- selfishness and greed must at last cease on
   the earth (9-12). Note, also, the religious dues to be paid (13-17).
   Also the fact of sin still existing (18-20), and the feasts (21-24),
   excepting, however, the feasts of weeks, or Pentecost. It might be
   thought that this would be the most prominent of the feasts during the
   Millennium, as that period is considered so peculiarly the era of the
   Holy Spirit which Pentecost represents, but the feast drops out of the
   list. Of course the Holy Spirit will be poured out on all flesh in that
   day, as the prophets foretell, but for a different object than now. Now
   He comes to baptize both Jew and Gentile into the body of Christ the
   exalted Head of the Church, this is the meaning of Pentecost, but then
   each Jew and Gentile will be blessed on their own ground, but there
   will be no union. There will be greater breadth of blessing then, but
   not the height and depth there is today.

   The feast of tabernacle, however, is alluded to (25), because it most
   fully expresses their great ingathering when they rejoice before
   Jehovah, and look back on pilgrim days forever past (Kelly).

   4. Public Worship. 46.

   The Sabbath is made much of, and the new moon (1). There is a
   distinction between the prince and the people, but neither goes within
   the temple to worship (2, 3). "There is no drawing near as we now do
   through the rent vail, for Israel is being blessed on earth, and not
   like the church in heavenly places." There is no longer an evening
   lamb, although the offering of the morning lamb continues (12-15). The
   jubilee year is re-established (16-18).

   5. The Temple Waters. 47:1-12.

   Compare with verses 1-5 of this chapter Joel 3:18 and Zechariah 14:8,
   which show that the region of the Dead sea, which had been the
   embodiment of barrenness and desolation, is, in the coming day to be
   changed into a scene of life and fruitfulness. And the remarkable fact
   is that the waters increase continually, without the least hint, but
   rather to the exclusion of, accession from tributary streams. The whole
   thing is literal in fact, and yet supernatural in origin. For the
   healing effect of these waters read verses 6-12.

   6. The Division of the Land. 47:13-48.

   In accordance with Genesis 48:5 and 1 Chronicles 5:1 Joseph has two
   portions (13). The land will be rich enough not only for all Israel
   gathered there, but for the stranger and his children as well {22). And
   think of the largeness of vision of Israel in that day (22)! A
   comparison of chapter 48 shows the distribution of the tribes in the
   millennial kingdom will be different from that previously known, but we
   can not consider it in detail (1-29). The distribution is to be made by
   lot.

   The last and chief glory is the presence of Jehovah in the city of His
   choice (30-35).

   Questions.

   1. What shows that the "prince" is not identical with the Messiah?

   2. What consequence of sin will still be in evidence during the
   Millennium?

   3. What notable feast of earlier Israel will be omitted in the
   Millennium, and why?

   4. What ordinance of public worship shows the less desirable position
   of earthly Israel as compared with the heavenly church?

   5. What other prophets corroborate Ezekiel concerning the temple
   waters?

   6. Are these waters literal or only figurative?

   7. What is the chief glory of the city of Jerusalem in the millennial
   age?
     __________________________________________________________________

DANIEL

   NEBUCHADNEZZAR'S DREAM

   Chapters 1-2

   Daniel, like Ezekiel, was an Israelite in Babylonian captivity, but of
   a little earlier date (1-4, compared with Ezekiel 1:1, 2). Of royal
   blood, fine physique, strong intellectuality and deep knowledge, he
   became trained in the language, traditions and astrological science of
   his captors that, with the other eunuchs, he might serve their king in
   responsible relations in the palace (4-7). For religious reasons, and
   out of reverence to the true God, he sought the privilege of abstention
   from a certain part of the physical preparation (8), with the happy
   result indicated in the chapter. God was preparing Daniel better than
   Nebuchadnezzar was and for a greater purpose than he knew.

   The Testing Time. 2:1-30.

   In process of time the testing came (1-13).

   "Each victory will aid you

   Another to win."

   Daniel had won one, and his faith had been strengthened to essay
   another (14-16). We gather from these verses and the preceding that he
   had not been consulted with the heathen advisers above (2). Observe the
   character of his piety (17, 18), and note the first young men's
   prayer-meeting on record, and its results (19-23). "Belteshazzar" (26)
   is the Babylonian name bestowed on Daniel. Note his unfaltering witness
   to the true God (27-30).

   The Dream and Interpretation, vv. 31-45.

   At this point the book of Daniel differs from the preceding prophets in
   that they deal chiefly with Israel or Judah, and only secondarily with
   the Gentile nations; while he deals chiefly with the latter, and
   secondarily with the former. In other words, he is giving us the
   outline history of these nations during the time Israel is scattered
   among them in punishment, and up until the period of her restoration to
   her land and deliverance from their oppression.

   Nebuchadnezzar's dream, which he interpreted, shows that this period of
   Gentile dominion in the earth, lasting from the time of that king, when
   Judah is taken from her land until the end of this age when she shall
   be restored there again, is divided among four world-powers (31-35).

   The metal image equals Gentile dominion in all this period. The head of
   gold, the Babylonian power, the breast and arms of silver, the
   Medo-Persian power succeeding; the belly and thighs of brass, the
   Grecian; the legs and feet of iron and clay, the Roman. The stone "cut
   out of the mountain without hands" represents the Kingdom of the
   Messiah, which shall be set up on the earth at the end of this age, and
   whose establishment shall involve the demolition of all the earthly
   powers (36-45).

   An interpretation of some of the difficulties follows: Note the two
   words of verse 31, "excellent," "terrible," as characterizing the
   history of the Gentile powers in all this period. They will have that
   to attract and that to repel to the very end. Note that the stone
   smites the image (34); in other words, the establishment of God's
   Kingdom on the earth will be with destructive judgments, as all the
   prophets have shown. Note that some day after the present kingdoms as
   such, are destroyed, but not before, God's Kingdom will be supreme in
   the earth (35). For the meaning of verses 37, 38, see Jeremiah 27.

   Note that all the world-powers following Babylon will be inferior to it
   in a descending scale (39, 40). Inferior not in territorial extent or
   military prowess, but in the character of their government. Babylon was
   an absolute monarchy, Nebuchadnezzar's word was law (12, 13). The
   Medo-Persian power represented a limited monarchy -- Darius hearkened
   to his princes and his lords (6:4-16). The Grecian was weaker, in that
   after the death of Alexander the Great, the empire was divided into
   four parts. The Roman, the weakest of all, the clay mingled with iron,
   indicating the development of the democracy in the latter times; in
   other words, constitutional monarchies and republics.

   Note particularly the fourth, or Roman, power (40-43). The two legs
   foreshadow the later division of that empire into the eastern and
   western halves. The ten toes speak of a time when five separate
   kingdoms shall represent each half. The iron and clay show the
   monarchical elements in more or less contention with the democratic,
   and vice versa. These governmental features are to characterize the end
   of this age (44), when God shall set up His Kingdom in the midst of
   heavy and destructive judgments.

   Questions.

   1. In whose reign was Daniel taken captive?

   2. State in your own words his history down to the time of the dream.

   3. How does his book differ from the other prophets?

   4. State the beginning and the ending of Gentile dominion.

   5. Name its four great historical divisions.

   6. Shall this age end in peace or disorder?

   7. Have you compared Jeremiah 27?

   8. In what sense do the world-powers grow inferior to one another?

   FROM NEBUCHADNEZZAR TO CYRUS

   Chapters 3-6

   The effect of the interpretation of his dream on Nebuchadnezzar is the
   inflation of his pride. To be sure, he was grateful to Daniel
   (2:46-49), to whom he offered worship, although the latter rejected it
   no doubt, as did Paul later (Acts 14:11-18). His apprehension of
   Daniel's God, however, is yet only as one amongst the national or
   tribal gods, although greater than they. This is clear from what
   follows in chapter 3:1-7, which is an attempt "to unify the religions
   of his empire by self-deification." The tower of Babel (Gen. 11) was an
   attempt of the same kind in the same place, and it will be again tried
   there by the "Beast," the last head of Gentile world-dominion (Dan.
   7:8; Rev. 13:11-15; 19-20).

   Speaking of the "Beast" brings to mind the tribulation Israel shall
   suffer at his hands; and the three faithful Jews of verses 8-18 are a
   type of the faithful remnant in that day which will not bow the knee to
   him (Isa. 1:9; Rom. 11:5; Rev. 7:14).

   "The Son of God" (25) is translated in the R. V., "A son of the gods,"
   and possibly refers to an angel which the king beheld (Psa. 34:7)
   though some apply it to the Second Person of the Trinity (Isa. 43:2).
   The result of Nebuchadnezzar's experience in this instance is a further
   confession of the true God, but still He is only the God of the
   Hebrews, ruler of angels and the rewarder of them who honor Him. At the
   conclusion of the next chapter his vision is cleared considerably.

   The King's Confession. 4.

   This next chapter is his confession in the nature of a general
   proclamation (1). The tree he saw in vision (10) symbolized himself
   grown great in the earth, as God, through Daniel, had foretold. Its
   hewing down (14) was the punishment coming on him for his pride. The
   stump left in the earth (15) was his return to power again after the
   lesson of his humiliation was learned. He became a lunatic, and lived
   like a beast for seven years (16). The reason for it all is in verse
   17. Daniel is kind and sympathetic towards him though obliged to speak
   the awful truth (19). He is faithful also (27), and who can tell what
   the outcome may have been had the king heeded his warning? In a
   twelvemonth, however, the stroke fell (29-33). But at the end of the
   experience the king has a different testimony to bear of God (34, 35).

   Passing of Babylon. 5.

   Many years have elapsed since the events of the last chapter.
   Nebuchadnezzar is dead and his son-in-law, Nabonidus is reigning, with
   his son (and Nebuchadnezzar's grandson), Belshazzar, as co-regent (1).
   His name means "Bel protect the king," while "Belteshazzar," the name
   assigned to Daniel, means "Bel protect his life." In verse 2
   Nebuchadnezzar is called "his father," but there is no discrepancy
   here, because the Semitic tongues have no equivalent for "grandfather"
   or "grandson." A corroboration of the position here assigned Belshazzar
   is found in verse 7, where the interpreter of the mysterious
   handwriting is promised the "third" place in the kingdom -- Nabonidus
   being first and Belshazzar himself second.

   The "queen" (10) is probably the aged widow of Nebuchadnezzar and
   grandmother of the present king, who has not forgotten Daniel, though
   her offspring and his court seem to have done so in their degeneracy.
   Like herself, the prophet is now old, perhaps eighty, but as the result
   shows, God has more service in store for him, and the honor that
   accompanies it. Note his words and the character of his indictment
   against the king (17-28). And yet the king acts like a king in verse
   29. In that night the power was wrested from the Babylonians by the
   Medes and Persians, and the breast and arms of the image had become
   realized in history.

   "Darius the Mede" (31) is unknown to history by that name outside of
   this book, and is not to be confounded with the later Darius of Ezra
   (5:5). When it is said he "took the kingdom," some think it means that
   it was taken in his name merely, but really by his general, who was
   also his relative, Cyrus, who afterward became king, and who is named
   at the close of chapters 1 and 6. There is obscurity surrounding this
   subject on which our space will not permit elaboration.

   Daniel in the Lion's Den. 6.

   Darius had heard of Daniel and his prophecies, and desired to honor him
   (1-3), but human jealousy is at work (4, 5). How does the first word of
   verse 7 prove that these rulers told a falsehood to the king? Is not
   this sin into which he fell practically the same as that committed by
   Nebuchadnezzar in chapter 3? Was ever faith more beautifully displayed
   than by God's aged servant in verse 10? Referring to our last lesson,
   how does verse 14 illustrate the inferiority in character of this
   kingdom over the preceding?

   As another says, "Well may we think here of another law and another
   love." God's holy law condemned man, and justly so, yet He found a way
   to save him (2 Cor. 5:21). An absolute monarchy is what man wants, if
   only it be a holy monarchy. It was a terrific judgment that fell on
   Daniel's accusers, but remember the age in which it occurred, and also
   that it was not commanded by God, although permitted as a judicial
   retribution.

   Notice in closing, the last verse of the chapter. Do we recall that
   Isaiah had prophesied of Cyrus between one and two hundred years before
   his birth (44-45)? He is the one under whom the Medo-Persian kingdom
   was consolidated, and who later gave liberty to the Jews to return to
   Jerusalem at the close of their seventy years' captivity, as we saw in
   Ezra (1:1-4). Doubtless Daniel's influence had much to do with this.

   Questions.

   1. How was Nebuchadnezzar affected by his dream?

   2. Illustrate his development in the knowledge of the true God.

   3. What was the motive or aim of his action in chapter 3?

   4. To what event in the "end" period does this point?

   5. Of what is the faithfulness of the three Jews a type?

   6. Give the story of chapter 4 in your own words.

   7. What was Belshazzar's relation to Nebuchadnezzar?

   8. Who was the real conqueror of Babylon?

   9. Quote from memory 2 Cor. 5:21.

   10. Tell what you know of the story of Cyrus.

   DANIEL'S VISION OF THE FOUR BEASTS

   Chapter 7

   This and the vision in chapter 8 are the prophet's "dream and visions,"
   and not the king's, and they occurred apparently during his political
   retirement in the earlier years of Belshazzar (7:1, 8:1). They cover
   the same ground as Nebuchadnezzar's dream and give us in more detail,
   and from a different point of view, the same story of Gentile dominion
   from his period to the end of the present age. One difference is that
   Nebuchadnezzar's dream revealed the imposing outward splendor of the
   world-powers, while Daniel's shows their moral character as indicated
   by ferocious and rapacious beasts. "It is remarkable that the heraldic
   insignia of the Gentile nations are all beasts or birds of prey."

   The "sea," in Scripture, stands for the peoples of the earth (Isa.
   17:5, Rev. 17:15). The "great sea" Daniel saw was the Mediterranean,
   the center of the prophetic earth. That is, where not otherwise
   indicated, the nations with which prophecy has to do chiefly, are those
   that border on that sea, or whose political affiliations are closely
   related to them.

   The Four Beasts. 7:1-8.

   The first of these two visions (chapter 7), when more closely viewed,
   resolves itself into four, with their interpretations, but we shall
   treat it singly.

   The lion (v. 4) corresponds to the golden head of Nebuchadnezzar's
   image, and stands for Babylon. The bear (v. 5) corresponds to the
   breast and arms of silver, and stands for the Medo-Persian empire.
   Being "raised up on one side," means that one part of the empire was
   stronger than the other, which was Persia. The "three ribs in the mouth
   of it" are the three provinces conquered by it not long before,
   Susiana, Lydia and Asia Minor. The leopard (v. 6) is the Grecian
   empire, corresponding to the "belly and thighs of brass." The four
   wings denote the swiftness with which it carried its victories in every
   direction, and the four heads its ultimate partition into as many parts
   on the death of its great head, Alexander. The dreadful and terrible
   beast, too dreadful and terrible for a name (v. 7) corresponds to the
   legs of iron, and is equivalent to the Roman empire. Its ten horns,
   like the ten toes in the other case, speak of the ten kingdoms into
   which it shall be divided at the end of this age; while the little horn
   (v. 8) "who subdues three of the ten kings so completely that the
   identity of their kingdoms is lost," is the important additional
   feature of this vision over that of Nebuchadnezzar. We will again refer
   to this.

   The Ancient of Days. vv. 9-14.

   While these events are culminating on the earth others are transpiring
   in heaven -- a great judgment scene is before us (compare Ps. 2; Matt.
   25:31-46, and Rev. 19: 19-21). "The Ancient of Days" is identified by
   some as the First, and by others as the Second Person of the Godhead
   (Rev. 1:12-14; John 5:22). The slaying of the "beast" (v. 11) means the
   destruction of the world-powers as represented in their final form of
   the revived Roman Empire. As to the "rest of the beasts" whose dominion
   was taken away while their lives were prolonged for a season (v. 12),
   the meaning is that each of the preceding empires was, in turn,
   swallowed up by its successor, and lived in it, though it lost its
   place of independent power. "The Son of man" (v. 13) needs no
   identification as He comes forward to receive His earthly Kingdom --
   the stone cut out of the mountains without hands. (Compare the parable
   of the nobleman, Luke 19.)

   The Inspired Interpretation, vv. 15-27.

   Note that while the Son of man receives the Kingdom (v. 13) "the saints
   of the Most High" take and possess it with him (v. 18). These may mean
   the faithful Israelites on earth, but the glorified church will be with
   the King as her Head in the air reigning over the earth.

   The great interest for the prophet in this interpretation focuses on
   "the little horn" (v. 24), which is referred to under the title of the
   "Beast" in Revelation 13 and 17. He is a blasphemer of God and a
   persecutor of His saints (v. 25), who shall have great power for three
   and one-half years at the close of this age, and just before God
   interposes with judgments to set up His Kingdom. "Time" here stands for
   a year, "times" for two years, and "the dividing of time," half a year.
   (See Rev. 11:2, 3; 12:6.)

   Questions.

   1. To whom is this vision revealed, and at what period in his life?

   2. How does it correspond with Nebuchadnezzar's dream?

   3. How does it differ in its point of view?

   4. What does the "sea" symbolize in the Bible?

   5. What particular sea is now in mind, and what gives it its great
   importance prophetically?

   6. Which was the stronger part of the second empire?

   7. What is the interpretation of verse 12?

   8. What is the meaning of "a time, and times, and the dividing of
   time?"

   THE RAM AND THE HE-GOAT

   Chapter 8

   How much later was this vision than the preceding? Where was it
   revealed to Daniel (v. 2)? It is important to keep in mind that it
   covers the same ground as the preceding, except that the story begins,
   not with Babylon's supremacy, but that of the Medes and Persians
   represented by the ram (v. 3), though in the former vision by the bear.
   The higher horn of the ram is the Persian half of the empire. The
   united empire made conquests* west, north and south, but in its western
   campaigns it awakened the triumphing opposition of the Greeks
   represented by the "he-goat," whose "notable horn" was Alexander the
   Great (vv. 5-7). In the former vision this empire was represented by
   the leopard.

   Verse 8 foreshadows the death of Alexander, and the division of the
   Grecian empire into four parts -- Syria, Egypt, Macedonia, Asia Minor,
   under the rule respectively of four of Alexander's generals, Cassander,
   Lysimachus, Seleucus and Ptolemy.

   Antiochus Epiphanes. vv. 9-14.

   "A little horn," as in the preceding vision, comes out from these four
   (v. 9), whose power developed towards the south and east, and
   especially "the pleasant land," the land of Israel. The "little horn"
   is the eighth of the dynasty of Seleucus on the Syrian throne, whose
   name was Antiochus Epiphanes, although he was sometimes called
   "Epimanes," or the "madman," because of his life and deeds.

   As an oppressor of the Jews he fulfilled the prophecy in verses 10-12,
   as will be seen by the book of Maccabees. "The host of heaven" and "the
   stars" are types of Israel, especially their leaders -- the princes,
   priests, rabbis of the period, which was about 171 B. C.

   "The prince of the host" (v. 11) is doubtless the Lord Himself, from
   whom the daily sacrifice was taken away, and whose sanctuary was
   polluted. Indeed, when Antiochus conquered Jerusalem he caused a sow to
   be sacrificed on the altar, and its broth sprinkled over the entire
   temple. He changed the feast of tabernacles into the feast of Bacchus,
   and greatly corrupted the Jewish youth who were spared from the sword,
   one hundred thousand of whom were massacred.

   The time during which this continued is revealed by a conversation
   between two angels which Daniel in vision hears (vv. 13, 14). The 2,300
   days is sometimes identified by going back from the time of Judas
   Maccabees' victory, or rather the date when he cleansed the sanctuary
   from its abomination, about December 25, 165 B. C, to 171 B. C, the
   date of the interference of Antiochus. This Antiochus is a forerunner,
   or an approximate fulfillment of that "little horn" spoken of in the
   preceding vision, and again in the closing part of the present one.

   The Inspired Interpretation, vv. 15-27.

   The angel Gabriel here appears for the first time, and in the likeness
   of a man (vv. 15, 16), but it is evident that the interpretation he is
   to give has reference not so much to Antiochus and his deeds as to the
   greater than he who shall arise "at the time of the end" (5:17), the
   same one possibly, and the same period as are referred to in the
   preceding vision. "The time of the end" is identified in verse 19 as
   "the last end of the indignation," an expression frequently met with in
   the Old Testament, and meaning God's indignation against Israel on
   account of her disobedience and apostasy, an indignation which will be
   poured out upon her at the end of this age.

   This being of whom Antiochus is the forerunner or approximate
   fulfillment, and who is possibly the same as in the preceding vision,
   is further described in verses 23-25. What language in verse 23 shows
   that he appears at the end of the age? How are his spirit and character
   described in the same verse? How does the next verse suggest superhuman
   agency in his case? And his animus towards Israel? Express the
   deceitfulness indicated in verse 25, in your own words. What language
   in this verse shows his opposition to the Messiah personally? How is
   his destruction expressed? (Compare 2 Thess. 2:8.) It may be objected
   that this being can not be the same as the "little horn" of the
   preceding vision, because that is seen to come up out of the ten horns;
   in other words, out of the Roman Empire or the last form of Gentile
   dominion on the earth, while this comes up out of the four, or the
   Grecian Empire, which is next to the last. But a simple answer is that
   he may come up out of that part of the Roman Empire which was
   originally the Grecian; in other words, that his rise may be expected
   in that quarter of the world and from such antecedents.

   Nevertheless some think the "little horn" of this chapter, who shall
   arise at the end, is a different person from the one in chapter 7. They
   hold that he of chapter 7 will be the head of the revived Roman Empire,
   but that he of chapter 8 is another king of the north, who is to be the
   foe of Israel, and at the same time the enemy of the head of the
   revived Roman Empire. This may be true, and we would not dogmatize in a
   matter of such uncertainty, but we think the view suggested here of the
   identity of the two is the simpler and more practical one to hold
   awaiting light.

   Questions.

   1. Flow far is the scope of this vision identical with the preceding?

   2. Name the geographic divisions of the Grecian Empire and their
   respective, rulers.

   3. Historically, who is meant by the "little horn"?

   4. Give as much as you can of the history of Antiochus Epiphanes.

   5. Of whom is he a type or forerunner?

   6. What is meant by "the time of the end"?

   7. What objection might be raised as to the identity of the "little
   horn" in chapter 7 with that of chapter 8?

   8. How might it be met?

   THE SEVENTY WEEKS

   Chapter 9

   Thus far in Daniel we have been dealing with the prophetic history of
   the times of the Gentiles, but now we return to that of his own people,
   the Jews.

   Note the time and circumstances, verses 1, 2. The prophet is studying
   such books of the Old Testament as he possessed, especially Jeremiah,
   and knows the seventy years' captivity nears its end, therefore he is
   moved to offer one of the most notable prayers in the Bible. This
   prayer is divisible into confession, verses 3-15, and supplication,
   verses 16-19, and it is remarkable that in the former, holy man as
   Daniel was, he includes himself as partaker in the national sins. It is
   equally remarkable that his supplication is based on desire for God's
   glory, verses 17, 18. Israel has no merit to claim, but the Lord's
   honor is at stake. We have seen this before in the prayers of the
   patriarchs, the prophets and the psalmists, and we need to keep its
   lesson in mind.

   Gabriel's Visit, vv. 20-23.

   What mystery is shrouded in these verses! The nearness of heaven, the
   interest of God in the petition of His people, the nature and ministry
   of angels, the divine estimate of the saints, who can fathom these
   things?

   Answer to the Prayer, vv. 24-27.

   "Weeks," verse 24, might be translated "sevens," but whether is meant
   "sevens" of days, or weeks, or months or years must be determined by
   the context. The context points to years, "Seventy sevens" of years, i.
   e., 490 years, are decreed upon Israel and the city of Jerusalem is the
   sense of the first phrase of this verse. At the close of this period
   six things shall have been accomplished for that people. In other
   words, Gabriel's message is not merely an answer to Daniel's prayer
   about the return from the seventy years' captivity, but a revelation of
   the entire future of Israel from the end of that captivity to the end
   of the present age. This is evident from the nature of the six things
   mentioned:

   1. To finish the transgression.

   2. To make an end of sins.

   3. To make reconciliation for iniquity.

   4. To bring in everlasting righteousness.

   5. To seal up the vision and prophecy.

   6. To anoint the Most Holy.

   The first three of the above refer to a time still future, for Israel's
   transgression is not yet finished, nor her sins ended, nor her iniquity
   covered. The time, therefore, is that spoken of by all the prophets,
   and especially named in Zechariah 13:1 and Romans 11:26-27. This is the
   time, moreover, when "everlasting righteousness" shall be brought in,
   otherwise the blessings of the millennial age. The vision and prophecy
   will be sealed then, in the sense that their final accomplishment in
   the history of God's earthly people shall have taken place. The most
   holy place will be anointed then in that new temple to be erected, as
   we saw in Ezekiel.

   The Division of the Sevens.

   "From the going forth of the commandment to restore and build Jerusalem
   unto Messiah, the Prince, shall be seven weeks," verse 25. This is the
   first of three divisions in this period of 490 years, and covers
   forty-nine years, seven weeks of years being equal to that number. This
   division begins to be counted "from the going forth of the commandment
   to build Jerusalem," which, it is commonly thought, means the twentieth
   year of Artaxerxes, King of Persia, who gave that authority to
   Nehemiah, in the month Nisan (see Neh. 2). It is proved historically
   that this was 454 B. C. During this period of forty-nine years the
   street and wall were built again "even in troublous times." (See S. P.
   Tregelles on Daniel.)

   But to this period of seven weeks, or forty-nine years, is added
   another of three-score and two weeks, or 434 years, a total of 483
   years, "unto the Messiah the Prince," i. e., until "Messiah be cut
   off," verse 26.

   Observe that this period extends not merely to the birth but to the
   death of Christ, when He is "cut off, but not for Himself." It is now
   admitted that our Lord was crucified April A. D. 32, and those
   competent in such calculations show that this was precisely 483 years
   of 360 days each, allowing for leap years, changes in the Julian and
   Gregorian calendars and matters of that sort. That the Messiah was cut
   off, "but not for Himself," has been translated, "and there shall be
   nothing for Him," which probably means that He did not then receive the
   Messianic Kingdom.

   [Anstey maintains that the point of departure for the 70 weeks is the
   first year of Cyrus. However the outcome is not different so far as the
   fulfillment of the prophecy is concerned, as the calculation in the
   other case is based, in his judgment, on an error of 82 years in the
   Ptolemaic chronology.]

   "And the people of the prince that shall come shall destroy the city
   and the sanctuary," refers to the destruction of Jerusalem and the
   temple by the Romans under Titus, A. D. 70. They, i. e., the Romans,
   are "the people of the prince that shall come," but this "prince"
   himself is identical, not with the Messiah, but with the little horn of
   Daniel 7, the terrible despot who will be at the head of the restored
   empire at the end of this age.

   The End Period.

   We now come to the last of the seventy sevens, or the closing seven
   years of this age. In other words, there is a long ellipsis between the
   close of the sixty-ninth and the beginning of the seventieth week,
   indeed, the whole of the Christian age, of which more will be said
   later.

   The events of the seventieth week begin with the words "and the end
   thereof shall be with a flood," which should be, as in the Revised
   Version, "his" end, not "the" end, for the allusion is still to the
   "prince that shall come," i. e., the Antichrist. The word "flood" also
   might be rendered "overflowing," which, to quote Tregelles, is
   doubtless the same overflowing as in Isaiah 10:22 and as that of the
   final crisis of Israel's history at the end of the age. The interval
   until this time will be characterized by war and desolation (compare
   Matt. 24:3-8).

   "And he," i. e., "the prince that shall come," "shall confirm the
   covenant with many for one week." The "many" refers to the people of
   Israel then to be in their own land, but still in an unconverted state
   as far as the acceptance of Jesus as their Messiah is concerned. It
   will be to the mutual interest of the "little horn," i. e., the
   Antichrist, and Israel to enter into this covenant for seven years.
   There will be a faithful remnant, however, who will not bow the knee to
   him -- the covenant will be made with "many" but not all (compare Isa.
   28:15-18).

   He will break this covenant after three and one-half years and "cause
   the sacrifice and the oblation to cease," no longer permitting them to
   worship God in their newly-erected temple. Now begins their great
   tribulation, "a time and times and the division of time" named in
   chapter 8:25 (compare Rev. 13:5, 11-17).

   The latter part of this verse has been translated thus: "And upon the
   wing (or pinnacle) of abominations (shall be) that which causeth
   desolation, even until the consummation and that determined shall be
   poured out upon the desolator."

   The "abominations" are doubtless idols that shall be set up by this
   wicked prince to be worshipped in the temple, when the true God has
   been set aside. Then the "consummation" comes and with it the judgment
   and desolation of the "desolator."

   Questions.

   1. With whose history are we dealing in this lesson?

   2. What great feature marks the prayers of God's people in the Bible?

   3. What are some of the suggestions growing out of Gabriel's visit?

   4. What period of time is covered by the "seventy weeks"?

   5. To what place and people does this period apply?

   6. Name the six important things which will be accomplished in that
   people at its close.

   7. When does this period begin and end?

   8. Divide it into its three parts.

   9. What event is identified with the first part?

   10. With what event does part two close?

   11. Explain the allusion to "the prince that shall come."

   12. What age intervenes between the last two parts?

   13. Tell what you know about the "covenant" of verse 27.

   SUPPLEMENT ON BIBLE CHRONOLOGY

   The last lesson referred to the lapse of time between the sixty-ninth
   and seventieth weeks, and as other lapses have been noted in the sacred
   chronology, it is desirable to devote a lesson to that subject.

   The chronology of the Bible has a system of its own, whose center would
   seem to be the crucifixion of Jesus Christ. Forbes Clinton, an
   authority on such matters, has worked out the following dates without
   reference to any human system: Adam was created 4141 B. C, and Abram
   was called 2055 B. C, showing an intervening period of 2,086 years. But
   precisely the same period elapsed between the call of Abram and the
   crucifixion of Christ. The call of Abram, therefore, is the center date
   between creation and the cross, a supposition harmonizing perfectly
   with the importance of that event in the history of redemption.

   Cycles of Years.

   To take another illustration, God's dealings with Israel are in cycles
   of 490 years, (1) The period from Abram to Exodus was 490 years, plus
   the fifteen years during which the bondwoman and her child (Hagar and
   Ishmael) dominated in Abram's tent, and which are not counted. (2) The
   period from Exodus to the dedication of Solomon's temple was 490 years,
   plus the 131 years of captivity in the time of the Judges, which are
   not counted. (3) From the dedication to the return from Babylon was 490
   years, plus the seventy years of that capacity not counted. (4) From
   the return from Babylon to the beginning of the millennial age is 490
   years, plus the dispensation in which Israel is dispersed, and which is
   not counted.

   When God Does Not Count Time.

   Prophetically speaking, God does not count time with reference to
   Israel while she is in captivity, or dispersion, or dominated by any
   other nation. In evidence of this, note that in 1 Kings 6:1 mention is
   made of the fourth year of Solomon as being 480 years after the Exodus.
   But we know from Numbers 14:33 that they were forty years in the
   wilderness; then, according to the Book of Joshua, they were
   thirty-seven years in conquering Canaan and up until the period of the
   Judges; Acts 13:20 shows that they were 450 years under the Judges;
   then they were forty years under Saul (Acts 13:21), and forty years
   under David (2 Sam. 5:4, 5). These periods total up 607 years, to which
   should be added the four years of Solomon referred to, making a total
   of 611 years.

   How shall we explain this discrepancy, of which infidels and others
   have made so much? The answer has been stated above, that God does not
   count time prophetically while Israel is in captivity. For example,
   seven captivities are mentioned in the Book of Judges, one of eight
   years (3:8); eighteen years (3:14); twenty years (4:3); seven years
   (6:1); eighteen years (10:8); forty years (13:1), and twenty years (1
   Sam. 7:2), making a total of precisely 131 years. The above is a
   sufficient illustration of the principle.

   We close this lesson with a rough diagram of the 490 years covered by
   Daniel 9:24-27, which may aid in fastening that important prediction in
   the memory:

   Seventy-sevens -- 490 Years.

   From the twentieth year of Artaxerxes to the end of this age.

   Seven weeks, or forty-nine years. The street and wall of Jerusalem
   built.

   Sixty-two weeks, or 434 years. At the close of this period the Messiah
   is cut off and has nothing. A. D. 32.

   The Uncounted Period.

   1. Jerusalem destroyed.

   2. Jews dispersed.

   3. Jerusalem trodden down.

   4. The church called out.

   5. Apostasy of Christendom.

   6. Jews in part to return to Jerusalem in unbelief.

   7. Coming of Christ for the Church.

   One week, seven years.

   1. The Roman prince, or little horn in covenant with the Jews.

   2. The covenant broken in the midst of the week.

   -----

   3. The great tribulation begins.

   4. Antichrist in power.

   5. Christ appears to deliver Israel.

   (See reference to Anstey in previous lesson.)

   Questions.

   1. What is peculiar to the chronology of the Bible?

   2. What appears to be the central date between creation and the Cross?

   3. How are God's dealings with Israel chronologically identified?

   4. Name some of the cycles referred to.

   5. When does God not reckon time prophetically in the case of Israel?

   6. Can you illustrate this?

   7. Name the chief events associated with the four periods of time in
   the preceding diagram.

   "A GREAT WARFARE"

   Chapters 10-11:35

   Note the late date of this prophecy (10 :1), and the different
   rendering of a phrase in the Revised Version, where "even a great
   warfare" is substituted for "the time appointed was long." As the
   unveiling of the lesson will show, this phrase is an appropriate title
   for it.

   Note the physical and spiritual preparation of the prophet for the
   revelation that follows (2-4), a condition into which he had doubtless
   brought himself by prayer. Had he been seeking of heaven an explanation
   of the previous mysteries -- especially that of the ram and the
   he-goat? This seems probable, because what follows traverses so much of
   the ground of chapter 8.

   Verses 5-9 bear so strong a resemblance to the description of the Son
   of Man in Revelation 1:12-17 as to suggest that it also is a
   Christophany, or manifestation of the Second Person of the Trinity. But
   this does not carry with it that it is He who touches and speaks to the
   prophet in the verses succeeding.

   Mysteries of Satan's Kingdom.

   Verses 10-14 are full of mystery, yet note first, the appreciation of
   Daniel in the heavenly courts (11); and then the testimony to the
   potency of prayer (12). But who is "the prince of the Kingdom of
   Persia" (13)? Doubtless a spirit of eminence in the kingdom of
   darkness, to whose control Satan has committed the earthly affairs of
   Persia (compare Eph. 4:12). This interpretation seems confirmed by the
   reference to Michael, elsewhere known as the archangel, and who in the
   kingdom of light is the special guardian of Israel (10:21. 12:1; Jude
   9; Rev. 12:7). What mighty power must Satan possess as judged by this
   verse, but what a relief to know that there is One stronger than he!
   Note in the conclusion of this section that the revelation now to be
   given chiefly concerns what we identify as the end period, the last
   seven years (14).

   Intervening Events, 11:1-35.

   Passing over the effect on the prophet, we come to the revelation of
   what shall take place between his time and that of Antiochus Epiphanes,
   with whom we were made acquainted in an earlier chapter.

   The three kings of verse 2 were Cyrus, Ahasuerus (Cambyses) and Darius
   Hystaspes (see Anstey's The Romance of Chronology, Vol. I, p. 239). The
   fourth king was Xerxes (see Ezra 4:5-24). The "mighty king" (3) was
   Alexander the Great, while the next verse tells once more of the
   division of his kingdom at his death among his four generals.

   Two of these kingdoms of the four now come into prominence, Egypt and
   Syria (5, 6), as those most closely related to Israel in their
   subsequent history. The "king's daughter" (6) was Bernice, offspring of
   Ptolemy II, who married Antiochus Theous of Syria, but was subsequently
   poisoned by him. Her brother is referred to in verses 7-9 -- Ptolemy
   Energetes of Egypt.

   Verse 9 is a mistranslation, and refers to the king of the north (R.
   V.), whose sons (10) were nevertheless overcome by the Egyptian king,
   Ptolemy Philopater (11), who became weakened at length through
   licentious living (12).

   We have now reached the period of about 200 B. C, when Syria, after
   many vicissitudes, turns the tide of battle in her favor under the
   leadership of one known as Antiochus the Great. He entered the Holy
   Land in the course of his campaign (13-16), treating it considerately,
   however, as the Jews had been his allies. The last part of verse 16 is
   an incorrect rendering and should be compared with the Revised Version.
   Later he made another effort to get possession of Egypt, the working
   out of his plan including a treaty engagement, and the espousal of his
   daughter, Cleopatra, to the Egyptian king, but the scheme did not
   succeed (17). Why the Cleopatra in this case is called "the daughter of
   the women" is not clear, but some suppose it to be because she was but
   a child and under the tutelage of both her mother and grandmother.
   Verses 18 and 19 speak of a contest with the Romans into which he
   unsuccessfully entered, and of his subsequent death.

   Antiochus Epiphanes.

   The brief reign of Seleucus Philopater B. C. 187-176 is depicted in
   verse 20, and then we come upon Antiochus Epiphanes, whose story
   continues through verse 35. "Vile" is "contemptible" in the Revised
   Version. This man was a younger son of Antiochus the Great, to whom the
   kingdom did not by right belong, but who stole the hearts of the people
   as Absalom did from David. He is the "little horn" of chapter 8, and as
   we have seen, forerunner of the greater "little horn" of the end
   period. Of his atrocities against Israel and the holy city and temple
   we read in the books of the Maccabees.

   "The ships of Chittim" (30) are a Roman fleet whose power put an end to
   his victories in Egypt. Returning north, angry in his defeat, he
   committed those base things against Judea of which mention has been
   made and which are foretold again in verses 30-35. Apostate Jews
   sympathized with and aided him, as their successors will do in the case
   of his successor at the end period; but there were faithful ones under
   the lead of the Maccabees who valiantly resisted him (32). It was a
   period of testing for Israel, out of whose fires they came forth much
   purified.

   Questions.

   1. When was this prophecy revealed to Daniel?

   2. How was he prepared for it?

   3. What illustration of "the law of recurrence" is seen in this lesson?

   4. Who presumably is the "man" referred to in verse 5?

   5. Who is meant by "the prince of Persia"?

   6. What relation does Michael bear to Israel?

   7. Name the four kings of Persia referred to in verse 2.

   8. What does this lesson reveal about Antiochus Epiphanes?

   THE ANTICHRIST AND THE TRIBULATION

   Chapters 11:36-12

   In the introduction to this last vision of Daniel, it was stated
   (10:14) that it concerned his people "in the latter days," but thus far
   it has extended only to Antiochus Epiphanes and the Maccabees. The
   dividing line is at the close of verse 35 and the beginning of 36, In
   the former we read of the testing and purifying experiences of the wise
   ones in Israel "even to the time of the end," and in the latter of a
   certain "king" who "shall do according to his will." Most students
   agree that the space between these two verses represents another lapse
   of time from the Maccabean period to the end of the age, and that the
   king now before us is the Antichrist of those coming days, who is
   referred to more particularly in Zechariah 11:15-17, 2 Thessalonians
   2:1, and Revelation 13:11-17. Some identify him with the "little horn"
   of chapter 7 and the "little horn" of chapter 8, whom Antiochus
   Epiphanes typifies. This, indeed, may be true, i. e.. the restored head
   of the Roman Empire in that day, and the Antichrist, may be one and the
   same individual, but there are others who think that they may be two --
   of this we cannot now be certain.

   The King Described, vv. 36-39.

   He is self-willed, proud, blasphemous, successful, idolatrous,
   materialistic, and covetous. "The God of his fathers" (37) is a phrase
   indicative of his Jewish extraction; "the desire of women," is taken by
   some as signifying the true Messiah, to whom all pious Jewish women in
   pre-Messianic times desired to give birth. "The god of forces," or "a
   god of fortresses" (38, R. V.), is difficult to understand except in
   some materialistic sense. Shall we say it finds interpretation in
   Revelation 13:11-17, by identifying the first beast as the restored
   head of the Roman Empire, and the second as this evil king, the
   Antichrist, who causes all men to worship the first? Is the first
   beast, this god, in other words?

   The Last Campaign, vv. 40-45.

   This king has enemies, the "king of the south" and the "king of the
   north" (40) of that period, but who they are cannot be conjectured. The
   last-named is more vigorous and successful, entering Jerusalem and
   overcoming countries (including the south country, Egypt, 41-43) until
   at length a menace in the east and north moves him to make quick work
   at Jerusalem (45), in which he meets his own inglorious end (compare
   Zech. 8 and 15, and Joel 2). It would appear from these passages that
   the coming of the Lord on behalf of Israel brings about his end, and we
   know that it is nothing less than this which also dispatches the
   Antichrist (2 Thess. 2:8). There are deep things here for whose
   solution we can only wait, as Daniel was obliged to do (12:12).

   Israel's Deliverance, 12:1-3.

   The opening verses of this chapter, should be read in connection with
   Christ's words in Matthew 24, especially verse 21, and also Revelation
   12, especially verses 7-12. Note the deliverance of the faithful
   remnant of the Jews in that day as shown in the latter part of verse 1,
   Zechariah 13:8, 9; Matthew 24:22. It is a question whether it is a
   physical or a moral resurrection that is spoken of in verse 2, but it
   would be harmonious with Ezekiel 37 to say the latter.

   "They that be wise" (3), may be rendered "teachers," and refers
   doubtless to the faithful Jewish witnesses of the end period and the
   reward which comes to them; though, of course, it can be applied in a
   secondary sense to faithful witnesses anywhere and always, for "He that
   winneth souls is wise."

   The Final Vision and Final Word to Daniel, vv. 4-13.

   This book is still sealed to Daniel's people the Jews, but the time is
   coming when it will be unsealed (4). "The man clothed in linen" (5) is,
   it would seem, the same who appeared to the prophet at chapter 10:5,
   the blessed Lord Himself. Compare Daniel's question and its answer with
   Revelation 10:1-6. The answer once more identifies the last three and
   one-half years of the end period, "the time of Jacob's trouble," the
   1,260 days of Revelation 11 and 12. But verse 11 adds another 30 days,
   and what may be understood by this we do not know. In the meantime may
   the promise to Daniel be fulfilled to us in our place and measure,
   "thou shalt rest, and shalt stand in thy lot at the end of the days."

   Questions.

   1. What period of time is represented by the division between verses 35
   and 36?

   2. How might the "king" of verse 36 be identified?

   3. How is he described?

   4. Have you read Revelation 13?

   5. Have you read Matthew 24?

   6. Do you recall the subject of Ezekiel 37?

   7. Where is found the verse "He that winneth souls is wise?"

   8. Quote from memory the last verse of Daniel.
     __________________________________________________________________

HOSEA

   THE SWEEP OF THE BOOK

   Chapters 1-3

   It will be seen by the opening verse of this lesson that we are back in
   the land of Israel before the Babylonian captivity. Examine 2 Kings
   14-20 and the corresponding chapters in 2 Chronicles for the history of
   this period, and the more carefully you read those chapters the more
   interested you will be in Hosea, and the more you will get out of it.
   While four of the kings named in verse 1 reigned in Judah, and only the
   last-named, Jeroboam, in Israel, nevertheless it is to Israel rather
   than Judah that Hosea's prophecies apply.

   The Prophet's Domestic History, 1:2-9.

   God called upon him to do an unusual thing in taking an unchaste woman
   to wife (2), but it had a symbolical significance which the last part
   of the verse explains.

   Other prophets, Isaiah, Jeremiah and Ezekiel, were called upon to do
   strange things with the same purpose, so we are not surprised. It was
   not wrong for Hosea to contract such a marriage because God commanded
   it, and because his motive was to exalt the woman to his own moral
   sphere. When he married her, and it became known in Israel, his
   opportunity came to show the loving-kindness of Jehovah to a nation
   that had no more to commend itself to Him than this woman had in
   Hosea's case. See the marginal references for the proof of this.

   The children of his union are symbolical in their names (4-9). For
   historical reference to Jezreel and Jehu (4), see 2 Kings 10:11; but
   notice that there are two predictions in this verse, separated by the
   comma after "Jehu," which are at least forty years apart in their
   fulfillment. Judgment fell on the house of Jehu in Zachariah's reign (2
   Kings 15:12), while the kingdom of Israel did not cease till the
   Assyrian captivity in King Hoshea's day (2 Kings 18).

   It is with reference to this captivity that the names of the other two
   children are given (6, 8, 9). For the fulfillment of verse 7 see the
   marginal reference to 2 Kings 19:35 in the light of its context.

   The Better Day Coming, vv. 10, 11.

   Like all the prophets, Hosea speaks of Israel's happy future, which
   shall come to pass after the tribulation of which we learned in Daniel.
   How is her increase indicated? Her restoration to her own land? Her
   reunion with the two tribes? In explanation of the last clause it
   should be noted that the meaning of Jezreel is "the seed of God."

   An Unfaithful Wife. 2:1-23.

   This chapter begins at verse 2, and we see that Hosea's wife, failing
   to appreciate her blessings, went after her former lovers, took up with
   her old life of sin again. In this the prophet's domestic history
   carries further the symbolic reference to Jehovah's relationship to
   Israel. That nation did in the spiritual realm what the wife did in the
   physical. It is difficult to determine just where the symbol ends and
   the history of Israel begins in the chapter, because the two are so
   closely blended, but there is little doubt that the nation is in view
   at verse 3 and the following. Students will recall earlier teachings
   about "the law of double reference" which finds illustration here.

   Following through the chapter, note the punishment to fall on the
   adulterous nation (6-13); her political bewilderment (6); her
   disappointments in the expectation of help from the Gentiles (7); her
   deprivation of the divine blessing and the positive suffering entailed
   by it (9-13). All of these came to her in her captivity, and are her
   experiences still among the nations.

   But again we see the future bright when, in repentance and faith, she
   returns to the Lord (14-16). "Ishi" means "My husband." "Baali," "My
   master," (see margin). Millennial conditions follow (17-23).

   A Loving Husband. 3.

   "The law of recurrence," finds an illustration in chapter 3, where the
   story of the preceding chapter is repeated with additional data.

   The prophet is commanded still to love his wandering and faithless wife
   as Jehovah still loves Israel in her disobedience (1). His love takes
   shape in material provision for her, though she is separated from him
   (2), as Jehovah is still caring for Israel that she should not perish
   from the earth. In the meantime the wife is not to take up with another
   husband, and the prophet will not marry again (3), the application of
   which is stated in the next two verses. The foregoing lessons in the
   prophets have made this plain.

   Questions.

   1. State the time of this book.

   2. Have you re-read the history of the time?

   3. To which of the kingdoms was Hosea particularly sent?

   4. Relate the story of the prophet's domestic history in your own
   words.

   5. What two prophecies are found in 1:4?

   6. In the reign of what king of Judah was 1:7 fulfilled?

   7. What is the definition of "Jezreel"?

   8. What two laws of rhetoric find renewed illustration in this lesson?

   JEHOVAH'S LOVE FOR ISRAEL

   Chapters 4-14

   With Hosea begins the "Minor" prophets, extending to the close of the
   Old Testament, and so-called to distinguish them from the "Major," the
   first four already considered. The major are the more important not as
   to their contents but their size; and yet the minor prophets are, in
   principle, only repeating what the major prophets have recorded over
   and over again.

   For this reason the minor prophets will be considered briefly. It may
   be repeated that we are not attempting to treat every chapter and verse
   in the Bible in detail. So far as the prophets are concerned, however,
   we have set forth the great subjects with which they alike deal, and in
   the laws of recurrence and double reference have indicated the path by
   which the student may with care find his own way through any of them.
   Of course, there always will be things calling for explanation which
   only the larger commentaries or Bible dictionaries can supply, but
   along the broader lines of study we trust these comments will be found
   helpful. In their use it is presupposed the reader is going through the
   Bible in regular order for the purpose of studying or teaching it in
   its completeness as a revelation of God.

   The General Contents of the Chapters.

   With the above understanding in view, it will be found that the
   following chapters in this book are simply giving in detail what the
   first three reveal in outline. They speak of Israel's unfaithfulness to
   Jehovah, and these enlarge on the expressions of that unfaithfulness.

   For example, chapter 4 charges the nation with, "swearing and lying,
   and killing and stealing, and committing adultery" (2). People, priests
   and prophets are alike (4, 5). Idolatry flourishes with all its
   licentious accompaniments (12-14). Judah is warned by Israel's
   declension (15-19) but the next chapter indicates that the warning will
   profit her little.

   Chapter 6 opens with a prophetic expression of repentance on Israel's
   part -- prophetic in the sense that as a nation she has not yet taken
   that attitude, although she will be led to do so in the latter days
   (1-3). Suddenly, at verse 4, Jehovah is introduced as pleading with her
   under the name of Ephraim her chief tribe, and pleading with her sister
   Judah as well. The plea is accompanied by explanation of their
   chastisement (4-11).

   This thought is continued in the next chapters where Israel's folly in
   turning for help, first to Egypt and then to Assyria, is pointed out
   (12). The marginal references direct the reader to Kings where these
   matters were spoken of in their historic setting.

   The style of Hosea is abrupt and broken, but the ejaculations in which
   it abounds are frequently expressions of God's wonderful love for His
   people. Examine especially 11:1-4, 8, 9. Sometimes it is difficult to
   determine when the prophet is expressing only his own feelings toward
   his nation rather than Jehovah's, and yet even in those instances it is
   the Holy Spirit using the feelings of man to illustrate the tenderness
   of the heart of God.

   The Appeal to the Backslider.

   But the chapter expressing this tenderness the most is the last, and
   though the reader finds it necessary to hasten over those intervening,
   he should pause here.

   Note God's appeal coupled with His condemnation (1). Consider His
   kindness in setting before His people the way to return (2, 3). They
   are to take words, not works -- words of confession, faith,
   consecration, repentance. Look at the attitude in which He will meet
   them, and the promises He gives them (4-7). Here is growth, strength,
   expansion, loveliness and beneficence -- all to be theirs in that day.

   Verse 8 is a kind of divine soliloquy. Jehovah hears Israel's
   repentance, and her testimony to renewing grace, and assures her of
   Himself as its source.

   The chapter closes with an exhortation as applicable to us as to her.

   Questions.

   1. To what division of the prophets does Hosea belong?

   2. Why are the "Major Prophets" so-called?

   3. How would you describe the contents of the chapters of this lesson
   as distinguished from the preceding one?

   4. What are some of the charges against the nation?

   5. What characterizes Hosea's literary style?

   6. How would you analyze chapter 14?

   7. How would you describe verse 8?

   8. Can you quote verse 9 from memory?
     __________________________________________________________________

JOEL

   The text of this lesson except the questions is taken from the author's
   "Synthetic Bible Studies."

   Joel was probably the earliest of the prophets whose writings have
   descended to us. His personal history is unknown further than the bare
   statement, 1:1. His field of labor was presumably Judah rather that
   Israel, the southern rather than the northern kingdom, because of
   allusions to the center of public worship which was at Jerusalem, 1:9,
   13, 14, 2:15, and because of non-allusions to Israel distinctively.
   Such places as 2:27, and 3:16 are thought to mean Israel as inclusive
   of Judah, i. e., the whole united nation. Although it is assumed, that
   Joel was the earliest of the prophets, yet the evidence is inferential
   rather than direct. He is presumbably earlier than Amos who is known to
   have prophesied somewhere about the close of the eighth century B. C,
   because he seems to be quoted by Amos 5:16-18. He also refers to the
   same heathen nations as Amos 3:4-6, and to the same physical scourges
   as prevalent in the land, 1:4, 17, 20. (Compare the marginal references
   to Amos.)

   General Outline of the Book. -- As to the book itself we outline the
   contents of its chapters thus:

   Chapter 1:

   Introduction 1-3

   Announcement of a coming judgment of locusts 4, 5

   Announcement of the coming judgment from the heathen nations, of which
   that of the locusts is a type 6, 7

   A lamentation of sorrow 8-13

   A call to repentance 13-20

   Chapter 2:

   A recurrence to the same judgments 1-3

   A description of their executioners in which there is a blending of the
   idea of the locusts with that of the warriors. The picture is made
   vivid by the use of the present tense in the Revised Version 4-11

   A call to repentance 12-17

   A promise of future blessing 18-32

   (a) The enemies overthrown (18-20)

   (b) The land blessed (21-27)

   (c) The Holy Spirit poured out (28-32)

   Chapter 3:

   This chapter recures to the future blessing spoken of in the preceding
   chapter, for the purpose of amplifying some of its features, a
   peculiarity of all the prophets, as was indicated in one of our earlier
   lessons:

   The overthrow of the enemy 1-15

   The deliverance of Jerusalem 16, 17

   The blessing on the land 18

   The permanency of the restoration 19,20

   Questions.

   1. What chronological relation does Joel bear to the other prophets?

   2. To which kingdom were his messages sent?

   3. What proof is there of this?

   4. What future blessings are predicted for Israel?

   5. When was the prophecy of 2:28-32 partially fulfilled?
     __________________________________________________________________

AMOS

   It will be seen from the opening verse that Amos, like Hosea, was a
   prophet sent to Israel, though his home, Tekoa, was in Judah. He was
   contemporary with Hosea for a while, though the latter prophesied
   longer than he.

   After the introduction (1:1-3) there follows a series of messages
   concerning Gentile nations (1:4-2:3), each beginning with the words
   "For three transgressions . . . and for four, I will not turn away the
   punishment," an orientalism, meaning that it was not for three or four
   transgressions merely, but an innumerable number, that the judgments
   predicted were to fall.

   These messages are succeeded by one to Judah (2:4, 5) while the
   remainder of the book is concerned with Israel.

   The messages of Amos are more orderly than Hosea, and admit of
   homiletic divisions like the following: The first, beginning at chapter
   2, verse 6, and concluding with the chapter, contains, (1), an
   indictment for sin (6-8), aggravated by the divine goodness toward them
   (9-12); and (2), a declaration of the judgment to follow (13-15). This
   sin is greed (6), lust (7) and oppression (8). The marginal references
   frequently give the meaning of expressions in the prophets. Compare
   Exodus 22:26 with verse 8 for example, and Jeremiah 11:21 with verse
   12.

   God will press them as a cart full of sheaves presseth the ground
   (2:13, R. v.). In other words none shall escape the Assyrian hosts when
   they come down against them (14-16).

   The second discourse is limited to the third chapter, and contains,
   after the introduction, verses 1 and 2, (1), the prophet's
   justification of his message (3-8); (2) an indictment for sin (9, 10);
   (3), a declaration of punishment (11-15).

   When God says, "You only have I known," etc., (2), He means what is
   expressed in Deuteronomy 7:6, Psalm 147: 19, 20, and other places.
   Israel's punishment is proportioned to her privilege, Amos prophesied
   because he could not do otherwise, is practically the interpretation of
   verses 3-8. As two do not walk together except they are agreed, or have
   made an appointment; as a lion does not roar when it has no prey, etc,
   so the fact that Amos prophecies is an evidence that Jehovah hath
   spoken to him (8).

   Notice the suggestion of the preservation of a faithful remnant in the
   "two legs" or "piece of an ear" of a sheep taken out of the mouth of
   the lion (12).

   Messages of this character continue till the seventh chapter when a
   series of visions begins.

   In the first vision (1-3), Jehovah is withholding the coming judgment
   at the prophet's intercession, and the same is true of the second
   (4-6), but not of the rest (7-9; 8:1-3; 9:1-10).

   And yet notice the conclusion of the last message growing out of the
   vision of the Lord beside the altar (9:8, 9). He will not "utterly
   destroy." He will sift Israel "among all nations" as He has been doing
   all these centuries, but only the chaff will be destroyed.

   This thought is amplified m the epilogue of the book (9:11-15), where
   the prophet definitely reveals the history of Israel in the latter
   days: (1) the kingdom is to be restored (11); (2) Israel is to be the
   head of the nations (12); (3) the land of Palestine is to be greatly
   increased in fruitfulness (13); (4) the cities are to be rebuilt (14);
   (5) the blessing is to be perpetual (15).

   Questions.

   1. In which kingdom was Amos sent?

   2. What "orientalism" is employed by him and what is its meaning?

   3. How do the messages of Amos differ in form from those of Hosea?

   4. Name some of the sins of Israel at this time.

   5. Have you examined the marginal references?

   6. How would you interpret 2:3-8?

   7. What change in the character of Amos' messages take place at chapter
   7?

   8. What five promises are given Israel for the latter days?
     __________________________________________________________________

OBADIAH

   In all probability this prophet's period was just after the conquest of
   Judah by Babylon, and prior to that of Edom by the same people, which
   it is his mission to proclaim (1). Of all the nations afflicting the
   Jews the chief were the Assyrians, the Babylonians and Edomites; and
   although the last-named were their close relatives, they were the
   greatest enemies of all. The Edomites descended from Esau, the brother
   of Jacob, the ancestor of Israel. Examine the map to familiarize
   yourself with their territory, and by the aid of the concordance or
   Bible dictionary, refresh your recollection of their relations with
   Israel in the past. Compare also Jeremiah 49:7-22.

   The Edomites were not thought of very highly by their neighbors (2),
   but were conceited in their own eyes. Why (3)? Would their supposedly
   impregnable situation save them (4)? What figures of speech are used to
   show, by contrast, the thoroughness of the destruction to fall upon
   them (5, 6)? Of what were they proud in addition to the physical
   features of their territory (8, 9)?

   Why is this judgment to fall upon them (10)? Note what they did in the
   case of Judah in her day of need: (1) They stood aloof (verse 11); (2)
   they rejoiced in her calamity (verse 12); (3) they boasted against her
   (same verse); (4) they shared in her spoiling (verse 13); (5) they
   prevented the escape of some of her people (verse 14); and (6) they
   actually delivered up some of them as prisoners (same verse). Is it to
   be wondered at that God should speak as He does (15, 16)?

   And now mark the difference. Judah has been carried into captivity and
   her land was deserted, but was that condition in her case to continue
   (17)? On the contrary, what would be true of Edom (18)? In the day to
   come observe that while she will be swallowed up, Judah and Israel
   shall arise again, and possess not only their own land but that of Edom
   and Philistia as well (19, 20). It will be the day of the Messiah (21).

   Questions.

   1. What was Obadiah's period?

   2. What is his mission?

   3. What relation existed between the Edomites and Israelites?

   4. Have you identified the territory of the first named on the map?

   5. How did they show enmity toward Israel?

   6. What contrast will be seen in Edom and Israel in the time to come?

   7. When will that be?
     __________________________________________________________________

JONAH

   There is only one instance of Jonah's prophesying to his own people of
   Israel, 2 Kings 14:25. There he made a prediction concerning the
   restoration of the coasts of Israel, which was fulfilled in the reign
   of Jeroboam II about 800 B. C, showing that he lived earlier than that
   date. Of his personal history nothing further is known than what is
   found in this book.

   Chapter 1.

   Nineveh (2) was the capital of Assyria, and the reason Jonah sought to
   avoid the divine command against it (3) arose from his patriotism. As a
   student of the earlier prophets he knew what was to befall his nation
   at the hands of Assyria, and he shrank from an errand which might
   result favorably to that people, and spare them to become the scourge
   of Israel. The contents of the rest of this chapter require no comment
   till the last verse, where it is interesting to note that it is not
   said that a whale swallowed Jonah, but "a great fish" which "the Lord
   had prepared."

   Chapter 2.

   Is self-explanatory, but it is interesting to observe Jonah's penitence
   under chastisement (2), the lively experiences he underwent (3-6), his
   hope and expectation even in the midst of them (4), his unshaken faith
   (5), the lessons he learned (8), and the effect of it all on his
   spiritual life (9). God could now afford to set him at liberty (10).

   Is This Historic?

   The question will not down, "Is this chapter historic?" The evidence
   for it is found: (1) In the way it is recorded, there being not the
   slightest intimation in the book itself, or anywhere in the Bible, that
   it is a parable. (2) In the evidence of tradition, the whole of the
   Jewish nation, practically, accepting it as historic. (3) The
   reasonableness of it (see the remarks under chapter 3. (4) The
   testimony of Christ in Matthew 12:38, and parallel places. There are
   those who read these words of the Saviour in the light of the argument
   of which they form a part, and say that they allude only to what He
   knew to be a parable, or an allegory, but I am not of their number.
   Jesus would not have used such an illustration in such a connection, in
   my judgment, if it were not a historic fact. (5) The symbolic or
   prophetic character of the transaction (see the remarks under chapter
   4.

   Worshiping the Fish God.

   Chapter 3.

   To grasp the significance of the events in this chapter it is necessary
   to know that the Ninevites worshiped the fish God, Dagon, part human
   and part fish. They believed he came up out of the sea and founded
   their nation, and also that messengers came to them from the sea from
   time to time. If, therefore, God should send a preacher to them, what
   more likely than that He should bring His plan down to their level and
   send a real messenger from the sea? Doubtless great numbers saw Jonah
   cast up by the fish, and accompanied him to Nineveh as his witnesses
   and credentials.

   There are two side arguments that corroborate the historicity of this
   event. In the first place, "Oannes" is the name of one of the latest
   incarnations of Dagon, but this name with "J" before it is the spelling
   for Jonah in the New Testament. In the second place, there was for
   centuries an Assyrian mound named "Yunas," a corrupted Assyrian form
   for Jonas, and it was this mound's name that first gave the suggestion
   to archaeologists tha tthe ancient city of Nineveh might be buried
   beneath it. Botta associated "Yunas" with Jonah, and the latter with
   Nineveh, and so pushed in his spade, and struck the walls of the city
   -- E. B. Helme, D.D.

   The Moral Miracle.

   But before leaving this chapter observe that the moral miracle was
   greater than the physical. The sparing of a nation of confessed
   sinners, simply on their repentance and their giving heed to the
   message of the prophet, was mote astounding than the prophet's
   preservation in the fish's belly (5-10)!

   Chapter 4.

   Especially the opening verse (1-3), corroborates the view that
   patriotism led Jonah to flee from his divinely-imposed duty. He could
   not bear to see his enemy spared.

   From verse 5 we gather that he waited in the hope of seeing the
   destruction of the city; and yet how gracious God was to his
   narrow-minded and revengeful servant (6)!

   Jonah a Type of Israel.

   But we should not conclude this lesson without speaking of the
   dispensational significance of Jonah and his mission, which is a
   contribution to its historicity. To illustrate: (1) Jonah was called to
   a world mission, and so was Israel.

   (2) Jonah at first refused compliance with the divine purpose and plan,
   and so did Israel.

   (3) Jonah was punished by being cast into the sea, and so was Israel by
   being dispersed among the nations.

   (4) Jonah was not lost, but rather especially preserved during this
   part of his experience, and Israel is not being assimilated by the
   nations, but being kept for God.

   (5) Jonah repentant and cast out by the fish, is restored to life and
   action again, and Israel repentant and cast out by the nations shall be
   restored to her former national position.

   (6) Jonah, obedient, goes upon his mission to Nineveh, and Israel,
   obedient, shall ultimately engage in her original mission to the world.

   (7) Jonah is successful in that his message is acted upon to the
   salvation of Nineveh, so Israel shall be blessed in that she shall be
   used to the conversion of the whole world.

   Questions.

   1. Have you read 2 Kings 14:25?

   2. What was the motive for Jonah's disobedience?

   3. Give five reasons for believing the historicity of this book.

   4. Can you quote Matthew 12:38?

   5. What explanation of this miracle is found in the worship of the
   Ninevites?

   6. What two side arguments for the historicity of this event can you
   name?

   7. What second miracle does this book contain?

   8. Indicate the sense in which Jonah is a type of Israel.
     __________________________________________________________________

MICAH

   The little known of Micah is briefly stated. Calling himself a
   Morasthite indicates Moresheth, or Mareshah, as his birthplace in
   southwestern Judah, near Gath. The time of his prophesying is shown in
   the same verse by the reference to the kings of Judah, as between 758
   to 700 B. C. He seems to have been the writer of his own book, if we
   may judge from the personal allusions in chapter 3:1, 8, and to have
   died in peace, judging by Jeremiah 26:18, 19. He is frequently referred
   to as a prophet, and his utterances quoted, not only in the instances
   above given, but in Isaiah 2:2-4 and 41:15; Ezekiel 22:27; Zephaniah
   3:19; Matthew 2:5; and John 7:42. Jesus quotes him in Matthew 10:35,
   36. For further references to his period, see our lessons on Isaiah.

   1. A Description of Judgment.

   Chapters 1-3 contain a description of the approaching judgment on both
   kingdoms -- Israel and Judah. How do verses 1 and 5 of chapter 1
   indicate that both kingdoms are under consideration?

   Notice the order in which the three classes of hearers are addressed:

   (1) The people at large, chapter 1:2.

   (2) The princes, chapter 3.

   (3) The false prophets, 3:5.

   According to verse 11 what seems to have been the most crying sin of
   all? And yet notwithstanding their covetousness and greed, how did they
   show either gross hypocrisy or gross ignorance of God (same verse, last
   part)? It is at this point that the declaration of judgment is
   expressed, and in language which has been literally fulfilled, verse
   12.

   2. A Vision of Hope.

   Chapters 4 and 5 unfold the future and happier, because holier,
   experience of the nation. The first four verses of chapter 4 are quoted
   almost verbatim in Isaiah 2, unless we reverse the order and say that
   Micah quoted Isaiah.

   At what time are these better things to come to pass according to the
   beginning of this chapter? How are these things figuratively expressed
   in verse 1? It is not difficult to recognize in these figures of speech
   the exaltation of Jerusalem and Judah over all the nations in that day.
   But how does verse 2 show that the exaltation will not be exacting and
   tyrannous, but the opposite? What language shows that the millennial
   age is referred to, and no period which has yet appeared in the history
   of the world? How do verses 3 and 4 strengthen this conviction? What
   expression in verse 7 almost directly states this to be the case? In
   Joel we saw that prior to Israel's deliverance, and, as incident
   thereto, the Gentile nations will be besieging Jerusalem and desirous
   of seizing her, and that Jehovah will interpose on her behalf. How do
   the closing verses of this chapter parallel that prophecy?

   Addressing ourselves to chapter 5, we discover what is the common
   teaching of the prophets that these good times coming for Israel and
   Judah are connected with the Person and work of the Messiah. How is
   that led up to in verse 2? To be sure, these words are quoted in
   Matthew 2, to apply to the first coming of Christ, but that does not
   exclude His second coming. Moreover, all the succeeding verses in this
   chapter point to events which did not occur at His first coming, but
   will be found to be uniformly predicated of His second coming.

   3. A Contrast Drawn.

   Chapters 6 and 7 present a "contrast between the reasonableness, purity
   and justice of the divine requirements, and the ingratitude, injustice
   and superstition of the people which caused their ruin."

   The closing chapter is peculiarly affecting, a kind of soliloquy of
   repentance on Israel's part. The better element among the people are
   confessing and lamenting their sinful condition in verses 1-6, but
   expressing confidence in God's returning favor (7, 8).

   Putting all together, there are few verses in the Bible more expressive
   of quiet hope and trust than these. It is beautiful to see the spirit
   of confession and submission in verse 9, and the certainty of triumph
   over every foe, verse 10. Observe how Jehovah Himself speaks through
   the prophet in verses 11-13. (Revised Version). See the promise of
   interposition on Israel's behalf in that day, verse 15; and the
   confusion of the Gentile nations at their triumph, and their own
   discomfiture, 16, 17. Of course, the temporal blessings thus coming
   upon Israel are all predicated of their return to the Lord and His
   forgiveness of their sins (18, 19).

   Nevertheless these things will take place on the ground of the original
   promise to Abraham (20).

   Questions.

   1. What can you say of the history of Micah?

   2. Name the three great divisions of the book.

   3. Analyze chapters 1-3.

   4. With what future event is the deliverance of Israel always
   associated?

   5. What makes the closing chapter particularly affecting?
     __________________________________________________________________

NAHUM

   Isaiah concludes his work at about the end of Hezekiah's reign, which
   synchronizes with the captivity of the ten tribes of Israel by the
   Assyrians. At this period of perplexity, to quote Angus: "When the
   overthrow of Samaria (the capital of Israel), must have suggested to
   Judah fears for her own safety, when Jerusalem (the capital of Judah),
   had been drained of its treasure by Hezekiah in the vain hope of
   turning the fury of the Assyrians from her, and when rumors of the
   conquest of a part of Egypt by the same great power added still more to
   the general dismay, Nahum was raised up by Jehovah to reveal His
   tenderness and power (1:1-8), to foretell the subversion of the
   Assyrians (1:9-12), the death of Sennacherib the Assyrian king and the
   deliverance of Hezekiah from his toils (1:10-15)." The name of the
   prophet means consolation.

   After the consolatory introduction which covers the whole of chapter 1,
   the prophet predicts in detail, the destruction of Nineveh, the capital
   of the Assyrian empire. Properly to grasp Nahum, one needs to compare
   it with Jonah, of which it is a continuation and supplement. "The two
   prophecies form parts of the same moral history; the remission of God's
   judgments being illustrated in Jonah, and the execution of them in
   Nahum. The city had one denunciation more given a few years later, by
   Zephaniah (2:13), and shortly afterwards (606 B. C.), the whole were
   fulfilled."

   Questions.

   1. Against what Gentile nation is this prophecy uttered according to
   verse 1?

   2. Indicate the verses in chapter 1 that are particularly consolatory
   to Israel.

   3. How is Nahum 2:2 rendered in the Revised Version?

   4. How does chapter 3:7, 19 show the ultimate utter destruction of
   Nineveh?

   5. How does 3:16 indicate the commercial greatness of that city?
     __________________________________________________________________

HABAKKUK

   Nothing is known of the personal history of Habakkuk, and but little as
   to the time when he prophesied. He is placed by some successor to
   Zephaniah, for he makes no mention of Assyria and yet refers to the
   approach of the Babylonian invasion. See 1:6; 2:3; 3:2, 16-19. The book
   seems to have been written by himself, as we judge from 1:2, and 2:1,
   2.

   His "burden" begins by lamenting the iniquity of his people 1:1-4. He
   then declares God's purpose of raising up the Chaldean nation as a
   scourge against them, 5-10. The probability is that the Chaldeans (or
   Babylonians) were still a friendly nation (see 2 Kings 20:12-19), but
   they were soon to march through the land as a ravaging enemy. There
   were three invasions by the Babylonians, as the second book of Kings
   showed us; in the reigns of Jehoiakim, Jehoiachin and Zedekiah, and it
   is thought Habakkuk alludes to all three. Verse 11 of chapter 1 might
   be taken as a prophecy of the disease that came over Nebuchadnezzar
   when, as a punishment for his pride, his reason was taken from him for
   a season. The chapter concludes with an expostulation to the Holy One
   for inflicting such judgment on Judah and for using a nation to inflict
   them less righteous, as the prophet thinks, than themselves.

   In chapter 2 he awaits God's answer to this expostulation (verse 1),
   and receives it (verses 2-4). This is encouraging. "The vision shall
   surely come and the just shall live by faith and wait for it." The
   continuation of the chapter is a prediction of the judgments that shall
   fall on the Babylonians for their cruelty and idolatry.

   "The prophet, hearing these promises and threatenings, concludes his
   book with a song, of praise and prayer (chapter 3). He celebrates past
   displays of the power and grace of Jehovah, supplicates God for the
   speedy deliverance of His people and closes by expressing a confidence
   in God which no change can destroy." -- Angus.

   Attention is called to the words in chapter 2, verse 3, which the
   writer of Hebrews, according to the law of double reference, applies to
   the second coming of Christ (Hebrews 10:37, 38).

   In the same manner notice verse 4 of the same chapter, "The just shall
   live by faith," and the application of it in Romans 1:17; 5:1 and
   Galatians 3:24.

   Questions.

   1. What are the terms of the indictment against Judah, 1:1-4?

   2. What features of the military power of Babylon are noted 1:8?

   3. How would you interpret 2:1?

   4. Have you identified the New Testament reference in this lesson?

   5. What are the terms of indictment against Babylon, 2:5-19?

   6. Memorize 3:17, 18.
     __________________________________________________________________

ZEPHANIAH

   [This lesson with the exception of the questions is taken from
   "Synthetic Bible Studies."]

   Little is known of the personal history of Zephaniah beyond the two
   facts in the first verse of his prophecy, the first bearing on his
   ancestry and the second on the period of his ministry. About fifty
   years have elapsed since Nahum, and Hezekiah has been succeeded by
   three of his descendants (see 2 Kings, chapters 20, 21). Manasseh and
   Amon were idolatrous and wicked, but Josiah now upon the throne, is
   righteous and God-fearing. The story of his reign is in the succeeding
   chapters of 2 Kings and should be read preparatory to Zephaniah, who
   prophesied in the earlier part of his reign and assisted him in his
   efforts to restore the worship of the true God. To quote Angus:

   "The first chapter contains a denunciation of vengeance against Judah
   and those who practiced idolatrous rites; Baal, his black-robed priests
   (Chemarims), and Malcham (Moloch), being condemned (1-2:3). The second
   chapter predicts the judgments about to fall on the Philistines, those
   especially of the sea-coasts (Cherethites), the Moabites. Ammonites,
   and Ethiopians, and describes the desolation of Nineveh.

   "In the third chapter, the prophet arraigns Jerusalem, but concludes
   with promises of her restoration in the latter day (3:1-7, 8-20).

   "Coincidence of expression between Isaiah and Zephaniah are frequent,
   and still more between Zephaniah and Jeremiah. It may be added that the
   predictions of Jeremiah complete the view here given of the devastation
   to be effected by Chaldea in Philistia and Judah."

   In verse 8, observe the agreement with Joel concerning the gathering of
   the Gentile nations to judgment at the end of the present age. In verse
   9, we see these nations, or the spared and sifted remnant of them,
   converted to God and serving Him with a ready will. In verse 10 they
   are bringing the sons of Israel back to their own land, the second
   gathering of them as explained in Isaiah. In verses 11 to 18, the
   cleansed, rejoicing, nation of Israel appears, dwelling in their own
   land. In verses 19, 20, we find the restored people a blessing in the
   whole earth as foretold in the original promise to Abraham, and in the
   millennial psalms. Verse 17 will repay careful meditation. The old
   marriage covenant between Jehovah and Israel is there depicted as
   gloriously restored (Is. 62:5; Hos. 2:19): the husband is rejoicing in
   His wife, resting in His love and joying over her with singing. "Rest"
   is translated in the margin "be silent," and this silence of Jehovah
   towards His people is no longer the silence arising from forbearance in
   order to punish at last (Psalm 50:21), but because He has nothing more
   to reprehend.

   Questions.

   1. Have you reviewed 2 Kings 20 and 21?

   2. In whose reign did this prophet prophesy?

   3. Name the nations denounced in Chapters 2 and 3.

   4. How would you interpret 3:8-20 in detail?

   5. How would you interpret 3:17 especially?
     __________________________________________________________________

HAGGAI

   This is the first of the post-Babylonian prophets -- those who
   prophesied after the return from the seventy years' captivity. To be
   interested in this book therefore, one needs to read Ezra afresh,
   particularly chapters 4 and 5, for the mission of Haggai was to stir up
   the people of that time to rebuild the temple.

   What excuse did the people make for not engaging in the work (2)? What
   showed their selfishness (4)? What showed their moral blindness (6)?
   What remedy for the material conditions indicated does God propose (7)?
   How is the divine judgment upon their neglect extended in verses
   (9-11)? What is the result of the prophet's indictment against them
   (12), and its effect in heaven (13)? How shall we explain this result
   from the spiritual point of view (14)? How much time is covered by the
   events of this chapter (compare first and last verses)?

   Note the date of the second message beginning chapter 2, and compare
   Ezra 3:8-13. Some were discouraged because of their weakness and
   poverty, and felt that the temple could never be completed, and that in
   any event it would be outclassed by that of Solomon (3). How does God
   inspire them (4, 5)? Verses 6-10 are messianic, in which the first and
   second advents of our Lord are blended. The "shaking of the nations"
   seems future. "The desire of all nations" is taken as a personal
   designation of Christ, and yet the Revised Version renders it "the
   desirable things of all nations" which has a millennial flavor. Verse 9
   is usually considered fulfilled by Christ's presence in this second
   temple.

   Note the date of the third message (2:10). For the Levitical bearing of
   11-13, compare the marginal references, Leviticus 10:10, 11;
   Deuteronomy 33:10; Numbers 19:11; Malachi 2:7, etc. Moral cleanness was
   not communicated by contact, but the same was not true of uncleanness,
   Israel was unclean in the spiritual sense, and all that they did in the
   way of divine service was correspondingly so (14), but in God was their
   help as the following verses prove.

   God did not wait until the outcome of their labors testified to their
   change of heart, but from the day of that change His blessing began to
   be visited upon them (19). Previously, as the result of their
   disobedience, they reaped but ten measures of grain where they expected
   twenty, and twenty vessels of the fruit of the vine where they expected
   fifty; they had experienced blasting, and mildew and hail. But now all
   this would be changed, and the harvest plenteous. Let them take it by
   faith before the seed was in the barn, or the blossoms had come upon
   the trees (19).

   Note the date of the fourth message (2:20). This is in the future, and
   recalls the forthcoming judgments on the Gentile nations of which the
   pre-exilic prophets have spoken. The period referred to is the end
   time. There are those who regard verse 23 as a prophecy of Christ of
   whom Zerubbabel is the type, though others take the words literally as
   foreshadowing the resurrection of the governor himself.

   Questions.

   1. To what period does Haggai belong?

   2. With what historical book is this contemporaneous?

   3. Have you re-read that book?

   4. What was Haggai's mission?

   5. How many of the questions on chapter 1 were you able to answer?

   6. How would you explain the purpose of the second message?

   7. To what period does the fourth message point?
     __________________________________________________________________

ZECHARIAH

   THE PROPHET'S OWN TIME

   Chapters 1-8

   Zechariah, like Haggai, had a two-fold mission, to strengthen the hands
   of Israel for the rebuilding of the temple, and to quicken their hope
   as the earlier prophets had done, by painting in glowing colors the
   coming time of triumph over every foe.

   This mission is set before us in a two-fold division of the book.
   Chapters 1-8 give us a series of prophetic visions bearing primarily,
   upon the prophet's own time, while chapters 9-14 deal chiefly with the
   events culminating at the end of the age and the opening of the
   millennium.

   Part one, after the introduction, chapter 1:7-6:8; might be outlined
   thus:

   1. The prophetic visions, 1-6.

   The man among the myrtle trees.

   The four horns.

   The four smiths.

   The measuring line.

   The high priest in the temple.

   The golden candlestick.

   The flying roll.

   The woman in the ephah.

   The four chariots.

   2. The symbolic crowning of the high priest, 6:8-15.

   3. The instruction about fasting, 7-8.

   The First Four Visions, 1-2.

   To understand the first vision is the key to the rest. When was it
   received by the prophet? Chapter 1:7. Describe what he saw (8). Observe
   that two persons are referred to, the man upon the red horse, and the
   angel that talked with Zechariah, sometimes called "interpreting
   angel." The man on the horse seems afterward identified with "the angel
   of the Lord," verses 11, 12, one of the Old Testament names for Christ.
   It is presumable that the other horses had angelic riders also. Who are
   these described to be (10)? What report gave they of the earth (11)?
   Prosperity and peace seem to have been characteristic, of all the
   peoples, while Jerusalem was distressed, the temple unfinished, and the
   remnant of the Jews there persecuted by enemies. Who now intercedes on
   behalf of Jerusalem and Judah (12)? Is the answer of Jehovah
   encouraging or the opposite (13)? What was His answer in detail
   (14-17)? Was the peace and prosperity of the Gentile nations an
   evidence of the divine blessing upon them (15)? Jehovah had used them
   to discipline His people, but what shows their selfish and wicked
   intent in the premises ("same verse)? What does Jehovah promise shall
   be accomplished by the little remnant at this time (16)? What of the
   future (17)? This was fulfilled in the history of God's people at the
   time, in a measure at least. The temple was built, the cities restored,
   and Jerusalem and Judah comforted. And yet there is to be grander
   fulfillment in the days to come.

   The two following visions, if we call them two -- the four horns and
   four smiths (Revised Version), are closely connected with the one just
   considered. The four horns are the four world-powers (Babylonian,
   Persian, Greek and Roman) who scatter Israel, but the four smiths are
   four corresponding powers of some sort, not necessarily nations, which
   shall overcome them at the last and bring deliverance. We are almost
   necessarily shut up to the conclusion that this prophecy extends to the
   latter days by its reference to the whole of the four powers.

   The next vision, that of the measuring line, presents no serious
   difficulty. Its significance explained (chapter 2:4, 5), is the same
   practically as that of the man among the myrtles. However it may have
   had an approximate fulfillment in the prophet's own time, verses 10-13
   indicate that it looks toward the future, what declaration in those
   verses seem to prove that?

   The High Priest and Satan, 3.

   To understand the meaning of the vision now reached, keep in mind that
   a cause of dejection of the Jews was their consciousness of past sin.
   They felt that God had forsaken them, and that their present calamities
   were the result. We see herein, a parallel to the spiritual condition
   of a true believer in our own day, whom Satan torments with the belief
   that he cannot be saved on account of his many sins. This is now set
   before us in symbol, only there is a nation in the case here, and not
   an individual, for Joshua the high priest represented Israel.

   Where is the high priest seen to be (3:1)? It is thought that he was
   represented as in the holy place ministering at the altar. Who is seen
   with him, and for what malign purpose? We have here in symbol, Satan's
   temptation of the saint to doubt God's power to forgive and save. How
   is this goodness and power shown, in the next verse? On what ground is
   Jerusalem to be saved, on that of merit or of the divine choice? What
   does verse 3 teach as to the truth of Satan's insinuation against
   Israel as represented by the high priest? Does the imagery indicate the
   holiness or sinfulness of the people. Yet how is divine grace
   illustrated in the next command of Jehovah (4)? What did the removal of
   his filthy garments signify? What did the changed raiment signify?
   Compare Romans 3:22. What next was done (5)? By this act the clothing
   of the high priest was completed and he was fitted for his official
   service. Who is represented as "standing by" all this time as if
   interceding for Joshua (and through him for the nation), and to see
   that these commands were carried out and these benefits conferred? With
   whom have we identified "the Angel of the Lord"? What charge is now
   laid upon Joshua, and what privilege is connected with it (7)?

   Questions.

   1. Name the two-fold mission of this prophet.

   2. Name the nine prophetic visions of Part 1.

   3. Give some reasons showing the application of these visions in the
   future.

   4. What leads to that conclusion in the case of the four horns and the
   four smiths?

   5. What is necessary to understand the vision of chapter 3?

   THE PROPHET'S OWN TIME -- CONTINUED

   Chapters 4-8

   The Golden Candlestick, 4.

   The candlestick was a copy of that in the early tabernacle, but with
   what difference (verse 2)? From what source was its oil supplied (3)?
   What did this supply of oil from the trees symbolize (6)? The
   candlestick itself may represent the temple which the Jews were now
   essaying to build, or for that matter, the Jewish nation as a whole
   which was now sought to be re-established and become a light in the
   world. The difficulties in the way of accomplishing these things seemed
   insuperable, if the strength of man only should be considered, but God
   would interpose, and His Spirit do what human agencies could not do.
   How is this difficulty and its removal figuratively expressed (7)? How
   is the figure explained (8-10)? On what point did the prophet desire
   further light (12)? What reply was made to him (14)? By these "two
   anointed ones" is understood Zerubbabel and Joshua, the leaders of
   Israel at this time on whom, and through whom the Holy Spirit would be
   poured out for the successful termination of the work.

   It is proper to use this symbol as applying to the church of the
   present day in its testimony and work; in which case the "two anointed
   ones" may represent any who "filled with the Spirit" are executing the
   Lord's will in power. At the same time the whole thing applies
   primarily to Israel, not only in the time of Zechariah, but in the last
   times when through the blessing of the Spirit, she shall be restored,
   and become a rejoicing in the earth. It is proper to add that the
   deeper meaning of verse 14 is probably Christ Himself. "The Priest upon
   His throne," which will supply Israel as He now supplies the church
   with His Holy Spirit!

   The Flying Roll and the Ephah, 5.

   The two visions in chapter s are mysterious and like the four chariots
   in chapter 6, seem to express the idea of judgment. That the "flying
   roll" has that significance would seem plain by a comparison with
   Ezekiel 2:9, 10, and Revelation, chapters 5 and 10, where similar
   figures have such meaning. We have seen that judgment is coming upon
   the Gentile nations, and that Israel also is to be purified before she
   is finally restored, and it may be that to both the present vision
   applies.

   What is now seen (6)? An ephah or measure is an emblem of trade or
   commerce. What was seen sitting in the ephah? What is the woman said to
   symbolize (8)? The whole figure then represents wickedness in commerce.
   What is done with the ephah and whither is it carried? The land of
   Shinar suggests Babylon again, of whose revival in the latter days
   mention has been made. Every one knows that commercialism is prominent
   in Revelation 18 as the climax of ungodliness. Read that chapter in
   connection with Habakkuk 2:12, and James 5. Babylon is real, and the
   woman the commercial spirit that will reign there at the end. The
   spirit of self that prevailed in the Babylon of Genesis 11, will build
   up and prevail in the Babylon of Revelation 18. The description of the
   Babylon of Nebuchadnezzar's day will fit the one to come. It will be
   the city of "the prince of this world," the seat of the Anti-christ. It
   is noticeable that certain prophecies concerning Babylon in Isaiah and
   Jeremiah have not yet been fulfilled, while these prophecies are
   closely identified with those in Revelation 17 and 18. The drift in our
   day is in the direction of a commercial center in the East.

   The ninth and closing vision, chapter 6:1-8, furnishes another
   spectacle of judgment on the nations and the quieting of the divine
   Spirit with the result.

   Crowning of the High Priest. 6.

   The prophet is now called upon to do something in the nature of an
   object lesson to symbolize that great future event which will follow
   the judgments referred to, viz: the manifested reign of Christ over the
   millennial earth. Who have now come from Babylon on an embassage (10)?
   Whose guests are they (same verse)? What articles do they seem to have
   brought as gifts for the temple (11)? What is the prophet to do with
   some of this silver and gold? What is he to say in connection with this
   transaction (12-13)? What then shall be done with the crowns, and why
   (14-15)?

   That this transaction is symbolic is plain from two or three points of
   view. In the first place, the royal crown did not belong to the high
   priest or any son of Levi, but to the tribe of Judah in the line of
   David. In the second place, there is the expression "Behold the Man
   whose name is the Branch!" To whom does that name belong? In the third
   place, we have the declaration, "He shall build the temple of the
   Lord." To whom in the fullest sense can this apply, save Christ? And
   then, "He shall bear the glory,' and "He shall be a priest upon His
   throne." Of none other than Christ has this ever been predicted. He
   only is the priestly King. Compare Psalm no, and Hebrews 7. What
   language in verse 15 bears a possible reference to the Gentiles in that
   day? On what condition is all this to be fulfilled (same verse)?

   We pass over particular consideration of the two next chapters, which
   are in a sense parenthetical, although in accord with the whole book.
   Men of Babylon sent messengers to Jerusalem to inquire on the subject
   of ritual or ceremonial fasting. Had their fasting hitherto been
   acceptable to God and were they to continue it in the new regime? They
   are shown what a hypocritical thing that service had been hitherto; how
   it was such formalism and hypocrisy which had brought punishment upon
   their fathers: how that the fasting Jehovah desired was of a different
   nature, and finally, that in the blessed time coming feasting will take
   the place of fasting. These hints, will enable the reader to reach a
   fair understanding of the chapters in their present connection.

   Questions.

   1. What may the golden candlestick typify?

   2. How might the reference to "the two anointed ones" be applied?

   3. What about the flying roll and ephah?

   4. What shows the crowning of the high priest to be symbolical?

   5. Give briefly the substance of chapters 7 and 8.

   END OF THE AGE AND THE OPENING OF THE MILLENNIUM

   Chapters 9-14

   It was stated that the first part of the book, chapters 1-8, referred
   chiefly, though not entirely, to the prophet's own time. The basis of
   all the prophecies in that part had a historical relation to the period
   then present. They were uttered, to encourage the people in rebuilding
   the temple. And yet there is not one of them that did not take
   cognizance of the far future. The discourses of this, the second part,
   deal almost entirely with the future.

   It will aid in the understanding of these chapters if we recall a few
   historical facts. At the date of this book the Medo-Persian was the
   world-power to which the Jews were subject.

   It was followed by the Greeks, and the Greeks by the Romans. During the
   Roman regime our Lord was crucified and Jerusalem destroyed. The
   present (i. e. our own time), is an interregnum so far as Jewish
   national history is concerned, which will continue till Israel is once
   more in Jerusalem, in covenant with Antichrist and about to pass
   through the tribulation prior to her final deliverance and blessing.
   Here are three periods in Jewish history which we may call, the
   Grecian, the Roman and the final periods. Zechariah, it is believed,
   treats of each of these in the chapters following.

   1. The Grecian Period, 9-10.

   You will recall from Daniel that this period begins with Alexander the
   Great, the notable horn between the eyes of the he-goat. When he
   crossed from Greece into Asia he swept down the Phoenician and
   Palestinian coast of the Mediterranean, besieging and capturing
   Damascus, Sidon, Tyre, Gaza and other cities in the south Philistine
   country. But he passed by Jerusalem more than once without doing it
   harm. The Jewish historian Josephus explains this by a dream the great
   monarch had, and which was fulfilled by the appearance to him at
   Jerusalem of the high priest and his train. However this may be, the
   opening verses of chapter 9 give us the prophetic outline of his career
   at this time. Read verses 1-7. For the deliverance of Jerusalem which
   occurred, read verse 8.

   But now we come to a further illustration of the law of double
   reference, for the verse which speaks of the deliverance of Jerusalem
   from Alexander, speaks evidently of another deliverance which can only
   find fulfillment in the latter times. What shows that this deliverance,
   thus foreshadowed, is connected with the coming of Christ (9)? When
   were these words fulfilled at least in part? (Matthew 21:5). What shows
   that their complete fulfillment is reserved for the latter times, or
   Christ's second coming (10-11)?

   Verses 13-17 are obscure, but thought to refer to the period of the
   Maccabees who delivered their people for a while from the yoke of the
   tyrant Antiochus Epiphanes B. C. 170, or thereabouts, while the
   Grecians represented by him were still in power. However this may be,
   it is evident from what follows that, as in so many other instances,
   this deliverance foreshadowed a greater and final one to come.

   The Roman Period, 11.

   Greek supremacy is at an end, and we have reached the Roman period
   culminating in the rejection by the Jews of the Son of God. The
   eleventh chapter opens with a scene of judgment (verses 1-6). Then
   follows the cause of it (verses 7-14). In verse 4 the prophet is
   commanded to do a symbolic act, and in verse 7 he is in the performance
   of it. What was this act? There will be little doubt after reading the
   context, that in this act he is the type of the Good Shepherd, Jesus
   Christ. Compare Matthew 9:36, and John 10. What does the Shepherd carry
   with Him to guide and protect His flock? There is difficulty in the
   meaning of these staves unless we adopt that hinted at in verses 10 and
   14, where "Beauty" seems to refer to the divine covenant, and "Bands"
   to the union between the ten tribes and the two.

   Who are "cut off" in verse 8? It is supposed that these "three
   shepherds" "stand for the three classes of rulers that governed
   Israel," priests, prophets and lawyers, Jeremiah 2:8, Matthew 16:21.
   Our Lord pronounced woes against them (Matthew 23), and when the city
   was destroyed their rule came to an end. What portion of the flock paid
   attention to and were fed by the shepherd (11)? Compare Matthew 5:3,
   11:25; 1 Corinthians 1:26-29. How does verse 12 point to the rejection
   of the Shepherd by the flock? What is foreshadowed in the next verse?
   Who is the prophet commanded to impersonate (15)? What person yet to
   come will answer the description in verses 16 and 17? Can this be any
   other ultimately than the Antichrist? Read John 5:43.

   The Final Period, 12-14.

   The prophecies in this section of the book are to be fulfilled at the
   end period frequently referred to. It is the time when Israel is once
   more in Jerusalem in the national sense, though at first in an
   unconverted condition.

   We saw in Daniel that the Antichrist would at this time enter into
   covenant with Israel, and afterwards (in the middle of the last seven
   years), break that covenant. Then "the time of Jacob's trouble" begins,
   the nature of which will in part be the combination of the Gentile
   nations, i. e., the Roman world, against it. Antichrist will be at the
   head of this combination if we may judge from a comparison of Daniel
   with Revelation. It is at this point, when the nations are besieging
   the Holy City, that the "burden of the Word of the LORD" begins (12:1,
   2).

   We can not outline these chapters in detail, nor is it necessary for
   those who have perused the earlier prophets in connection with these
   lessons. A hint here and there will suffice. For example, in this siege
   Jerusalem will for the first time be victorious (12:2, 3); the victory,
   however, will be of a supernatural character (4-8, R. V.); the
   conversion of the nation will accompany it (10), also 13:1, and it will
   take place coincident with the great tribulation (13:8, 9, 14:1-3);
   Christ shall appear to them (14:4); the earth will rejoice (9); and
   especially Judah and Jerusalem (10, 11); their enemies will be
   punished, and the millennium will have begun (16, and the following
   verses).

   Questions.

   1. With what period chiefly, does this lesson deal?

   2. Name the world powers of which these chapters treat.

   3. Give the story of chapter 9:1-8.

   4. What illustration of the law of double reference is here shown?

   5. Who is suggested as a type of Christ in chapter 11?

   6. For whom do the "three shepherds" stand?

   7. To what time do chapters 12-14 refer?

   8. Give an outline of their application.

   [This lesson with the exception of the questions is from "Synthetic
   Bible Studies."]
     __________________________________________________________________

MALACHI

   This book is a continuous discourse, so that, properly speaking, there
   are no intervening events. The prophet is a contemporary of Nehemiah,
   following closely Zechariah and Haggai. The evidence of this is chiefly
   internal and gathered from two facts: (1) That the second temple was
   evidently in existence at the time, and (2) That the evils condemned by
   Nehemiah are those which he also condemns. This will appear as we
   proceed, but compare Malachi 1:7, 8; 2:11-16; 3:8-10 with the last
   chapter of Nehemiah, especially verses 10-14, 23-29.

   Following an outline by Willis J. Beecher, we have:

   The Introduction, 1:1-5.

   What word in verse 1 indicates that the message, or messages, are in
   the nature of rebuke rather than comfort? With what declaration does
   verse 3 begin? While Jehovah thus declares Himself towards His Israel,
   how do they receive it? This skeptical insinuation in the
   interrogation, "Wherein hast thou loved us?" is a peculiarity of the
   book, and shows the people to have been in a bad spiritual frame,
   calculated to give birth to the practical sins enumerated later.

   Be careful not to read a wrong meaning into that reference to Esau, as
   though God caused him to be born simply to have an object on which He
   might exercise His hate, or as if that hate condemned the individual
   Esau to misery in this life and eternal torment beyond. The hate of
   Esau as an individual is simply set over against the choice of Jacob as
   the heir to the promised seed of Abraham. Esau did not inherit that
   promise, the blessing to the world did not come down in his line, but
   that of his brother Jacob, and yet Esau himself had a prosperous life;
   nor are we driven to the conclusion by anything the Bible says that he
   was eternally lost. Moreover, the particular reference is not so much
   to Esau as a man as to the national descendants of Esau, the Edomites,
   who had not only been carried into captivity as Israel had been, but
   whose efforts to rebuild their waste places would not be successful as
   in the case of Israel, because the divine purposes of grace lay in
   another direction.

   The Second Division, 1:6-3:4, consists of an address to the priests and
   Levites, more especially the former, in which they are charged with
   three kinds of offenses. The first is neglect of their temple duties,
   see chapter 1:6-2:9. The character of the offense is seen in verses 7
   and 8, and 12 and 13 of chapter 1, while the punishment in the event of
   impenitence is in chapter 2:1-9. The second offense concerns unholy
   marriages, verses 10-16 of chapter 2. It was for this sin as well as
   the preceding one that Jehovah refused to accept their offerings (13,
   14). Notice the strong argument against divorce found in verse 15. God
   made one wife for one man at the beginning though He had the power to
   make more, and He did this because of the godly seed He desired. The
   third offense is that of skepticism, and as Beecher calls it, a bad
   skepticism, for there is a species of doubt which deserves
   compassionate treatment and which cannot be called evil in its spirit
   and motive. That, however, is hardly the kind of doubt now under
   consideration (See chapter 2:17). This division closes, as does the
   division following, by a prediction "concerning a day in which the
   obedient and disobedient shall be differentiated and rewarded." This
   "day" we have often recognized as the "day of the Lord" still in the
   future both for Israel and the Gentile nations (3:1-4).

   Notice the partial fulfillment of verse 1 in the career of John the
   Baptist, as indicated in the words and context of Matthew 11:10; Mark
   1:2; Luke 1:76. But the concluding verses of the prediction show that a
   complete fulfillment must be ahead. The offering of Judah and Jerusalem
   has not yet been so purified by divine judgments as to be pleasant unto
   the Lord as in the days of old, but it shall yet come to pass.

   The Third Division, 3:5-4:3, consists of an address to the people as a
   whole, who like the priests, are charged with three kinds of offenses.
   The first is certain public wrongs in which are grouped false swearing,
   adultery, oppression and injustice (3:5-7). The second is the failure
   to support the temple and its ministers (3:8-12), in which case notice
   the charge of divine robbery, and the blessing promised to faithfulness
   in tithes. The third is the same kind of skepticism as with the priests
   (3:13-15). The prediction concluding this section covers verses
   3:16-4:3, and is more comforting in character than the preceding one.

   The Fourth Division, 4:4-6, is a grand conclusion in which the great
   day of the Lord is once more referred to, and Elijah the prophet named
   as His forerunner. We learn from Matt. 11:14, Mark 9:11 and Luke 1:17
   that John the Baptist is to be considered the type of this forerunner,
   but that Elijah is to come again to this earth is the opinion of many.
   There are those who believe that he and Moses are the two witnesses in
   Revelation 11 that shall do wonders in Jerusalem during the reign of
   the Antichrist.

   Questions.

   1. What is the peculiarity of this book?

   2. Give the proof that Malachi is contemporary with Nehemiah.

   3. How do you explain God's "hatred" of Esau?

   4. What argument against divorce is found here?

   5. How do some interpret the prediction about Elijah?
     __________________________________________________________________

New Testament
     __________________________________________________________________

MATTHEW

   INTRODUCTORY

   About four hundred years have elapsed since Malachi, and no prophet has
   arisen in Israel. We left Israel under the dominion of the Persians,
   which was soon followed by the Grecians including the Syrian period in
   which Antiochus Epiphanes flourished, and the Maccabees, about one
   hundred and fifty to one hundred and seventy years before Christ. Then
   came the Roman period when the Messiah appeared.

   At the outset, remember that the Old Testament promised an earthly
   Kingdom to Israel when the Messiah came, and for which the faithful
   were looking. Jesus was the Messiah though they knew Him not, and He
   had come to set up that Kingdom. Moreover, from the beginning of His
   ministry down to a certain point to be named later, He proceeds on the
   assumption that the Kingdom has come if the nation will receive Him. He
   is not received, but rejected, whereupon He changes the character of
   His teaching. He then begins to speak of the Church instead of the
   Kingdom, and to lay plans, humanly speaking, for the formation of a new
   body of people altogether. This body is composed of Gentiles as well as
   Jews, who sustain a peculiar relation to Him while the Kingdom is in
   abeyance, and indeed forevermore.

   That phrase, "the Kingdom in abeyance," means that the Kingdom promised
   in the Old Testament is yet to be set up on this earth in Israel, with
   Jesus, the Messiah, at its head. This will be when Israel, punished and
   repentant, shall receive Him by faith as all the prophets have spoken.
   In the meantime the Church comes into view, with a unique origin,
   history and destiny, concerning which the New Testament treats almost
   exclusively.

   The Transition Gospel.

   How then shall we place Matthew's Gospel? Can we do better than to
   speak of it as covering the transition period, i. e., the period
   including the rejection of the Kingdom by Israel and the coming into
   view of the Church after the resurrection of our Lord?

   Keep in mind that Matthew is writing for the Jewish people, and is
   seeking, under the inspiration of the Holy Spirit, to present Jesus to
   them as the One who fulfills the Old Testament features of the Messiah.
   For this reason the first Gospel is sometimes called the Gospel of the
   Kingdom, because more than any other, it dwells upon that aspect of the
   truth.

   But this suggests that each of the Gospels has its own viewpoint of the
   history and work of the Saviour, to appreciate which is important in
   the study of that Gospel. In the Old Testament the Coming One is
   alluded to in different ways, but they have been reduced to four, as
   for example: He is the King of Israel, He is the Servant of Jehovah, He
   is the Son of Man, and He is the Son of God. This classification
   reappears in the Gospels, and as we shall see, Matthew reveals Him in
   the first particular, Mark in the second, Luke in the third and John in
   the fourth.

   Questions.

   1. How long an interim has taken place since Malachi?

   2. Give an outline history of Israel during this period.

   3. How does the Messiah change His teaching at a certain point, and
   why?

   4. What is meant by "the Kingdom in abeyance"?

   5. What period does Matthew's Gospel cover?

   6. For what class of people is he writing?

   7. What is this Gospel called, and why?

   8. How may the other Gospels be classified?

THE ADVENT OF OUR LORD

  Chapters 1-2

   In this lesson there are four divisions.

   The Genealogical Table, 1:1-17.

   The Announcement to Joseph, 1:18-25.

   The Flight into Egypt, 2:1-18.

   The Return, to Nazareth, 2:19-23.

   I. We learned the value of genealogical tables to Israel in the Old
   Testament. This value applied to the separation into families and
   tribes with reference to the possession of Canaan; but it had a
   peculiar application to the Messiah also. He must come in the line of
   Abraham through David (v. 1), and no Israelite could be interested in
   one claiming to be He of whom this was not true. That Matthew should
   lay stress on this, and give the "generation" in detail is one evidence
   that his Gospel was addressed to Israel rather than the Gentiles.
   Neither Mark nor John gives a genealogy, and Luke's table (3:23-38),
   written for the Gentile, is a different one, and for a special reason
   does not pause at Abraham, but extends back to God, through Adam.

   Reference will be made to Matthew's table again when we reach Luke's
   Gospel, but verse 16 is important, showing that "Joseph the husband of
   Mary" was legal heir to the throne of David, for the genealogical table
   following David's time is that of the kings. And also that although
   "the husband of Mary," he was not the begetter of Jesus as in the
   preceding cases. The changed expression is significant, "Mary, of whom
   was born Jesus." The latter did not come of natural generation, but in
   the manner indicated in the next chapter.

   The "Mary" in this instance is always identified in the New Testament
   as the mother of Jesus, but there are five other Marys. "Mary
   Magdalene" (Luke 8:2); Mary, the mother of James the less and Joses,
   the wife of Alpheus and a sister of the Virgin (Matt. 27:56; Mark
   15:40; John 19:25); Mary of Bethany, sister of Martha and Lazarus (Luke
   10:39); Mary the mother of John Mark (Acts 12:12), and another Mary,
   associated with Paul in Rome (Rom. 16:6).

   "Jesus" is the family name of our Lord (Luke 1:31), the same as
   "Joshua" in the Old Testament, and means "Saviour" (v. 21); but
   "Christ" or "The Christ," in His official designation. "Christos" is
   the Greek form of the Hebrew "Messiah" (Dan. 9:25, 26), and means "The
   Anointed One." In the Old Testament, the prophet, the priest and the
   king were all anointed with oil, but Jesus their great antitype was
   anointed with the Holy Spirit (3:16).

   II. Under "the announcement to Joseph," notice the testimony to the
   virgin birth (vv. 18, 20). Had Jesus been begotten after the flesh He
   would have been a sinner like us, and incapable of being our Saviour.
   And yet had He not been the legal descendant of Joseph, and heir to the
   throne, the Jews would have been justified in rejecting Him. Behold the
   wisdom and power of God! Compare the predictions of the virgin birth.
   Genesis 3:15; Isaiah 7:14; Jeremiah 31:22, and the corresponding
   account in Luke 1:28-35.

   "His people" (v. 21) means in the first place the Jews, and then all
   who accept Him as their Saviour by faith.

   Verses 22 and 23 are peculiar to Matthew, who, in writing instinctively
   for Israel, is careful to connect the events of Jesus' life with the
   Old Testament in which they believed and which contained His
   credentials.

   III. "The flight into Egypt" is divisible into:

   The visit of the wise men (vv. 1, 2).

   The testimony of the priests and scribes (vv. 3-6).

   The worship of the babe in the manger (vv. 7-12).

   The warning to Joseph (vv. 13-15).

   The slaughter of the little children (vv. 16-18).

   1. This "Herod" is Herod the Great, an Edomite and appointee of Caesar.
   He was a cruel and despotic man, and his practical usurpation of the
   throne, and tyranny over the people, explain his apprehension (v. 3),
   on hearing that a true King of the Jews was born.

   The "wise men" ("Magi" in Greek), were Gentile astrologers, occupied
   with occult things, foretelling events from the stars, etc. (Dan.
   2:48), and earnest seekers after truth. Kepler, the astronomer, thought
   the "star" was a constellation of Jupiter and Saturn, but it is more
   likely to have been a miraculous sign from God. Nor is it necessary to
   suppose that it led them all the way from their eastern home, because
   verse nine indicates that when they started from Herod towards
   Bethlehem it reappeared to them. The way they came to expect a great
   King is suggested by their probable acquaintance with Balaam's prophecy
   in Numbers 23 and 24 and the predictions of Daniel.

   2. The conduct of the priests and scribes illustrates a common
   phenomenon, viz, the truth held in the mind but having no power in the
   life. They knew where the Messiah should be born, but lacked the
   interest to inquire whether this were He. Their quotation (v. 6) is
   from Micah 5:2, although its rendering suggests that it was taken not
   from the Hebrew, or Greek Septuagint, but probably a Chaldaic
   paraphrase.

   3. Herod's interest (vv. 7, 8) was the grossest hypocrisy, but what a
   contrast is borne to it by these Gentiles worshipping, not the child's
   mother, but the child! Some find a significance in their gifts, "gold"
   representing royalty, "frankincense" purity, and "myrrh" suffering.

   "We three kings of Orient are," is a line of a familiar hymn alluding
   to this visit, but is misleading, since there is nothing to indicate
   that they were kings, or that their number was limited to three.
   Another error is traceable to the picture representing them as
   worshiping a babe in a manger, whereas it is not unlikely that Jesus
   was a year old at this time. The reasons for thinking so are (1) that
   Luke 2:30 says, "when they had performed all things according to the
   law * * * they returned * * to Nazareth," while Matthew speaks of their
   going into Egypt after the departure of the wise men. (2), The
   shepherds in Luke 2, found "the babe wrapped in swaddling clothes lying
   in a manger;" but the wise men "saw the young child with Mary" in "the
   house." Possibly His parents returned to Nazareth after His birth, and
   then at the recurrence of the Passover the next year came down to
   Bethlehem again.

   4. In the subsection designated as "The warning to Joseph," two
   prophecies find fulfillment. In verse 15, Hosea 11:1, and in verse 18,
   Jeremiah 31:15. The first found an approximate fulfillment in Israel,
   which in the Old Testament is sometimes called God's Son (Ex. 4:22;
   Jer. 31:9); but, according to the law of double reference, it has here
   an ultimate fulfillment in Christ who is often identified with Israel.
   The second causes Rachel, the beloved wife of Jacob, to personify
   Israel weeping for her children slain by Herod's sword. This weeping,
   in a sense, has continued ever since and will not end until Israel at
   last looks "upon Him whom they pierced" and mourns because of Him.

   IV. "The return to Nazareth" demands attention because of the words
   "that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the prophet He shall be
   called a Nazarene" (v. 23). The meaning is not clear because no one of
   the prophets calls Him by this name. However, all the prophets speak of
   Him in one way or another, as the despised or rejected One, and this in
   the eyes of a Jew is what it meant to be a dweller in Nazareth. The
   whole of Galilee was despised by them because it held so many Gentiles,
   but Nazareth was despised even by Galileans themselves. (Compare John
   1:46.)

   Questions.

   1. Divide this lesson into four parts.

   2. Name the two-fold value of genealogies to Israel.

   3. What two facts give importance to 1:16?

   4. Give the list of the "Marys" of the New Testament.

   5. What are the distinctions between the two names of our Lord?

   6. How are the wisdom and power of God shown in His birth?

   7. What is peculiar to Matthew as writing for the Jews?

   8. Analyze chapter 2 into its main divisions.

   9. How may the Magi have known of the coming King?

   10. What does the conduct of the priests and scribes teach?

   11. Why may we think that chapter 2 refers to Jesus when a year old?

   12. How may the last verse of that chapter be explained?

PREPARATION FOR HIS PUBLIC MINISTRY

  Chapters 3-4:11

   1. Baptized by John, 3.

   For the earlier history of John the Baptist compare Luke 1. In verses
   1-6 of the present lesson, however, we have the place and theme of his
   ministry, a statement of his official relationship to the Messiah, his
   description, and an account of the interest awakened by his mission.

   "The Kingdom of heaven," or "the heavens," (verse 2), means the earthly
   kingdom promised to Israel in the Old Testament, over which the Messiah
   was to reign. It is "the Kingdom of the heavens" in that it is the rule
   of the heavens over the earth (6:10). Compare Daniel 2:34-36, 44. It
   was the rejection of the Messiah that caused the postponement of this
   Kingdom until His coming again.

   In 7-12 we have a reference to the religious leaders of the nation at
   this time, and a warning of judgment awaiting them. We met with
   "scribes" in the preceding chapter, and here we have "Pharisees and
   Sadducees." The "scribes" made copies of the sacred Scriptures, and
   classified and taught them (2 Sam. 8:17; Jer. 8:8), but by and by, they
   added to this other things not so necessary or lawful, and compelled
   the people to accept them or be charged with heterodoxy. This was the
   charge brought against our Lord Himself because He confined His
   teaching to the Scripture. Among the things they added were Hebrew
   legends Gemara), and rabbinical rules on questions of ritual (Mishna),
   the two forming the Talmud of later times.

   "Pharisee" comes from a Hebrew word meaning "separate," and identifies
   a sect whose origin dated from the return from Babylon. At first its
   object was to keep alive a reverence for the law of God, but later it
   degenerated into a traditionalism corresponding to the teaching of the
   scribes. Pharisees were zealous but self-righteous, and became the
   fiercest enemies of Jesus Christ. "Sadducees" some think were named
   after their founder Zadok. They were skeptics who denied the
   immortality of the soul. They also denied the oral tradition on which
   Pharisaic teaching was largely based. They were the rich and worldly
   people of Judea in our Lord's time. These definitions explain the hard
   names and the warnings applied to the Pharisees and Sadducees (v. 7).
   Their hypocrisy is seen in verse 8, their pride of race, verse 9, their
   speedy judgment, verse 10.

   Baptism with water (v. 11) had been practiced among the Jews in
   connection with the proselytism of the Gentiles, and was the outward
   sign by which the latter signified the change of mind and purpose
   supposed to have taken place within, and which is really the meaning of
   "repentance." This baptism of John, however, is not identical with
   Christian baptism as will be seen later.

   The last clause of verse 11 refers to Christ, who baptized His
   disciples with the Holy Ghost, after His ascension, on the day of
   Pentecost (Acts 2; 1 Cor. 12:13); and will baptize Israel with fire
   when He comes again in judgment (v. 12). This is an illustration of the
   law of double reference of which we learned in the Old Testament.

   Verses 13-17 are the most important. The sinless one coming to a sinner
   to be baptized with sinners, how strange! No wonder John forbade Him.
   But it was not John's baptism He sought, although John baptized Him.
   John's baptism was the sign and seal of repentance to escape wrath, but
   Jesus had no need of repentance and no fear of wrath. His baptism was
   to "fulfill all righteousness" (15). In other words, the Father had
   made a covenant of redemption with the Son, in which the Son engaged to
   work out, as God Incarnate, through atoning sufferings and obedience, a
   perfect righteousness for sinful men. Of this covenant His baptism by
   John was the sign and seal. It was His own seal of consecration to His
   chosen work, and the Father's seal of faithfulness to the sufferer, the
   latter being proven by the open heavens, the descending dove and the
   paternal voice. Thus was He inaugurated into His great office. (Bishop
   W. R. Nicholson.)

   2. Tempted by Satan. 4:1-11.

   It is the Holy Spirit who is referred to in verse 1, and indeed, after
   His anointing by the Spirit, almost everything Jesus is said to have
   done, was accomplished, not in the power of His own natural spirit, but
   the Holy Spirit. It would have been wrong for Him to have entered into
   this temptation on His own account. The "Devil" of the same verse we
   became acquainted with as a personal being, in the Old Testament. But
   although he possesses personality, a word synonymous with
   self-consciousness, that is not to say that he appeared to Jesus in
   human form. The form he assumed is not revealed, although the
   temptation was objective in character, as was that of the first Adam in
   Eden, with which it stands in contrast.

   The temptation was three-fold, the appeal being directed to "the lust
   of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life" (1 John
   2:16), which is all the devil has to offer. The Father had just
   testified to His Sonship, but He is tempted to doubt it because He is
   hungry (3). He has just declared His confidence in the Word of God (4),
   and He is tempted to presume upon it (5-7). He had been promised the
   Kingdom through the Cross, and He is tempted to obtain it in another
   way (8-10). As Scofield says, "Satan's one object was to induce Christ
   to act from Himself and independently of His Father," and Christ
   defeated him "by a means open to His humblest follower, the intelligent
   use of the Word of God."

   This victory of Christ takes on great significance when we realize that
   as the second Adam He took the place of the first. What we lost in the
   first, we, who believe, have restored to us in the second. (Romans
   5:12-21 and 1 Corinthians 15:20-22, 45-49.)

   Questions.

   1. Where do we learn the earlier history of John the Baptist?

   2. Define "the Kingdom of heaven."

   3. Define "scribes," "Pharisees," "Sadducees."

   4. Give the history of the Jewish "Talmud."

   5. What illustration of the law of double reference is found in this
   lesson?

   6. What meaning is attached to Jesus' baptism?

   7. What is the meaning of "personality"?

   8. What was Satan's one object in the temptation of Christ?

   9. What gives the temptation its great significance for us?

BEGINNING HIS MINISTRY

  Chapters 4:12-5:12

   1. The Starting Point. 4:12-17.

   For antecedent and parallel events, read John 1:15-51; Luke 3:1-20;
   4:14-32, which explain why John the Baptist was imprisoned, and why
   Jesus left Nazareth. Identify Capernaum on the map, and read up its
   history in a Bible dictionary since it becomes important as the center
   of our Lord's ministry in Galilee. "Zabulon and Nephtalim" or Zebulun
   and Naphtali, we recognize as names of tribes of Israel and locations
   in Canaan, called after them. Locate them on the map, and compare
   Isaiah 9:1, 2, R. V., which is to have a completer fulfillment at the
   second coming of Christ. The "Kingdom of heaven" He "began to preach"
   (17) was that which He came to set up in Israel had the nation received
   Him. Not a spiritual Kingdom only, but a manifested Kingdom like that
   of David, wherein righteousness should reign.

   2. The First Followers, vv. 18-22.

   He had met these men before (John 1), and called them to be His
   disciples. Having believed on Him, they are now called into His
   service.

   3. The First Works, vv. 23-25.

   The teaching was in the synagogues, and the preaching in the open air
   where the crowds gathered. Note the theme of His preaching, not the
   gospel of grace which now saves the sinner, but the "gospel of the
   Kingdom" the good news that the earthly Kingdom promised to Israel was
   ready to be set up if they would have it. By and by when His rejection
   by Israel is confirmed, this gospel ceases to be preached, and the
   gospel of grace takes it place. The gospel of grace is preached in the
   present dispensation of the church, but when the Church, the body of
   Christ, is complete, and caught up to meet Him in the air (1 Thess.
   4:13-18), then the gospel of the Kingdom will be again preached because
   the Kingdom will be drawing near a second time. The miracles of healing
   are in connection with the gospel of the Kingdom. That is not to say
   that there are no such miracles at present, but only that they are
   peculiar to the setting up the earthly Kingdom, and doubtless will be
   seen again in a marked manner as the day approaches. The Satanic
   counterfeits of these miracles now in many places would indicate that
   the time is at hand.

   4. The First Discourse. 5:1.

   Beginning here and extending to the close of chapter 7 we have what is
   called the "Sermon on the Mount" (5:1); but we are not to suppose that
   these words were all spoken at one time, or in their present
   connection. A comparison with the other Gospels suggests differently.
   For the purpose of the Holy Spirit in Matthew's Gospel however, it was
   desirable to group them as though they formed a single discourse.
   Addressing the Jew, he is showing that Jesus is the King who has come
   to set up His Kingdom, and in these words, chapters 5-7 sets forth at
   one glance the laws or code of that Kingdom. We must be clear about
   this. The "Sermon on the Mount" does not set forth the terms of
   salvation for sinners. Neither is it the experience which the Church
   will perfectly attain in this age, but is primarily Jewish and pertains
   to conditions on the earth when the manifested Kingdom of the Messiah
   is in vogue. It would be wrong to press this too far, and say that the
   "Sermon on the Mount" has no application whatever to the Christian
   Church or the times in which we live, for God is the same through all
   dispensations, and the underlying principles of His government never
   change. But just how to apply it must be determined in detail, and by
   the never failing light of the Holy Spirit who has been given to lead
   the Christian into all the truth (John 16:13).

   The first twelve verses, or the "Beatitudes" constitute an exordium to
   the discourse, in which is set forth the characteristics of the heirs
   of the Kingdom. There are nine beatitudes, and dispensationally viewed,
   show us Israel, or rather the faithful remnant of Israel, in the
   tribulation period awaiting the Kingdom. They will be poor in spirit,
   and shall get the Kingdom. They will mourn and shall be comforted. They
   will be meek and shall inherit the earth. They will hunger and thirst
   after righteousness, and shall be filled.

   But in an accommodated sense the beatitudes apply to believers in the
   present age. There is a heavenly side and an earthly side to the
   Kingdom, and it is only those who are "poor in spirit," humbling
   themselves on account of sin and believing on the Lord Jesus Christ,
   who, through the new birth, receive the Kingdom. They who now mourn for
   their sins are comforted in forgiveness and cleansing through the
   blood. They who now hunger and thirst after righteousness are filled.
   As Weston says, we have here a picture of a redeemed and sanctified
   man, an ideal man whom the Saviour is to make actual by saving him from
   his sin.

   For private study or class-room work, it would be desirable to include
   the whole of the Sermon on the Mount in one lesson, but for the purpose
   of this commentary, we pause here.

   Questions.

   1. Divide this lesson into four parts.

   2. Did you read the scripture references for the antecedent or parallel
   events?

   3. Have you looked up Capernaum?

   4. Why does Matthew so often quote the Old Testament?

   5. What is meant by the "Kingdom of heaven" in this case?

   6. What is the distinction between "the gospel of the Kingdom" or
   "gospel of grace"?

   7. What is set forth in the "Sermon on the Mount"?

   8. What is set forth in the beatitudes?

   9. What is their historical sense?

   10. How do they apply to us in an accommodated sense?

THE CODE OF THE KINGDOM

  Chapters 5:13-7

   The King has announced His kingdom at hand, and now declares the laws
   or code of that Kingdom. These which we began to speak of in the last
   lesson, have a two-fold application, ultimately to the Kingdom when it
   shall be set up, and approximately and in an accommodated sense to the
   Christian at present. Except at the first of these is kept in mind,
   confusion and uncertainty must attend the interpretation.

   1. We have two figurative descriptions of disciples, (5:13-16), "Salt"
   and "Light." Salt is a preservative, and true Christian disciples
   counteract worldly corruption. They are the light of the world whose
   conduct is to reflect the Saviour. These two descriptions are a text
   for what follows, which shows how the disciple is to preserve the world
   and shine in it.

   2. We have a statement of Christ's relation to the law, (17-20). His
   mission was not to set aside the Old Testament, but to fill it out, in
   that He obeyed the law perfectly, and fulfilled in Himself all the
   prophets had spoken of the Coming One. He also completely revealed the
   meaning of the Old Testament, which involves the warning of verse 19,
   made necessary by what He says in verse 20.

   3. We have a comparison between righteousness outward and inward
   (21-48). The righteousness of the scribes and Pharisees was outward and
   ceremonial, that of the Kingdom of God on earth must go deeper. The
   spirit of murder is anger (21-22, compared with 1 John 3:15). "Raca" (a
   word of contempt) uttered against a brother will involve a condemnation
   by the Sanhedrin, and "thou fool" shall subject the guilty one to "hell
   fire" when the Kingdom is on earth. In the meantime these penalties
   show us God's estimate of sin now and always, and intensify our
   thanksgiving for the salvation we have in Christ.

   As anger is the spirit of murder, so a lustful look is adultery
   (27-30). It were better to be blind than be guilty of it. The Greek
   word for hell is "Gehenna," the place in the valley of Hinnom where
   human sacrifices were formerly offered and which is used in Scripture
   as identical with "the lake of fire." Divorce is linked with adultery,
   and becomes adultery under the circumstances indicated (31, 32). The
   command against swearing (33-37) does not forbid legal oaths, but
   profanity, which includes expletives common in everyday speech.
   Retaliation (38-42) is personal, not judicial nor governmental. If the
   cause were that of another we have no right to do some of the things
   here commanded, or permit others to do them, but they are clearly
   within one's own rights. This is how men will act in the Kingdom, and
   how they ought to act now. And the absence of such a spirit shows how
   far we are from God, and what it is to be lost. What would become of
   us, without a Saviour! This leads to the law of love (43-47) which is
   as far from human hearts in their natural state as the foregoing. Our
   example is God (48), but who has attained to it? And if not, how can we
   see His face, except as He has in grace made provision for us in His
   Son?

   4. Following these laws on our relation to others, we have those
   touching the religious life, i. e., our relations to God -- almsgiving
   (6:1-4), worship (5-15), fasting (16-18), all of which must be done as
   in the presence of the Father. The "Lord's Prayer" will be dealt with
   in Luke.

   5. Next are laws relating more particularly to one's self -- trust
   (19-34), self-judgment (7:1-6), prayer (7-12), false teachers (13-20),
   future reward (21-23). Under the head of "trust," note (22-24), that
   the eye cannot look to earth and to heaven at the same time; and (34),
   that lack of trust is always pessimistic of the future. Under
   self-judgment, we are not denied privilege, nor liberated from the
   duty, of passing upon the conduct of others and the evil that is in the
   world, which would be contradictory of Matthew 18:15-18, 1 Corinthians
   5:12, 13 and other places; but to defer judgment as to motives, the
   sources from which such conduct or evil springs. (Rom. 14.) To abuse
   this spirit of restraint, however, and permit evil to remain unjudged,
   would be to "cast that which is holy unto the dogs."

   The reason for the "Golden Rule" (7:12) has been suggested thus: (1) We
   are to be careful about judging others; (2) we should seek divine
   wisdom in doing so; (3) which obtained, would lead us to act in love
   towards all. How many foolishly say that they live by the "Golden
   Rule"! But the Bible and experience prove that no one has ever done so
   except Him who uttered it. And yet it is that by which the man out of
   Christ elects to be judged! What madness! Some tell us that Christ
   borrowed this word from the sacred books of the east, but this also is
   folly, for what is found there is merely a negative teaching, while
   this is positive. What you would not have others do to you, do not to
   them, is different from doing unto others what you would have them do
   unto you.

   Under "false teachers," note that "fruits" (20) does not necessarily
   mean open immorality, but the counterfeit of the truth of God. False
   prophets and teachers are sometimes very attractive in their lives, but
   their words, rightly understood, are inconsonant with Holy Writ.

   The conclusion of this discourse shows our Lord's mind to be resting on
   the end of the age, and the incoming of the Kingdom. Our study of the
   Old Testament taught us to interpret the phrase, "in that day" (22), in
   that way.

   Questions.

   1. What is meant by the "code of the Kingdom"?

   2. What two figures of speech describe the relation of disciples to the
   world?

   3. In what sense did Christ fulfill the law and the prophets?

   4. What does "Gehenna" refer to, and how is it used in Scripture?

   5. What kind of retaliation does out Lord refer to?

   6. What is meant by "Judge not"?

   7. Does any one really live by the "Golden Rule"?

   8. What is meant by the "fruits" of false prophets?

CREDENTIALS OF THE KING

  Chapters 8-9

   We have seen that the "Sermon on the Mount" was probably separate
   discourses grouped by the evangelist under the guidance of the Holy
   Spirit, for a particular purpose. That purpose was the presentation of
   Jesus to the Jews as the Messiah, the King promised them in the Old
   Testament. In like manner, the miracles now following were probably
   wrought at different times but grouped by the evangelist for the same
   purpose. Jesus had come proclaiming the Kingdom to be at hand ; He had
   laid down the laws of the Kingdom, and now in these mighty works we
   have the credentials of the King.

   There are ten in all, (nine being miracles of healing), to say nothing
   of the many unclassified ones (8:16, 17; 9:35).

   The Dispensational View.

   Surely God only could do these things, and He through whom they were
   accomplished can be none other than the One He claimed to be. (Isa.
   35:5, 6.) Their practical teachings have been made familiar in
   Sunday-school lessons, so that here attention may be given to their
   dispensational aspects. Gaebelein teaches that the cleansing of the
   leper stands for Jehovah in the person of Jesus among His people
   Israel; the healing of the centurion's servant, absent and healed by a
   word, represents this Gentile dispensation still running. When its
   course is completed. He will enter the house again in restored
   relations to Israel, as symbolized in raising the sick daughter of
   Zion, the mother of Peter's wife. Now comes the millennial blessings to
   all the earth -- they brought Him those suffering from many diseases
   and He healed them all.

   For the leprosy of Israel compare Isaiah 1:5, 6. Only God can heal that
   disease, and when Jesus spake the word, and sent the healed man to the
   priest, why did not the latter recognize Him? He, the priest, thus
   becomes the type of the unbelieving nation who ultimately rejected Him.

   Grace now comes to the Gentiles typified by the centurion who manifests
   simple faith, drawing forth from our Lord the words prophetic of this
   dispensation, "Many shall come from the east and from the west, and
   shall sit down with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob."

   The sick woman is typical of Israel whom the Lord has promised to heal
   at His second coming, and who will then become his minister (8-15).
   With the verses immediately following, compare Isaiah 53:4. The
   self-seeking scribe of verses 18-20 is a type of Israel filled with
   selfish expectations of earthly gain and glory, after the flesh and not
   after the Spirit.

   Coming to the latter part of the chapter, we are reminded by the
   casting out of the demons, that Satan, the prince of the demons, will
   be cast into the bottomless pit when Christ comes a second time to
   deliver Israel (Rev. 20). From the dispensational point of view, the
   deliverance of these men foreshadows that of the faithful Jews in the
   tribulation, while the destruction of the swine indwelt by the demons,
   foreshadows the remainder of the nation rushing into the judgment
   awaiting them.

   The healing of the paralytic (9:1-8) shows from another point of view
   what Christ will do for Israel when He comes again. He will pardon
   their iniquity (Isa. 43:25), and heal them of their sin in soul and
   body (Mal. 4:2).

   The important feature in the call of Matthew (9-17) is the question of
   John's disciples and its answer. The explanation is that Christ is the
   bridegroom, and while He was with His disciples there could be no
   mourning; but by and by, He would be rejected, and then it would be
   different. Here follows a revelation of a new order of things. The old
   garment is Judaism with its legal righteousness, which cannot be
   patched up; i. e., law and grace cannot go together in the same system
   of faith. The new wine is Christianity, while the old bottles are the
   Mosaic institutions, a figure which teaches the same truth.

   The miracles of verses 18-26 are typical. Christ is coming to bring
   life to Israel, the daughter of Zion; but while He is coming, the
   Gentiles, in parenthesis as it were, touch Him by faith, and salvation
   comes to them in that moment.

   These hints are sufficient for our present purpose if they whet the
   appetite to turn to larger works and pursue the subjects further.

   New and Important Words.

   There are two or three words here which we meet for the first time.
   "Devils" is one, which in the Revised Version is rendered "demons."
   There is but one devil, Satan, but there are many demons. We know
   nothing of their origin save that they are not to be confounded with
   evil angels, as for instance in 2 Peter 2:4. Any Bible dictionary will
   furnish information concerning them.

   "Lord" (Greek, Kurios), as applied to Christ, is met for the first
   time. It means "master" and may be used of merely human relationships,
   but in the New Testament is chiefly employed as the divine title of
   Jesus Christ.

   "Son of Man" our Lord uses of Himself about eighty times. "Son of
   David" is His Jewish name, "Son of God" His divine name, and "Son of
   Man" his racial name. This latter conveys the thought that His mission
   transcends" in scope and result all merely Jewish limitations."

   Questions.

   1. What is signified by the title of this lesson?

   2. How many miracles are in this group and of what nature chiefly?

   3. Name the miracles in their order.

   4. Give a general idea of their dispensational intent.

   5. Explain Christ's references to the old garments and old wine
   bottles.

   6. Distinguish between the devil and demons.

   7. How is the word "Lord" commonly used of Christ?

   8. What is the significance of the title, "Son of Man"?

EXPANSION AND OPPOSITION

  Chapters 10-12

   The King has come, the code of His Kingdom is set forth, His
   credentials presented, and He now expands the testimony concerning
   Himself, with the result of increasing opposition. This expansion is
   connected with the commission of the twelve disciples (Chap. 10), and
   the opposition is revealed in various ways in the chapters following.

   1. The Disciples Commissioned, 10.

   Here we find "apostles" for the first time (v. 2), which means "those
   sent forth," an indispensable qualification for whose office was that
   of an eye-witness of the resurrection of Christ (Acts 1:22; 1 Cor.
   9:1). The apostles were endued with miraculous powers as credentials of
   their ministry, and their work at this time was to announce to Israel
   only, that the Kingdom was at hand (vv. 6, 7). The Kingdom is the one
   promised to Israel on this earth, and through Israel to the other
   nations. This explains things in the chapter, which if rightly
   understood, will keep us from reading into it that which does not
   belong there.

   For example, the power granted in verses 1 and 8 was in connection with
   this preaching of the Kingdom, and withdrawn when the Kingdom was
   finally rejected by Israel; although it will be renewed when the
   faithful remnant of the Jews again go forth during the tribulation to
   preach the same Kingdom. In the meantime, the preaching of the gospel
   of grace, especially committed to Paul, who was not of the twelve, is
   accompanied by gifts of another kind (Eph. 4:10-12). Look at verses 11
   to 15, where the "worthy" mean those looking for the Messiah promised
   by the Old Testament prophets. The gospel of grace is not offered to
   the "worthy," but to "whomsoever" will accept it. Or, take verses
   16-23, which speak of the way the apostles' message would be received,
   and compare the prophecy they contain with the persecution in the Acts
   of the Apostles; or look at these verses in the light of the second
   coming of Christ, to which verse 23 refers. We learned in Daniel and
   elsewhere, that time is not counted in the history of Israel when she
   is not in her own land. Hence the testimony here begun by the apostles
   and continued up to Israel's rejection of the Kingdom, is an unfinished
   testimony, and will be taken up again when the Church is translated
   during the tribulation.

   From this point to verse 33 we find encouragement. The disciples are
   identified with their Lord (vv. 24, 25); therefore, they need not fear
   (vv. 26-28), for He cares for them (vv. 29-33). Then follows a
   description of the age in which we live, a time of war rather than
   peace (34-36); of separation on the part of Christ's followers (vv. 37,
   38), and, yet with the prospect of a bright recompense (vv. 39-42).

   Modern research throws light on a chapter like this. Take verses and
   10. Upon a monument at Kefr-Hanar in Syria, during this same period,
   one who calls himself "a slave" of the Syrian goddess tells of his
   begging journeys in her services, and uses the word for his
   collecting-bag here translated "scrip." He boasts that "each journey
   brought in seventy bags." The contrast with the followers of Christ is
   marked, who were neither to earn nor beg as they went forth with speed
   to herald His coming. -- Habershon.

   2. Anxiety of John the Baptist, 11.

   We are not surprised that as the testimony of Christ thus expanded (v.
   1), John the Baptist in his prison should wonder. "Why, if this be the
   Christ, does He not take the Kingdom, or why does He not deliver me?
   Have I been mistaken in my witness to Him?" John is told to reflect
   upon the evidence and to wait (vv. 2-6).

   How our Lord defends John, lest this act should reflect upon him (vv.
   7-15)! Verse 11 has reference to John's relation to the Kingdom. The
   least in the Kingdom of heaven when it shall be set up upon earth,
   shall be greater than John could be before that time. The words do not
   speak of John in the moral sense, in which he was as great as any man
   born of woman, but in this dispensational sense. Verse twelve is
   capable of two interpretations, an external and an internal one. In the
   first, the enemies of Jesus and John are the "violent" who are
   rejecting the Kingdom by force; in the second, the "violent" are those
   who in face of the opposition are pressing into the Kingdom.

   A description of that generation follows as a foolish one (vv. 16-19),
   but there were some who believed and are referred to in the words
   "wisdom is justified of her children."

   As the judge of that generation our Lord now speaks (vv. 20-27). "Woe,"
   is heard for the first time. In the coming day there will be different
   degrees of punishment (vv. 2.2, 24), responsibility being gauged by
   privilege. From the "wise and prudent" in their own eyes, i. e., the
   self-righteous Pharisees, these things were hidden, but were revealed
   unto "babes," the poor in spirit conscious of their need (v. 25). Our
   Lord now turns toward these in verses 28-30, in which he offers no
   longer the Kingdom, but rest and service to them that come to Him.
   Practically He has been rejected by the nation, and is approaching the
   turning point in His ministry, when the proclamation of the Kingdom
   shall cease.

   3. Opposition Expressed, 12.

   The enmity is coming to a head. In 1-8, the Lord of the Sabbath is
   unjustly accused of Sabbath-breaking, and answers His accusers by facts
   of Holy Writ. David, as the rejected king in his time, ate the
   shew-bread, and "Great David's greater Son" in His rejection is
   correspondingly guiltless. Next comes the temptation of 9-14, with the
   result that the opposition now becomes organized (v. 14), and the Lord
   withdraws Himself for His hour is not yet come. As He is departing, the
   incident of 22-30 takes place, when He is again charged as the
   representative of Satan (v. 24, compared with 9:34). The blasphemy
   against the Holy Ghost consists in attributing His work to Satan (vv.
   31, 32). "A word against the Son of Man" might be forgiven, for the
   Holy Spirit still remained to convict one of that sin by testifying to
   Christ. But when the testimony of the Holy Spirit to Christ was
   rejected as in this case, there was no hope left.

   The opposition increases by the demand for a sign (vv. 38-42). Had He
   not given sufficient signs? Jonah is a type of His own death and
   resurrection and He will give him as a sign. The Queen of Sheba is
   another sign. But Israel is like a man out of whom a demon had gone of
   his own accord, and comes back to find the place unoccupied and brings
   seven other worse spirits to fill the former abode. The nation, in
   other words, had been cured of idolatry by the Babylonian captivity,
   but now it was boasting of forms and ceremonies, traditions and
   self-righteousness. It was empty so far as the fear of Jehovah was
   concerned, and by and by the evil spirit would return, and the end of
   Israel, i. e., the period of the tribulation, would be worse than the
   first.

   The Lord is rejected even by His family, as we judge by comparing the
   closing verses of this chapter with the reason in Mark 3:21. He
   declines to see them, and intimates the formation of a new family of
   faith.

   Questions.

   1. What is an essential qualification for an apostle?

   2. What is the limitation of the apostles' commission at this time?

   3. How does that limitation affect the teaching of chapter 10?

   4. How may "violent" be interpreted in chapter 11?

   5. On what principle will future retribution be rendered?

   6. What is the blasphemy against the Holy Ghost?

   7. How would you explain verses 43-45?

   8. How would you explain Jesus' reference to His mother and His
   brethren?

   THE TURNING POINT

   Chapter 13

   From the dispensational point of view, there is no chapter of the New
   Testament more needful to be understood than this. It contains seven
   parables, which now that the practical rejection of the Messiah by
   Israel has taken place, set forth the result of the gospel in the world
   down to the end of this age, when He shall come again. It is symbolic
   that our Lord now goes into a ship on the sea, the latter a type of the
   Gentile nations as compared with Israel; and also that He talks about
   sowing the seed in a field which is the world, as distinguished from
   laboring in a vineyard which is Israel (Isa. 5:1-7).

   The parables are divided into two groups, the first four spoken before
   the multitude, and the last three in the presence of the disciples
   only. The first again may be divided in two -- the sower, and the tares
   and wheat -- referring more especially to the earlier history of
   Christendom; and the mustard seed and leaven describing its further
   progress and development.

   1. The First Two of the First Group -- The Sower and the Tares and the
   Wheat.

   The Lord explains them, but prior thereto answers the question of the
   disciples (v. 10), in which He speaks of the "mysteries of the Kingdom
   of heaven. A "mystery" in Scripture is a previously hidden truth, now
   divinely revealed, but in which the supernatural element remains
   despite the revelation (Scofield). The "Kingdom of heaven," or, the
   "Kingdom of the heavens" as used here means that Kingdom which is to be
   set up on the earth, the truth concerning which is "left in the hands
   of men" while the King is absent, in other words, it stands for
   Christendom. It is given to true disciples to know the mystery of
   Christendom, but to others it is not given (vv. 11-17).

   The parable of the sower needs no comment other than emphasis on the
   fact that all the seed sown does not bear fruit. The devil in the first
   case, the flesh in the second, and the world in the third, prevent it.
   In other words, all men will not be converted to Christ before the end
   of this age. This is brought out with more force in the second parable
   (vv. 24-30 and 36-43). The good seed here is not the gospel of the
   first parable, but that which the gospel produces, "the children of the
   Kingdom." These are sown among men, and Satan sows his seed with them.
   The children of Satan look as much like the children of God as tares
   look like wheat. Only the angels can separate them. Scofield says:
   "Mere unbelievers are never called the children of the devil, only
   religious unbelievers are called so," i. e., those who profess the name
   of Christ, and do not hold the truth of Christ (Matt. 13:38; 23:15;
   John 8:38-44, and other places).

   2. The Second Two of the First Group -- The Mustard Seed and the
   Leaven.

   The mustard seed shows the rapid but abnormal development of
   Christendom to a great place in the earth. The fowls of the air mean
   unbelievers of various classes, who, for selfish reasons embrace
   Christianity and find shelter in its branches (Compare Dan. 4:20, 22
   and Rev. 18:2). "Leaven" represents "a principle of corruption working
   subtly" and is used in Scripture invariably in a bad sense (Gen. 19:3;
   Matt. 16:11, 12; Mark 8:15; 1 Cor. 5:6-8, etc.). The teaching of the
   parable is that the gospel would be mingled with false doctrine, the
   latter increasing to the end of the age. (Compare here 1 Tim. 4:1-3; 2
   Tim. 2:17, 18; 4:3, 4; 2 Pet. 2:1-3.)

   3. The Third Group -- The Hid Treasure, The Pearl, The Dragnet.

   The multitude is dismissed, the Lord and His disciples have entered the
   house, and He is explaining the parable of the tares. After this He
   says, "the Kingdom of heaven is like unto a treasure hid in a field"
   (v. 44). The "field" was previously defined as the world. The hidden
   "treasure" is Israel (Exod. 19:5; Ps. 135:4). Christ is the "man who
   hath found" it. It is now hidden. Who knows where the "lost tribes"
   are? And even the Jew as we know him is in the world, and is in a sense
   lost there (Rom. 11:25). Christ has sold all that He had to buy the
   field. He gave His life for the world (1 Pet. 1:18), but He died in a
   special sense for that nation (John 11:51). What joy He will have when
   He takes His treasure to Himself (Deut. 30:9; Isa. 49:13; 62:4-7).

   Christ is the "merchantman" of the next parable (v. 45), and "the pearl
   of great price" is the Church, for which He gave Himself (Eph.
   5:25-33). "Ye are not your own but are bought with a price." There is
   beauty in the thought of the Church as a pearl whether we consider its
   origin, form, appearance or value. It comes into existence not
   mechanically but vitally, just as Christ forms His church by
   communicating His life to it. The pearl comes from the sea as the
   Church comes from the nations symbolized by the sea. A grain of sand
   imbeds itself between the animal and the shell and creates a wound in
   the side of the animal in so doing. In the healing of the wound the
   animal deposits a thin crust of a bright aspect around this grain of
   sand, repeating the process till the pearl is formed, blending the
   colors of the rainbow. Eve was taken out of the side of Adam, and the
   side of Christ was opened that out of it He might build His Church, to
   which He addeth daily such as are being saved (Acts 2:41-47; Eph. 2:21;
   Col. 2:19, etc.).

   The Dragnet

   Is not the gospel net, but a picture of that which takes place in
   Christendom at the end of this age, i. e., after the Church is taken up
   into the air (1 Thess. 4:13-18). -- Gaebelein.

   The foregoing interpretation is unusual to those coming freshly upon
   it, but to others who have perused the lessons in the Old Testament
   prophets, it will appear perfectly consistent, and furnish a
   corroboration of the unity and divinity of the Bible.

   Questions.

   1. Name the parables in their order.

   2. What is the scope of their interpretation?

   3. What is meant by "the Kingdom of the heavens" as employed in this
   chapter?

   4. What is a "mystery" in a scriptural sense?

   5. What inference is clear from these parables?

   6. Who are "the children of the devil," scripturally interpreted?

   7. How is "leaven" invariably used in Scripture?

   8. Give the interpretations of the "hid treasure" and the "pearl."

   9. What four features give beauty to the pearl as a type of the Church?

THE FIRST MINISTRY TO THE GENTILES

  Chapters 14-15

   Jesus has come. He has proclaimed the nearness of the Kingdom, revealed
   its code or principles, presented His credentials, and sent forth His
   heralds. But He has been antagonized and practically rejected by the
   nation. Then comes the turning point, when He ceases to proclaim the
   nearness of the Kingdom, and discourses of it in mystery. In seven
   parables he outlines how it will fare among the nations in the absence
   of the King.

   One might suppose that the teachings and the doings of our Lord to
   follow, would assume a different complexion from any thing before. And,
   as a matter of fact such is the case in the judgment of those keen in
   dispensational discernment. But for the purpose before us it is
   undesirable to strain after such interpretations, and except where they
   are very clear, we shall content ourselves with the more practical line
   of comment as hitherto.

   At the close of the thirteenth chapter (vv. 53-58), "they were offended
   in Him"; less and less is the nation disposed to receive Him as its
   Messiah, and because of the suspicions of Herod (c. 14: I, 2), He deems
   it prudent to withdraw Himself once more (vv. 13, 14). The events that
   follow in the chapter are the feeding of the five thousand, the walking
   upon the sea, the quieting of the storm, and the healing of the sick.
   All these are additional evidences of the grace and power of Jesus,
   leading to the conviction "Of a truth thou art the Son of God" (v. 33).

   At chapter 15 the Pharisees once more seek occasion against Him (vv. 1,
   2), but His disciples have broken no divine law, but only disregarded
   one of their traditions. The charge is not that their hands are soiled,
   but only ceremonially unclean (Mark 7:1-4). Christ takes the indirect
   method of reply by attacking the traditions (vv. 3-6). The fifth
   commandment is plain enough, but the Pharisees had supplemented it with
   interpretations, making it so burdensome, that devices had to be
   invented to neutralize them. But in neutralizing the traditions they
   had done away with the original law. A man to honor his parents must do
   so and so for them, they said, i. e., more than the commandment
   contemplated. But if "so and so" became irksome in any case, it was
   only necessary to affirm that the money it involved had been pledged as
   a gift to the altar, and then it need not be given to the parents. Thus
   the latter failed to be honored at all.

   The boldness of Christ is marked in this instance (vv. 10, 11), giving
   further offence to His enemies (v. 12), His words calling for an
   explanation even to His disciples (vv. 15-20).

   There is a dispensational color in the transaction following (vv.
   21-28), which is the first recorded ministry of Christ to a Gentile and
   in a Gentile country. It comes close upon the aversion to Him of His
   own nation, and points prophetically to that "turning to the Gentiles"
   which marks the present age. The significance here is found in the
   woman's first appeal to Him as the "Son of David" (v. 22), to which as
   a Gentile, she has no right (v. 24); but when, dropping that, she
   throws herself upon His "uncovenanted mercies" so to speak addressing
   Him only as "Lord," the plea is at once granted.

   Questions.

   1. What may be assumed as to the teachings of this Gospel following the
   turning point of chapter 13?

   2. Name the leading facts of chapter 14.

   3. To what conviction do they lead?

   4. Explain in your own words chapter 15:1-6.

   5. What gives a dispensational color to the story of the Syro-phenician
   woman?

   6. What is its prophetic application?

THE FIRST ANNOUNCEMENT OF HIS DEATH

  Chapters 16-17:23

   In the first of these chapters there are several revelations, from one
   of which we take the title of the lesson.

   We need not dwell on the first section (vv. 1-4), in which Jesus once
   more rebukes the Pharisees and Sadducees. Nor need we dwell on the
   second section which is self-explanatory (vv. 5-12). But at the third
   (vv. 13-16) we reach something of much importance Of course, Jesus knew
   what men said of Him, but the question of verse thirteen was to lead up
   to the confession of Peter which in the outcome became His own formal
   claim to the Messiahship, the first He had made. The answer of verse 14
   shows that the people knew Him not, as it is to-day, at the drawing to
   a close of the Christian age (compare 2 Peter 2 and 3). In the face of
   this, Peter's confession is wonderful, including "all upon which
   personal faith in the Son of God rests."

   But it is wonderful also in that it is a supernatural revelation to
   Peter (vv. 17-20). The time is now ripe for Jesus to reveal that great
   fact, the mystery of His Church, which had been hid from former ages.
   There is in the Greek of verse 18, a play upon the words "Peter" and
   "rock." The first is "petros, which means "a little rock," a piece of a
   large rock. The second is petra, which means "rock." Christ does not
   mean to build His Church on Peter, but on the confession of Himself as
   the Christ, the Son of the Living God. Christ is the rock. Peter is
   careful to tell us this (1 Pet. 2:4-9). The word for Church,
   "ecclesia," is found here for the first time, and means an assembly of
   called-out ones. Israel was called out of Egypt and assembled in the
   wilderness (Acts 7:38), and the town-meeting at Ephesus was an
   assembly, an "ecclesia" (Acts 19:39). Observe the future tense, "I will
   build my Church." There was no Church in existence before, nor did it
   subsequently come into existence till the day of Pentecost. Nor did
   Peter receive "the keys" of the Church, but of the "Kingdom of the
   heavens" (v. 19), which is "the sphere of Christian profession," or
   Christendom. A key is a badge of authority, and whatever it meant for
   Peter, it meant for all the apostles as is seen by comparing the whole
   verse with 18:18, where the thought is repeated and applied to all.
   Peter never assumed any special authority (see Acts 15:7-19; Gal.
   2:11-15; 1 Pet. 1:1; 5:1). Just what is meant by the authority here
   conferred is not clear. Some think it was that exercised by Peter in
   opening the door of the gospel to the Jews on the day of Pentecost, and
   to the Gentiles in the house of Cornelius (Acts 2:38-42; 10:34-46).
   Others think it is a general authority constituted in the great
   commission (28:12). At all events, it was not what Rome thinks it is,
   for the eternal destiny of souls is held in the power of Christ alone
   (Rev. 1:18).

   The first revelation of His death following is hardly second in
   importance to the preceding revelation of His Church, except that it
   has been anticipated; but the outcome of it in the case of the
   disciples is of the deepest instruction (vv. 21-27). The time had not
   come earlier for this revelation, and now that it had come how poorly
   prepared were the disciples to receive it (vv. 22, 23)! Peter's
   "rebuke" is explained by his expectation that the earthly Kingdom would
   be immediately set up, and his disappointment in losing the worldly
   advantages which would be his at that time. His temptation of Christ
   was not different in essence from that of Satan in the wilderness, who
   would have Christ take the Kingdom other than by the Cross (v. 23).
   This was the occasion for a discourse on the denial of self (vv.
   24-27).

   The closing verse of the section above indicates that the expectation
   of the disciples will be realized at the second coming of Christ, and
   to strengthen their faith as to this the transfiguration follows
   (16:28; 17:8). It is to the transfiguration that verse 28 refers,
   inasmuch as three of them standing there saw Him "coming in His
   Kingdom" in miniature, in that event. For an inspired corroboration of
   this, read 2 Peter 1:16-18. To quote the Scofield Bible: "The scene
   contains in miniature all the elements of the future Kingdom in
   manifestation: (1) the Lord, not in humiliation, but glory; (2) Moses,
   glorified, representing the redeemed who have passed through death into
   the Kingdom; (3) Elijah glorified, representing the redeemed who have
   entered by translation; (4) the three disciples not glorified,
   representing Israel in the flesh in the future Kingdom; (5) the
   multitude at the foot of the mountain (v. 14), representing the nations
   who are to be brought into the Kingdom after it is established over
   Israel, For the third point, read 1 Corinthians 15:50-53 and 1
   Thessalonians 4:14-17; for the fourth Ezekiel 37, and for the fifth
   Isaiah 11:10-12 and many other places.

   It remains to speak of the disciples' question about Elijah (vv. 9-13),
   suggested by His appearance on the mountain, and which carries us back
   to Malachi 3:1 and 4:5, 6. Here are two distinct prophecies, the first
   fulfilled in John the Baptist who had come "in the spirit and power of
   Elijah" (Luke 1:17); and the second yet to be fulfilled before the Lord
   returns a second time. This will be doubtless after the Church is
   translated.

   Questions.

   1. How many divisions have been found in this lesson?

   2. To what was the confession of Peter equivalent so far as Christ was
   personally concerned?

   3. Give in your own words the play on the words "Peter" and "rock."

   4. Have you examined 1 Peter 2:4-9?

   5. What is the Greek word for "Church," and its meaning?

   6. When did the Church of Christ come into existence?

   7. Have you examined the texts touching on Peter's supposed authority?

   8. What are the views about the power of the keys?

   9. What explains Peter's "rebuke" of Christ?

   10. How is 16:28 explained?

   11. How does the transfiguration show us Christ "coming in His
   kingdom"?

   12. How would you explain Christ's words about Elijah?

THE SECOND ANNOUNCEMENT OF HIS DEATH

  Chapters 17:24-20:16

   The first announcement of His death and resurrection by our Lord in the
   last lesson, connected His suffering with the act of His own nation,
   while this predicts the part played in it by one of His own band (vv.
   22, 23). It furnishes a starting point for a new lesson as in the other
   case.

   The incident concluding chapter 17, is full of suggestive teaching. It
   is the temple tribute that is in mind, about sixty cents of our money,
   and Peter in saying "Yes," has already lost the significance of His
   confession of Christ. If He were "the Son of the living God," then was
   it not His glory that had appeared in the temple, and why should He pay
   tribute? But He surrenders His personal right, after He again makes it
   clear to His disciple. How His glory as Creator flashes forth in the
   miracle of the piece of money!

   "At the same time" the disciples ask the question beginning the next
   chapter. Did our Lord's words about "the keys of the Kingdom of the
   heavens" in the preceding chapter awaken this inquiry? (Compare Luke
   9:46.) How selfish and worldly was their ambition still! The Lord's
   answer (vv. 2-4), is what He gave to Nicodemus (John 3). It is a
   question whether in verse 5 the reference is to a "little child" in the
   literal or in the spiritual sense, but the words "believe in me" (v.
   6), turn the scale in favor of the latter. Verses 7 and 9 are hard to
   apply in. that connection, but they teach the necessity of removing all
   stumbling-blocks out of our way. Verse 10 brings us back to the little
   child in the literal sense. Some think the words mean that every such
   child has its guardian angel. Some that every believer has such an
   angel. While others take the word "angel" in the sense of "spirit"
   (Acts 12:15), and interpret the passage to mean that if such little
   children, "who belong to the kingdom die, their disembodied spirits
   behold the Father's face in heaven, -- in other words they are saved."

   In the section now reached (vv. 15-20), we meet for the second and last
   time in this Gospel the word "Church," which has special interest
   because her executive power in the earth is spoken of. It is plain
   until we come to verse 18, which is to be understood not as limited to
   the apostles and their "successors" so-called, but as including the
   whole of the local church in any place gathered unto the name of the
   Lord Jesus. He sanctions in heaven what she thus binds or loosens on
   earth. What a promise that in verses 19 and 20! What mighty things has
   it accomplished, and it still holds good!

   The law of forgiveness (vv. 21-35), is in answer to Peter's question,
   inspired by the preceding, probably. In that case, however, our Lord
   had been speaking about restoring a brother to the Church, while here
   it is a question of personal grievances, and the forgiveness must be
   unlimited (compare Luke 17:3, 4).

   At chapter 19 we find Jesus in Judea again, His last visit there prior
   to His crucifixion. Had we this Gospel alone to consider it would
   appear as the first visit of Jesus after His baptism, but as a matter
   of fact there were at least two visits intervening, judging by Johns
   record.

   Once more His enemies are at his heels, this time on the divorce
   question (vv. 3-12). The Pharisees were divided about this, the school
   of Hillel holding that a man might put away his wife for almost any
   cause, and that of Shammai, only for adultery. Our Lord goes back of
   Moses to the beginning (vv. 4-6). Moses never commanded writings of
   divorcement, but allowed or suffered it (vv. 7, 8) in cases where there
   was suspicion of adultery (Num. 5). The actual sin was punishable by
   death, the Lord's command in the matter is plain and authoritative (v.
   9). But the disciples think that under such circumstances it is better
   not to marry at all (v. 10) which leads Christ to say that some are
   unfitted for it by nature, some have been mutilated by wicked men,
   while some remain unmarried for the sake of the Kingdom (v. 12). All
   are not able wisely to remain unmarried, but where they are, it is not
   a man-enforced celibacy, but a divinely-bestowed gift. This seems to
   some to be the meaning of verse 11.

   The incident of the little children (vv. 13-15) shows that the
   disciples had not caught the significance of the teaching of the
   previous chapter. But blessed be God there is a place for children in
   the Kingdom. The parents in these cases must have been believers,
   setting an example to others to bring their offspring to Christ for His
   salvation and blessing.

   The next incident brings before us a typical religious man of the world
   (vv. 16-26) through which we are taught that salvation is of God, and
   not dependent on the deeds of man. The Lord rebukes him for calling Him
   "good" (v. 17), because the young man was thinking of Him as a man
   merely, and^ "There is none righteous, no not one." He then meets him
   on his own ground. If he would do something to earn eternal life, there
   is but one thing to do; but this he is shown never to have done. If he
   really loves his neighbor as himself he would share what he had with
   his neighbor. The sequel shows how self-deceived he was (v. 22). "The
   eye of the needle" (v. 24) was a proverb among the Jews. After the
   gates of a city were closed at night, caravans could not enter. There
   were narrow openings at the side large enough for the human traveler to
   pass through but not his beast of burden. This opening was called "the
   eye of a needle."

   Out of this event grows the conclusion of this lesson down to 20:16.
   The self-seeking disciple again comes into view (v. 27), and also the
   condescension of our Lord Who does not rebuke but graciously instructs
   him (vv. 28, 29). The "regeneration" here means the renewal of the
   earth when the Kingdom is finally set up (Rom. 3:18-25).

   "The Kingdom will be administered over Israel through the apostles
   according to the ancient theocratic judgeship (Judges 2:28)." But the
   promise holds something for all the faithful as well as the apostles
   (v. 29). The meaning of verse 30 is illuminated by the parable of the
   laborers in the next chapter which was uttered "to keep the disciples
   from a spirit of self-righteousness." God will give rewards in that day
   as may seem best to Him. They are not the legal outcome of our works
   even as saved sinners, but the expression of God's grace. We should be
   careful in the interpretation of parables not to seek a meaning or
   application of every detail, for in doing so we are as apt to teach
   error as truth.

   Questions.

   1. What distinction is made between the first and second announcements
   of Christ's death?

   2. Paraphrase the story of the miracle of the tribute money.

   3. How has the latter part of 18:10 been interpreted?

   4. To whom do we understand the power of 18:18 to be granted?

   5. Where is Jesus at the beginning of chapter 19, and thereafter?

   6. What is the Lord's teaching about divorce?

   7. What lesson may be learned from 19:13-15?

   8. What is the main lesson taught by the incident of the rich young
   ruler?

   9. Explain the proverb "the eye of the needle."

   10. What does "regeneration" mean, 19:28?

   11. What is the main teaching of the laborers in the vineyard?

   12. Of what are we to be careful in the interpretation of parables?

THE THIRD ANNOUNCEMENT OF HIS DEATH

  Chapters 20:17-22:14

   With this third announcement our Lord has indicated the three classes
   of his foes, the leaders of His nation in the first announcement, one
   of the twelve in the second, and now the Roman Gentiles (vv. 17-19).

   The ambitious request of James and John (vv. 20-28), is in keeping with
   the selfishness previously expressed by Peter. The immediate occasion
   for the request is found in our Lord's words which they had
   misunderstood (vv. 19-28). The gentleness of Jesus (v. 22) is as marked
   as in the other case. His "cup" stood for all the agony of the Cross,
   how could they drink it? Not the bodily agony merely, but that
   experienced in the withdrawal of His Father's face. They would indeed
   be partakers of His suffering in one sense (v. 23), not that from the
   side of God but from the side of man (Col. 1:24; Phil. 3:10 ; 1 Pet.
   2:21), but their place in the Kingdom, when it should be set up, must
   be determined by the Father. Of course, the subjection He here
   expresses towards the Father, is not that of His divine nature, which
   was co-equal with the Father, but His human nature. It is as the
   glorified man at the head of the Kingdom He now speaks (1 Cor. 15:27,
   28; Phil. 2:9-11). The indignation of the ten against the two was not
   because of the latter's presumption towards the Lord, but because of
   the advantage they were seeking over them. The ten, in other words,
   were as selfish as the two; hence the rebuke and instruction following,
   for all.

   The healing of the two blind men (vv. 29-34) recalls the instance of
   9:27-31, but it is not the same. Mark 10: 46 and Luke 18:35 mention but
   one man and the common explanation is that there were two miracles of
   the kind connected with this visit to Jericho, one as Christ entered
   and the other as He left the city. But some account for this seeming
   discrepancy in another way. For example, as son of David and heir to
   the throne, Christ was soon to be presented to Jerusalem, and ere this
   takes place He has the testimony of two witnesses that He is the Son of
   David, which was necessary according to the law. This they think, is
   the reason why two blind men are mentioned exclusively in Matthew's
   Gospel which is the Gospel of the Kingdom.

   The entry into Jerusalem (21:1-11), which took place on the first day
   of the last week of our Lord's earthly life, is His formal offer of
   Himself to the nation as their King. This was necessary to His formal
   rejection by the nation, and is established by His fulfillment of
   Zechariah 9:9. This allusion to Zechariah's words would mark Him as an
   imposter or else their true Messiah. The leaders of the nation regard
   Him in the former light; and even the multitude, though they at first
   acclaimed Him as "the Son of David" (v. 9), in their cooler judgment
   settled on the simpler title of 5:11, and afterwards took up the cry
   "Crucify Him!"

   This is the second time Jesus cleansed the temple (vv. 12-17), the
   first near the beginning of His ministry (John 2:13-16). It becomes a
   foreshadowing of His second coming to fulfill Malachi 3:3. the
   necessity for which appears in Daniel 9:27; Matthew 24:15, et seq.; 2
   Thessalonians 3:4, 8. How different the scene in v. 14, type of that
   which shall follow also in that day when He comes again to Israel! The
   language of the chief priests and scribes (v. 15) accentuates the
   rejection of Him manifested all along. The 8th Psalm which Jesus quotes
   is Messianic, and His use of it is a further asseveration of His claim
   to be that Promised One. Bethany, the home of Martha, Mary and Lazarus,
   was His abiding place during this week (v. 17).

   The barren fig-tree (vv. 18-22) stands for the nation of Israel. On
   seeing the leaves of profession, He had a right to expect fruit, but
   there was nothing on it for Him, though He hungered. Comparing Zech.
   4:7, a mountain is used in Scripture to represent a large or difficult
   undertaking, in which sense probably it is here used (v. 21). If Israel
   at this time was a mountain in the way of the gospel, it could be
   removed, as it was removed, by faith, and cast into the sea of the
   nations (Gaebelein).

   The climax is nearing. As the nation had rejected the Messiah, so now
   the Messiah rejects the nation in the parables following: The Two Sons
   (vv. 28-32); The Householder (vv. 33-46); The Marriage of the King's
   Son (22:1-14). The immediate occasion for them is in verses 23-27 --
   another attack of the leaders. They were incensed at His action in the
   Temple on the previous day and the words He then spake against them.
   Behold the divine wisdom with which He now deals with them, silencing
   them utterly!

   The first of these parables is interpreted by our Lord Himself. The
   second requires no extended comment. God is the householder, Israel the
   vineyard, the leaders of the nation the husbandmen, the servants the
   holy prophets, the son Christ Himself. The chief priests and the
   Pharisees are condemned out of their own mouths (v. 41). The next verse
   is a quotation from Psalm 118, which is Messianic. Christ as the
   "Stone" is revealed in a three-fold way. To Israel He was a
   stumbling-block and rock of offense, for He came to them not as a
   monarch but in the form of a servant (Isa. 8:14, 15; Rom. 9:32, 33; 1
   Cor. 1:23; 1 Pet. 2:8). To the Church He is the foundation-stone and
   head of the corner (1 Cor. 3:11; Eph. 2:20-22; 1 Pet. 2:4, 5). To the
   Gentile world-powers, He is the smiting stone of destruction (Dan. 2:3,
   4) -- Scofield. The Kingdom would not be given to that generation which
   had rejected Christ, but to the faithful remnant in the latter days.

   The third parable foreshadows more than the other two, as it brings in
   the Gentiles (vv. 8-10). Verse 3 applies to the offer of the Kingdom
   made to Israel up to the time of Christ's death and resurrection. Verse
   4 perhaps applies to the renewed offer down to the time of its further
   rejection in the martyrdom of Stephen (Acts 7). Read especially Acts
   3:19-21. Verse 7 applies to the destruction of Jerusalem by Titus A. D.
   70. Verses 8 to 10 apply to the preaching of the gospel to the Gentiles
   beginning with Peter at Acts 10. The man without the wedding garment
   (vv. 11-12) may mean the mere professor in Christendom. "Many are
   called," and make this outward profession, but "few are chosen," in the
   sense that they really accept and put on Christ as their righteousness.

   Questions.

   1. How did Christ distinguish His foes in connection with the
   announcement of His death and resurrection?

   2. What spirit was evinced by James and John?

   3. What dispensational meaning is attachable to the healing of the two
   blind men?

   4. To what was Christ's entry into Jerusalem equivalent?

   5. What does His cleansing of the Temple foreshadow?

   6. Of what is the barren fig-tree a type?

   7. How would you interpret 21:21?

   8. Name the three parables in which our Lord rejects the nation.

   9. Name the three ways in which Christ is revealed as the "Stone."

   10. Apply the parable of the marriage feast dispensationally.

   WOE AND FAREWELL

   Chapter 22:15-23

   Another effort to "entangle him in his talk," and a new enemy, the
   Herodians. They were the politicians of the time, a low class of Jews
   who, for selfish reasons, favored the Roman rule represented by Herod.
   With flattery He is approached (v. 16), but had He answered their
   question negatively (v. 17), the Herodians would have accused Him
   before the Roman judges, while affirmatively, the Pharisees could have
   done so before the Sanhedrin. No true Messiah, they would have said,
   would teach subjection to the Gentiles. But as before, He silences
   them, for had they rendered unto God the things that were God's, they
   would not now be obliged to render anything unto Caesar (vv. 18-22).
   The Sadducees were the rationalists who denied the future life and all
   connected with it; hence their question, although founded on Deut.
   25:5, et seq., was combined of ignorance and sarcasm. There will be a
   resurrection but it does not imply marriage (v. 30). The proof of
   resurrection He employs (v. 32), is a proof also of the inspiration of
   the words of the original Scriptures. In the quotation from Exodus
   3:14, the present tense of "to be" is used, and on that He bases His
   argument for the future life. The Pharisees fare no better with their
   inquiry than the other two (vv. 32-40), and then our Lord asks them a
   question which ends attempts of this kind on their part. He quotes
   Psalm 110 which at once proves Him the Messiah and the very God (vv.
   41-46).

   Now the declaration of the judgments on His enemies. The Scribes and
   Pharisees were the national leaders of the Jews, in which sense they
   sat in Moses' seat, and it became necessary to obey them. But to
   observe their instruction was one thing, and to follow their example
   another (v. 3). As to the first, compare Rom. 13:1-7, and 1 Peter
   2:13-17. "Phylacteries," meaning things to observe, get their name from
   Exodus 13:9-16, Deuteronomy 6:9 and the following verses. A phylactery
   is a strip of leather attached to a small box containing a parchment
   copy of Deuteronomy 6:4-8. This strip is used to fasten the box around
   the head so that it rests in the middle of the forehead. Another is
   wound around the left arm. This literal interpretation of the
   Scriptures was for show (5-7). And they not only loved show, but to be
   addressed by high-sounding names, which must not be true of disciples
   of Christ (vv. 8-12).

   The eight woes of the next chapter all pronounced against various forms
   of hypocrisy, and with which our Lord closed His public ministry,
   suggest the Beatitudes with which He opened that ministry. We cannot do
   more than touch upon a few of the distinctions He makes. The first,
   that of hindering (v. 13), comes home to preachers and teachers of
   Christianity who are not regenerated and taught of the Spirit in the
   Word. The second and third, verses 14 and 15, need no explanation. The
   fourth, verses 16-22, displays the ignorance of the mere ritualist. The
   fifth and sixth describe the formalist (vv. 23-26). The seventh is a
   figurative description of their religious character (v. 28), and the
   eighth no less so (vv. 29-31). They made a show of zeal in adorning the
   burial places of the prophets their fathers had slain, and yet they
   were exhibiting the same spirit. Did our Lord ever utter a severer word
   than verse 33? And in that connection note the personal pronoun of
   authority -- "Behold, I send unto you prophets." All He there predicts
   was soon fulfilled in the Acts.

   Now the pathetic farewell (vv. 37-39). Their house is left unto them
   desolate. It is Tuesday of that last week, and as He leaves the temple
   and the city it is not to return until Thursday, the day of the last
   passover and the betrayal. And yet His final word is one of hope.
   Israel would see Him again, i. e., at His second coming, and the
   faithful remnant would exclaim "Blessed is He that cometh in the name
   of the Lord."

   Questions.

   1. Who were the Herodians?

   2. What is the spiritual significance of the words, "Render unto
   Caesar," etc.?

   3. How does the quotation from Psalm no prove the deity of Christ?

   4. Explain the reference to the phylacteries.

   5. How many "woes" are there, and against what feature of iniquity are
   they directed?

   6. Quote our Lord's final word of hope.

THINGS TO COME

  Chapters 24-25

   The present lesson connects itself with the last without a break. The
   disciples were mystified by what our Lord said about the "house," i.
   e., the temple, being left "desolate" (23:38), which explains why they
   called His attention to its grandeur and strength (24:1). His further
   observation (v. 2) deepened their wonder, hence their improvement of
   the opportunity on the Mount of Olives for the three questions of verse
   three.

   The first was answered by the destruction of the temple under Titus, A.
   D. 70. But although Christ replies to this question as He does the
   other two, yet that reply is recorded only in Luke 21:20-24. The
   replies to the others follow.

   Verses 4-14 are capable of a two-fold application. In the first place,
   they give in outline panoramic form the features of the present age
   during the absence of the King, and then in a more particular way
   describe the end of the age; for, as the Scofield Bible says, "all that
   has characterized the age throughout all these centuries gathers into
   awful intensity at the end."

   What are these features? False Christs, wars, famines, pestilences,
   earthquakes, persecutions, apostasy, false teaching, abounding
   iniquity, and spiritual declension -- just what Christendom in these
   twenty centuries records as fulfilling the words. Compare Daniel
   9:24-27, and 2 Timothy 3.

   To be specific as to verse 14, it refers to the proclamation of the
   good news that the Kingdom promised to Israel, and which both John the
   Baptist and Christ preached at the beginning, is again "at hand." This
   will be proclaimed at the end of the age, not by the Church, as we
   understand it, which shall have been caught up to meet the Lord in the
   air (1 Thess. 4:13-18), but by the Jewish remnant, the believing
   Israelites on the earth at that day (Isa. 1:9; Rom. 11:5; Rev. 14:6,
   7).

   Verse 15 points to the crisis at the end. "The abomination of
   desolation" (Dan. 9:27), which is the image of "the man of sin" (2
   Thess. 2:3-8), and the "Beast" (Rev. 13:4-7) will then be set up in the
   temple of restored Jerusalem, and the hour of the Great Tribulation
   will have come. From this on (vv. 15-28), our Lord gives the details of
   this period. The believing Jews in Jerusalem at that time are warned to
   flee (vv. 16-20). A renewed warning is given as to false Christians
   (vv. 21-26). The sudden smiting of the Gentile world-powers is
   announced (vv. 27, 28 compared with Dan. 2:34). The glorious appearing
   of the Lord visible to the nations, together with the regathering of
   Israel as a nation are set before us next (vv. 29-31). The sign of the
   fig-tree is given (vv. 32, 33), and then "warnings applicable to this
   age over which these events are ever impending" (vv. 34-51); and yet,
   as stated above, especially applicable to the end period itself. The
   first verse of this last-named section (v. 34) requires special notice.
   The primary definition of the Greek word for "generation" is race,
   family, or stock, in which sense the word is evidently used by our
   Lord. The race of Jews Israel) "shall not pass till all these things be
   fulfilled" -- a promise to the truth of which the centuries bear
   witness.

   Chapter 25 continues the discourse. The phrase "the Kingdom of heaven"
   or "the Kingdom of the heavens" recalls the parables of chapter 13, and
   applies to the same thing, viz, the sphere of professing Christianity,
   i. e., Christendom during the absence of the King. At the first, that
   is, after our Lord's ascension, the attitude of the disciples was that
   of going "forth to meet the bridegroom" (v. 1). In other words they
   were "waiting for the coming of our Lord" (1 Cor. 1:7). But "the
   bridegroom tarried," and "they all slumbered and slept" (v. 5). The
   "midnight" is coming however, when the cry is made "Behold the
   bridegroom!" The wise virgins are the true believers, "the oil in their
   vessels" (v. 4) symbolizing the indwelling of the Holy Spirit (Romans
   8:9). The foolish virgins are the mere professors, as is evident from
   "I know you not" (v. 12). As this parable sets before us that testing
   of the Christian profession which the coming of the Lord will reveal,
   so the parable that follows sets before us the testing of service. The
   talents are the gifts God has bestowed on His servants to use for His
   glory (1 Co. 12). Exercise of any gift will increase it through the
   Holy Spirit; and faithful service, though it be in the use of any one
   gift, will bring approval. The difficulty in the parable is the
   faithless servant, who must not be regarded as a true believer, but a
   mere professor as in the preceding case. A true believer would never
   call Christ a hard master.

   The closing verses (vv. 31-46) do not contain a parable so far as the
   record goes, but for all we know a description of fact. It is a
   judgment scene, but not the last judgment (Rev. 20:11-15).

   The object of the judgment is the Gentile nations of the earth. The
   time is after the Church has been caught up to meet the Lord in the
   air, and when He has come for the gathering of the remnant of Israel at
   the end of this age. The place doubtless is Palestine. There is no
   resurrection here, no books opened, and nothing said about the dead,
   all of which is in contrast to the last judgment. Moreover, three
   classes are present here, sheep, goats, and "My brethren," the test
   being not the possession of eternal life, but the treatment accorded by
   the nations to these "brethren." The latter are the "Jewish remnant who
   will have preached the gospel of the Kingdom to all nations during the
   tribulation." Examine Zechariah 14:1-5 and Joel 3 for light upon this
   judgment scene.

   Questions.

   1. How many, and what, were the questions asked by the disciples on the
   Mount of Olives?

   2. What was the answer to the first question, and where is it recorded?

   3. What two-fold application may be given to 24:1-14?

   4. What features will mark this age increasing in intensity at the end?

   5. How would you interpret verse 14 particularly?

   6. What Old and New Testament passages are paralleled by verse 15?

   7. What does "generation" mean, verse 34?

   8. Who are meant by the wise and foolish virgins of chapter 25?

   9. What is the distinction between the "testings" of the two parables
   in this chapter?

   10. What is the difficulty in the second parable, and how would you
   explain it?

   11. How would you distinguish between the judgment at the close of this
   chapter, and the last judgment in Revelation?

   12. Who are meant by "My brethren"?

   BETRAYAL AND ARREST

   Chapter 26

   This solemn chapter divides itself thus:

   1. The counsel to kill Jesus, vv. 1-5,

   2. The anointing of Jesus, vv. 6-13,

   3. The bargain of betrayal, vv. 14-16,

   4. The last Passover, vv. 17-25,

   5. The institution of the Lord's Supper, vv. 26-29,

   6. The prediction of Peter's denial, vv. 30-35,

   7. The agony in the garden, vv. 36-46,

   8. The betrayal and arrest, vv. 45-56,

   9. The hearing before Caiaphas, vv. 57-68,

   10. The denial of Peter, vv. 69-75.

   As to the first point (vv. 1-5), note that Christ predicts His death
   for the fourth time, adding the manner of it, and the time it would
   take place. What a calm walking up into death it was! But see how
   Satan, through the human conspirators, would hinder, if he could, the
   offering of the sacrifice at the appointed time! (v. 5).

   As to the second point (vv. 6-13), we learn from John 12:1-8, that the
   woman was Mary, the sister of Lazarus, leading to the presumption that
   Simon the leper was her father, and possibly one whom Jesus had healed.
   The circumstance that one Gospel speaks of her as anointing Jesus' head
   and the other His feet, shows that the "ordinary anointing of
   hospitality and honor" included both. Matthew mentions the first as in
   harmony with the general purpose of his Gospel to reveal Jesus as the
   king. John reveals Him as the Son of God, in which the attitude of Mary
   at His feet is in harmony. Verse 12 is significant, indicating that
   Mary understood more of Christ's death than the disciples; in which
   connection note that she is "not among the women who went to the
   sepulchre to embalm His body." The cost of the ointment (John 12:5),
   equals about $50, which as values are to-day compared with those times
   would mean six times as much, or $300. A laborer's daily wage at that
   time being a penny, one understands the "indignation" of the disciples
   (v. 8). But how blessed to obtain our Lord's interpretation of the act
   (v. 10)! Let us bring our best to Him no matter what men say. To Him
   let it be brought. There is much charity and philanthropy in our day in
   which the glory of the Lord Jesus Christ is not considered.

   As to the third point (vv. 14-16), compare Psalm 41:9; 69:25; 109:8;
   Zechariah 11:12, and observe from Luke 22:3, that Satan entered into
   Judas, and that the price for which he sold our Lord was that of a
   slave (Exodus 21:32), Coming to the Passover (vv. 17-25). Let it not be
   supposed that because of the different accounts in the four Gospels
   there is any conflict among them, even though we may not be perfectly
   able to harmonize them. For the Passover itself, and what it
   commemorated, we refer to Exodus 12.

   The institution of the Lord's Supper which followed (vv. 26-29), marked
   the end of the Mosiac dispensation. The Passover had fulfilled its
   purpose as the paschal lamb to which it pointed, was to be slain the
   next day. Hence the inauguration of a new feast embodying the
   fundamental truth of Christianity as that had embodied the fundamental
   truth of Judaism (Weston). And the fundamental truth of Christianity is
   "remission of sins." "Remission" means to send off, or away, i. e., to
   separate the sin from the sinner. In this respect there is a difference
   between human and divine forgiveness. The first remits the penalty,
   which is all that it can do, while the second remits the sin. And the
   latter can do this, because with God, forgiveness always follows the
   execution of the penalty (see Lev. 4:35; Heb. 9:22). We are forgiven
   for Christ's sake, in the sense that Christ has borne the sins of the
   believer in His own body on the tree. What meaning must be wrapped up
   in verse 29, "new with you in my Father's kingdom!" Who can fathom its
   depths?

   Concerning the agony in the garden (vv. 36-46), we must not suppose the
   "cup" was the fear of mere physical pain or death, in which event
   Christ would have been lacking in the courage and faith of many an
   ordinary martyr. Moreover, He need not have died at all had He desired
   otherwise (John 10:17, 18). The "cup" must have been the making of His
   soul an offering for sin (Isa. 53:10), including the withdrawal of His
   Father's face on account of that sin (Psalm 22:1) -- not His own sin of
   course, but that of the whole world (1 John 2:2). The value of His
   petition is seen in the testimony it bears to the necessity of the
   atonement, showing that without the shedding of His blood there could
   have been no remission.

   Other events in this chapter we pass over to speak of them in the next
   lesson, pausing a moment to allude to the seeming discrepancy in the
   account of the denial of Peter (vv. 69-75). Comparing the story here
   with the corresponding places Mark 14, Luke 22, and John 18, it is to
   be kept in mind, that an excited crowd had gathered and that Peter was
   questioned in two places; with the servants (Matthew 26:58), where the
   first charge was made (v. 69); and in the porch where a great number of
   people would be gathered, and where the second and third charges were
   made by another damsel and by the crowd.

   Questions.

   1. Name the ten great facts of this lesson.

   2. How would you harmonize the two accounts of the anointing of Jesus
   by Mary?

   3. Name the events on the night of the Passover.

   4. What is the origin of the Passover and what did it commemorate?

   5. How does "remission" differ from "forgiveness," and why?

   6. How should we interpret the "cup" spoken of in Gethsemane?

   TRIAL AND CRUCIFIXION

   Chapter 27

   This chapter opens with the delivery of Jesus to Pontius Pilate, the
   Roman governor (vv. 1, 2); then follows the account of Judas' remorse
   (vv. 3-10); Jesus is now questioned by Pilate (vv. 11-14); Barabbas is
   released and Jesus is condemned (vv. 15-26); He is crowned with thorns
   and crucified (vv. 27-44; He dies (vv. 45, 46), and is buried (vv.
   57-66).

   The account of Judas' remorse (vv. 3-10) seems to contain two
   discrepancies. For example, verse 5 compared with Acts 1:18, the
   explanation of which is that he fell after the hanging. Verses 9 and 10
   may allude to Jeremiah 18:1-4 and 19: 1-3, but if so, the application
   is remote, since Zechariah 11:12, 13 fits the case more exactly.
   Perhaps this is a copyist's mistake, although there is another
   explanation. In the Jewish canon the books of the prophets began with
   Jeremiah, and sometimes his name was given to the whole section of the
   prophets just as we use David's name for any of the Psalms, or
   Solomon's for the Proverbs, though there were other authors in each
   case.

   Note that Jesus' reply to Pilate, "Thou sayest" (v. 11) is equivalent
   to a declaration that He was what Pilate said, "The King of the Jews."

   Note Pilate's testimony to the innocence of Jesus, and that according
   to Roman law He was condemned unjustly (v. 24).

   Note Jesus' consciousness to the end, as illustrated in his refusal to
   sip the stupefying drink (v. 34).

   The inscription on the Cross is recorded differently by the
   evangelists, but this does not imply a contradiction or weaken the
   argument for the inspiration of their records. The inscription was in
   three different languages involving a different arrangement of the
   words in each case. Secondly, no one of the writers quotes the entire
   inscription. Thirdly, they all agree in emphasizing the one great fact
   that He was "the King of the Jews." Fourth, their narratives combined
   give the full inscription, as follows:

   "This is Jesus, The King of the Jews"

   "The King of the Jews"

   "This the King of the Jews"

   "Jesus of Nazareth, the King of the Jews."

   It is consistent with the strictest view of the inspiration of the
   original autographs that the Holy Spirit may have had a purpose in
   causing the four different records to be written, and that the purpose
   was to bring out in relief the charge made against Jesus, as that
   charge was in itself the strongest testimony to His Messiahship and the
   fulfillment of the Word of God.

   The words "yielded up the ghost" (v. 50) should not be passed over.
   They mean "dismissed His spirit," and imply an act of His will. Christ
   did not die like other men who cannot help themselves, but because His
   work was done His life was laid down of His own volition. (Compare Mark
   15:37; Luke 23:46; John 10:18; 19:30). This is an inferential testimony
   to the sacrificial character of His death.

   The "veil of the temple" (v. 51) separated between the Holy Place and
   the Most Holy the latter that into which the High Priest alone entered
   once a year with the blood of atonement (Exod. 26:31; Lev. 16). It was
   a type of the human body of Christ, and its rending signified that "a
   new and living way" was opened for believers into God's presence
   (Compare 9:1-8; 10:19-22).

   The resurrection referred to (vv. 52, 53) was one of the most
   remarkable testimonies to the deity of Christ and the divinity of His
   work on the Cross. Did the bodies of these saints return to their
   graves? It is usual to imagine so, but they may have ascended to heaven
   with Jesus when He "led captivity captive" (Eph. 4:8-10). See "Progress
   in the Life to Come," by the author.

   Questions.

   1. Name the seven chief events of this chapter.

   2. Name the parallel Scriptures.

   3. How would you harmonize verse 3 with Acts 1:18?

   4. How would you explain the different reports of the writing on the
   Cross?

   5. What evidence have we here to the voluntariness of Christ's death?

   6. What was the significance of the rending of the veil?

   7. Have you read Ephesians 4:8-10?

   RESURRECTION

   Chapter 28

   Perhaps the most important comment we can make on this chapter will be
   the order of the ten events on the day of which it speaks. (1) The
   three women, Mary Magdalene; Mary, the mother of James; and Salome,
   start for the sepulcher, followed by other women bearing spices. (2)
   These find the stone rolled away and Mary Magdalene, goes to tell the
   disciples (Luke 23:55-24:9; John 20:1, 2). (3) Mary, the mother of
   James, draws near the tomb and discovers the angel (Matthew 28:2). (4)
   She returns to meet the other women bearing the spices. (5) Peter and
   John arrive, look in and go away. (6) Mary Magdalene returns, sees the
   two angels and Jesus (John 20:11-18). (7) She goes to tell the
   disciples. (8) Mary, the mother of James, returns with the other women,
   all of whom see the two angels (Luke 24:4, 5; Mark 15:15). (9) They
   receive the angel's message. (10) While seeking the disciples are met
   by Jesus (Matthew 28:8-10).

   Another comment of interest is the order of the appearances of Jesus on
   this day. (1) To Mary Magdalene (John 20:14-18); (2) To the women
   returning from the tomb with the angel's message (Matthew 28:8-10); (3)
   To Peter (Luke 24:34; 1 Cor. 15:5); (4) To the two on the way to Emmaus
   (Luke 24:13-31); (5) To the apostles in the absence of Thomas (Luke
   24:36-43; John 20:19-24)).

   In dividing the chapter we have (1) The narrative of the resurrection
   with the appearance of Jesus to the women (vv. 1-10); (2) The false
   invention of the Jews (v. 11-15); (3) The gathering in Galilee (vv.
   16-20).

   We can only touch upon the most important things, one of which is
   Christ's reference to His disciples as His "brethren" (v. 10). For the
   first time does he use that word in such connection, showing that until
   His death and resurrection on their behalf the relationship had not
   become possible. (Compare Ps. 22:22 and Heb. 2:11, 12.)

   Another important thing is verse 13, "Say ye, His disciples came by
   night, and stole Him away while we slept." We give excerpts from
   Gaebelein on this verse: "The watch recover from their fright, and some
   hasten to the city. Surely something happened or why should they leave
   their post to make a report? Then it is strange they went to the
   priests first and not the Roman governor. This was an irregular
   proceeding, from which we conclude that what they had to report was of
   greater importance for the priests than Pilate. Who knows but these
   priests had instructed the guard that if He should come forth they were
   to come to them first of all? Their report was a witness of the
   resurrection and that the tomb was empty.

   "The Sanhedrin was hastily summoned to receive the report in an
   official way. The straightforward statement, as men of military
   training are apt to report, made doubt about veracity impossible. To
   impeach them would have been insane. But what would happen if this
   truth got out among the people?

   "The resurrection must be denied which could only be by inventing a
   lie. The only possible lie was that His disciples stole the body. The
   story is incredible. It is easier to believe He arose from the dead
   than to believe what the Jews invented about His resurrection. The
   disciples had forgotten about the resurrection promised and they were a
   scattered, poor, timid lot of people. But even if they had been anxious
   to steal the body, how could they have done it? Here was the company of
   armed men. Then there was the sealed, heavy stone.

   "But the ridiculous side of the lie came out with the report the
   soldiers were to circulate. The disciples came and stole the body,
   while they were sleeping! It is incredible that all these men had
   fallen asleep at the same time, and so fast asleep that the commotion
   of rolling away the stone and the carrying away of the dead did not
   disturb them. Furthermore, sleeping at a post meant death for the Roman
   soldier. One might have nodded and risked his life, but that all slept
   is an impossibility. But the report is foolish; they were asleep, and
   while asleep witnessed how the disciples stole the body of Jesus! It
   was a miserable lie, and is continued to the present day."

   We might mention here the testimony of Josephus, who says in his
   antiquities: "He appeared to them alive on the third day, as the divine
   prophets had foretold these and ten thousand other wonderful things
   concerning Him."

   A third matter of importance is the "Great Commission" as it is called
   (vv. 19, 20). Note the word "Name" as indicative of the Trinity. It is
   not names but "Name." "Father, Son and Holy Spirit is the final name of
   the one true God. * * * The conjunction in one name of the three
   affirms equality and oneness of substance." Note the peculiarity of the
   terms. This is the Kingdom commission, as another expresses it, not the
   Christian commission. The latter is in Luke, distinctively the Gentile
   Gospel, but not here, which is distinctively the Jewish Gospel. And
   this is all the more remarkable because in Luke, the disciples are
   commanded to go to the Jews (24:47), while here they are commanded to
   go to "all nations." It points to the close of the age when the
   commission will be carried out by the faithful remnant of the Jews so
   often spoken about. It has not yet been carried out. The story of the
   Acts is not its fulfillment. Its accomplishment has been interrupted,
   but will be taken up before the Lord comes to deliver Israel at the
   last.

   Questions.

   1. Repeat the order of the events on the day of resurrection.

   2. Do the same with reference to the appearances of Jesus.

   3. Divide the chapter into three parts.

   4. How would you answer the argument that the disciples stole the body
   of Jesus?

   5. What is the significance of the word "Name" in the "Great
   Commission"?

   6. How do you distinguish the "Commission" in Matthew from that in
   Luke?
     __________________________________________________________________

MARK

   INTRODUCTORY

   As Matthew wrote for the Jew, so Mark wrote for the Gentile. In
   illustration of this we find that with a single exception at the
   beginning of his Gospel, Mark practically omits all reference to the
   Old Testament prophets. This shows that he is addressing a people to
   whom such references were not necessary as in the other case, even if
   they would have been intelligible. In other words, the Gentiles knew
   nothing of the sacred Scriptures, and were not expecting the Messiah of
   whom they spake. As carrying the thought further, Mark omits the
   genealogical table of Matthew, since it is not necessary for him to
   prove to Gentiles that Jesus descended from Abraham through David. More
   careful examination shows that all the omissions in Mark's Gospel are
   of an especially Jewish character. It will be seen too, that Mark
   explains Jewish words and customs which would be left unnoticed if he
   were addressing Jews (5:41; 7:1-4, etc.).

   There were two great Gentile peoples of that day the Romans and the
   Greeks, and Mark is addressing the first-named. The Romans represented
   the idea of active power in the world, and their ideal was military
   glory. They were the people who did things. Their highest conception of
   power and authority was themselves, i. e., the Roman state, which they
   worshipped in the person of its emperor. Their spiritual need as a
   people grew out of this fact, for they were failing to attain their
   ideal in the state. With all their power and authority, injustice,
   cruelty and suffering, still prevailed, and would continue to do so.

   Mark's Gospel fits into this condition of things. It sets forth Jesus
   as the active Servant of Jehovah. It is marked by energy, power,
   movement, particularly attractive to the Romans. It is the briefest
   Gospel, containing but sixteen chapters in comparison with the
   twenty-eight in Matthew, showing it to be intended for a people of
   action rather than meditation. The discourses of Jesus are omitted,
   rather than His deeds, as for example, the Sermon on the Mount, the
   charge to the disciples, the message on His second coming. And then,
   too, the things which Mark records as distinguished from Matthew, are
   those calculated to arouse the attention of men of affairs and action.
   In this connection note the frequent employment of the words
   "straightway" and "immediately," which are the same word in the
   original, and occur not less than forty times.

   Speaking of Jesus as the Servant of Jehovah, it is to be remembered
   that he was so announced by the Old Testament prophets. (See Isa. 42:1;
   43:10; 49:6, and elsewhere. Also Zech. 3:8, Mark 10:45; Phil. 2:7,
   etc.) It is not our idea to follow this thought closely in commenting
   on the Gospel, but it may be interesting to give the following outline
   of it from that point of view, in Gaebelein's Analysis of Mark:

   Part 1. The Servant; Who He is and How He came. 1:1-13.

   Part 2. The Servant's Work; not to be Ministered unto, but to Minister,
   1:14-10:52.

   Part 3. The Servant in Jerusalem. Presented as King and Rejected.
   Chapters 11-13.

   Part 4. The Servant giving His life a Ransom for Many. Chapters
   14-15:47.

   Part 5. The Servant Highly Exalted. Risen and Ascended; His Commission
   to His Servants. Chapter 16.

   Questions.

   1. Give four reasons for believing that Mark wrote for the Gentiles.

   2. Describe the Romans and their spiritual need.

   3. Give three reasons for believing that Mark wrote for the Romans.

   4. From what point of view does Mark present Jesus?

   5. Give Gaebelein's outline of Mark.

BEGINNING OF CHRIST'S MINISTRY

  Chapters 1:1-2:12

   Study this lesson in comparison with Matthew to discover what Mark
   omits and what, if anything, he adds; and then consider the same in its
   bearing on the object or purpose of the gospel as described in the
   "introductory" lesson.

   The following analysis will aid:

   Introduction, 1:1.

   Testimony of John the Baptist, 1:2-8.

   Testimony of God the Father, 1:9-11.

   Victory in the Wilderness, 1:12, 13.

   Call of the Disciples, 1:14-20.

   Works of Power, 1:21-2:12.

   The introduction is without a parallel in the other Gospels. Its
   abruptness is almost startling, but the chief feature of it is its
   testimony to Christ's deity. The Servant of Jehovah is at the same time
   "the mighty God" (See Isa. 9:6).

   John's testimony is paralleled in Matthew 3:1-11, but here it is much
   briefer (See the last lesson). Compare the intervening chapters of
   Matthew and observe in detail what Mark has omitted -- the genealogy,
   the Virgin birth, the visit of the wise men, the sojourn in Egypt, the
   settlement in Nazareth. None of these important events evidently fall
   in with the purpose of this Gospel. The Romans will be attracted by
   activity and strength, and hence the writer begins at once at the
   ministry of Christ.

   God's testimony to His Son is paralleled in Matthew 3:13-17. Note here
   the first use of "straightway," as referred to in "Introductory," and
   that Mark says -- Jesus "saw the heavens opened." Among minor points
   Mark's Gospel is notable for descriptive details of this kind.

   The wilderness victory is found in Matthew 4:1-11, and the student will
   be impressed with its succinctness here. Compare "driveth" with "led"
   in Matthew, and note the bearing on the supposed objective of this
   Gospel. The different temptations are omitted, but reference is made to
   "wild beasts," which is also characteristic.

   For what is placed here under the call of the disciples, see Matthew
   4:12-22 and the comments there.

   The works of power are paralleled in part in Matthew 8 and 9. Note
   another descriptive touch in Mark's reference to the healing of Peter's
   wife's mother, "He took her by the hand and lifted her up" (1:31). Also
   his reference to Christ's early rising to pray (v. 35), and His being
   "moved with compassion" in the case of the leper (v. 41). He alone
   speaks of the "four" men who bore the one sick of the palsy (2:3).

   Questions.

   1. Did you read again the chapters in Matthew leading up to the events
   of this lesson in Mark?

   2. What strikes you as peculiar in verse 1?

   3. Among minor points for what is Mark's Gospel noted?

   4. What four illustrations of this are found in the last division of
   this lesson?

   5. Have you examined a map in connection with this lesson?

FROM THE CALL OF LEVI TO THE TEACHING BY THE SEASIDE

  Chapters 2:13-3:35

   The events are:

   The call of Levi, 2:13-20.

   Parables of the cloth and the bottles, 2:21-22.

   In the cornfields on the Sabbath, 2:23-28.

   Healing the withered hand, 3:1-5.

   Healing the multitudes, 3:6-12.

   Choosing the twelve, 3:13-21.

   The unpardonable sin, 3:22-30.

   New relationship, 3:31-35.

   We will not in every case name the parallel passage in Matthew, which
   can be learned by the marginal references in one's Bible. It is assumed
   that every reader or student has a Bible of this character which he
   consults. He will look for the comment desired under our treatment of
   Matthew in that place, while in Mark we will limit ourselves to what is
   peculiar to that writer.

   The "Levi" of 2:13 is identical with Matthew. He took toll, or
   collected the taxes for the Roman government, which made him an object
   of hatred to his own people and one who was despised as an apostate.
   Mark mentions the fact, omitted by Matthew, that the feast of verse 15
   was in Levi's house.

   In the incident of the withered hand also, there is an addition not
   found elsewhere, indicating that Mark was a close observer of his
   Master's actions and interpreter of His feelings (3:5).

   The choosing of the twelve (3:13-21) has quite a different context in
   Mark from Matthew. Christ is on the mountain, but the Sermon on the
   Mount is not given. Notice, too, that the surnames of James and John
   are found here only (v. 17). And do not pass over verse 21, which is
   peculiar to Mark. "Friends" there means "kinsmen."

   A very important addition is that under the head of the unpardonable
   sin (v. 29). "Danger of eternal damnation" is rendered in the Revised
   Version "guilty of an eternal sin," which teaches us the awful nature
   of ascribing the work of the Holy Spirit to Satan, and also the
   certainty of eternal punishment. If there is such a thing as eternal
   sin, there must be eternal punishment to accompany it.

   Questions.

   1. What are the leading incidents of this lesson?

   2. Who was Levi?

   3. What is characteristic of Mark as a reporter?

   4. Name the things peculiar to Mark's record.

   5. What two great doctrinal truths are here emphasized?

PARABLES AND MIRACLES

  Chapters 4, 5

   This lesson contains the parables of the sower, the candle, the seed
   growing secretly and the mustard seed (4:1-34); and the miracles of the
   stilling of the storm, the healing of the Gadarene and the woman with
   the issue of blood, and the raising of Jairus' daughter (4:35-5:43).

   The parables of the sower (4:1-20) and the mustard seed (30-34) are the
   only two out of the seven in Matthew 13 which Mark records. The whole
   of the seven taught the mystery of the Kingdom in its present form
   which explains their presence in Matthew, the Gospel of the Kingdom;
   but why two of them are given in Mark, and only two, is not easy to
   determine. Keeping in mind, however, that Mark presents Jesus as the
   Servant of Jehovah, it may be because these two miracles relate to His
   work of ministry. Mark adds an interesting sentence to the parable of
   the sower (4:13) which indicates that it is fundamental in its
   character and teaching, and that until it is understood, the others
   cannot be.

   While the parable of the candle (4:21-25) is in Matthew yet it is found
   there in another setting. In the present instance, taken with that of
   the sower, it seems to teach that the word of truth sown in the heart
   is not only to give life and yield fruit, but to shine forth in
   testimony. The "bushel" stands for the cares and material things of
   life, and the "bed" for ease and comfort. We should be careful that our
   testimony be not hindered either in the one way or the other.

   The parable of the seed growing secretly (Chaps. 26-29) is peculiar to
   Mark, and teaches that the spiritual processes of the Word of God are
   mysterious in human life, and will only be known by the matured fruit
   at the harvest day.

   In the story of the stilling of the storm (4:35-41) we have another
   characteristic touch of Mark (v. 36).

   He also describes the condition of the Gadarene with the greatest
   fulness (5:1-20), and alone gives verse 26 in the story of the woman
   with the issue of blood.

   Questions.

   1. Name the events in this lesson in their order.

   2. Why, presumably, are but two out of the seven parables of Matthew 13
   found in Mark?

   3. Can you quote and explain the sentence added by Mark to the parable
   of the sower?

   4. What does the parable of the candle teach?

   5. Explain the figures of speech in that parable.

   6. What is taught by the parable of the seed growing secretly?

   7. What are the characteristic touches of Mark in 4:36 and 5:36?

   8. What descriptions of the demoniac are peculiar to Mark?

EXPANSION AND OPPOSITION

  Chapters 6, 7

   These chapters deal with Jesus' visit to Nazareth (6:1-6); the
   commission of the twelve (7-13); the martyrdom of John the Baptist
   (14-29); the report of the twelve (30, 31); the feeding of the five
   thousand (32-44); Jesus walking on the sea (45-52); healing at
   Gennesaret (53-56); opposition of the Pharisees (7:1-23); dealing with
   the Syrophoenician woman (24-30) and recovering the deaf and dumb man
   (31-37).

   Read Matthew 13:53-58 in comparison with Mark's story of Jesus' visit
   to Nazareth, and discover what is peculiar to the latter in verses 3-6.
   In the same way compare Matthew 15:13, with verse 31 of this lesson for
   a statement only given by Mark. Another calls attention to the fact
   that our Lord does not say anything about the success of the disciples
   when they make their report to Him in this instance; in which silence
   on His part we find a necessary warning against all self-exaltation. It
   is of His power and grace that we are able to do anything with success
   or acceptance in His sight.

   What notable feature of the walking upon the sea does Mark omit as
   compared with Matthew?

   We considered the opposition of the Pharisees (7:1-23) in our comments
   on Matthew, but note here in detail the circumstantial evidence that
   Mark was writing for a Gentile people who were in consequence
   unfamiliar with Jewish customs (1-4).

   In the case of the Syrophoenician woman note the comment of Mark (24),
   and the fuller description (25, 26, 30). What he omits is also
   significant, the appeal to Jesus as "Son of David," See the comment on
   Matthew 15:21-28.

   The story of the healing of the deaf and dumb man is peculiar to Mark.

   Questions.

   1. Name the different events of these chapters.

   2. What is peculiar to Mark in the story of Jesus' visit to Nazareth?

   3. What statement is peculiar to Mark with reference to the report of
   the twelve?

   4. What does the silence of Christ teach us in this instance?

   5. Have you reviewed our comments in Matthew on the story of the
   Syrophoenician woman?

REACHING A CRISIS

  Chapters 8, 9

   The four thousand fed (8:1-9); the leaven of the Pharisees (10-21); the
   blind man of Bethesda (22-26); Peter's confession (27-38); the crisis
   of the transfiguration (Chapter 9, 1-13); the lunatic healed (14-29);
   Christ's prediction of His death (30-32); ambition rebuked (33-37);
   sectarianism rebuked (38-41); future retribution (42-50) -- these are
   the topics or events of the present lesson.

   In the second of these events, observe a further illustration of Mark's
   power of observation and the minuteness of his record in particular
   cases -- Jesus "sighed deeply in His spirit" (8:12).

   The third is recorded only by Mark, and has an illuminating note
   attached to it in the Scofield Bible. It will be observed that the man
   was "led out of the town" (Bethsaida). This town, as appears from
   Matthew 9:21-24 had been abandoned to judgment, and Christ would
   neither heal nor permit further testimony to be borne there (v. 26 of
   the lesson). But while Bethsaida's probation as a community was ended,
   yet He would still show mercy to individuals. It suggests Rev. 3:20.

   Mark, as usual, gives the briefest account of Peter's confession, and
   does not mention the Church. The mention of the latter is
   dispensational and is found in the dispensational Gospel of Matthew.
   Notice verse 33, "when He had turned about and looked on His disciples"
   -- characteristic of Mark.

   The warning about future retribution (9:42-50) peculiar to Mark, is one
   of the most solemn in the Bible. "Where their worm dieth not, and the
   fire is not quenched," can hardly yield other meaning than the eternal
   conscious punishment of those who die in their sins. How awful the
   thought! What a motive for earnestness in soul-winning!

   "Every sacrifice shall be salted with salt," is an allusion to
   Leviticus 2:13. The salt represents the power of the Holy Spirit to
   keep us from all that tends to corruption. "Have salt in yourselves"
   really means to be filled with the Holy Spirit. God grant it to us.

   Questions.

   1. Name the topics or events of this lesson.

   2. Name some illustrations of Mark's peculiar characteristics as a
   writer, found in this lesson.

   3. What peculiarities do you find in the miracle at Bethsaida?

   4. What is the doctrinal teaching in 9:44, 46, 48?

   5. How would you interpret 9:49-50?

NEARING THE END

  Chapters 10, 11

   In these chapters we have (1) teaching about divorce (10:1-12); (2)
   blessing little children (vv. 13-16); (3) the story of the rich young
   man and its lessons (vv. 17-31); (4) Christ's second prediction of His
   death (vv. 32-34); (5) the ambitious request of James and John (vv.
   35-45); (6) the healing of Bartimeus; (7) the formal entry into
   Jerusalem (11:1-11); (8) the cursing of the fig tree (vv. 12-14); (9)
   the cleansing of the temple (vv. 15-21); (10) teaching about prayer
   (vv. 22-26); (11) discussion with the rulers (vv. 27-33).

   It will be worth while to compare the teaching about divorce with
   Matthew 19: 1-9, for the points of difference between them. Both the
   evangelists record the same incident, but reading of the two together
   throws light upon it. This does not mean that one contradicts the
   other, but that under the guidance of the Holy Spirit one describes the
   event as he saw it, and the other does the same. Again, one lays
   emphasis on this feature of the dialog between Christ and the
   Pharisees, and the other on that.

   But note Mark's particularities about the next event as compared with
   Matthew. Jesus "was much displeased," he says, "moved with indignation"
   (margin). Verse 15 is original with Mark, and so is the record that
   Jesus took the little children "up in His arms" and "blessed them."

   In the same way observe the details in the story of the rich young man.
   His running and kneeling. "Jesus beholding him, loved him." "Jesus
   looked round about." Also the astonishment of the disciples and Jesus'
   explanation (v. 24).

   The second prediction of Christ's death has similar features. Mark says
   "they were amazed," doubtless at His calmness in walking into the face
   of death, when even "they were afraid." "He took again the twelve."
   "And shall spit upon Him." Mark alone mentions this in Christ's
   prophecy.

   There is no contradiction between Mark 10:35 and Matthew 20:20, for if
   their mother spake for them it were really James and John who were
   speaking. All the disciples recognized this, for it was the sons they
   rebuked and not the mother.

   The healing of Bartimeus as we noted in Matthew, stands at the
   beginning of the end of Christ's earthly life, and is the prelude to
   the great events following in Jerusalem. It holds the same place in the
   three Gospels. The apparent contradiction as to whether one or two men
   were healed, is referred to in our notes on Matthew. But note the
   details in Mark (vv. 49, 50, 52).

   The entry into Jerusalem is equally graphic. "A colt tied, whereon
   never man sat." Note the details also in 11:5, 6 and 11.

   We can not pursue these comparisons, but trust interest has been
   awakened to lead the reader to do so for himself.

   Questions.

   1. Give the details of these two chapters.

   2. What is the most important difficulty you note in Christ's teaching
   on divorce as between Mark and Matthew?

   3. Have you reviewed our notes on Matthew with reference to Bartimeus?

   4. What are the details peculiar to Mark in 11:5, 6 and 11?

   5. Have you pursued the comparisons throughout this chapter?

QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

  Chapters 12, 13

   The parable of the householder (vv. 1-12); the question of tribute (vv.
   13-17); the question about the resurrection (vv. 18-27); the question
   about the first commandment (vv. 28-34); the question about the son of
   David (35-40); and the incident of the widow's mite constitute the
   contents of chapter 12. Chapter 13 is the discourse of Christ about His
   second coming delivered to the disciples on the Mount of Olives, also
   in response to questions.

   It will be recalled from our study of Matthew that the parable of the
   householder found in that Gospel (21:33-46), was one of the three in
   which Christ formally rejected His nation, after the latter, by its
   rulers had definitely rejected Him. It will be seen by comparison that
   Mark, as is His wont, passes on with celerity, omitting those features
   of the story which were not necessary for his purpose as in the other
   Gospel.

   With the question of tribute, begins that series of special temptations
   of Jesus devised by His enemies toward the last to entrap Him in His
   speech. The Pharisees and Herodians come first (see Matt. 22:15-22).
   The Sadducees next (Matt. 22:23-33). The scribe, representing the
   lawyers next (Matt. 22:34-40), and finally Christ silences them all by
   His question concerning Himself (22:41-46). We have included in this
   last section the few verses in which Mark refers to the discourse
   against the scribes and Pharisees, which in Matthew occupies the whole
   of chapter 23 (the "Woes"). And yet brief as Mark is, his abridgment
   contains "the chief characteristics of the corrupt leaders of the
   nation," which are religious vanity, hypocrisy and greed.

   The incident of the widow's mite is not found in Matthew, but is in
   Luke (21:1-4). How appropriately it follows Christ's denunciation of
   the Pharisees who "devour widow's houses" (v. 40). Note the detailed
   description here. Where had Jesus located Himself? What was Jesus
   doing? Whom and what did He see? What is the value of "two mites"? What
   does Jesus now do? What does He say? What is the estimate of, or
   enconium on, the widow? Which gave the more, she, or the rich, and why?

   In the occasion for the Olivet discourse, what interesting fact is
   given by Mark not mentioned by Matthew (13:3)? In treating of this
   discourse in Mark, Gaebelein says:

   "Mark's report is the briefest, Matthew's the longest. Omitted in Mark
   are the parables, which have special reference to the Christian
   profession (Matt. 25) and the judgment of living nations (c. 25:31-46).
   These belong in Matthew, but would be out of keeping with the purpose
   of Mark. The service of our Lord, as we have seen, is in the
   foreground. "The three characteristic discourses in Matthew nowhere
   else reported in full are: 1. The Sermon on the Mount, which is the
   proclamation of the King. 2. The parable discourse in Matthew 13, the
   mysteries of the Kingdom. 3. The Olivet discourse, Matthew 24-25, the
   future of the Kingdom. But why should there be anything at all in the
   Gospel of Mark about the future things, such as the end of the age, and
   His return in glory, if only the Servant is described? It will be seen
   that the predictions are in part at least in view of their service. He
   forewarned them as His servants of what was to come after His
   departure."

   Questions.

   1. Name the leading incidents of this lesson.

   2. To what group of parables does that of the householder belong?

   3. To what series of questions does that of the tribute belong?

   4. What chapter of Matthew contains the woes against the Scribes and
   Pharisees.

   5. What does Mark omit from the Olivet discourse?

   THE BETRAYAL AND ARREST

   Chapter 14

   This chapter corresponds with the 26th of Matthew, and contains the
   plots of Jesus' enemies (vv. 1, 2); His anointing at Bethany (vv. 3-9);
   the bargain of Judas (vv. 10, 11); the last Passover and the Lord's
   Supper (vv. 12-25); Peter's denial predicted (vv. 26-31); the agony in
   the garden (vv. 32-42); the betrayal and arrest (vv. 43-52); the
   hearing before the high-priest (vv. 53-65); Peter's denial (vv. 66-72).

   Mark's talent for details is seen in his giving a specific money value
   to the ointment which Mary used, 300 pence, while we shall never cease
   to be grateful to him under God, for quoting Christ's laconic
   commendation of her, "She hath done what she could" (vv. 3-9). How many
   sermons have these words preached, and what comfort have they brought
   to those whose limited ability has permitted only little ministries!

   It is Mark who tells us that the Sanhedrin was "glad" at the chance to
   bargain with Judas for the life of Jesus (vv. 10, 11).

   It is he who mentions the "two" disciples sent forth to make ready the
   Passover, and who indicates how the man was identified at whose house
   it was to be eaten. He also gives details of the conversation held with
   him (vv. 12-25).

   Christ's prediction of Peter's denial (vv. 26-31) is made more graphic
   by the statement concerning the cock crowing "twice," which is referred
   to again at the time of its fulfillment.

   In the Gethsemane crisis, according to Mark, Christ prays that "the
   hour" might pass from him (vv. 32-42).

   And an interesting detail is that of the young man who at the betrayal
   fled away naked, and whom tradition identifies as Mark himself (vv.
   43-52).

   In the hearing before the high-priest, note that significant touch,
   Peter "warmed himself"; and that other about the witnesses agreeing not
   together (vv. 53-65).

   Questions.

   1. Give the facts of this chapter.

   2. Indicate some of the interesting details it contains, peculiar to
   Mark.

   3. How was the host of the Passover feast identified?

   4. What item of Mark's personal history is supposed to be found in this
   chapter?

   5. How does he indicate the injustice of Jesus' trial?

CRUCIFIED AND RISEN

  Chapters 15, 16

   Jesus before Pilate (15:1-15); mocked by the soldiers (16:23); nailed
   to the cross (24-41); buried in the tomb (42-47); risen from the dead
   (16:1-18); ascended into heaven (19-20) -- are the closing events in
   Mark's Gospel.

   As in other instances, Mark's account of the trial before Pilate is the
   briefest while that of Matthew is the longest in the Gospels. The
   former, however, especially emphasizes the religious hatred of the
   people. He also describes more particularly the charge laid against
   Barabbas (15:7) who was released, though guilty and condemned; and this
   because the Lord Jesus took his place. "Christ was his substitute,"
   says another, "and Barabbas when released might have looked up at Him
   on the Cross, and have said, 'He died for me, he paid my penalty' -- a
   blessed illustration of the atonement."

   Mark says, "they clothed him with purple" (17), while Matthew describes
   it as a "scarlet robe" (27-28) but as Lange explains, the scarlet
   military robe was meant to represent the imperial robe, and hence
   called in the symbolic sense purple.

   Note how Mark dwells on the personality of Simon the Cyrenian (21). The
   reason he was drafted to bear the Cross was that Jesus' strength was
   exhausted and He could not Himself bear it. This seems implied in the
   word "bring" (22). They had to bring, in the sense that they had to
   bear, or carry, Jesus to Golgotha, they had to hold Him up on the road.
   As one says, what an appearance He must have presented after all the
   scourging and other indignities He received! How His face must have
   been marred by the blows, and how His sacred head must have bled from
   the cruel crown of thorns! It is Mark only who mentions that the wine
   (or vinegar) they gave Him was "mingled with myrrh," which was
   considered an anodyne to deaden pain. It was for this reason Jesus
   refused it. Mark says it was "the third hour" when they crucified Him.
   while John says the sixth (c. 19, 14); there is a difficulty here, but
   the latter alludes to the Roman method of computing time and the former
   the Hebrew.

   Mark mentions the "boldness" of Joseph of Arimathea in begging the body
   from Pilate (43). "Boldness" in the face of the Sanhedrin to which he
   belonged, and at whose insistence it was that Jesus had been crucified.
   One must be a converted Jew in these days and experience his
   persecution and torture at the hands of his own people, to understand
   something of what this may have meant to Joseph (Compare Isa. 53:9).

   Coming to the resurrection chapter, we again observe the brevity of
   Mark compared with Matthew. For the order of events on the resurrection
   day compare the comments on Matthew 28. Mark especially mentions Peter
   (7), which is the more noticeable because he also describes Peter's
   denial in the fullest way. The passage from verse 9 to the end of this
   chapter is not in the two most ancient manuscripts, the Sinaitic and
   Vatican, and others have it with partial omissions and variations, but
   it is quoted by some of the fathers of the second and third centuries.
   The whole church, practically, has accepted it as genuine from that
   period.

   The "Great Commission" in Mark (15:18) differs from Matthew. In the
   former the Kingdom is not in view, but "the Servant having given His
   life as a ransom, the good news is to go forth." Signs were to follow
   them that believe. These signs did not follow all even in the apostles'
   time, but they did follow some. And if they do not follow now, it is
   because there are other evidences more suitable for the later periods
   of Christianity. As a matter of fact, however, such signs do still
   follow the preaching of the gospel on foreign mission fields, and
   doubtless will be practically universal again as the end of the age
   draws near and the coming of the King.

   Mark records the ascension as Matthew does not, and even penetrates the
   clouds and sees Christ in heaven at the right hand of God. But He sees
   Him working with His disciples even though He is in heaven (20), and
   refers to it in a word found nowhere else in the Gospels. How fitting
   thus the close of that Gospel intended for the active energetic Roman!

   Questions.

   1. Name the closing events in this Gospel.

   2. What illustration of the atonement is found here?

   3. Why was Simon drafted to bear Christ's Cross?

   4. How do you harmonize the two accounts as to the hour of the
   crucifixion?

   5. Can you quote Isa. 53:9?

   6. What do you know about the closing verses of the Gospel?

   7. What comment may be made on 16:17, 18?

   8. What new thought about the life of our ascended Lord does Mark
   express?
     __________________________________________________________________

LUKE

   INTRODUCTORY

   Luke, like Mark, wrote for the Gentiles, but for a different class than
   he. While Mark had the Romans in mind, the writers of the first three
   centuries testify that Luke wrote for the Greeks, and this is
   corroborated by the internal evidence of the book itself.

   Characteristics of the Greeks.

   We have seen that the Romans represented the idea of activity or power,
   but the Greeks that of reason and culture. While the Roman ideal was
   military glory, that of the Greek was wisdom and beauty. The Roman felt
   his mission to be that of government, but the Greek that of education.
   The Greek was seeking the perfect, the ideal man, and as illustrating
   this fact they made their gods in the likeness of men.

   How Luke's Gospel Meets this Need.

   The Gospel of Luke meets this need of the Greeks by presenting Jesus as
   the perfect, the ideal, or universal man. Dr. D. S. Gregory in his
   excellent book, "Why Four Gospels?" sums up the reasons for this
   opinion in the following way:

   (1) Luke himself was a Greek, though a proselyte to the Jewish
   religion. He was moreover, a cultivated man as is indicated in the
   general style of his writing. And he was a traveling companion of Paul,
   the great apostle to the Gentiles, especially the Greeks.

   (2) His gospel is the most orderly history of the sayings and doings of
   Jesus, and evidently prepared for a thoughtful and philosophic people.

   (3) Speaking further of its style, it is remarkable for its poetry,
   song, eloquence and for the depth and sublimity of its thought.
   Differing from Mark it abounds in the discourses of Jesus, as though
   the people for whom it was intended were accustomed to think and
   meditate.

   (4) This Gospel also omits the distinctively Jewish portions of the
   record found in the other Gospels, and also the distinctively Roman
   features such as the vivid pictures and the activity associated with
   Mark.

   (5) Furthermore, it gives those incidents in the life of our Lord which
   more especially demonstrate his interest in the whole race. For
   example, the genealogy of Jesus is traced through Adam to God, and the
   sending out of the seventy is mentioned as well as the twelve, for the
   former were not limited in their work to Israel. Also a good deal of
   space is given to the ministry of Jesus among the Gentiles beyond the
   Jordan (9:51-18:30). The parable of the good Samaritan, and the healing
   of the ten lepers are also recorded, both of which are peculiar to
   Luke, and especially cheering to the Gentiles.

   (6) This Gospel again, contains peculiar marks of the humanity of Jesus
   (10:21; 22:43, 44; 23:46; 24:39), although Luke emphasizes His Deity as
   do all the evangelists.

   Questions.

   1. For what class of Gentiles did Luke write?

   2. How does he present Jesus as distinguished from Matthew and Mark?

   3. Describe the Greeks as distinguished from the Romans.

   4. How is Luke personally distinguished from other evangelists?

   5. How does the plan of his Gospel compare with theirs?

   6. Describe the style of his Gospel.

   7. How do the omissions and additions of Luke's gospel bear on the
   thought that he was writing for the Greeks ?

THE EARLY YEARS OF JESUS

  Chapters 1-2

   There is a preface to Luke's Gospel (vv. 1-4). "While Matthew and Mark
   tell us of whom they write (Matt. 1:1; Mark 1:1), Luke and John tell us
   why they write" (Compare John 20:31). Luke wrote for the instruction of
   Theophilus (Cf. Acts 1, 2), whose name indicates that he was a Greek,
   while "most excellent," suggests that he may have been of high rank.

   There were many records of our Lord (v. 1), received from eye-witnesses
   (v. 2), but Luke "had perfect understanding of all things from the very
   first" (v. 3). The Greek reads "from above," as if his information was
   confirmed by revelation. (Compare 1 Cor. 11:23).

   Luke contains much found in no other Gospel, practically the whole of
   this lesson for example,

   (1) Visit of the Angel to Zacharias vv. 5-25.

   Note the historic date (v. 5); the character of the husband and wife
   (v. 6); their domestic disappointment (v. 7); the angel's visit (vv.
   8-12); the prayer, which was more than answered (vv. 13-17) the acts of
   unbelief and its punishment (vv. 18-22); the consummation of God's
   promise (vv. 23-25). With verses 8 to 12 compare Mal. 3:1; 4:2, 5, 6.
   Not since that prophet's time, 400 years before, had there been
   communication from Jehovah to His people, but He was now visiting them
   again (cf. Daniel 9:25, 26).

   (2) Visit of the Angel to Mary vv. 26-38.

   Two sons were to be born, both named by the angel. Both would be great,
   but of John it is added, "in the sight of the Lord" (v. 15). Its
   omission in the case of Jesus is an incidental reference to His deity.
   The former "would be filled with the Holy Ghost," the latter conceived
   of the Holy Ghost. In this He stands alone. He became man in a way
   peculiar to Himself, since as God, He was from all eternity. (See verse
   35). Genesis 3:15 "the seed of the woman," now received elucidation and
   fulfillment. Also Isaiah 7:14. Note particularly verses 32 and 33 and
   their relation to prophecies like Isaiah 9:6, 7. These verses (in Luke)
   are yet to be fulfilled, for although Christ is now seated at the right
   hand of the Throne of God, this is not the throne of David.

   (3) Visit of Mary to Elizabeth vv. 36-56,

   is told in a way requiring no comment.

   (4) Zacharias' Prophecy vv. 57-80,

   is remarkable as the first through a human channel since Malachi; and
   also as a partial fulfillment of Malachi.

   (5) Birth of Jesus (1-20).

   Note the time and occasion (vv. 1- 5). "All the world" means, "The
   inhabited earth," or as usual in the New Testament, the sphere of Roman
   rule at its greatest extent. Compare Daniel 2 and 7, which reveal the
   nature and extent of the Gentile world empires. Cyrenius was twice
   governor of Syria, and this enrollment was ordered during his first
   term (see Revised Version). Note the fulfillment of prophecy in verse 4
   by comparing 1 Sam. 17:12; Micah 5:2.

   (6) Presentation in the Temple vv. 21-38.

   With the first four verses compare Exodus 13:12, 13; Lev. 12:8; Num.
   18:16. Observe that Mary was necessitated to offer a sacrifice (v. 24)
   because sinful as other women. Her child was holy, being conceived of
   the Holy Ghost, but not she. The story of Simeon is beautiful (vv.
   25-35), a Spirit-led man all through, and in nothing more than this,
   that in blessing Joseph and Mary, he did not bless the child. "The less
   is blessed of the greater" (Heb. 7:7). Anna's story is beautiful, but
   the thought we dwell on is that "she spake of Him to all them that
   looked for redemption in Jerusalem" (v. 38). Alas! none others would
   give heed, even as to-day.

   (7) Jesus at the Passover vv. 39-52.

   Eleven years of our Lord's earthly life are comprehended in verses 30
   and 40. He grew in stature, and increased in strength (the words "in
   Spirit," are not in the Revised Version). He was filled with wisdom and
   God's grace was upon Him. And yet He was like other boys but without
   sin. His wisdom and grace are illustrated in the incident following (w.
   42-51), in which three things are noticeable, "(1) As a child He kept
   His place, asking and answering questions, but not teaching; (2) as the
   Son of His Divine Father He was conscious of being about His Father's
   business; (3) as the child of His human mother, He was subject unto
   her." We read of Him not again for eighteen years!

   Questions.

   1. How do the first two evangelists differ from the last two in what
   they tell about their messages?

   2. Have you read Acts 2:1, 2?

   3. What leads us to think that Luke's record was confirmed by
   revelation?

   4. Name the seven leading facts of this lesson.

   5. In what does Jesus stand alone among human beings?

   6. How many Old Testament passages are referred to in this lesson?

   7. How many have you verified?

   8. What does "All the world" mean?

   9. What shows Mary to have been a sinner?

   10. How many years, in round numbers, were spent by our Lord in
   Nazareth?

   PREPARATION FOR PUBLIC MINISTRY

   Chapter 3

   (1) Ministry of John the Baptist is the first event here (vv. 1-22), in
   which we note another mark of history characteristic of Luke (vv. 1,
   2). Also he quotes more fully from Isaiah 40 than the preceding
   evangelists, and for the purpose of giving the words, "all flesh shall
   see the salvation of God." The quotation is from the Septuagint, and is
   in harmony with Luke's objective towards the Gentiles, as He
   distinctively shows that the grace of God in Christ is for all people
   who will accept it, and not for Israel only. We have met with John's
   preaching in the other evangelists, but not with the allusion to the
   different classes (vv. 10-14). The baptism of Jesus by John and its
   significance, have been spoken of in Matt. 3, but Luke alone tells us
   that the Lord was "praying" as heaven was opened unto Him (v. 21). Was
   He supplicating His Father with reference to Isaiah 61, now about to be
   fulfilled?

   (2) Genealogy of Mary is the next division (vv. 23-38). We say "Mary"
   because that is the generally accepted view of the differences between
   this list of names and that in Matthew. The latter gives us the
   genealogy of Joseph saying, "Jacob begat" him (1:16). In what sense,
   therefore, can Luke call him "the son of Heli" (v. 23)? The answer of
   some is, that inasmuch as the latter does not say Heli begat Joseph the
   inference is that he was as husband of Mary the son-in-law of Heli, who
   was, like himself, a descendant of David. That he should in such a case
   be called "of Heli" is in accordance with Jewish usage (1 Sam. 24:16).

   (3) The Temptation of Christ (4:1-13), is dealt with in Matthew as the
   supreme testing through which He, as man, must pass in preparation for
   His great work. The moral order of the temptations as Luke presents
   them is observable, "corresponding to those by which Eve was seduced"
   (Gen. 3:6), and which, according to 1 John 2:16, is a kind of general
   principle with Satan in dealing with humanity. Christ resisted the
   temptations in obedience to the Word of God. Our first parents knew the
   Word of God and quoted it, but did not obey it. What a contrast! "Had
   they kept the Word it would have kept them" (Ps. 17:4).

   Stuart referring to the moral order of the temptations as Luke gives
   them, calls attention to the fact that it was not the actual order in
   which Satan presented them and which is given by Matthew, who says the
   temptation on the pinnacle was the second and not the third. Of course
   there was a Divine reason for these differing records, and we have here
   an evidence of the guidance of the Holy Spirit in the writing of the
   four Gospels. The same author suggests how the temptation illustrates
   that much may go on in the world without man's knowledge. Who saw our
   Lord on the pinnacle of the temple, and Satan with Him, and yet how
   momentous to the world was the event!

   (4) Return to Galilee vv. 14,15. is notable from the fact that He did
   so "in the power of the Spirit." The reference is to the Holy Spirit of
   which He was "full," and by Whom, as we see in the next lesson, He was
   now anointed. It is instructive that all Jesus is said to have done
   after this anointing, was done not in the power of His natural spirit,
   but the Holy Spirit. What a lesson for His disciples! If He were
   anointed, may not we, and if He required it for service, how much more
   we?

   Questions.

   1. What are the leading events in this lesson?

   2. What is the significance of Luke's quotation from Isaiah?

   3. What special feature is mentioned by Luke in connection with the
   baptism of Jesus?

   4. How is the genealogy in Luke explained in comparison with Matthew?

   5. What distinction is mentioned as to the order of the temptations in
   Matthew and Luke?

   6. Can you quote Psalm 17:4 from memory?

   7. What practical truth is taught in the closing verses of this lesson?

THE MINISTRY BEGUN

  Chapters 4:16-5:16

   (1) At Nazareth vv. 16-30.

   It was the custom for visitors to be granted the privilege of reading
   the Scriptures on such occasions (vv. 16, 17), and Jesus read from
   Isaiah 61. Perhaps it was not the appointed portion for that day, which
   may explain the last sentence of verse 20. However, when He began to
   apply the prophecy to Himself (v. 21), there was astonishment indeed,
   for nothing like that had ever been heard. Verse 23 indicates the state
   of mind and heart of His hearers. He knew the rejection before Him was
   such as had been meted out to Elijah and Elisha, and as God had worked
   by them among the Gentiles so would He do again. This aroused enmity,
   with the result of verses 29 and 30. A comparison of Isaiah 61:2,
   affords an instance of "the exquisite accuracy of Scripture," since
   Jesus stopped midway in the verse. The first half is connected with His
   first Advent and the present dispensation of grace, and the second,
   with His second Advent and the judgments to follow.

   (2) At Capernaum vv. 31-44.

   The leading events here are the casting out of the demon (vv. 33-35),
   and the healing of Peter's wife's mother (vv. 38, 39), both of which
   are referred to in Mark 1, the second also in Matt. 8. Matthew 4 tells
   us that Christ made His home at this time at Capernaum, while Luke
   (4:23) tells us why He did so. Note in the case of the demon: (1) that
   demons know their ultimate fate; (2) that Jesus will not receive their
   testimony to Himself though it be true; (3) that there is a distinction
   between them and the persons they inhabit and control. But why were the
   people amazed (v. 36)? To cast out demons was not new (Matt. 12:27),
   but the way and the power by which Jesus cast them out was altogether
   new. Compare the testimony of Nicodemus (John 3:2, last clause). Notice
   verse 40, "He laid His hands on every one of them, and healed them."
   and also verse 43. What labor it represents!

   (3) At Gennesaret 5:1-11.

   The great draught of fishes is original with Luke, but calls for little
   comment. But note Peter's confession of sin in verse 8. Sin, not sins.
   It is his state of which he speaks, and not particular transgressions.
   What he is, not what he has done, utterly unfits him for the Divine
   presence, and he can find no comfort in that presence until his old
   nature has been taken away and a new put in its place. Nor is verse 11
   less remarkable. "They forsook all and followed Him," because one who
   could do what they had just seen done, was able to meet all their needs
   henceforth including those of their families.

   (4) In a Certain City vv. 12, 13,

   With the exception of Miriam (Num. 12), this is the first illustration
   of the healing of leprosy in Israel, where the law of Leviticus 14
   could have been acted upon. No wonder the fame of Jesus spread abroad
   (v. 15)! Who could work this miracle by His own power save the God of
   Israel?

   Questions.

   1. Name the geographical divisions of this lesson.

   2. Have you examined a map in its study?

   3. Can you quote Isaiah 61:1-3?

   4. Give in your own words the Old Testament incidents referred to in
   4:26, 27?

   5. What is noticeable about Jesus' quotation of Isaiah 61:2?

   6. Why did Jesus change His residence from Nazareth to Capernaum?

   7. What three things do we learn about demons?

   8. Quote John 3:2.

   9. What is most noticeable in the story of the great draught of fishes?

   10. How does the cleansing of the leper prove the deity of Christ?

TEACHING

  Chapters 5:17-6:49

   1. Forgiveness of Sin vv. 17-26.

   Comparing this with Mark 2:1, we find it took place in Capernaum, and
   possibly in the house in which our Lord dwelt (Matt. 9:1). What a proof
   it contains of the deity of Christ.

   2. Jesus' Earthly Mission vv. 27-32.

   "Levi" as we saw in Mark 2, is Matthew whose faith in following Jesus
   is more remarkable than that of Peter, for he had more to relinquish.
   He soon showed his faith further by his works (v. 29). But though he
   made "a great feast" for his Lord, yet the latter made a greater one
   for him and for others like him in verse 32.

   3. Fasting vv. 33-39.

   To impose fasting on disciples who were enjoying His presence, would be
   like patching an old garment with a piece out of a new, and so both
   would be spoiled. A new era had begun and everything must be in harmony
   with it. The joy of the disciples could not accommodate itself to old
   forms and practices. Nevertheless, till others had proved what that joy
   was, they would naturally be satisfied with practices to which they had
   been accustomed (v. 39).

   4. The Sabbath Day 6:1-11.

   The events of these verses are recorded by Matthew and Mark also, and
   we need dwell on them but briefly. The Pharisees were not zealous of
   God's law but of their traditions super-added to the law, which
   practically made it of no effect. There was no law of God against doing
   what Jesus' disciples did, nor would God command His people to starve
   because it was the sabbath. Works of necessity might be done on that
   day as the Pharisees themselves taught. The disciples were hungry and
   in want because they were suffering rejection with their Lord. This is
   the significance of His reference to David, who also was suffering
   rejection as God's anointed when he partook of the shewbread and was
   sinless in so doing.

   5. Happiness and Woe (vv. 12-26).

   We do not dwell again on the choice of the twelve (vv. 12-16), having
   spoken of it in Matthew only to observe that Luke records that the
   night previously our Lord spent in prayer. But at verse 20 He begins to
   speak of the heavenly calling of those who are rejected on earth. This
   is not that the earthly kingdom will never be set up or Israel blessed
   in it, but only that for the time being the called out ones for heaven
   are addressed (Hebrew 3:1). Four beatitudes are named, poverty, hunger,
   sorrow, excommunication might be their lot on earth, but great their
   reward in heaven (vv. 20, 21). As another puts it, "the antidote is
   given before the trial comes."

   6. Treatment of Enemies vv. 27-36.

   It is natural to think that Luke is here giving a synopsis of the
   "Sermon on the Mount" recorded more fully in Matt. (cc. 5-8), but we
   face the difficulty that these words were spoken "in the plain" (v.
   17). Shall we say that the same instruction was given more than once?
   There is nothing in the verses different from Matthew, and we only note
   that the whole teaching is not that of righteousness under the law but
   of grace, which was entirely new to the hearers. Verse 30 is not to be
   taken unqualifiedly but in connection with our treatment of enemies --
   if any of them should even ask aught of us it is to be given.

   7. Treatment of Fellow-disciples (vv. 37-45).

   8. Summing up vv. 46-49.

   Questions.

   1. Name the seven subjects of teaching in this lesson.

   2. How does the incident first-named prove Christ's deity?

   3. Explain "the new wine in old bottles" in your own language.

   4. Where is the parallel between Christ's disciples and David in the
   incident of 6:1-11?

   5. What experience of our Lord preceded the choice of the Twelve?

   6. What is the comparative character of this whole teaching of Christ?

   7. Can you quote 6:46?

HIS FAME SPREADING

  Chapters 7, 8

   1. The Centurion's Servant 7:1-10.

   Matthew describes the centurion as personally entreating our Lord
   (8:5-13), but Luke tells how he first approached Him through the Jewish
   elders and then through other friends.

   2. The Widow of Nain vv. 11-17.

   is a story original with Luke. Note that no appeal was made to our Lord
   in this case, but that His compassion was awakened by the sight itself.
   This was probably the first occasion when He raised the dead, which
   accounts for the effect and testimony in verses 16 and 17.

   3. Christ's Witness to John the Baptist vv. 18-35.

   As the fame of the wonder-worker spread it reached John the Baptist in
   prison (cf. 3:19). For John's doubts, and our Lord's discourse
   concerning him see Matt. 11.

   4. The Woman That Was a Sinner vv. 36-50.

   The Pharisee was willing to show Jesus the outward honor of an
   invitation for selfish reasons, but had no love for Him, as his
   treatment showed. Houses in the east were easy of access, and on
   occasions when distinguished rabbis were entertained, outsiders were
   admitted to listen to the conversation. Reclining at the table with the
   feet extended outward, made possible the action of this woman. It was
   grace in her that drew her to Jesus as her Saviour, hence she had
   already been forgiven ere she washed His feet. In other words, as the
   latter part of verse 47 shows, she was not forgiven because she loved,
   but she loved because she was forgiven. It is solemnly suggestive that
   she was the only one in that company to whom such an announcement of
   forgiveness was made. They all heard it, including the host, but none
   seemed to desire it for himself.

   5. The Parable of the Sower 8:4-15.

   Before reaching this parable it is pleasant to read of the women
   ministering of their substance not to Jesus only, but to "them," i. e.,
   He and His disciples (vv. 2, 3, R. V.). Compare this with the earlier
   suffering and need in the cornfield. We pass over the parable because
   of our comment in Matthew, but add a remark of Stuart, that "in Matthew
   the fruitful ones hear and understand; in Mark they hear and receive;
   in Luke they hear and keep." These words are alike in that to
   understand, receive, and keep the Word are all requisite to
   fruit-bearing.

   6. In the Gerasene Country vv. 26-39.

   The remaining incidents of the chapter have been touched upon in the
   other Gospels, but we pause at the visit to the Gerasene country. A
   practical thought has been suggested to us here, viz: that if men can
   be the mouthpiece of demons, "why should it be difficult to believe
   that a man may be the mouthpiece of the Spirit of God?" Matthew speaks
   of two men though Mark and Luke call attention to only one. Was it
   because of this one's subsequent request (v. 38)? What a contrast in
   this he presents to the other people of that country! They wished Jesus
   to depart, but he wished to go with Him. Salvation makes all the
   difference as to whether one desires the Lord's presence or not. But
   the Lord wanted a witness in Gerasene and could not spare this man to
   come with Him (v. 39). Does the man's work afterward explain what Mark
   says of this country at a later time (Mk. 7:31-37)?

   Questions.

   1. How does Luke's account of the centurion's action differ from
   Matthew?

   2. How is the raising of the son of the widow of Nain distinguished?

   3. How was it possible for the incident of v. 11, 36-50 to occur in
   Simon's house?

   4. What three things are necessary in a Christian to fruit-bearing?

   5. What desire does salvation awaken in the human heart?

THE TWELVE AND THE SEVENTY

  Chapters 9, 10

   The events of chapter 9 with a single exception, were dealt with in
   either Matthew or Mark. Luke, however, adds items of fresh interest to
   some of them which the student can easily discover by comparison.

   Chapter 10 has three subjects original with Luke: (1) the sending forth
   of the seventy (vv. 1-24); (2) the lawyer's question and its answer
   (vv. 25-37); and (3) the story of Martha and Mary (vv. 38-42).

   The sending forth of the seventy fits into the purpose of his gospel to
   reach the Gentiles. The twelve apostles were sent only to the lost
   sheep of the house of Israel, but these went "into every city and place
   whither He himself would come." In most other respects the charge to
   the seventy was like that to the twelve. When they returned and
   reported the subjection of demons unto them (v. 17) our Lord's reply
   was an "earnest of complete victory over all the power of the enemy."
   They had spoken of demons but He speaks of Satan (v. 18), and the
   downfall of the one presaged that of the other. It is instructive that
   our Lord defines demons as being in nature spirits (v. 20). Nor let the
   story pass without noting His prayer in verse 21, which occurs in
   Matthew in another place (chapter 11:25-27). Stuart believes Luke has
   correctly located it because of the words "In that hour," for otherwise
   we would not have understood the full significance of the passage.

   The lawyer's question (vv. 25-37) suggests Matthew 22:34-40 and Mark
   12:28-34, and yet it is a different occasion. Certainly our Lord's
   reply including the story of the good Samaritan is original with Luke
   and peculiarly suited to the Gentiles for whom he wrote. The Jewish
   priest and levite passed by the wounded man, but the Gentile Samaritan
   befriended him. The lesson taught is that anyone in need is our
   neighbor, without reference to his nationality, religion or character.

   We linger a moment at the story of Martha and Mary (vv. 38-42), to
   speak of a unique reason for its position here, suggested by Stuart.
   The lawyer in the preceding incident had not gotten eternal life, and
   the question is how could any man obtain it? The answer is given in the
   attitude and occupation of Mary as distinguished from Martha. To sit at
   Jesus' feet, and hear His word is the way of blessing.

   Questions.

   1. What is the title of this lesson, and why?

   2. What three utterances about the transfiguration are original with
   Luke?

   3. Name the three events of chapter 10.

   4. How does the record of the sending forth of the seventy fit into the
   purpose of this Gospel?

   5. What are demons?

   6. Have you compared Matthew 11:25-27?

   7. How is the story of the good Samaritan fitted to this Gospel?

   8. What is the great lesson of that story?

   9. What is the way to find eternal life?

   DOCTRINE OF PRAYER

   Chapter 11

   We name this lesson after its chief topic, for as the Scofield Bible
   says, we have here "the central New Testament passage on prayer." The
   disciples' request (v. 1) is answered first by a model prayer (2-4),
   then by a story or parable about prayer (vv. 5-10), and finally by
   setting before them the chief object of prayer (vv. 11-13). The "model"
   contains fundamental principles of prayer, (a) the right relationship,
   that of a son to a father; (b) the right attitude, worship, "Hallowed
   be Thy Name, Thy Kingdom come. Thy will be done"; (c) the right spirit,
   love, trust, holiness (vv. 3-4). "Used as a form, the Lord's prayer as
   it is called, is, dispensationally, upon legal ground, rather than that
   of grace. It is not in the name of Christ for example, and makes human
   forgiveness the condition of Divine forgiveness" -- Scofield.
   Christians have always used it however, and will continue to use it,
   but they must think into it the conditions of their standing in Christ.
   The parable following teaches importunity and intercession for others,
   and shows in its application that the reason for prayer from the Divine
   side is God's desire for the fellowship of His creatures. That is why
   He waits to give till we ask and seek, or to open unto us until we
   knock. The chief object in prayer is the Holy Spirit. Here it should be
   remembered, we are on Old Testament ground, and "to go back to this
   promise is to forget Pentecost, and to ignore the truth that now every
   believer has the Holy Spirit dwelling in Him (Romans 8:9-15; 1
   Corinthians 6:19; Galations 4:6; 1 John 2:20-27)." It is right for us
   to seek to 'be filled with the Spirit" (Ephesians 5:18) but not to seek
   the Spirit Himself, Who is already ours if we are Christ's. The
   subsequent events are (1) the false charge against Jesus and His reply
   (vv. 14-28); (2) the challenge for a sign (vv. 29-32); (3) the parable
   of the lighted candle (vv. 33-36), and (4) the denunciation of the
   Pharisees (vv. 37-54). The first three were found in Matthew, but the
   last, while suggesting Matthew 23: 13-35, is the record of a different
   occasion, verses 37-41 make this clear, but in reading them we must not
   misinterpret verse 38 to mean that our Lord was physically unclean, but
   only ceremonially so (cf. Mark 7:3). His reply to His host is difficult
   to understand at verse 41, but the Revised Version throws light upon
   it. "Lawyers" (v. 45) is really the same as "Scribes," and so
   throughout the Gospels. We have seen that the scribes made copies of
   the Scriptures, and classified and taught the precepts of the oral law
   as well. Verse 51 is very solemn. For Zechariah's death see 2
   Chronicles 24:21.

   Questions.

   1. What gives distinction to this chapter?

   2. Analyze the "Lord's Prayer."

   3. What is its place dispensationally?

   4. What three things are taught or suggested in the parable about
   prayer?

   5. What is the place of verse 13 dispensationally?

   6. What are the other events of this chapter?

   7. Have you reviewed Mark 7:1-4?

   8. What was the work of a "lawyer"?

   WARNINGS

   Chapter 12

   This chapter, almost entirely original with Luke, consists of four
   warnings against hypocrisy (1-12), covetousness (vv. 13-24)
   carelessness (vv. 25-48), ignorance (vv. 49-59).

   1. Hypocrisy (vv. 1-12).

   Note the fearlessness of Christ (v. 1), and in the same verse the
   typical use of "leaven" in the sense of evil, which is never used
   otherwise in the Bible. Hypocrisy will not avail in the day of judgment
   (vv. 2-3), and one of its causes, the fear of man (v. 4), is supremely
   foolish in the light of responsibility to God (v. 5), and in the light
   of His abounding care for us (vv. 6-7). The lesson is that of open
   acknowledgment of Jesus Christ in order to His acknowledgment of us,
   (vv. 8-10), even though it mean trial and suffering (vv. 11-12). The
   explanation of verse 10 seems to be that one might speak against the
   Son of Man and do it ignorantly. But it is the office of the Holy Ghost
   to testify to Christ and make Him known, and thus he who rejects that
   testimony puts himself outside of the pale of salvation and hence,
   forgiveness.

   2. Covetousness vv. 13-24.

   There is a closer connection in thought between this and the foregoing
   than appears at first. The disciple might be called a fool who would
   act according to the foregoing, but the real fool is now brought into
   view. He is a covetous man (cf. Ezek. 33:31) for that was the animus of
   him who made this request of Jesus (vv. 13-15). The latter was setting
   forth the heavenly calling, but his questioner thought only of his
   possessions in the present life. This explains the parable that follows
   (vv. 16-21), and in the light of it all the verses are to be
   interpreted down to 48, but especially to 34. "Take no thought" (v. 22)
   means no anxious, worrying thought indicative of a lack of faith and
   knowledge of God in. Christ. The birds of the air and the grass of the
   field might teach us lessons (vv 24-28). Such a spirit belongs to the
   world, but not to the family of God (vv. 29-34).

   3. Carelessness vv. 35-48.

   is connected with covetousness, for he who is absorbed in the things of
   earth is not getting prepared for those of heaven, which will be his
   when the Lord comes again. It is to be noted that He comes before
   daybreak (v. 38) hence, the need of always watching, and working too
   (vv. 42-48, cf. with 1 Cor. 15:58). The unfaithful disciple, the merely
   professing Christian will have his portion with the unbelievers.

   4. Ignorance vv. 49-59.

   is the cause of carelessness. In other words we are not to expect peace
   and worldly co-operation in the present age but unpopularity and
   divisions. Happy are we, if warned by our surroundings we take the
   right course (v. 57) for judgment cometh (vv. 58-59). In the "Sermon on
   the Mount," our Lord used similar language, but then as another says,
   He was pressing on His disciples the importance of reconciliation with
   an adversary. Here He is teaching the multitudes a similar lesson in
   view of the judgment, but in both instances we are reminded that there
   is no mercy for the guilty at the bar of God. "Now is the accepted
   time, to-day is the day of salvation."

   Questions.

   1. Name the four warnings of this chapter.

   2. Analyze verse 1-12.

   3. Why is blasphemy against the Holy Ghost unpardonable?

   4. Who is a fool?

   5. Periodically considered, when may the Lord be expected?

   6. Why should men accept Christ now?

   JUDGMENT AND PENALTY

   Chapter 13

   There is such a close connection between the opening of this chapter
   and the close of the preceding, that it were better not to have
   separated them. Jesus had been speaking of judgment and penalty, and
   now came those to Him who put a case or two which seem to illustrate
   what he said (vv. 1-15). But they are mistaken, as He teaches them.
   "Those events had a voice for the living, and concerned not only the
   dead."

   The parable of the barren fig-tree is intended to impress this still
   further (vv. 6-9). The Jewish nation was the fig-tree, and for the
   three years of Christ's ministry there had been no fruit from it. A
   little longer delay would be granted, and then it would be cut down,
   but not rooted up, observe. This agrees with all the prophets, that a
   goodly remnant will in the future spring up and bear fruit.

   All that follows down to and including verse 21, is related to this
   same teaching. For example, the spirit of the ruler of the synagogue
   (vv. 10-17), showed the unlikelihood of any change in the nation ;
   while the parables of the mustard-seed and the leaven foreshadowed what
   we were taught in Matthew 13 from another point of view, in other
   words, the Jews were to lose their place as God's witnessing people on
   the earth for the time being, and His Kingdom would come to embrace the
   Gentiles. Both of these parables treat of Christian profession, the
   first (vv. 18-19) showing its spread from a small beginning, and the
   second (vv. 20-21) "its permeation by a generally accepted creed, as
   leaven permeated the dough." There is no thought in either of the
   parables however, that the Gospel would spread over the whole earth in
   this age, nor have we found this taught anywhere in the New Testament.

   The remainder of the chapter consists of Christ's teachings on His way
   toward Jerusalem {22), and they too, bear on the general subject of
   judgment and penalty. The question in verse 22 is answered only
   indirectly. Each one is to make sure of his own salvation. It is no
   ideal picture that is set before us in the verses following (vv.
   25-30), for it is the Judge of that solemn day Himself Who speaks. The
   Pharisees, troubled at His words, but hypocritically professing
   interest in His safety, warn Him in verse 31, but they might spare
   themselves their pains, for He was walking deliberately towards death,
   which, for Him, could take place only in Jerusalem.

   Questions.

   1. Tell the story of verses 1-5 in your own words.

   2. Give an interpretation of the barren fig-tree.

   3. Do the same for the two parables of the lesson.

   4. Memorize verse 24.

PARABLES OF GRACE

  Chapters 14-15

   1. The Selfish Guest c. 14:1-14.

   We pass over vv. 1-6 which set forth the occasion for the first
   parable. The lesson from this first parable is, that if in natural
   things such selfishness was unbecoming, how much more on the spiritual
   plane? (cf. 1 Peter 5, 5-6; Isa. 57:15).

   2. The Great Supper vv. 15-24.

   This was spoken on the same occasion as the other and in response to
   the remark of verse 15. Christ had spoken of reward at "the
   resurrection of the just" (v. 14), for those who, in the spiritual
   sense, acted on the principle He had laid down. But the resurrection of
   the just will take place at His second coming, although that of the
   unjust, or unbelieving, will not occur for at least 1,000 years
   thereafter (John 5:28-29) (Acts 24:14; 1 Cor. 15:23; Rev. 20:5-6).
   Those who will share in that first resurrection are described in verses
   21-23. The leaders of Israel are represented by those first invited to
   the supper (vv. 17-20). The common people were the next class (cf. v.
   21, with the first five chapters of the Acts). The Gentiles were the
   last (cf. v. 23 with Acts 13:46, 28:23-28, etc.

   3. The Tower and the Field of War vv. 25-35.

   The Saviour is again on the road, and admonishes the multitudes as to
   the spirit of true discipleship in the two parables that follow,
   closing with the simile of salt. True disciples were the salt of the
   earth (Matt. 5:13), but mere profession in that direction was as
   useless as salt which had lost its saltness.

   4. The Lost Sheep, the Lost Coin, and the Lost Son c. 15:1-32.

   The foregoing chapter deals with grace in a subjective way, acquainting
   us with the subjects of it and the danger of rejecting it, and adding
   exhortations for those who have received it. But in this we have the
   objective side, and behold the joy of God in bestowing it. It is
   fitting that these parables should have been spoken in the presence of
   the "publicans and sinners," and to understand their teaching we should
   remember that they, being Israelites, were on the same ground of
   privilege as the Scribes and Pharisees who objected to them. Hence the
   form of the parables -- a sheep wandering from the flock, a piece of
   money out of a number of pieces in the house, a prodigal son gone from
   the parental roof. If the shepherd and the woman could be so concerned
   under the circumstances, was it surprising that God should care for His
   immortal creatures, and especially His chosen people? Separating these
   first two parables, the first shows the activity of the Lord under the
   similitude of the shepherd, and the second, that of the Holy Spirit
   under the similitude of the woman. In other words, men are not only
   guilty (Rom. 3:19) as indicated by the wandering sheep, but they are by
   nature dead (Ephesians 2:1) as seen in the lifeless coin. The Son of
   God removes the guilt by His death and Sacrifice, and the Holy Spirit
   quickens the sinner. The third parable divides itself in two at verse
   24. The meaning of the first part is plain, that God welcomes the
   penitent sinner and rejoices over him. And that of the second part
   also, that the murmuring scribes and pharisees are depicted by the
   elder brother. We thus learn that self-righteous people, like the
   latter, who is not seen to enter the father's house, are in danger of
   excluding themselves from heaven through failure to understand and
   delight in salvation by grace.

   Questions.

   1. How many parables are here treated?

   2. Divide them into those subjective and objective.

   3. Give the dictionary meaning of these terms.

   4. Can you quote 1 Peter 5:5-6?

   5. What period intervenes between the two resurrections?

   6. How many passages of Scripture are referred to in this lesson, and
   how many have you verified?

   7. Distinguish the work of the two Persons of the Godhead in the
   parables of the lost sheep and the lost coin.

   8. What do we learn from the case of the elder brother in the parable
   of the prodigal?

USE OF OPPORTUNITY

  Chapters 16-17:19

   In the last lesson thought was turned towards the heavenly calling of
   the disciple, of which earthly wealth is not necessarily a part. To the
   Jews, this was "a great change, which we who, unlike them, never had a
   country on earth allocated to us, cannot well understand." For this
   reason our Lord now changes the character of His instruction, and shows
   in the parable of the unjust steward the results of the right use of
   opportunity, and in the story of the rich man and Lazarus, the perilous
   consequences of the opposite.

   "The lord" of verse 8 is not Jesus Christ, but the steward's earthly
   master who commended him for his foresight. The world which the sinner
   serves commends him in the same way for similar chicanery. On the other
   hand, verse 9 is to be understood as in the Revised Version. It is not
   "when ye fail," but when "it shall fail," the mammon of unrighteousness
   the worldly possessions leased to you for a little while, that the
   eternal friends you have made by the righteous use of it will "receive
   you into the eternal tabernacles." We thus see that our future
   possession "so apt to be viewed as airy and intangible, comes out as a
   solid and substantial reality."

   Of course the covetous pharisees deride Him for teaching like this (vv.
   13-15). therefore, after He rebukes them for their fleshly desires (v.
   18), He enforces what He has said by the story that follows (vv.
   19-31). It is not said that this is a parable, and for aught we know
   there may have been two such men on earth "whose history in the other
   world answers to that set forth in language suited to the day." "The
   vail is here lifted by Him who was competent to do it, and the
   condition of the lost in the unclothed state laid bare before us." Of
   what use then is earthly wealth so dearly prized by the covetous, if it
   be expended only in gratifying the selfish desires of its possessor?

   This lesson will not be too long if we include the next chapter down to
   verse 20, where we reach a natural division of the book. The chief
   feature of that chapter is the healing of the ten lepers (vv. 11-19),
   but the transition to it is our Lord's discourse to His disciples on
   the duty of forgiveness (vv. 1-10). The occasions for the forgiveness
   would be many and unavoidable in a life of sin (vv. 1-2), but it should
   never be omitted (vv. 3-4). In the presence of such an obligation the
   disciples might well say "Lord increase our faith!" (v. 5). And yet as
   He teaches them, it is not faith they require so much as obedience.
   This obedience should be displayed without self-glorying (vv. 6-10).

   Following Stuart, the story of the ten lepers illustrates four
   principles of the gospel: (1) the Lord visited the scenes of their
   wretchedness unasked; (2) they owned that among themselves, Jews and
   Samaritans there was no difference; (3), they supplicated divine mercy
   as those who felt their need of it; and (4), manifesting the obedience
   of faith they got the desired blessing. It is not till after all this
   that any difference is seen, and that in the case of the Samaritan. "He
   who was the most signal example of grace of them all, most valued it."
   But what a gainer he was by turning back to glorify God! (v. 19).

   Questions.

   1. In what sense does Christ now change the character of His
   instruction?

   2. Who is meant by "lord" in verse 8?

   3. How does this lesson show that the future hope of the saint is solid
   and substantial?

   4. Have we any positive ground for calling the story of the rich man
   and Lazarus a parable?

   5. How does the incident of the ten lepers illustrate the principles of
   the gospel?

COMING OF THE KINGDOM

  Chapters 17:20-18:30

   A transition of thought and teaching is marked by the demand of the
   Pharisees, "when the Kingdom of God should come" (c. 17:20) -- the
   Kingdom of which He had said so much, and which they had been led to
   expect by the Old Testament prophets. In our Lord's answer, "within
   you" (v. 21) is to be taken in the sense of "in the midst of you" (see
   R. V. margin), the meaning of which is seen in the context. The note in
   the Scofield Bible is informing here: "The Kingdom in its outward form
   as promised to David and described by the prophets had been rejected by
   the Jews, so that during this present age it would not 'come with
   observation' i. e., with outward show, but in the hearts of men.
   Meantime however, it was among them in the Person of the King and His
   disciples."

   The Kingdom would come some day with observation, but prior thereto
   persecution and suffering would be the lot of Christ's disciples, so
   that they would long for its speedy appearing (v. 22). They should be
   careful lest they be deceived (v. 23), for when it came it would be as
   open as it would be unexpected (v. 24). Its unexpectedness to the world
   is illustrated (vv. 26-30), and its discriminating judgments (vv.
   31-37). Of course, the coming of Christ here referred to is not His
   coming for His Church which will be caught up to meet Him in the air (1
   Thess. 4:16), but His manifestation to the world and to Israel after
   that has taken place.

   In view of the persecution and suffering to be experienced prior to
   that day, the resource of the disciples must be prayer (c. 18:1-8). The
   "widow" is doubtless the godly remnant of the Jews, to which the
   disciples in their day belonged, and which will be found on the earth
   between the translation of the church and the appearing of Christ
   referred to above. Verse 8 confirms this application, since the word
   "faith" there means not "personal faith, but faith in the whole body of
   revealed truth." In other words, it will be a time of such apostasy
   that the truth of God will have departed almost entirely from the
   earth.

   But other traits should characterize the saints of God at that trying
   time, of which He speaks first in parabolic form (vv. 9-14), and
   afterwards plainly (vv. 15-30). The traits emphasized in the parable
   are lowliness of spirit based on a right apprehension of sin and faith
   in sacrificial atonement. The Greek for "Be merciful" is used in the
   Septuagint and in the New Testament in connection with the Mercy seat
   (Exod. 25:17, 18, 21; Heb. 9:5), and the publican was "thinking not of
   mere mercy, but of the blood-sprinkled Mercy-seat." His prayer has been
   paraphrased thus: "Be toward me as Thou art when Thou lookest upon the
   atoning blood."

   The thought is carried out in connection with the blessing of the
   little children (vv. 15-17), see especially the last-named verse. And
   also in the story of the young ruler (vv. 18-30) found as well in
   Matthew and Mark. This last shows the hindrance against which all are
   to be warned who would enter into the Kingdom.

   Questions.

   1. Whence is obtained the title of this lesson?

   2. What is the meaning of "the Kingdom of God is within you?"

   3. How would you explain verse 22, chapter 17?

   4. What aspect of the "Coming of Christ" is referred to in the closing
   part of this chapter?

   5. How would you interpret the parable of the widow and the unjust
   judge?

   6. What is the meaning of "faith," 18:8?

   7. How do you understand the publican's prayer, "Be merciful?"

   REJECTION

   Chapters 18:31-19

   At this point we enter the period of Christ's formal rejection by His
   nation with which we have been made acquainted in the other synoptics,
   and hence we pass on to that which is peculiar to Luke, the conversion
   of Zaccheus (c. 19:10).

   Jesus never declined an invitation to hospitality, but this is the
   first instance in which He ever invited Himself (5). Murmured at for
   lodging with a "sinner," He justified the act (vv. 9-10 )and then spake
   the parable of the pounds (vv. 11-17) to "dispel the mistaken
   supposition that the Kingdom of God would immediately appear."

   In this parable Christ is the nobleman. The pound represents the
   opportunity for service given each of His disciples, and on that
   disciple's use of it will be determined his place in the Kingdom, when
   the nobleman returns to set it up. This parable differs from that of
   the talents (Matt. 25:14-30), though the two resemble each other. This
   speaks of opportunity, that of ability; and yet they agree in this,
   that the character of the service in the age to come will be that of
   ruling. But notice the reference to the "citizens" as distinguished
   from the servants. When Christ went away these two classes were left on
   the earth, and when He comes back the same two classes will meet Him,
   friends and enemies. Hence there can be no millennium before He comes.
   Notice also where this parable was spoken -- Jericho. There was still
   to be seen there a palace of Archelaus, who had gone to Rome to get
   Kingly power confirmed upon him. His citizens did send after him to
   frustrate his object, but he returned to reign in spite of all their
   efforts to influence Caesar against Him. As their attempt failed in the
   one case, so will it in the other. (Stuart.)

   The triumphal entry into Jerusalem (vv. 28-48) we pass over as
   sufficiently treated in Matthew 21, dwelling a moment however, on
   verses 41-44 which are original with Luke. Compare here chapter
   13:34-35. Christ's was the only sad heart in that rejoicing multitude,
   and sad not for Himself but the city that was soon to finally reject
   Him.

   Questions.

   1. What three things in this lesson are original with Luke?

   2. Why was the parable of the pounds spoken?

   3. How does this parable differ from the "talents"?

   4. Wherein do they agree?

   5. What rendered the speaking of this parable in Jericho specially
   appropriate?

THE LAST TEACHING IN JERUSALEM

  Chapters 20-21

   The facts of this lesson are: (1) the challenge of the chief priests
   and scribes as to the authority of Jesus which, as we saw in Matthew
   21, was equivalent to their formal rejection of Him who had just
   entered their city as the Messiah in fulfillment of Zechariah's
   prophecy; (2) the parable of the vineyard which, as we saw in the same
   place, was equivalent to His formal rejection of the nation; (3) the
   questionings of the Pharisees, the Sadducees and the scribes, "that
   they might take hold of His words, that so they might deliver Him unto
   the power and authority of the governor," (19-47); (4) the incident of
   the widow's mite (c. 21:1-4), dealt with in Mark 12; (5), the Olivet
   discourse on His second coming, being a shorter record of that in
   Matthew 24, and covering in this chapter verses 5-34.

   In the questioning of the Sadducees (c. 20 : 27-40) Luke gives
   particulars unnoticed by the other evangelists. He adds the words of
   Jesus, (v. 36) explaining why they who are counted "worthy to attain
   that world and the resurrection from the dead, neither marry nor are
   given in marriage," because they never "die any more" but, in that
   sense, "are equal unto the angels." In other words the ordinance of
   marriage is not needed to perpetuate the race. A further particular is
   at verse 38, "For all live unto Him." Death does not terminate man's
   existence -- either that of the righteous or the wicked, the believing
   or the unbelieving. As unclothed spirits they live before God, and of
   course this will be true in the further sense on the resurrection of
   their bodies from the dead. Another particular peculiar to Luke is in
   the Olivet discourse. Verses 20 and 24 are not given by Matthew or
   Mark. The whole of that section in Luke refers to the siege of
   Jerusalem by Titus A. D. 70, when the city was taken; but that siege
   foreshadows the greater one at the end of this age of which we learned
   in the Old Testament. In the siege at the end of the age the city will
   not be taken, but be delivered by the appearing of Christ (Rev.
   19:11-21). The references in Mathew and Mark unlike this in Luke, are
   to this last siege and not to the earlier one. In Luke, the sign is the
   compassing of Jerusalem by armies (v. 20), but in the other gospels it
   is the abomination in the holy place (2 Thess 2:4) -- (Scofield Bible).
   There is no contradiction among the evangelists as to this, as a
   comparison shows that questions touching both the commencement and the
   end of Jerusalem's trouble were put to Christ by His disciples. But the
   different narrators give those which relate to our Lord's reply as each
   was guided of the Spirit to record them. The trouble of Jerusalem
   caused by the rejection of Christ, began with the siege under Titus,
   but will not end till the times of the Gentiles have run their course.
   (Luke 21:24).

   Questions.

   1. Name the great facts of this lesson.

   2. Why is there no marrying in the resurrection life?

   3. What words of Jesus prove life after death?

   4. What essential difference is there between the siege of Jerusalem,
   A. D. 70, and that at the end of the age?

   5. To which does Luke refer?

   6. How would you harmonize the different statements of the evangelists
   on this point?

LAST DAY UPON EARTH

  Chapters 22-23

   Here we meet the momentous events recorded in Matthew 26 and 27 and
   Mark 14 and 15, and there treated as fully as space permitted.

   The incidents peculiar to Luke are first, the explanation of Judas'
   conduct that Satan entered into him (c. 22:3). Satan can enter into no
   man without his own consent, but the only safeguard against that is the
   new birth, (John 3); second, the information that Peter and John were
   the two disciples sent to make ready the passover (v. 8); third, the
   report of the strife among the disciples at that feast (vv. 24-30);
   fourth, the prediction of Peter's fall as the direct result of the work
   of Satan upon him -- (vv. 31-34). Satan's desire here should be
   understood as comprehending all the twelve, although it is Peter only
   for whom the Lord would pray as the one in danger. We cannot fail to
   contrast the sin of Peter with that of Judas, the former being forgiven
   while the latter was not. Peter a child of God was ensnared by Satan,
   Judas, a child of the devil was his tool. That is the great difference
   which faith produces; fifth, the story of Gethsemane is enriched by
   Luke in the mention of the angel from heaven strengthening Jesus, the
   drops of blood He sweat, and the circumstance that it was "for sorrow"
   the disciples slept (vv. 39-46); sixth, in the arrest, Luke alone
   reports the words of Jesus to the betrayer, "Betrayest thou the Son of
   Man with a kiss"? the request of the disciples whether they should
   "smite with the sword?" and the healing of Malchus' ear (vv. 47-53).
   Last, but not least, so far as Chapter 22 is in mind, it is Luke who
   tells us that "Peter remembered the word of the Lord" about his denial
   of Him, after the latter had "turned and looked upon Peter" (vv.
   61-62).

   Coming to the next chapter, Luke tells us the nature of the indictment
   against Jesus before Pilate, and perhaps the very form of it (v. 2);
   and he alone gives us the hearing before Herod (vv. 6-12). On the way
   to Golgotha, he describes with detail the procession. Simon the
   Cyrenian is bearing the cross "after Jesus" (v. 26); that is, as some
   think, Jesus Himself is bearing the cross, but the other is carrying
   "the lighter end of it behind Him." A great multitude are following,
   and lamenting women among them (v. 27). To these Jesus addresses the
   warning of verses 28-31 not recorded elsewhere. Luke also gives the
   correct meaning of Golgotha (Aramaic) and Calvary (Latin) as "the
   Skull" (v. 33).

   Luke's account of the crucifixion is different from the others. Matthew
   and Mark bring out men's hatred of Christ in the fullest way, John
   presents Him as a Divine Person in Whom is the calmness of One who knew
   whence He was, but Luke shows us "the Man Christ Jesus, suffering, but
   showing grace even on the cross." Of the seven sayings on the cross
   three are found only in Luke, one when interceding for His murderers,
   one when about to breathe out His life, and the third when His reply to
   the penitent thief.

   The story of the thief is original with Luke, who presents Him as a
   witness to Christ little expected at that moment and in that place. But
   what a miracle of grace is he -- a malefactor saved, blessed, and
   received into Paradise!

   Questions.

   1. In what chapters of Matthew and Mark are the events of this lesson
   paralleled?

   2. Name the incidents in Chapter 22 peculiar to Luke.

   3. Do the same with Chapter 23.

   4. Contrast the sin of Peter with that of Judas.

   5. Give the Aramaic sayings of Jesus on the cross as recorded only by
   Luke.

   6. Give the Aramaic and Latin words for "the place of a skull."

   FIRST DAY OF THE WEEK

   Chapter 24

   The order of our Lord's appearances on this day was given in the
   comment on Matthew 28, and need not be repeated. Indeed all of the
   events in the chapter were dealt with there, except the walk to Emmaus
   (vv. 13-35). Three score furlongs represent nearly eight miles (v. 13).
   Cleopas, one of the two on this journey is not met with elsewhere, and
   is to be distinguished from the "Clopas" of John 19:25. Luke has
   sometimes been identified as the other, but this is conjecture. The
   story runs on smoothly and requires little explanation; but, following
   Stuart, we remark on the wisdom Christ displayed in dealing with the
   men. He brought them to the written word, and He left them there (vv.
   25-27), furnishing no fresh revelation, but expecting them to rest on
   the old one. What He expected of them, He still expects of His
   disciples, and the sooner we realize and act on it, the sooner will we
   have peace.

   Another interesting item is the reference to Simon Peter (v. 34) which
   no other evangelist mentions, but which Paul records later (1
   Corinthians 15; 5). The reason for silence concerning it was the
   question of communion with His Lord that had to be settled for Peter.
   Could he again enjoy it after what he had done? "That visit settled
   it," says Stuart: "We say visit because evidently it was the Lord who
   sought him out." He "hath appeared unto Simon." The effect of this
   interview on Peter is seen in John 21:7.

   Luke is very definite concerning the evidences of Christ's
   resurrection. "A spirit hath not flesh and bones, as ye see me have"
   (39). There is no mention of blood, for that is the life of the flesh
   (Lev. 17:14), and was poured out when He died for guilty men.

   Luke's version of the commission to the disciples is new, in that
   "repentance and remission of sins" were to "be preached in His Name
   among all nations, beginning at Jerusalem" (v. 47). This is "the gospel
   of the grace of God" (Acts 20:24), and is to be distinguished from the
   gospel of the Kingdom which our Lord Himself and His disciples preached
   throughout His earthly life. That gospel will be preached again as we
   have seen (Matt. 24:14), but not until after the translation of the
   church, and Israel takes up her mission once more among the Gentiles.

   Power was needed for the preaching of this gospel, and it is promised
   (v. 49), but our Lord must first ascend ere it can be "shed forth,"
   hence the record following (vv. 50-51). This reference to the ascension
   in Luke makes his Gospel the most complete outline of the four, for it
   begins with the announcement of the birth of John the Baptist as none
   of the others do, and closes with this event which Mark alone alludes
   to but in the briefest manner. Speaking of verse 51, the Scofield Bible
   says very beautifully, "the attitude of our Lord here characterizes
   this age as one of grace, an ascended Lord is blessing a believing
   people with spiritual blessings. The Jewish, or Mosaic age was marked
   by temporal blessings as the reward of an obedient people (Deut.
   28:1-15). In the Kingdom or Millennial age, spiritual and temporal
   blessings unite."

   Questions.

   1. Have you reviewed the order of our Lord's appearances?

   2. How was Christ's wisdom displayed on the walk to Emmaus?

   3. What reason for silence is suggested in regard to our Lord's
   appearance to Simon?

   4. Why is the mention of "blood" omitted in the testimony to Christ's
   bodily resurrection?

   5. What is the distinction between the two "gospels" mentioned?

   6. In what sense is the third Gospel the completest?

   7. Distinguish among the three ages, the Jewish, Christian and
   Millennial.
     __________________________________________________________________

JOHN

   INTRODUCTORY

   The first three gospels are called the Synoptics, from two Greek words
   which means "a view together," the idea being that they set forth the
   same general view of the story of Jesus Christ, and contain much the
   same material although differently arranged. They were the earliest
   gospels, in circulation within twenty-five or thirty years of the
   Ascension, and did the work of an evangelist in carrying the knowledge
   of Jesus to peoples theretofore ignorant of Him. From among these
   peoples thus converted to Jesus, Jews, Romans and Greeks, the Christian
   church was founded, and to this latter body, composed of all three
   classes, the Gospel of John was addressed.

   The Reason for John's Gospel.

   Thirty years, more or less, had elapsed since the Synoptics, and with
   the growth and development of the church had come up questions for
   settlement that the fourth gospel was designed to meet. These touched
   on the Person and work of Jesus as the Messiah, his nature and the
   significance of His death, so that in answering them John reveals the
   profoundest truth found in the gospels. For the same reason John's
   Gospel is nearly altogether new as compared with the Synoptics. This is
   not to say that John invented what he wrote, or that the substance of
   his Gospel was unknown to the other writers, but only that, in the
   wisdom of God, the relation of such things as he records was held back
   until the period when it was particularly needed and could best be
   understood and appreciated. John was the last survivor of the twelve,
   dying near the close of the first century, kept on the earth by divine
   Providence, until, like his Master, he, too, had finished the work
   given him to do.

   Proof of Later Date.

   The proof of the later date of John's Gospel is in such references as
   1:32, and 3:24, which assume a previous knowledge of the facts on the
   part of his readers. It is found also in the omissions of all the
   material of the Synoptics down to the passion. There is only one
   exception to this, the feeding of the 5,000 which was retained in John
   probably in order to introduce the discourse on the Bread of Life
   (chapter 6).

   There is a further evidence of the later date of John in that which, at
   the same time, affords an illustration of its profounder character,
   viz., the prevailing use of words belonging to the later rather than
   the earlier experiences of Christianity such as: Sinner, Repent or
   Repentance, Righteous, Justify, Believe, Love, God as Father, World as
   Renewed, Humanity, Truth, True, Light, Life and Eternal Life.

   Depth of Its Teaching.

   Further illustration of its profundity is found in the miracles it
   records, which show a higher degree of power than those in the
   Synoptics, and testify the more emphatically to the divine origin of
   Jesus' message, and by inference to the Deity of the Messenger. Witness
   the turning of the water into wine (chapter 2), the healing of the
   nobleman's son in the same chapter and that of the impotent man in
   chapter 5. Also the man born blind (9), and the raising of Lazarus
   (11).

   The nature of the discourses in John's Gospel illustrates the same
   thing. They are on the profoundest themes which fell from the lips of
   our Lord. For example : The New Birth, The Living Water, The Honor of
   the Son, The Living Bread, The Good Shepherd, The Farewell Discourse.

   Consider also the doctrines emphasized in John's record. Take those
   related to the Godhead alone. Observe how he speaks of God in the
   abstract, 1:18, 4:24, 5:37. No such teaching about God is found
   anywhere in the Bible outside of the epistles of this same evangelist
   and those of Paul Observe how he speaks of God as Father, 3:16, 5:36,
   6:37, 8:18, 10:30, 17:11. Of the person of Jesus Christ as related to
   the Father, 1:1, 14, 18, 5:17, 18, 26, 14:9, 10; and as related to man,
   1:4, 6:46, 8:40-46, etc. Of the Holy Spirit, 3:5, 4:14, 7:38, 14:12,
   16, 26, 15:26, 16:7. Of course, in these instances it is frequently
   Christ Himself who is speaking and John simply reporting or quoting
   Him, but the point is, it was left for John to do this, to report Him
   in these deeper and profounder utterances which are so important for
   the church to know.

   Questions.

   1. Why are the other gospels called the Synoptics?

   2. What was their accomplishment?

   3. How much later than they was this gospel written?

   4. What was the particular object of this Gospel?

   5. How does it compare in character and contents with the others?

   6. What was the date of John's death?

   7. Have you examined the proof texts as to the date of this Gospel?

   8. What further evidence of a late date can you indicate?

   9. Give one or two illustrations of the profundity of this Gospel.

   10. Name some of its great discourses.

DEITY OF JESUS CHRIST

  Chapters 1-2:12

   This portion of the Gospel is chosen as a lesson because it gives an
   opportunity at one view to consider the Deity of Jesus Christ as
   declared in the preface 1:1-14, as witnessed to by the testimony of the
   Baptist, 1:15-34, and demonstrated in the first visit to Judea after
   the baptism, 1:35-2:12.

   1. Preface. 1:1-14.

   Observe the earliest illustration of John's presentation of Jesus as
   the Son of God. Nothing corresponding is found in the Synoptics. John
   asserts the Deity of Jesus, showing Him to be the Creator of all things
   and the source of all life (verses 1-5). He emphasizes the point by
   comparing Him with John the Baptist (6-9). He is careful, too, to
   proclaim Jesus as the source of the renewed spiritual life of man, the
   eternal life which is coincident with salvation (10-13). And yet side
   by side with these testimonies he demonstrates His perfect humanity
   (14).

   "Word" is the Greek Logos which means (1) a thought or concept, and
   (2), the expression or utterance of that thought. And thus as a
   designation of Christ it is peculiarly applicable because in Him are
   embodied all the treasures of the Divine Wisdom or the collective
   thought of God (1 Cor. 1:24; Eph. 3:2; Col. 2:2, 3), and also because
   from all eternity, but especially in His incarnation, is He the
   utterance or expression of the Person or "thought" of God (John 1, 3-5,
   9, 14-18; 14:9-11; Col. 2:9) -- Scofield Bible.

   2. The Testimony of John the Baptist. 1:15-34.

   Every student will be impressed with the originality of this Gospel
   concerning the testimony of John the Baptist. Nothing corresponding is
   found in the Synoptics. Observe his testimony to the pre-existence and
   deity of Jesus Christ (15-18), and to the sacrificial nature of His
   death (29). It was questions of this character which arose for
   settlement in the early church and which John the evangelist was
   retained on the earth to answer. Was Jesus God as well as man? Was His
   death a sacrifice for human guilt? How clearly the Baptist's witness
   bears upon these points.

   3. The First Visit to Judea. 1:35-2:12.

   It is a peculiarity of the fourth Gospel that it dwells upon the
   ministry of Jesus in Judea while the others mention more especially His
   ministry in Galilee. In Matthew, after the narrative of the baptism,
   there is scarcely any allusion to Jesus visiting Judea until the
   nineteenth chapter, which was His last visit. A convenient division of
   the present Gospel will be along the line of these different visits.

   This first includes the baptism, overlapping what we described as the
   testimony of John, and might be said to begin at verse 29 instead of
   35. Besides the baptism it includes the call of the first four
   disciples (35-51), a call preliminary to the more formal call in the
   other gospels. In connection with the call of Nathaniel, Christ's
   reference to the prophetic symbolism in Jacob's dream of the ladder
   points to the Millennial age, when visible communication may be carried
   on between earth and Heaven.

   This first visit to Judea ended with His return to Capernaum in
   Galilee, on which journey was wrought the creation of wine out of water
   at the wedding feast. The nature of this miracle and the bearing of its
   record upon the peculiar position of John's Gospel has been alluded to
   in "Introductory."

   Questions.

   1. Why have these chapters been chosen as a lesson?

   2. How is the Deity of Christ brought out in the "preface"?

   3. What does "Word" mean, and how does it show the Deity of Christ?

   4. Have you examined the texts in Corinthians, Ephesians and
   Colossians?

   5. How does John the Baptist witness to the Deity of Christ?

   6. On what feature of Christ's ministry does this Gospel dwell?

   7. What events are included in the first visit to Judea?

   8. What kind of a work was the turning of water into wine?

SECOND VISIT TO JUDEA

  Chapters 2:13-4

   With reference to what occasion, and hence at what period of the year,
   did this visit take place (2:13)? With what display of Jesus' authority
   and power is it associated (14-17)? Comparing this with Matthew 21:12,
   13, it would seem that this transaction was repeated at the last
   Passover. In what manner did He refer at this time to His death and
   resurrection (18-22)? What great discourse of Jesus is associated with
   this second visit to Judea (3:1-21)? Where did this discourse occur
   presumably (2:23)? How does the theme of this discourse demonstrate the
   profundity of this gospel, and bear out the theory that it was written
   for the church? How further does John the Baptist bear testimony to
   Jesus on this visit (3:25-36)? An analysis of this testimony like that
   in the first chapter, would make an excellent sermon, or Bible reading.
   He testifies (1) to Jesus, relationship to His people (verse 29); (2),
   His growing influence and authority (30); (3), His exaltation (31);
   (4), His truth (32, 34); (5), His supreme power and grace (35, 36).

   What reason is assigned for Jesus' departure from Judea at this time
   (4:1-3)? Whence did He journey, and what route did He take (3, 4)? What
   exhibition of grace was associated with this journey (5-42)? Select
   some passages in this part of the chapter which harmonize with the
   design of John's Gospel. What about verses 10, 14, 24? How long did
   Jesus remain in Samaria, and where did He next go (43) ? What miracle
   is connected with this return journey to Galilee, and how does it bear
   on the purpose of John's Gospel (46-54)? An allusion to this miracle
   was made in the introduction to our study of John.

   We must not pass the teaching in 3:3-8 about regeneration. We see how
   essential it is because the natural man can not "see," apprehend, the
   Kingdom of God without it. Read here Jer. 17:9; 1 Cor. 2:14; Rom. 8:7,
   8; Ps. 51:5; Eph. 2:3. As to its nature or source it is a supernatural,
   creative act of the Holy Spirit, not reforming our old nature, but
   giving us a new one alongside of the old (John 1:12, 13 2 Cor. 5:17;
   Eph. 2:10; 4:24). There is but one condition for our receiving it, viz:
   faith in the crucified and risen Lord (John 3:14, 15, 16; Gal. 3:24).
   This gospel is richly set before us in the familiar 16th verse referred
   to above. Salvation may be said to be its theme, and we find in it:
   (1), its source, the love of God; (2), its ground, the gift of Christ;
   (3), its means, faith; (4) its need, "should not perish"; (5), its
   result, eternal life; (6), its extent, "whosoever." That word "perish"
   must not be misunderstood. It is translated "marred" in Mark 2:22 and
   "lost" in Matt, 10:6 and other places, but no where does it signify
   cessation of existence.

   The great teaching in chapter 4 is suggested in verses 6-14 about the
   Holy Spirit, whose indwelling in the believer is set before us in the
   Symbol of the living water. Other truths are the nature of God {24),
   the revelation of the Messiahship (26); the governing motive of Jesus
   (34), and the miracle of verses 46-53.

   Questions.

   So many questions are asked in the text of the lesson that but few are
   required here.

   1. What is the doctrine in chapter 3:3-8?

   2. Tell what you have learned about it in this lesson.

   3. How many of the corroborative scriptures have you examined?

   4. Analyze John 3:16.

   5. What do we learn about the Holy Spirit in chapter 4?

THIRD VISIT TO JUDEA

  Chapters 5-6

   1. This visit like the second was occasioned by the Passover, and a
   year later (6). What miracle was wrought on this occasion (5:2-9)? With
   what effect on the unbelieving Jews (10-16)? How does Jesus justify
   such labor on the Sabbath day (17)? On what two-fold ground did His
   enemies seek to kill Him (18)? The latter of these grounds, because He
   said "God was His Father," is deeply important. The Revised Version
   translates it because "He also called God His OWN Father." The Jews
   understood Him to declare God to be His Father in a sense in which He
   was not the Father of other men. This is why they said He made "Himself
   equal with God." The importance of this is seen in that it contains a
   direct claim on Jesus' part to be equal with God, i. e., a claim of
   absolute Deity.

   The Jews so regarded His words, and Jesus took no pains to correct that
   impression, on the contrary, His words that follow are an argument, to
   prove that He was God. Almost all the verses down to 31 prove this, but
   especially verse 22,. This discourse concludes with a supplementary one
   on the Four Witnesses (32-47). We have here cited by Jesus Himself, the
   witness of John the Baptist (32-35), the witness of His own marvelous
   works (36), the witness of the Father (37, 38), and the witness of the
   Holy Scriptures (39), but how vain so far as moving the wills of His
   unbelieving countrymen was concerned (40)!

   2. Leaving Judea again, where do we next find Jesus (6:1-3)? What
   miracle is associated therewith (5-13)? This is one of the few miracles
   found in the other gospels which is also recorded by John, and for the
   reason doubtless of leading up to the discourse on the Living Bread.
   What effect had this miracle on those who saw it (14)? What did they
   propose to do with Jesus in consequence of their opinion (15)? What did
   the knowledge of their purpose lead Jesus to do? What bearing has His
   action on the incident in chapter 18:10, 11, and His words before
   Pilate in the same chapter, verse 36? To what place did Jesus depart?
   What miracle took place during the night (16-21)? Where next do we find
   Jesus (22-24)? It is at this point the discourse is given to which
   reference has been made, and which is one of those which give the
   gospel its distinctively spiritual character. At what place was this
   discourse given (59)? How does it seem to have been received by the
   people generally (41, 52)? How by the disciples (60, 66)? What
   foreshadowing of His death does He reveal (66-71)? Why did He confine
   His ministry to Galilee just now (7:1)?

   3. The importance of these two chapters grow on one as establishing the
   Deity of Christ, and the vital character of the work for man which He
   came into the world to do. As illustrating the latter, consider
   especially verses 37-40 in the discourse on the Living Bread: (1), the
   Father gives His chosen ones to the Son; (2), the Son receives all
   such; (3) the reason for His so doing is His devotion to His Father's
   will; (4), His will is that He lose none of those the Father gives Him;
   (5), the means by which this choice of the Father becomes operative in
   individual cases is faith, "believing on" the Son.

   Another way to treat this chapter is to divide it into four parts
   designated by the attitude of the multitude towards our Lord; (1),
   Discussion (four dialogs) (25-40); (2), Dissatisfaction, (41-51);
   Dissension (52-59); Defection; (60-66). The foregoing is quoted from an
   unknown source.

   Questions.

   1. What occasioned this visit to Judea?

   2. State the circumstance under which Jesus claimed equality with God.

   3. What four witnesses does He produce to substantiate His claim?

   4. What distinction is accorded the miracle of the loaves and fishes?

   5. Analyze chapter 6:37-40.

   6. Analyze the chapter as a whole.

FEAST OF TABERNACLES

  Chapters 7-10:21

   The story of the fourth and last visit to Judea is too long and
   important to gather into one lesson, and will be broken up into three
   or four, the first of which bears the above title.

   1. How did the brethren of Jesus regard Him at this time (7:2-5)? What
   hesitancy did He exhibit in going up to this feast (6-9)? This feast
   took place in the fall, corresponding to our October. This chapter and
   the next are identified as those of the Controversies in the Temple.
   They represent periods of sustained contention with enemies such as are
   described nowhere else in the gospels. The crisis indicated in the
   Synoptics is now rapidly approaching. Examine in this connection verses
   12, 13, 20, 26, 27, 30, 32, 43, of chapter 7. What effect had Jesus'
   answers to His opponents upon the officials (45, 46)? What
   authoritative person speaks on His behalf at this critical moment
   (50-52)?

   2. Where did Jesus pass the night after this exhausting day (8:1)?
   Where is He found the next morning (2)? With what work of courage and
   grace does the day begin (3-11)? Who came off victor in that contest of
   light and darkness, Jesus or His adversaries (6)? The controversy
   begins again by Jesus' bold declaration of Himself as "the Light of the
   World," a declaration which, if unsupported by the truth, makes Him an
   imposter, but otherwise establishes His right to be all that this
   gospel claims for Him -- that He is God. Observe the features of the
   controversy all through this chapter, but especially at verses 13, 19,
   25, 37, 48, 52, 59. Observe, too, the repeated declarations of Jesus
   bearing upon the dignity of His person, as in verses 16, 18, 19, 23,
   28, 36, 42, 46, 51, 56, 58. It is comforting that His testimony was not
   fruitless in discipleship (30).

   3. As Jesus passed from this murderous crowd, what miracle is wrought
   (chapter 9)? What explanation does Jesus afford as to why this man was
   born blind (3)? How does this work of power and mercy effect the
   enemies of Jesus, does it soften or harden their opposition (16, 28,
   29)? What did they finally do to the man (34)? What does "cast him out"
   probably mean? Compare verse 22, last clause. How does Jesus make a
   further claim of Deity in addressing this man (35-37)? It is to be
   observed in this connection that the discourse on the Good Shepherd, in
   chapter 10, grew out of the casting out of this man from the synagogue
   because of his confession of Jesus. The Scribes and Pharisees are the
   "hirelings" Jesus has in mind, who showed themselves to be such in
   their treatment of this man. Notice how this discourse also falls into
   harmony with the purpose of John's Gospel to present the highest aspect
   of Christ's Person and work, for example, compare His utterances in
   verses 10, 11, 15, 17, 18. His work is clearly that of a substitute
   Savior, and yet none other than God could speak of Himself thus. What
   opposite results were produced by this discourse (19-21)?

   4. Reference was made above to chapters 7 and 8 as those of the
   controversies in the Temple. The first controversy has been described
   as touching the character of Christ's teaching and the condition for
   testing it (15-30) ; the second, as touching the character of the
   Sabbath day (21-24); the third, on the divine character of Christ
   Himself (25-31); the fourth, on His approaching disappearance, its
   nature and object (32-36). Another outline is the following:
   controversy one, on the source of His knowledge (14-24); controversy
   two, on the origin of His being (25-31); three, on the mysteriousness
   of His sayings (32-36). In the same way chapter 8 might be regarded as
   a controversial discourse on (1), the nature of His mission (12-20);
   (2), its need (21-30); (3), its result (31-36); (4), possibly, its
   motive (37-58).

   Speaking specifically of chapter 10 and the discourse on the Good
   Shepherd it may be stated that the Shepherd work of our Lord has three
   aspects: (1), as the Good Shepherd He gives His life for the sheep;
   (2), as the Great Shepherd He intercedes for them as one alive from the
   dead, and hence is caring for and perfecting them (Heb. 13:20); (3), as
   the Chief Shepherd He is coming again in glory to reward the faithful
   under shepherds (1 Pet. 5:4).

   Questions.

   1. When do the feasts of the Passover and the Tabernacles relatively
   occur?

   2. How would you characterize chapters 7 and 8?

   3. How is Jesus proven to be God in this chapter?

   4. Analyze chapter 8.

   5. Name the three aspects of Christ's work as Shepherd.

FEAST OF THE DEDICATION AND THE HOME IN BETHANY

  Chapters 10:22-11

   1. The Feast of the Dedication took place midway between that of the
   Tabernacles and the Passover, or some time corresponding to our
   December or January. It is mentioned no where else in the Bible, and it
   is not positively known just what it commemorated.

   Where Jesus had been in the meantime is not revealed except that it is
   not stated that He returned to Galilee. We dwell on this period to call
   attention to the same features as in the previous one, viz: the putting
   forth of the boldest claims on Jesus' part, followed by conflict with
   His opponents. For the claims consult verses 28 and 30, and the
   conflict, 31 and 39. What was the sequel of this appearance so far as
   Jesus was concerned (40, 41)? Notice that in the face of all the
   criticism and opposition, the disciples continually increased (42).

   We should not leave this without a further word on verse 30, which
   literally translated is, "I and My Father are one thing." (Bishop
   Ryle.) Christ does not say "One" in the masculine, but in the neuter
   gender. That is, He and His Father are not one in Person, but one in
   nature, power, will. It silences those who say there is but one Person
   in the Godhead, and those also who say that the Son is inferior to the
   Father.

   Our Lord's defence of this language against the charge of blasphemy
   (33-36), is an argument from a lesser to a greater. In Psalm 82, the
   inspired writer is speaking of the position and duties of princes and
   rulers, whose elevation above other men and consequent responsibility
   was so great, that compared with them, they might be called "gods." If
   then no fault is found with them, who receive this honor by grace, how
   can He deserve blame Who possesses this honor by nature? "Sanctified"
   (34) means "set apart," and the verse teaches the eternal generation of
   Christ. The Jews did not understand Christ to claim to be "god" in the
   sense of the 82d Psalm or they would not have threatened to stone Him;
   but God in the sense of Deity, and hence Christ's acceptance of that
   claim, as in chapter 5, is an assertion of that fact on His part.

   2. We now come to chapter 11, where we find Jesus in Bethany. Here
   occurs the raising of Lazarus. In the Synoptics we read of the raising
   of Jairus' daughter and the son of the widow of Nain. In the first case
   death had just ensued, and in the second but a single day had
   intervened. Here, however, Lazarus had been four days dead. Of course,
   with God it is no harder to restore life in the one case than in either
   of the others, and yet all must be impressed with the gradation of
   difficulty illustrated in the three, and that the most difficult,
   humanly speaking, should be recorded only in John's Gospel. This, like
   so many other features, shows the purpose of this gospel to set forth
   Jesus in the highest aspect of all, that of the Son of God -- the Son
   of God giving life to the world. What a wonderful declaration that in
   verse 25!

   Speaking of this miracle in general terms, Bishop Ryle makes three good
   points: (a), it was intended to supply the Jews with one more
   incontrovertible proof that Jesus was the Messiah (cf. again their
   question in 10:24), (b), it was meant to prepare their minds for our
   Lord's own resurrection. They could not say when the tomb of Jesus was
   found empty, that His resurrection was an impossibility; (c), it is the
   most credible of all our Lord's miracles, and supported by the most
   incontrovertible proof.

   Questions.

   1. When did the Feast of Dedication take place?

   2. Explain 10:30.

   3. Explain 10:33-36.

   4. With what circumstances are we impressed in comparing the raising of

   Lazarus with the other two restorations to life?

   5. Quote from memory 11:25, 26.

   6. What three good points on this miracle are made by Bishop Ryle?

APPROACH TO THE HOLY OF HOLIES

  Chapters 12-13

   1. A footnote of the Scofield Bible which suggests the title of this
   lesson is well worth quoting: "chapters 12-17 are a progression
   according to the order of approach to God in the Tabernacle types.
   Chapter 12 in which Christ speaks of His death answers to the brazen
   altar of burnt offering, type of the cross. Passing from the altar
   toward the holy of holies, the laver is next reached answering to
   chapter 13. With his associate priests now purified, the High Priest
   enters the holy place in the communion of chapters 14-16. Entering
   alone the holy of holies, the High Priest intercedes 17. It is not for
   the salvation of His own for which he intercedes, but their keeping and
   blessing. His death has saved them, and this is assumed as accomplished
   (17:4)."

   2. The facts of chapter 12 are the supper at Bethany (1-11), the
   triumphal entry (12-19) and the visit of the Greeks concluding the
   chapter. The first two having been touched upon in the synoptics, let
   us consider the last which some regard as the second great temptation
   in Jesus' life. The considerations justifying such a view are found in
   the effect which the request of the Greeks to see Him made upon Jesus:
   "Now is my soul troubled," "Except a corn of wheat fall into the ground
   and die," "Father, save me from this hour." Also in the heavenly
   testimony to His Sonship which was again afforded Him. The thought is
   that the Greeks, whether heathens or proselytes to the Jewish religion,
   had come to invite Jesus to return with them to their own land. We have
   seen what the Greek race stood for, what their ideals were, and how
   likely they would have been to make a god of Jesus had He consented. It
   was a temptation not unlike that of Peter, when in Matthew 16, he
   sought to dissuade Jesus from going to the Cross, or, like that of
   Satan in the wilderness, when showing Jesus "all the kingdoms of the
   world and the glory of them," He said: "All these will I give Thee if
   Thou wilt fall down and worship me." This view assumes deeper
   significance if we recall that the time these Greeks approached Jesus
   was when He had most come to realize that "He had come to His own and
   His own received Him not." It was when He was rejected by His own
   nation that this sister nation, great in much that the world called
   greatness, came to Him thus and said, "Come with us and we will
   receive, honor, and deify Thee !" Ah! if He had, what would have become
   of this poor lost world (20-36)?

   3. We should not pass to the next chapter without observing in passing
   the additionally strong testimony John bears as his manner is, to the
   Deity of Jesus. See for example, the argument to be drawn from verses
   37-41, especially the last-named. Look up the quotation in Isaiah 6 and
   ask yourself whether John's testimony must not be utterly dishonored
   unless Jesus is God incarnate. How corroborative of this are Jesus' own
   words in verses 44, 45. What is the leading event in chapter 13? What
   is the lesson taught in this transaction (12-16)? And yet is there not
   more than a lesson in humility here? What of the mysterious teaching in
   verses 8, 9 We have here a symbolic representation of Christ's
   intercessory work for His people. They are already "clean" so far as
   their salvation is concerned because of faith in Him, and on the ground
   of His finished work on the Cross; but passing through the world brings
   daily defilement which requires daily cleansing, for which provision is
   made by His intercession as our High-priest. Compare 1 John 1, 9.
   Peter's words in verse 8, illustrate the mistake of the sinner with
   reference to Christ's atonement: while those in verse 9, illustrate the
   mistake of the saint with reference to His intercession.

   What omission is found in this gospel with reference to the events of
   this last Passover night as compared with the Synoptics? What
   additional details of the betrayal are given here (18-30)?

   Questions.

   1. What justifies the title to this lesson?

   2. What are the three great facts of chapter 12?

   3. What significance is attached by some to the visit of the Greeks,
   and why?

   4. With what other temptation of Jesus is this classed?

   5. How do verses 37-41 compared with Isaiah 6:1-4 prove the Deity of
   Jesus Christ?

   6. What verses in chapter 12 teach the sacrificial character of
   Christ's death?

   7. What symbolic representation is afforded in chapter 13?

   8. Explain the spiritual distinction between "bathed" (R. V.) and "wash
   his feet" in verse 10.

   9. What two mistakes are illustrated in Peter's words?

   10. Can you quote from memory 1 John 1:9?

   CENTRAL TEACHING OF JESUS CHRIST

   Chapter 14

   1. The title of this lesson is borrowed from Bernard's volume on
   chapters 13-17 inclusive. Others call the chapters the heart of the
   heart of the Gospel. Commonly chapters 14-16 are known as the farewell
   discourse to the disciples, which occurred in the same place and on the
   same occasion as the washing of the disciples' feet. Indeed there seems
   to have been two discourses on the occasion, the one limited to chapter
   14, and the other to 15 and 16.

   2. Chapter 14 as to subjects might be thus classified: the preparation
   for Christ's Second coming (1-3); the identity of the Father and the
   Son (4-15); the office of the Holy Spirit in the Church (16-26); and
   the bequest of peace (27-31). We have seen that the Second Coming of
   Christ is to be conceived of under two aspects, a coming for His saints
   (1 Thess. 4:14-17), and a Coming to judge the nations (Matt. 24:29,
   30), and it is the first of these aspects that is here referred to. The
   "Father's house" not God's dominion is in the foreground. It has "
   'mansions' which suggests settled continuance and secure possession,"
   "many" mansions, not in the sense of ampleness only, but variety.
   Jesus' going is necessary to prepare them, for they were not open to
   the sons of men till the Son of Man was glorified (see the Author's
   "Progress in the Life to Come") and yet their preparation was not
   enough, but there is the added grace of the Coming again to receive His
   disciples unto Himself. This is not a continuous coming again but a
   final and collective one (Rev. 22:20). It is a re-union too, "Where I
   am, there ye may be also" (cf. 12:26; 17:24; 2 Cor. 5:8; Phil. 1:23).

   3. The next subject (4-15) is introduced by the suggestion that
   disciples sometimes know more than they suppose or use (4). "Cometh
   unto the Father" (6), is to be construed not only as coming to Him in
   glory at the last, but coming to Him in a reconciled relation now
   through faith in Christ. Verses 7-11 contain truths too deep for human
   understanding, and we can only say in the face of them that the more we
   know of the Son, the more we know of the Father. The first half of
   verse 12 refers to the miraculous gifts the apostolic church exercised,
   and the last to the moral and spiritual effects of the preaching of the
   gospel from that day to this. The reason for these gifts and these
   effects is twofold, "because I go to my Father" and because "Whatsoever
   ye shall ask in My name, that will I do." The only qualification to
   this asking and receiving is "that the Father may be glorified in the
   Son" (13).

   4. The subject following (16-26), is in harmony with the foregoing,
   because as the result of His going to His Father the Holy Spirit was
   given to the Church, through whose power the mighty works are done and
   prayer made efficacious (Zech. 4:6; Rom. 8:26, etc.). This is the first
   time the Holy Spirit is named as Christ's special gift to His people.
   Of course He was the regenerator, guide and aid of the Old Testament
   saints, but His relation to New Testament saints is peculiar as we
   shall see later. Several things are here taught about Him. He is a
   person for the words do not fit an influence or an inward feeling. His
   special office is to apply the truth to the heart. He is the eternal
   possession of the believer. His coming to dwell in him fulfills the
   deep mysterious sayings of verses 17-23: "I will come to you" ;
   "because I live you shall live also"; "Ye in me and I in you" ; "make
   our abode with Him."

   5. In the conclusion of this chapter there is a difficulty at verse 28,
   where our Lord says, "My Father is greater than I," but where He means
   as touching His manhood simply (cf. Phil. 2:7). And yet why does He say
   that the disciples ought to rejoice at His going to the Father because
   the Father is greater? Perhaps because then He would resume the glory
   He had with Him before the world was, or perhaps then He would receive
   the kingdom which in the eternal counsels the Father had prepared for
   the Son as mediator. "If I had not placed Myself in a position of
   inferiority to the Father by becoming man for man's sake, you would
   have no hope for your souls. But now the work is finished, and I return
   to My Father and ye ought to be glad." The last words of verse 31
   indicate some kind of a break in the discourse, and make it a suitable
   place to bring the lesson to a close.

   Questions.

   1. Why is this title given to our present lesson?

   2. In what terms do others designate these chapters?

   3. Name the different subjects of chapter 14.

   4. Expound verses 1-3.

   5. Explain verse 12.

   6. What do we learn about the Holy Spirit here?

   7. Explain verse 28.

CENTRAL TEACHING -- CONTINUED

  Chapters 15-16

   Bernard speaks of the fundamental subject of what follows in this
   discourse as "that of the relation of believers to Jesus Christ in
   respect to practical life under the coming dispensation."

   1. The relation of members who share in His life and thereby bring
   forth fruit unto God (15:1-8).

   2. The relation of friends who share in His love and maintain its
   continuance and manifest its effect by love to each other (9-17).

   3. The relation of followers who share in His work toward the world,
   and therefore in its enmity (18:16, 3).

   4. The relation of adherents on whom He bestows a share in His own
   Spirit, the comforter, advocate and teacher (16:4-15).

   Then follow answers to thoughts raised in the minds of His hearers,
   renewed warnings, promises and assurances, closing with a sad
   intimation of desertion, which passes again into a note of peace and
   victory.

   Under the first of the above relationships (1-8), we learn that the
   union between Christ and His true disciples is a living one -- the
   branch lives in the vine and the vine in the branch. All the meaning
   that can be gathered out of that simile belongs to the Christian's
   faith. We learn also, that there are false Christians as well as true
   ones, branches which appear to be joined to the vine and yet bear no
   fruit. Further, we are taught that the only satisfactory evidence of
   being a true Christian is fruit. Again, that fruitfulness is increased
   in such by God's providential dealing with them. Verse 7 is a distinct
   promise of power and success in prayer as a result of fruit bearing.

   Under the second relationship (9-17) think of the measureless compass
   in the words, "Even as the Father hath loved Me, so have I loved you"
   (9); think how simple it is to continue in that love, just to keep His
   commandments; and the two-fold motive for so doing, that He may have
   joy in us, and that our own joy may be filled full. Note the high
   privilege of a believer in verse 15 and compare it with Gen. 18:17.

   As to the enmity of the world, how kind that our Lord should relieve
   His disciples of fault or blame in the promises (18-21)! Verse 22 does
   not teach that they would not have been sinners at all had not Christ
   come, but that they would have had a less degree of guilt (cf. John
   9:41).

   In the teaching about the Holy Spirit there is a mysterious saying at
   verse 7 of chapter 16. It is hard to understand why it could be good
   for Christ to go away from His disciples, but the fact remains that
   when He went away and the Comforter came at Pentecost the faith of the
   disciples became a new thing altogether. The Acts of the Apostle will
   teach us this. If Christ had remained bodily with them He could not
   have been in more places than one at the same time, and there would
   have been far less room for the exercise of their faith, and hope and
   trust. And what about His exalted life in heaven as our High Priestly
   intercessor? How could His people have continued without that? Verse 8
   is also mysterious. As commonly understood, it describes the ordinary
   operation of the Holy Spirit in saving sinners, but there is more in
   it. Bishop Ryle thinks it means that when the Spirit came at Pentecost
   He would stop the mouths of enemies, and oblige them however
   unwillingly, to think of Christ and what He taught very differently
   from what they were thinking now. The Acts illustrates this for there
   was a peculiar irresistible power accompanying the work of the Apostles
   which neither the heathen nor the unbelieving Jews were able to resist
   or gainsay. Witness the stoning of Stephen, Acts 7, and Pliny's famous
   letter to Trojan about the Christians. Verses 12 and 13 of this chapter
   are "Christ's pre-authentications of the New Testament." He would leave
   many things to be revealed for example, and this revelation would be
   completed after the Spirit came (cf. 1 Cor. 14:37 and Rev. 22:19.

   But there is nothing in this sublime discourse of more practical value
   than what it teaches about prayer. See 14:13, 14, 15:16, 16:23-27. To
   ask the Father in Christ's name is in advance of asking for His sake.
   To ask in His name is as though He asked Himself with all the assurance
   of answer which such a fact implies. This is the privilege of the true
   believer who is thus a member of Christ's body, and of Him only, and it
   is a revelation of truth which Christ at no time had made known to His
   followers until now, doubtless because they were not prepared to
   receive it.

   Questions.

   1. Name the four different relations of believers to Christ treated of
   in this discourse.

   2. What are the subjects concluding chapter 16?

   3. What do we learn from the parable of the vine and the branches?

   4. What is the high privilege of a believer as stated in 15:15?

   5. Explain 15:22.

   6. Explain 16:7 and 8.

   7. How would you characterize verses 12 and 13, and why?

   8. What does it mean to pray in Christ's Name?

   THE INTERCESSORY PRAYER

   Chapter 17

   1. This chapter because of its subject, and its great preciousness is
   worthy to stand out by itself. Bernard divides the prayer into three
   great parts and a sequel: (1) for His work and glory, 1-5; (2) for the
   disciples, 6-19; (3) for all believers, 20-24; (4) the sequel, 25, 26.
   The first and second part he subdivides again into two sections, 1-3,
   and 4, 5, and 6-10 and 11-19 respectively. The third into three. 29-23,
   23, 24.

   2. The Scofield Bible divides it into seven petitions: (1) that Jesus
   may be glorified as the Son who has glorified the Father; (2) for
   restoration to the eternal glory, 5; (3), for the safety of believers
   from the world, verse 11, and from the evil one, verse 15; (4), for the
   sanctification of believers, 17; (5) for the spiritual unity of
   believers, 21; (6) that the world may believe, 21; (7) that believers
   may be with Him in heaven to behold and share His glory, 24. The same
   source notes the five gifts which Christ bestows on them whom the
   Father gives Him; Eternal life, 2; the Father's Name, 6:26; the
   Father's words, 8:14; His own joy, 13; His own glory, 22.

   3. We have here the only long prayer of our Lord which the Holy Spirit
   has thought good to record for our learning. And how wonderful it is
   when we think of the One Who prayed it! One Person of the adorable
   Trinity praying to another Person of the Trinity! Or when we think of
   the occasion on which it was prayed, the night in which He was
   betrayed! Or those for whom it was prayed, disciples soon to forsake
   Him and flee, and other believers like ourselves, so unworthy of it
   all, or finally, when we think of its terms, the character of its
   petitions. Wonderful indeed! Perhaps it was prayed in the room where
   the Lord's supper was instituted, but from the closing words of chapter
   14 it seems likely to have been uttered in some quiet place outside the
   walls, and before the crossing of the brook Cedron (18:1).

   4. Among the utterances, we note especially the last clause of verse 1,
   which proves, inferentially, the equality of Christ with God. Then
   verse 3 as a description of saved souls. Of course, head knowledge is
   not here meant, but that to which we have been renewed by the Holy
   Spirit through faith in Christ (Col. 3:10). God known out of Christ is
   a consuming fire. A question of grave importance arises at verse 12.
   The "but" in this case is not exceptive but adversative as Bishop Ryle
   thinks. It does not mean that Judas was once a true believer who became
   lost, but should be read: "Those to whom Thou gavest Me I have kept,
   and out of them not one is lost. But there is one soul that is lost,
   even Judas, the son of perdition." This view is confirmed in John 18:9,
   where no hint is given of any exception having been made by our Lord in
   the previous instance, when John of course, heard Him speak. Verse 17
   seems to us next in importance. Sanctification there is in the
   experimental sense. Saints are sanctified the moment they accept Christ
   in that they are then set apart for God, but after that they are
   expected to become sanctified in that their life and conduct are to
   measure up to their position. In this verse we see such sanctification
   to be an obligation; and also that it is the work of God in us. He must
   do the sanctifying; and yet there is an instrument or means to be used
   to that end, even His Word of truth. Without a knowledge of God's Word
   in us the Holy Spirit has nothing on which He can work so to speak,
   hence the primary importance of Bible reading and study.

   Verse 19, in this connection must not be misunderstood. Christ Himself
   required no sanctification in the sense of experience or growth. He was
   always perfect and without sin. The word in this case is the same as
   "consecrate" or "set apart." He offered Himself to God as a sacrifice
   in other words, that His people might be both justified and sanctified.
   To pause next at verses 21-23, the unity of believers there sought is
   not that of any visible church or denomination, but that of the church
   considered as the body of which He is the Head, and which was effected
   potentially on the day of Pentecost (Acts 2:1-4; 1 Cor. 12:13; Eph.
   4:1-6). We express this unity not in forms of worship, discipline or
   government, but in oneness of will, heart, doctrine and conduct.

   Questions.

   1. How does Bernard divide this prayer?

   2. How does Scofield divide it?

   3. What are the gifts Christ bestows on His disciples?

   4. What makes this prayer wonderful?

   5. Where, presumably, was it uttered?

   6. What question arises at verse 12 and how is it answered?

   7. What are we taught about sanctification?

   8. What are we taught about Christian unity?

AT MAN'S JUDGMENT SEAT

  Chapters 18-19

   1. A way to study this lesson is to compare the text with the
   corresponding places in the synoptics and observe what is original to
   John. Any "Harmony" of the Gospels would furnish valuable aid. For
   example, it is John who named "the brook Cedron" or "Kidron," and
   identifies the "garden" (18:1). The others speak of "a place called
   Gethsemane," etc., but nothing more. He alone tells us that Judas "knew
   the place," and why (2), 18:4-8 is new, and one sees its fullness as
   the design of that Gospel is to emphasize the power and Godhead of
   Christ. Here we learn the name of the high priests' servant Malchus
   (10). Again from 13 to 17 is original, and from 17 to 23, also verses
   29, 32 and 34-38. These give details of Peter's denial of His Master,
   and Jesus hearing before the Sanhedrin and before Pilate.

   2. John gives no record of the agony in Gethsemane, which otherwise
   would have appeared between verses 1 and 2 of chapter 18. Verse 2
   affords one of the many illustrations in this chapter of the
   voluntariness of Christ's death He did not hide Himself, but went where
   He could easily be found. Verse 4 is to the same purport. With verse 6
   compare Ps. 28:3. Let not verse 8 be passed without noting the
   illustration of Christ's constant watchcare and protecting power over
   all His believing people. Verse 9 shows that one way He keeps His
   people faithful is by keeping them from being tempted above what they
   are able to bear. The circumstance in verse 13 is mentioned only by
   John, and is explained by some in saying that Annas, having served his
   time as high priest, was living in the same place with his son-in-law.
   Certainly their relations were intimate judging by Luke 3:2. There was
   disorder in the office of the high priest at this period, which must be
   kept in mind in considering the difficulties of this chapter, verse 24
   for example. Then too, for wise reasons, the Holy Spirit may have led
   one writer to dwell more on one set of facts than another. If each had
   told the story in the same words, the whole would have been less
   satisfactory.

   3. The larger part of chapter 19 is new with John. The events are the
   crowning with thorns (1-3); the appearance before the multitude (4-13);
   the final rejection (14, 15); the crucifixion (16-37); the entombment
   (38-42).

   The outstanding figure from the point of view of human iniquity is
   Pilate, the double-minded, cruel deceitful Pilate. Note the scourging
   of Jesus, verse 1, and remember that "by His stripes we are healed"
   (Isa. 53:5). Matt. 27:29 tells us that this took place in the "Common
   hall," the soldier's guard room, the character of which may be imagined
   by what we know of similar places in modern days. The Roman legionaries
   were expert in torturing prisoners. Verse 7 refers to Lev. 24:16. Verse
   14 means that it was the day before the great Sabbath of the Passover
   Week (Mk. 15:42). There is a difficulty in that John speaks of the 6th
   hour and Mark the 3d, a common solution being that the latter reckoned
   by Jewish and the former Roman time. Note how the close of verse 15
   stamps the Jews at this time as an apostate nation. With the word
   "delivered" (16), compare Rom. 4:25; 8:30, and with "led," Isa. 53:7;
   Acts 8:32. With "went forth" (17). Compare Lev. 16:27; Heb. 13:12.

   At verse 24, Bishop Ryle calls attention to the importance of
   interpreting prophecy literally, of which importance there are several
   illustrations in the chapter, for example 36, 37. At verses 28-30
   observe another proof of the voluntary character of Christ's death, as
   the final separation between body and soul could not take place until
   He willed it. The author just quoted, thinks the "Blood and water"
   (34), was a symbolic fulfillment of Zech. 13:1, which the student will
   look up. Verse 38 was predicted in Isa. 53:9, which should be
   translated, "His grave was appointed with the wicked; but with the rich
   man was His tomb."

   Questions.

   1. Do you possess a "Harmony of the Gospels?

   2. Name some of the events original to John in these chapters.

   3. Name some of the proofs of the voluntariness of Christ's death.

   4. What is one of the means by which Christ keeps His people faithful?

   5. How often is Isaiah 53 quoted in this lesson?

   6. How would you harmonize the difficulty in verse 14?

   7. Name some of the illustrations of the importance of interpreting Old

   Testament literally when it can be done.

AFTER THE RESURRECTION

  Chapters 20-21

   1. The Fact of the Resurrection, 20:10.

   The original features are Mary Magdelene's message to Peter and John
   and the visit of the last two to the tomb. Perhaps the most notable
   verse is the 7th which shows the deliberate manner in which the
   resurrection took place. Everything contradicted the idea that the body
   had been stolen. Why thus, should the linen clothes have been left? The
   quantity of linen must have been large when 100 pounds of aromatic
   powder had been used wrapping the body.

   2. The Appearance to Mary Magdalene, vv. 11-18.

   The critical verse is the 17th. In view of Matt. 28:9, why should
   Christ say "touch Me not" ? Was it because several women were present
   then, and here but one? Was it because she evinced extravagant joy in
   some way? Or was it because Christ would now teach her of the new
   relationship to His disciples He was about to assume? (cf. 2 Cor.
   5:15-17). And then the words, "I am not yet ascended," what is their
   significance in this case? We must confess inability to answer these
   questions satisfactorily.

   3. Appears to the Ten, vv. 19-23.

   With what body did Christ arise? It was of a more spiritual kind than
   He had before, because He appeared in the room without unfastening the
   doors, and yet it was a real human body and not a mere shadow or
   spirit. "Peace be unto you" was not merely a formal salutation, but a
   re-assurance that all had been forgiven them. The breathing on them is
   a strong intimation that the Holy Ghost proceeded from Him, and hence
   another indirect proof of His Godhead (John 1:33; Acts 2:33). It is
   difficult to interpret the sense in which they now received the Holy
   Ghost, since they had received Him at their regeneration and conversion
   (1 Cor. 12:3); and receive Him again on the day of Pentecost (Acts 2).
   May it be that this was a special enduement of power for the
   intervening period before Pentecost? Of course the authority to remit
   sins is not absolute but declarative, just as the high priest in the
   old economy pronounced who were clean and who were unclean as to
   leprosy. It was God who cleansed in the one instance or forgave in the
   other, but the evidences of either might be made known through His
   representatives.

   4. The Appearance When Thomas Was Present, vv. 24-29.

   Here is strong indirect evidence of the truth of the scriptures, as an
   impostor would not have told us of the unbelief of an apostle! Christ's
   words to Thomas are a warning to all who demand an excessive amount of
   evidence before they believe. And yet when Thomas did express his
   faith, "My Lord, and My God" became an unanswerable testimony to
   Christ's Deity. It was said in the presence of ten witnesses and our
   Lord accepted it as a fact.

   5. Summing up the Testimony, vv. 30, 31.

   These verses are parenthetic and break the thread of the narrative. If
   the Gospel ended here they might apply to the whole of what the
   evangelist had written; but as another chapter follows he is probably
   referring only to the proofs of the resurrection.

   6. The Sea of Tiberias, 21.

   There is little requiring explanation in these verses, but the Scofield
   Bible offers a good interpretation of them. The whole chapter it
   entitles, "The Risen Christ is Master of our Service." Verses 3 and 4
   show us service in self-will under human leadership, and verse 5, the
   barren results. Verses 6 to 11 on the other hand, show us
   Christ-directed service and its result, while 12-14 indicate that the
   Master is enough for the need of His servants. Then in 15-17 we have
   the only acceptable motive in service. 18 and 19, the Master appoints
   the time and manner of the servant's death. 20-25, if the Master
   returns the servants will not die.

   "Naked," verse 7, means the absence of a loose outer garment, the same
   which he "girt" about him afterwards. That the number 153 has some
   symbolic significance seems probable, but up to the present it is only
   speculation to inquire. The "third time" (14) means doubtless, the
   third time Christ appeared to any number of the disciples gathered
   together. "Lambs" in contradistinction to "sheep" means probably the
   young and weak in spiritual experience, what ever their years. Verses
   18 and 19 shows that the future history of every saint is known to
   Christ, and it is commonly supposed that in fulfillment of them Peter
   was crucified as a martyr. The latter is interested to know of John's
   future and in gently rebuked for it (20-22). Verse 22 is mysterious,
   and has never been fully explained and is distinguished as having given
   rise to the first tradition in the church (23). This tradition through
   early and common, was nevertheless false. It is always better to say,
   "I do not know," than to build up a conclusion on a false premise. In
   verse 24, John alludes to himself and his authorship of this Gospel.
   While in 25, according to Calvin, he employs a figure of speech for
   commending the greatness of Christ's works.

   Questions.

   1. What are the features original to verses 1-10?

   2. Which is the most notable verse, and why?

   3. What explanations have been offered of verse 17?

   4. How might the breathing upon them of the Holy Ghost be explained?

   5. What two-fold evidential value is attached to 20:24-29?

   6. What spiritual interpretation of chapter 21 has been suggested?

   7. What gave rise to the first tradition in the Church?
     __________________________________________________________________

ACTS OF THE APOSTLES

   FROM THE RESURRECTION TO PENTECOST

   Chapter 1

   Following our plan in the preceding books, we waive the consideration
   of the human authorship of the Acts and other questions of Biblical
   introduction and enter at once on the text. It is assumed from verses
   one and two compared with the opening verses of the third gospel, that
   "Luke, the beloved physician" (Col. 4:14), was the author chosen by the
   Holy Spirit. It is also assumed from verse two, that it is not so much
   the acts of the apostles he here records, as the acts of Jesus Christ
   through the apostles in the power of the Holy Spirit.

   These two verses constitute the first division of our lesson. The
   second includes verses 3 to 11, being an outline of the events from the
   resurrection to the ascension. The features to note are (a), the
   evidence of Christ's bodily resurrection in verse 3, accentuated by His
   mingling with the disciples for six weeks; (b), the teachings
   "pertaining to the kingdom of God" which are outlined in the verses
   immediately following (vv. 4-8); (c), the Ascension (v. 9); (d), the
   promise of His return (vv. 10, 11). Under (b), our Lord taught three
   things: first, the distinction between receiving the Holy Spirit and
   the baptism of the Holy Spirit (vv. 4, 5); secondly, the distinction
   between the church of Christ and the kingdom of Israel (vv. 6, 7); and
   thirdly, the distinction between the evangelization and the conversion
   of the world (8).

   As to the first of these three things, these disciples had previously
   received the Holy Spirit in regeneration or else they had not been His
   disciples at all (to say nothing of the specific experience in John
   20:22), yet they were to be "baptized with the Holy Spirit not many
   days hence." As to the second of the things, the kingdom of Israel
   promised in the Old Testament, and of which so much has been said in
   previous lessons, was not immediately to be set up, the church of
   Christ was to take its place for the time being, but that did not mean
   that the promise concerning it had failed. It was coming on the earth,
   but "the times" and the "seasons" were in the Father's keeping.
   Witnessing unto Christ was left for the disciples in the meantime, but
   nothing was said about waiting for the conversion of the world before
   that witness could have accomplished its purpose. As to the Ascension,
   the probability is that the "cloud" was not the vaporous material of
   which we are cognizant, but the Shekinah Glory which overshadowed
   Christ on the Mount of Transfiguration. The testimony of the angels to
   His return shows that it will be a personal in the sense of a visible
   appearing.

   The remainder of the chapter requires but little explanation. The
   "upper room" (v. 13) may have been the same as that in John 20:19.
   Observe the presence of Mary and the brethren of Jesus (v. 14) with the
   others, and in no position of superiority whatever. The "scripture"
   Peter refers to (v. 20) is Psalms 69:25 and 109:8. That he should have
   been so intelligent and positive in his position is probably explained
   by such post-resurrection teaching of Jesus as Luke 24:27, 46, and
   verse 3 of this same chapter. There is no contradiction between verse
   18 and Matt. 27:5, as doubtless the rope broke by which the traitor
   hanged himself. Notice the qualifications for an apostle (v, 21). The
   "lot" was legitimate at that time, as the disciples were still on Old
   Testament ground (Prov. 16:33), but for us to use it would not be
   equally so, as we have the complete Word of God and the Holy Spirit to
   lead us into the meaning of it.

   Questions.

   1. Who was the human author of this book?

   2. How does the text lead to that conclusion?

   3. What four things are included in the second division of this lesson?

   4. What three things did Jesus teach pertaining to the Kingdom of God?

   5. What "cloud" may that have been in which our Lord ascended?

   6. What is the testimony of the angels as to the character of His
   Second Coming?

   7. What explains Peter's intelligent leadership in the choice of
   Matthias?

   THE FORMATION OF THE CHURCH

   Chapter 2

   1. The Descent of the Holy Spirit, vv. 1-4.

   "The Day of Pentecost" alludes to the Levitical feast, with which we
   became acquainted in the Old Testament. The word is Greek, meaning
   "fifty," the feast occurring 50 days after the offering of the barley
   sheaf in the Passover feast. It commemorated the wheat harvest and was
   sometimes called "the Feast of Harvest" (Ex. 33:16), or "the Feast of
   Weeks," (Ex. 34:22), or the "Day of the First Fruits" (Num. 28-26).
   After the Babylonian captivity it came to commemorate the giving of the
   law on Mt. Sinai. There is reason to believe that on this occasion it
   occurred on the Lord's Day, which explains the declaration in verse
   one. The "wind," the "tongues" and the "fire" were not the Holy Spirit
   but the signs of His advent. 'Their being "filled with the Holy Ghost"
   was the fulfillment of Matt. 3:2, Luke 11:13, John 1:33; 7:37-39; 14:
   16, 17. Acts 1:5, etc. This was the gift of the Spirit, the promised
   Comforter, the baptism of the Holy Ghost. He came to dwell in the
   believers individually, and yet that individual indwelling by the
   Spirit, naturally resulted in a corporate work, uniting them all in one
   body which is the church of Christ (1 Cor. 12:13). Since that day,
   whenever a sinner believes on the Lord Jesus Christ, he shares in that
   baptism and becomes a member of that one body, of which Christ is the
   head, (1 Cor. 6:19; Eph. 1:23; 4:3-6). From a scriptural point of view,
   it is therefore improper for a believer to pray for the gift of the
   Spirit, or for a greater baptism of the Spirit, because these blessings
   are already his; but it is different with reference to being filled
   with the Spirit, if one may judge by Acts 4:8, 31; 6:5; 7:55; Eph.
   5:18.

   2. Immediate Effects vv. 5-13.

   The first of these was given in verse four, the speaking "with other
   tongues as the Spirit gave them utterance"; the second was the coming
   together of the multitude in consequence of this, and the third, the
   conclusion the latter reached. As to the first, the thought is that the
   disciples, not of their own volition, but as instruments of the Holy
   Spirit, proclaimed not the gospel as such, but the praises of God in
   various languages theretofore unknown to them. Their act had been
   symbolized in the cloven tongue of fire that had sat upon each, and it
   prophesied that the Holy Spirit had come to make known through them the
   gospel to all nations under heaven. It is not likely that they
   continued thus to speak in different tongues. In Acts 10:46 it is
   referred to again as an evidence that the Gentiles had received the
   gift of the Holy Ghost the same as the Jews had on the Day of
   Pentecost, and in Acts 19:6 it shows that the Jewish disciples of John
   had received it, but beyond this it is not named further and these were
   all special and initial cases. The passage in 1 Cor. 14 will be
   considered when it is reached. In the meantime a caution is necessary
   because phenomena of this character can so easily be counterfeited by
   evil spirits.

   3. Peter's Discourse vv. 14-36.

   This may be divided at each of the verses where he directly addresses
   his hearers: "Ye men of Judea" (v. 14); "Ye men of Israel" (v. 22);
   "Men and Brethren," or simply "Brethren," as the R. V. puts it, (v.
   29). In the first division he disposes of the charge of drunkenness,
   and shows the relation of that which had occurred to the prophecy of
   Joel 2:28, 29. He does not say that Pentecost was a complete
   fulfillment of that prophecy, which will not take place until the end
   of the age, but it was a foretaste of it. In the second division, he
   describes the death of Christ and charges that sin upon them; and in
   the third, he affirms His resurrection as proven by the scriptures, by
   the testimony of the disciples who were its eye-witnesses (Ps. 16), and
   by the event that was just transpiring.

   4. The First Converts vv. 37-47.

   Questions.

   1. What does "Pentecost" mean and to what does the feast allude?

   2. Have you re-examined the New Testament scriptures which predicted
   this event?

   3. How does 1 Cor. 12:13 explain this event?

   4. What is the thought of verse four?

   5. Of what was their act at once a symbol and a prophecy?

   6. Why is a caution necessary about "speaking with tongues"?

   7. Analyze Peter's discourse.

THE OFFER OF THE KINGDOM RENEWED

  Chapters 3-4:30

   The disciples are still in Jerusalem, and the preaching is still
   limited to Jewish hearers, and in a sense we are still on Old Testament
   ground. An illustration of this is found in the previous lesson, for
   example: where in 2:38 to "repent and be baptized" was essential "for
   the remission of sins" and to "receive the gift of the Holy Ghost." But
   this is no longer so when the Gentiles are being approached (10:44-48).
   The Jews who had openly rejected Jesus of Nazareth must openly accept
   Him in order to receive the blessing, but with the others grace deals
   in a different way. That is not to say that repentance and baptism are
   no longer necessary; indeed repentance is always involved in saving
   faith; but baptism now follows the gift of the Spirit as a sign of it,
   rather than precedes it as a condition.

   As a further illustration of Old Testament conditions the disciples are
   still worshipping in the. Temple (v. 1), at one of whose gates this
   miracle occurs in the Name of the rejected and now risen One (vv.
   2-11). It is Peter's discourse in this case that justifies the title of
   this lesson, especially verses 19-26. This work had not been wrought in
   the names of the apostles but in Christ's Name, Whom they had crucified
   (vv. 12-16). This fulfilled prophecy (vv. 17-18). Let them now repent
   that the Lord may "send the Messiah who hath been appointed for you"
   (v. 20 R. V.). The inference from all this to the end of chapter is
   that had they as a nation repented, the Messiah would have returned at
   that time to set up His kingdom in Israel.

   But the opposite took place as indicated in the next chapter, the facts
   of which are (a), the arrest of Peter and John (vv. 1-3); (b), their
   defense (vv. 5-12); (c), their threatening and their deliverance (vv.
   13-22); (d), their return "to their own company" with the spiritual
   quickening that followed (vv. 23-30).

   Questions.

   1. What is to be remembered in the study of this part of the Acts?

   2. Give an illustration of this from the preceding chapter.

   3. Also from this lesson.

   4. What justifies the title of this lesson?

   5. What inference is deducible from this?

VARIED EXPERIENCES

  Chapters 4:21-5

   1. Unity of Love 4:31-37.

   The quickening in the last lesson was associated with another
   outpouring of the Holy Spirit but not another "baptism," and some who
   had been filled before were refilled, with results following: (a),
   courage in preaching (v. 31); (b), unity of soul (v. 32); (c), power in
   testimony (v. 33); (d), love in practical conduct (vv. 34-37). This
   last result has sometimes been quoted as favoring Christian communism,
   but it is to be remembered that it was voluntary in origin, temporary
   in duration, and limited in its application. Where such communism is
   the result of the work of the Holy Spirit on regenerated hearts, and
   accompanied by such fruit as it here revealed, no one need have any
   apprehension in regard to it.

   2. Pride and Hypocrisy vv. 1-11.

   But there is mildew in every garden, and the opening of the next
   chapter shows its presence here. Notice in verse three the testimony to
   the personality and power of Satan, and the personality and Deity of
   the Holy Spirit. One can not "lie" to an "influence" or a mere
   "principle of good." Moreover, in verse five the Holy Spirit is
   identified as God. The penalty on Ananias and Sapphira does not
   necessarily involve eternal retribution, inasmuch as, notwithstanding
   their sin, they may have been in vital relationship to God through
   faith in Christ (1 John 1:8). But it is an illustration of God's
   chastening His people on earth, paralleled by the cases of Nadab and
   Abihu and Achan in the Old Testament (Lev. 10; Josh. 7), and the
   Corinthians in the New Testament (1 Cor. 11:30-32), (Compare here 1
   John 5:16).

   3. Power and Persecution vv. 12-42.

   Note in passing, the continued growth of the Church (v. 14); the
   unusual nature of the signs wrought by Peter (v. 15); the continued
   enmity of the Sadducees because the apostles preached the resurrection
   (vv. 17-18); the supernatural deliverance (vv. 19-24); the defence
   before the Sanhedrin (vv. 25-32); the unexpected advocate (vv. 33-39);
   the penalty (v. 40); the effect on the apostles and the church (w.
   41-42).

   Questions.

   1. What were the results of the filling with the Holy Ghost?

   2. What are the distinctions between the charity of the early church
   and the modern communism?

   3. What sin in the heart led to the open hypocrisy of Ananias and
   Sapphira?

   4. How is the Deity of the Holy Spirit proven in this lesson?

   5. Is there a distinction between the Divine retribution of the
   unbelieving and the Divine chastening of the followers of Christ?

   6. Give some Old and New Testament illustrations of the latter.

   7. Give in your own words the story told above under the head of "Power
   and Persecution."

FIRST CHRISTIAN MARTYR

  Chapters 6-7

   The Church was being blessed and multiplied but the conditions were not
   perfect. The flesh was asserting itself. Verse 1 carries us back to the
   close of chapter 4, and we see that the charity which led to hypocrisy
   there, led to "murmuring" here. "Grecians" should be translated
   "Grecian Jews" to distinguish them from the native born. The apostles
   who had been distributing the alms could do so no longer, and hence the
   institution of the office of "deacon" (v. 5), after the Greek of "serve
   tables" (v. 2). (It is an interesting fact that their names are all
   Greek.) Note in passing, the exalted nature of the Christian ministry
   (v. 4), the high qualifications of those who even should carry on the
   secondary work of that ministry (v. 3), the democratic nature of the
   church assembly, and yet the respect for order and authority (v. 6).
   The whole multitude selected the deacons, but the Apostles ordained
   them. Note also the direction in which the truth of the gospel was now
   advancing (v. 7).

   The above leads up to the personal history of Stephen, whose ministry
   was not limited to that of an almoner, and who was endued with
   miraculous power (v. 8). Verse 9 is explained by the fact that in
   addition to the Temple in Jerusalem there were many synagogues, where
   the Jews from different countries assembled according to local
   preferences. (The "Libertines" were Jews from Rome). "The servant is
   not greater than his Master," and if false witnesses caused the death
   of the One, the other need not expect different treatment (vv. 11-14),
   but the Master has not forsaken His servant (v. 15).

   The defense of Stephen before the Sanhedrin (c. 7) is a historical
   address carrying his hearers through the glory of God's dealings with
   Israel from the call of Abraham to the building of Solomon's Temple,
   special emphasis being laid on Joseph and Moses who were remarkable
   types of Christ (vv. 2-50). One instinctively feels that he was
   proceeding to a climax in his witness to Christ and the resurrection,
   when he was diverted by the gathering opposition of his hearers, and
   broke off in the language of rebuke at verses 51-53. Their fury vented
   itself upon him at this time (vv. 54, 57, 58); but he was marvellously
   sustained, and had a marvellous testimony to bear of what he saw, which
   enabled him, as his Saviour before him, to pray for the forgiveness of
   his murderers with his last breath.

   A comparison of Stephen's words with the Old Testament records show
   certain variations, but the Holy Spirit through him may have been
   adding details to that record. On the other hand, Stephen was a Grecian
   Jew, using doubtless the Septuagint or Greek translation of the Old
   'Testament, which would explain some things.

   Note in verse 55 the first manifestation of the glorified Christ on
   record. Note in verse 58 the illegality of Stephen's judges when
   compared with John 18:31. And in the same verse the presence of Saul,
   who, in a sense, owed his conversion to this scene, and of whom we are
   soon to learn more. (cf. 22:20.)

   The second offer of the kingdom to Israel is brought to an end here,
   and in our next lesson we enter on the transition period through which
   the story of the Church passes out of the Jewish into its Gentile
   stage.

   Note in closing, that the name "Jesus" (v. 45 ), should be rendered as
   in the R. V. "Joshua," the two in the original being the same.

   Questions.

   1. To what earlier event in the history of the Church is the opening of
   this lesson related?

   2. What is the significance of "Grecians" in 6:1?

   3. Whence does the word "deacon" originate?

   4. What distinguished men of Israel were now uniting with the Church?

   5. What is the interpretation to be put upon the synagogues of the
   Cyrenians, etc.?

   6. What was the character of Stephen's defense before the Sanhedrin?

   7. What important epoch is thought to have come to an end at this time?

TRANSITION PERIOD

  Chapters 8-9:30

   We explained in the last lesson the meaning of the "transition period"
   which continues to chapter 13. The first sentence in chapter 8 is more
   properly the concluding one of chapter 7, although it introduces the
   account of the persecution following in which Saul was the leader
   (8:1-3). With the account of this persecution cf. Heb. 10:32-34, and
   for Saul's part in it. Acts 22:4, 19, 20; 24:10, 11 and parallel
   places.

   "The blood of the martyrs is the seed of the church," as the results in
   verses 4-8 bear witness. Notice in this case that every one was a
   preacher, somewhat as in the later instances of the Waldenses and
   Huguenots. John 4:42 shows how the soil had been prepared in Samaria.
   Miracles were in order here because the New Testament had not come into
   existence, but in our day faith in the Word of God is substituted for
   them.

   Simon, or "Simon Magus," was one of Satan's instruments to anticipate
   the coming of the gospel and counterfeit God's power (vv. 9-11). Cf. 2
   Thess. 2:9 for the multiplication of such persons towards the end of
   the age. His pretended faith deceives even Philip (v. 13).

   Verses 14-17 have lead to error in two directions. Some teach therefrom
   that one may believe in Christ and yet not possess the Holy Spirit, and
   whose reception it is claimed is distinct from conversion. While others
   affirm that the laying on of hands as in the rites of confirmation and
   ordination, are needful to His reception. The correction of these
   things is found in the dispensational character of this part of the
   book. The Samaritans who had a controversy with the Jews (John
   4:19-24), had to be identified with those in Jerusalem, after their
   conversion, hence the gift of the Holy Spirit was withheld in their
   case till Jerusalem sent the apostles to them.

   To quote Gaebelein, Peter uses the "keys" here as with the Jews on the
   day of Pentecost and the Gentiles later in the case of Cornelius (Acts
   10). Nowhere in the New Testament is it taught that the believer on
   Christ should seek the gift of the Holy Spirit afterward, nor that He
   is to be received only by the laying on of hands. The believer may be
   "filled with the Spirit" many times, but the Spirit comes to dwell in
   him once and forever.

   "Simony" is the name given to the offence of the imposter recorded in
   18-24, and it stands for any attempt to make merchandise of the gifts
   of God. In so far as Christian Science, claiming to be a divine
   religion, seeks pay for its healing benefits, it is guilty of this sin.

   The remainder of the chapter is quite plain. As a soul-winner all must
   be impressed with Philip's obedience (vv. 26, 27), tact and
   intelligence (vv. 30-35) and success (v. 38), but the explanation is
   that he was "full of the Holy Ghost," Acts 6:3. Verse 37 is omitted in
   the Revised Version as not belonging to the text. It states a great and
   important truth, but it anticipates the later teaching of Christianity
   which was given Paul to reveal (Acts 9:20; Gal. 1:12). The catching
   away of Phillip (v. 39), suggests 1 Thess. 4:17, and is a kind of type
   of that which will occur when the Church as a whole has finished her
   labors here, and will be translated to "meet the Lord in the air."

   We include the conversion of Saul in this lesson, as the opening of
   chapter 9 leads us back to that of chapter 8, showing the intervening
   narrative as a parenthesis. With the exception of the descent of the
   Holy Spirit, the conversion of Saul is the most important event in the
   book. For something of his early history see Acts 22:3, 28; 23:6; Gal.
   1:13, 14; Phil. 3:5, 6. What happened on the way to Damascus was unique
   (vv. z-7), and will not be repeated till Zech. 12:10 is fulfilled at
   the end of this age. It is related twice again, and with more detail,
   in chapters 22:5-16, 24:12-18. The "light out of heaven" (9:3) was
   doubtless the Glory of the Lord, but later on it is the Lord Himself
   Who appears unto Saul. For proof of this cf. verse 5 with verses 17 and
   2y of the same chapter, also 26:16, 1 Cor. 9:1 and 15:8, 9.

   Note the identification of the Lord and His people, the Head and the
   members of the body in the words, "Why persecutest thou Me"? Note the
   correspondence in the two visions to Saul and to Ananias (vv. 6,
   10-16), which establishes the actuality of the occurrence. Note the
   particularities of God's knowledge of man, -- the name of Ananias, the
   city, the street, the house in which he dwelt, the name of Saul, his
   birthplace, his present occupation! How real and startling it all is!
   And Ananias is an ordinary disciple, not an apostle, to whom the great
   commission is accorded (Gal. 1:1). Note the first indication of what
   Paul's mission is to be (v. 15). Note that he was first filled with the
   Spirit and afterward baptized (vv. 17, 18), which was different from
   Acts 2:38; 8:16 and 10:44. "Evidently had there been uniformity in all
   these cases it would have resulted in the belief that to receive the
   Spirit, the same method always must be followed, which has to be
   avoided. It is to be remembered that these cases were all unique as
   taking place in the Jewish and the transition stages, while the present
   method of receiving the Spirit is revealed in Eph. 1:13." -- Gaebelein.

   We pass over the remainder of this story except to notice verse 23. The
   many days doubtless included the journey to Arabia and back spoken of
   in Gal. 1:17, and which will be treated when that epistle is reached.

   Questions.

   1. What is meant by the transition period?

   2. Have you carefully examined the other scriptures referred to in this
   lesson?

   3. What is now substituted for miracles?

   4. In what two directions has the translation in 8:14-17 led to error?

   5. In what is the correction found?

   6. What is "simony"?

   7. What marks Philip as a soul-winner?

   8. What is suggested by his being caught away?

   9. What comparison is made between the conversion of Saul and other
   events in this book?

   10. How is God's knowledge of our intimate life shown in this lesson?

   11. What did we note about receiving the Holy Spirit?

   12. What is included in the "Many days" of 9:23?

DOOR OPENED TO THE GENTILES

  Chapters 9:31-11:18

   The closing of the 9th chapter shows Peter on a tour of visitation, and
   the instrument of two great miracles, it being significant that the
   greater of the two was in answer to prayer (v. 40). Almost all the
   commentators regard these miracles as having a bearing on the crisis of
   the Church recorded in the next chapter. In that chapter Peter is again
   to use the "keys," this time in opening the door of the gospel to the
   Gentiles. Indeed, since the occupation of a tanner was unclean in the
   eyes of a Jew because of the handling of the skins of dead animals, it
   is seen that Peter in Joppa is already breaking with the customs of his
   nation.

   As an introduction to chapter 10, carefully read Paul's words in Eph.
   2:11-18. Note, in passing, that the Caesarea in this case was not that
   of Matt. 16, but another city of the same name located near Joppa,
   which the Emperor Augustus gave to Herod, and which the latter greatly
   beautified.

   The description of Cornelius (vv. 1-8), shows this Gentile Roman
   soldier very near the kingdom of God, and an example of how God will
   reveal more light to any man who lives up to the light he has. But the
   need of this "more light" in the sense of the knowledge and acceptance
   of Jesus Christ as a Saviour, is also revealed with equal clearness.

   Passing to the vision of Peter (vv. 9-23), the "vessel" represents the
   Christian church; the "four corners," the four corners of the earth;
   the clean animals, the Jews; the unclean, the Gentiles. In the Church
   however, all are cleansed (read here 2 Cor. 6:11 and Eph. 3:6). The
   Lord providentially interprets the vision in verse 17-20. Note the
   proof of the personality of the Holy Spirit found in verses 19 and 20
   -- "the Spirit said * * * I have sent them."

   We are now in the centurion's house and listening to Peter's sermon
   (vv. 24-43). He has had his eyes opened to the great truth expressed in
   v. 34. This does not mean that any man merits God's acceptance by his
   natural morality, for the true fear of God and the working of
   righteousness are always the result of His grace. It means that God
   vouchsafes this grace to men of every nation, whether Gentile or Jew.
   Verse 43 emphasizes this, being the first echo of John 3:16 in the
   history of the Church.

   That the household of Cornelius acted on this promise by faith is seen
   in the result (vv. 44-48), which demonstrates that the Holy Spirit is
   given to men without either water baptism or the laying on of hands,
   but simply by believing (Gal. 2:2). Water baptism followed, but not as
   an act of Peter himself as is worth noticing (v. 48).

   The next chapter indicates that party spirit showed itself early in the
   Church. "They that were of the circumcision" (11:2), means the
   Palestinian Jews as distinguished from the Grecian Jews or "Hellenists"
   as they were sometimes called, and who were born in Greece. The priests
   and the Pharisees belonged to the former who were more zealous for the
   letter of the Mosaic law than the others (Acts 21:20). As we shall see
   later (c. 15), they thought it necessary for a Gentile to become a Jew
   before he could be saved i. e., he must submit to be circumcised at
   least. But Peter rehearses all the circumstances in the case of
   Cornelius, and at this junction they appear to be more than satisfied
   (v. 18).

   Questions.

   1. Name the two miracles of Peter at the close of chapter 9.

   2. What is Peter about to do in chapter 10?

   3. Have you read Eph. 2:11-18?

   4. Give a brief history of Caesarea.

   5. What does the history of Cornelius teach?

   6. Explain the housetop vision.

   7. What proof of the personality of the Holy Spirit is here found?

   8. How is 10:34 to be interpreted?

   9. How is the gift of the Holy Spirit received?

   10. What distinguished the Palestinian Jews from the Hellenists?

THE CHURCH AT ANTIOCH

  Chapters 11:19-13:3

   By connecting the first verse of this lesson with 8:4, it will be seen
   that all intervening is a parenthesis, an important one indeed, but
   making it necessary now to return to the martyrdom of Stephen for a new
   start. Be sure to consult a map for the localities in verses 19 and 20.
   Antioch now coming into prominence as the headquarters of the Gentile
   church, was a beautiful and influential city, but luxurious and
   immoral. It was founded about 300 B. C. Saul's great life work really
   begins here (v. 25), and here also the name of Christianity takes its
   rise (v. 26). Antioch is said to have been famous for its witty
   epigrams, and it is thought that such was the origin of the name
   "Christian." The Church there was richer in this world's goods than at
   Jerusalem, which enabled the Christians to show the beautiful spirit of
   verse 29.

   Another parenthesis meets us at chapter 12, the closing verse of which
   brings us back to Antioch. Chapter 12 is of events in Jerusalem, the
   martyrdom of James by Herod, the imprisonment and deliverance of Peter,
   and the fate of the wicked king.

   To begin with the last-named. Four Herods are mentioned in the New
   Testament, Herod the Great who killed the innocents in Bethlehem, Herod
   who killed John the Baptist, this Herod, and him before whom Paul stood
   later on.

   The story of this, the second persecution of the Church is told in
   verses 1 to 5. The James here mentioned was the one honored by our Lord
   on the Mount of Transfiguration, and in Gethsemane. See also the
   memorable circumstance in Matt. 20:23. Peter was now the only apostle
   remaining in Jerusalem. The four quaternions, 16 soldiers, "to keep
   him," suggest that the enemies of the Church in Jerusalem had not
   forgotten his earlier deliverance (c. 4).

   The story of the present deliverance is told in verses 6-17, and is so
   plain we need not dwell upon it.

   The judgment on Herod (vv. 18-23), suggests to some "the presumption
   and fate of the Anti-christ," who also will persecute the Jewish
   saints, claim divine honors and assume the place of God (2 Thess.
   2:3-8).

   In verses 24, 25 Barnabas and Saul have returned from their mission of
   bearing the alms of Antioch to Jerusalem and have brought John Mark
   with them.

   It is now that Antioch comes to the front as the second great center of
   Christianity, and with it Paul, no longer called Saul, the great
   apostle to the Gentiles. The time is supposed to be toward the spring
   of A. D. 46. Verses 1-3 tell the story. Five names are given, one of
   them very prominent in social circles -- Manaen, a foster-brother of
   Herod. Note the phrase "they ministered to the Lord." How? Just by
   quiet worship. And, Oh! who can measure the results to the Church and
   to the world that came of it! What a contrast with the present-day
   "Movements" of one kind and another, the banquets, conventions,
   newspaper advertisings, photos, and "whoop-'em up" song services, to
   say nothing of meetings for the so-called deepening of the spiritual
   life. The simplicity of ministering to the Lord strikes us here, and
   the circumstance that He Himself is present to guide into large things
   through the voice of His Spirit, Who can be recognized by all who are
   holy enough and quiet enough to hear.

   The laying on of hands in this case is hardly identical with modern
   "ordination," but simply the testimony of the church to the genuineness
   of the call that had been received, and their outwardly expressed
   "fellowship and identification with the two" who had thus been set
   apart by the Holy Spirit. This is the way all true missionary work
   should begin, and the only way to insure a blessing.

   Questions.

   1. With what earlier event is this lesson connected?

   2. Have you located the cities on the map?

   3. What do you know about Antioch?

   4. To what locality do the events of chapter 12 belong?

   5. Name these events.

   6. Identify the different Herods.

   7. Identify James, the first of the apostles to suffer martyrdom.

   8. Of whom may this Herod be taken as a type, and in what particular?

   9. At what date did the great work of missions to the Gentiles begin?

   10. What is here meant by ministering to the Lord?

PAUL'S FIRST MISSIONARY JOURNEY

  Chapters 13:4-14

   Note who was the real inspirer and director of this missionary journey
   "sent forth by the Holy Ghost" (v. 4). This does not contradict the
   last phrase of the preceding verse which, properly rendered, is "they
   let them go." Study the localities of Seleucia and Cyprus on the map.
   What was the first port of Cyprus at which they preached (v. 5)? Note
   that they began their work in the synagogues because it was the Divine
   order to preach to the Jew first (Rom. 1:16), and because this assured
   them a waiting audience. The kind of ministry John Mark rendered is not
   stated, and some think it may have been of a domestic or personal kind.
   The emphasis in this part of the journey is on the events in Paphos,
   which place the student should identify. Those versed in dispensational
   matters speak of Elymas as a type of apostate Judaism which has turned
   away from the truth and perverts the right ways of the Lord. As he
   tried to keep the Word of God from the Roman governor, so the Jews
   tried to keep it from the Gentiles as a class; while on the other hand
   the judgment falling on him is also significant. Blindness has been put
   upon the Jews judicially, and they are grouping in the darkness without
   a leader. Cf. the story (13:6-1) with such a passage as Isa. 6:9, 10,
   for example.

   Leaving the island for the continent of Asia Minor at verse 13, we find
   that verse to contain two interesting things. Paul is now first called
   by that name and begins to take the first place in the narrative as
   compared with Barnabas or any other fellow-worker. Also John Mark is
   pointed out as a deserter for some cause, just what is not known. Cf.
   here Acts 15:38 and 2 Tim. 4:11, the first of which shows that Mark was
   to be blamed, and the second that he was subsequently restored to
   Paul's fellowship. The word Paul means "little," but why it was now
   assumed by him is not known, except it be as expressing his estimate of
   himself spiritually.

   "Antioch in Pisidia" (v. 14) was a region sometimes known as "Galatia"
   and as one of Paul's most important epistles was sent there it gives
   special interest to this part of the story. Furthermore we have here a
   sample of Paul's preaching as in the case of Peter at Pentecost, and
   also an intimation of how he found access to the people in the
   synagogues. The order of exercises there is given in verse 15. From 16
   to 41 is the sermon, which differs from Peter's in an important way.
   Peter addressed the Jews distinctively, and before the final offer of
   the kingdom was withdrawn from them for the time being, and hence he
   offered forgiveness on the ground of repentance and baptism. But Paul
   speaking to Gentiles as well as Jews, and proclaiming the gospel of
   grace as distinguished from that of the kingdom, "utters a truth for
   the first time which Peter did not declare" (v. 39). See comments on
   chapter 3.

   The sermon breaks itself up into three parts: a historical retrospect
   (vv. 16-25), an unveiling of the gospel (vv. 26-39), and a warning (vv.
   40, 41). "Ye that fear God" in contrast with "Men of Israel" (v. 16),
   means the devout Gentiles who sometimes worshipped in the synagogues.
   Observe that while Paul addresses himself chiefly to the Jews (v. 23},
   yet true to his commission these others are not forgotten -- "Whosoever
   among you feareth God" (v. 26). The gospel part of the sermon is a
   model for all time, a statement of facts (vv. 27-31), a glorious
   declaration based upon them and buttressed by holy writ (vv. 32-37),
   and the whole pressed home in a personal application (w. 38, 39). The
   warning seems to have been drawn forth as was that of Stephen, by a
   spirit of opposition rising among his hearers.

   The effects of the sermon are pointed out in verses 42-44, both Jews
   and Gentiles having been impressed, some of whom were saved. The next
   week shows a change in the situation explained in verses 44-48.
   "Ordained" in the last-named verse is not to be interpreted as an
   arbitrary act on God's part, although it remains true that their
   acceptance of eternal life by faith shows that He had chosen them to
   that end. There was a wide work of evangelization in this place (v.
   49), but at length the gospel messengers were forced out into other
   regions (v. 50). "Devout and honorable women," means doubtless Jewish
   worshippers who were wives of the rulers of the city.

   We need not dwell on the story of Iconium (14:1-5) except that the
   missionaries abode there a long time before persecution drove them
   forth, and that a great multitude of both Jews and Gentiles believed.

   The events at Lystra are full of dramatic movement (vv. 6-20). The
   supernatural deliverance of Paul suggests Job 2:6. But is it not
   amazing that they should have returned, without fear, through the
   cities in which they had so recently suffered persecution (v. 21). Some
   have calculated that the whole of this journey covered about a year and
   a half.

   Questions.

   1. Who originated this missionary journey?

   2. What geographical relation does Cyprus bear to Syria and Asia Minor?

   3. In what sense may Elymas be spoken of as a type?

   4. What is the meaning of the word "Paul"?

   5. Describe the simple service of the synagogue.

   6. Analyze Paul's sermon at Antioch.

   7. Give the story of Lystra in your own words.

   FIRST GENERAL CHURCH COUNCIL

   Chapter 15:1-35

   This lesson is one of the most important in the whole historical part
   of the New Testament. It is the record of the first general council of
   the Church, called to settle the fundamental question as to how a man
   may be just with God. We have become acquainted with "they of the
   circumcision" who, at chapter 11, objected to Peter's fellowship with
   the Gentiles in the case of Cornelius. The party was strong and growing
   stronger. As Jews of the stricter sort they could not understand how
   Gentiles could become Christians without in a sense first becoming
   Jews. Their theory is expressed in verse 1. Some of them, who have come
   to be styled "Judaizing teachers," had followed Paul and Barnabas to
   Antioch and sought to undermine their work there. The immediate result
   is given in verses 3 and 4. The second of these two verses should be
   read in connection with Paul's account of this gathering in Gal. 2. The
   appearance of Peter (vv. 7-11) is his last in this book, and it is
   remarkable that as an apostle of the circumcision so-called (Gal. 2:8),
   he should have been used by the Holy Spirit to reprove the error of the
   Judaizing teachers. He does so by a plain relation of facts, an
   interrogative argument and a statement of belief. The preciousness of
   that statement is enhanced by a recurrence to the later dark ages of
   the Church when its momentous truth was obscured by the sacramentalism
   of the papacy.

   But the settlement of this great doctrine is not the only feature
   marking the value of this Council, since we have in the inspired words
   of James following (vv. 13-18), the Divine program for the whole of
   this age and the following. Here we have the great truth of the
   dispensations so necessary to the understanding of the Bible, and so
   little appreciated by many Christian teachers to-day. As another puts
   it, "How different would be the work of our large denominational
   gatherings if the facts here alluded to were taken into consideration"?
   Here is the order of events: First, God is now in this Christian age
   visiting the Gentiles "to take out of them a people for His Name."
   This, in other words, is a time of outgathering of an elect number from
   the nations to form the Church or the body of Christ (cf. Eph. 3:6 in
   the light of its context). Secondly, "After this" Christ "will return"
   (v. 16). The feature of the return of Christ here spoken of is not that
   for the translation of the Church which is His body (1 Thess. 4:16-18),
   but His visible return in power and glory of which the Old 'Testament
   prophets speak. This is that second feature of His second coming to
   which reference has been made before in these pages. It follows the
   rapture of the Church synchronizing with the threatened judgments on
   the living Gentile nations and the deliverance of Israel from her great
   tribulation. Thirdly, following this event will transpire the building
   again of "the tabernacle of David" (v. 16), in other words the
   restoration of the kingdom to Israel (cf. Luke 1:32, 33). Finally, i.
   e., during the Millennial Age "the residue of men" will "seek after the
   Lord." (Cf. Isa. 2:2, 11:10, 60:5, etc.)

   The divine program enunciated by James is followed by his "sentence"
   (v. 19), which is, in effect, the judgment of the whole assembly now
   reduced to writing, and to be transmitted to the churches by a
   committee of the brethren named in verse 22. All that the Gentiles are
   asked to abstain from are those things more or less associated with
   idolatry (v. 20), and which were not distinguished as Mosaic
   prohibitions, but based on the earlier covenant of Noah (Gen. 9:4),
   binding equally on Gentile and Jew. Nevertheless, verse 21, indicates
   that in the abstinence therefrom they were to show a suitable respect
   for their Jewish neighbors who were instructed in these things in the
   Old Testament scriptures, of which the Gentiles until that time were
   ignorant.

   The remainder of the lesson requires no comment.

   Questions.

   1. With what event does this lesson deal?

   2. What question, or doctrine, was now settled?

   3. What was the contention of the "Judaizing" teachers?

   4. In what epistle does Paul refer to their false teaching?

   5. What is the nature of Peter's address on this occasion?

   6. What other feature gives an outstanding character to this chapter?

   7. What is the divine order of the ages as indicated here?

   8. What was the final "Sentence" of this Council?

SECOND JOURNEY

  Chapters 15:36-13:22

   Though the text of this lesson is long, it will be interesting to read
   it through at a single sitting, and get the whole journey at one view.
   The events are clear cut, easily remembered and apparent in their
   spiritual teaching.

   Starting Forth.

   It begins with the "contention" between Paul and Barnabas -- men "of
   like passions" with ourselves, which was providentially overruled so
   that two missionary journeys grew out of it instead of one (15:36-41).
   Note that there were churches in "Syria and Cilicia" though no account
   is given of their origin beyond that of Antioch. It is a hint of the
   activity of the preachers of the Word, and the extent to which the
   gospel may have spread in that early time far beyond the record.

   The story of the second visit to Lystra (16:1-3), gains interest from
   the subsequent prominence of Timothy, of whom further data are found in
   the epistles Paul afterward addressed to him. His circumcision is no
   evidence of inconsistency on Paul's part, since no question of
   principle was involved, but only expediency (v. 3). As Timothy's father
   was a Greek, it would be known that he was uncircumcised which would
   prevent this ministry among the Jews (cf. here 1 Cor. 9:20).

   The outstanding feature of this journey is in verses 6-10 of this
   chapter. "Asia" (v. 6) was a name given to a large part of the coast of
   Asia Minor especially on the southeast. Why the Holy Spirit forbade the
   missionaries to preach there at this time, or the manner in which the
   prohibition was communicated, is not stated; but we know that later a
   great work was wrought there especially in Ephesus. The story is
   repeated with reference to the North (Bithynia), and as the only point
   of the compass left is the West, they make for the seaport of Troas.
   The student is urged to identify these localities on the map. At Troas
   special direction is required, for the sea is to be crossed, and God
   meets the need in the vision vouchsafed to Paul. At this point interest
   is added by the pronoun "we" in verse 10, indicating that the author,
   Luke, has now joined the party.

   Experiences in Philippi.

   Their stay at Philippi is full of movement (vv. 12-40). It was an
   important city found by Philip of Macedon, inhabited chiefly by Roman
   citizens, but lacking in a Jewish population as is shown in the fact
   that it contained no synagogue (v. 13). It is unusual to read of a
   woman (Lydia) as engaged in commercial pursuits on her own account in
   that early time, but she seems to have been an exporter of Thyatira,
   noted for its purple dyes (vv. 14, 15).

   The case following is that of demon possession, with phenomena not very
   different from modern clairvoyance or the spiritualistic seance (vv.
   16-18). Of course the resultant proceedings were all illegal (vv.
   19-24), but how greatly was God glorified thereby (vv. 25-34)! Verses
   35-38 are an illustration that a Christian may with dignity insist upon
   his legal rights. Immunity from corporal punishment was one of the most
   valued privileges of Roman citizenship, and to impose it was a crime in
   the eye of the law. No wonder the magistrates were afraid. But learn
   the lesson of these verses concerning the way of Satan with the gospel.
   He first applauds and seems to help it along by flattery and with
   advertisement (v. 17), but when his testimony is rejected, he shows his
   true character (v. 19). Paul's preaching aimed at the idol worship of
   Rome which gave the excuse of verses 20, 21. Let us also be impressed
   with the simplicity of the gospel in verse 31. To believe on the Lord
   Jesus Christ is simply to commit one's self to Him to be saved. Nothing
   else is to be done, for God has put away our guilt in His atonement,
   and offers reconciliation for our acceptance. Note the reference to the
   jailer's "house." No one can be saved except by the exercise of a
   personal faith in the Saviour, but there is great encouragement here
   for the Christian parent to bring his offspring to the Lord in full
   assurance.

   Thessalonica to Athens.

   Thessalonica now claims our attention (17:1-9), a most influential city
   then and now, located on the Aegean Sea, and on the direct route to
   Rome. Paul's method with the Jews is further presented here in verses 2
   and 3. He employed the Old Testament scriptures. He reasoned with them,
   doubtless in the form of questions and answers. They were expecting the
   Messiah, the Christ, and he showed them that when He came it was
   necessary according to their own scriptures that He should suffer, die
   and rise again from the dead. Establishing these points he was then
   ready to show that "this Jesus Whom I preach unto you is the Christ,"
   because He has fulfilled these things. The customary results follow,
   faith in some, envy and opposition in others, persecution, and removal
   to another place. The experience is repeated in Berea (vv. 10-14), and
   then we find Paul at Athens (vv. 16-34), still at this time "the
   intellectual and artistic capital of the world." It was also a
   religious capital, the strongest in Greek mythology, as illustrated in
   the text. The "Areopagus" (v. 19) was a court somewhat like the Roman
   Senate; and here Paul addressed the philosophers and leading citizens
   in terms familiar to them. Their "unknown God" he introduces to them as
   the Creator of all things and the "Lord of heaven and earth," and the
   future judge of men through His Son Jesus Christ, Whom He hath "raised
   from the dead" (vv. 23-31). The poets he quotes (v. 28) were Cleanthus
   and Aratus, whom he tactfully employs against their country-men, whose
   boasted philosophy was "ignorance" (v. 30). The times of this ignorance
   God had "winked at" hitherto, overlooked in other words. Not in the
   sense that they would not be held to account or judged for it, but that
   He had sent them no special revelation of Himself until now. There is
   no distinctive application of the gospel here, and possibly because
   Paul's hearers were not prepared for it, but still his testimony was
   not in vain (v. 34).

   Corinth and Ephesus.

   Corinth was the capital of Achaia, the lower peninsula of Greece; and
   in comparison with Athens, a great commercial center, cosmopolitan in
   its population, and as immoral as could well be conceived. The record
   of Paul's experiences here is varied by several details, for example
   his association with Aquila and Priscilla; the reference to his trade,
   for all Jewish lads, no matter what their circumstances, were taught
   trades; the encouraging vision he received; the length of time he
   remained in the city; the turning of the tables on his enemies; the
   Jewish vow he assumed, etc. (18:1-18). To speak of the vision, judging
   by verse 5, and also by certain allusions in Paul's two epistles to
   this Church, there was special need of it at this time. He seems to
   have been much depressed, and the Lord graciously desired him to be
   without anxiety. This explains why he remained there so long. The event
   before Gallio brings to mind one of the incidental evidences of the
   historical accuracy of this narrative. He is called the "deputy" of
   Achaia, and as a matter of fact that is what he was only, and not a
   proconsul, for at this time Achaia was united to Macedonia. Somewhat
   later it was constituted a province on its own account, and then came
   to have its own proconsul. The "vow" which Paul took may have been one
   of those concessions to the Jews he thought needful for expediency's
   sake.

   Ephesus next reached (vv. 19-21), was just across the Aegean Sea from
   Corinth, and was the capital of the Roman province of Asia, noted for
   its commerce, but particularly for its temple of Diana (Artemis). There
   was a large Jewish population there, and they were accorded special
   privileges by the local government. We shall learn more of Paul's work
   there in our next lesson.

   Questions.

   1. What hint does this lesson give of the development of Christianity
   at this time?

   2. Have you read 1 Cor. 9:20?

   3. Have you traced this journey on the map?

   4. Name the four missionaries in the journey.

   5. How were the rights of Paul and Silas infringed upon in Philippi?

   6. What is it to believe on the Lord Jesus Christ?

   7. What encouragement for Christian parents is found here?

   8. What is the meaning of 17:30?

   9. Tell the story of Paul's stay in Corinth in your own words.

   10. What was the geographical relation of Corinth and Ephesus?

THIRD JOURNEY

  Chapters 18:23-21:17

   As in the last lesson, it is recommended that the text of the present
   one be read through at a single sitting, and two or three times if
   possible, before considering the comments, which then will be more
   valuable.

   Some time had been spent again in Antioch, after which the whole
   territory of Phrygia and Galatia, in Asia Minor, was once more
   traversed for the purpose indicated in 18:23. Ephesus was duly reached
   (19:1), where Paul found a condition of things explained by the closing
   verses of chapter 18. Apollos does not seem to have been a Christian
   till Aquila and Priscilla met him, but he had been awakened by the
   ministry of John the Baptist, and was learned in the Old Testament
   Scriptures. The "disciples" Paul met (19:2), were possibly those of
   Apollos' ministry, whom he (Paul) brought out into the full fellowship
   of the gospel (vv. 2-7). "Since ye believed" of verse 2, should be
   rendered "when ye believed." There was something lacking in these
   disciples which Paul observed, and which led him to put this question,
   because the reception of the Holy Spirit is the test of true
   discipleship (Rom. 8:9). (See comment on 2:5-13).

   Verses 8-20 show an unusual work of grace in and around Ephesus at this
   time. "The school of Tyrannus" (v. 9) was the convenient meeting place.
   The special miracles by Paul (v. 11) were an offset to the unusual
   power of the evil one there. This power showed itself in the "vagabond
   Jews" of verse 13 who suffered justly for their wickedness (v. i6), and
   whose defeat wrought gloriously for the Gospel (v. 17). There was much
   of this occultism in Ephesus, the overthrow of which is portrayed in
   the bonfire of the books of the black art, the cost of which was about
   $10,000.

   But the spread of the Gospel exhibited itself also in the undermining
   of the controlling trade of the city, with the consequences following
   (vv. 23-41).

   Chapter 20 is a diary of an extended journey from Ephesus to Macedonia
   (vv. 1, 2), when again Paul must have visited Philippi, Thessalonica,
   Berea, etc. Then he came down into Greece, possibly Athens, certainly
   Corinth saw his labors again. Here his purpose to cross by sea to Syria
   was interfered with by plots against his life, so that he retraced his
   steps into Macedonia, and crossed again to Troas (vv. 3-6). A week in
   Troas was made memorable by his discourse till midnight, and the
   miraculous recovery of the young man Eutychus (vv. 7-21). Note that
   this gathering of the saints to "break bread," i. e., observe the
   Lord's supper, was on the first day of the week, strengthening the
   conviction that the Lord's day had taken the place of the Jewish
   Sabbath as the time for Christian assemblies. Twenty miles on foot, and
   apparently alone, brought Paul to Assos, and thence by ship to
   Mitylene, and finally Miletus (vv. 13-16).

   A tender episode meets us here in his farewell discourse to the beloved
   elders (bishops or presbyters) of the church at Ephesus (vv. 17-38).
   Three of his discourses have been reported hitherto somewhat at length,
   but this is especially interesting as the first spoken to the church.
   The others were missionary discourses. He first testifies to his own
   integrity as a minister (vv. 18-21); he then alludes to the bonds and
   afflictions that await him (vv. 22-27); a charge to the elders follows
   (vv. 28-31); a further testimony to his faithfulness (vv. 32-35); the
   prayer of farewell (vv. 36-38). Space will not permit elaboration, but
   verse 28 should not be passed over in its clear testimony to the
   oneness of God in Christ. "The Church of God which He purchased with
   His own Blood." The Deity of our Lord is here asserted, and the
   priceless cost of our redemption. There is no suggestion of an
   "apostolic succession" in verse 29, but just the opposite; a prophecy
   by-the-way, finding fulfillment in all the centuries, and never more
   positively than now. The beatitude of verse 37 was evidently current in
   the early church in addition to those recorded in the gospels, and this
   reference to it gives it inspired authority.

   The journey continues until Jerusalem is reached (21:1-17), the most
   important features of which are the warnings of the apostle not to go
   to Jerusalem at all (4:10-14). The second says that these warnings were
   not merely from man but from the Holy Spirit. How then can we explain
   his neglect of them? Shall we say that they were not in the nature of a
   command, but a testing? Verses 11-13 suggest this. There is one other
   difficulty in this chapter, where the prophesying of women is referred
   to (v. 9), and which seems to contradict Paul later on in 1 Cor. 14 and
   1 Tim. 2. We can not explain it, except to suggest that possibly this
   prophesying was in private rather than the public assembly.

   Questions.

   1. Have you read the text of this lesson as requested?

   2. Why did Paul take this journey through Asia Minor?

   3. What is suggested in this lesson as the test of true discipleship?

   4. State in your own words the story of Paul's ministry in Ephesus at
   this time.

   5. What makes memorable his stay at Troas on this journey?

   6. Analyze his discourse to the elders of Ephesus.

   7. What two great doctrinal truths are emphasized in 20:28?

   8. Quote the new beatitude of verse 37.

   9. What do verses 11-13 suggest concerning Paul's warnings?

TUMULT IN JERUSALEM

  Chapters 21:18-23

   The stirring events in this lesson are: 1st, Paul's ceremonial vow (21:
   18-26); 2nd, his apprehension by the Jewish Mob (vv. 27-30) 3rd, his
   speech to them on the castle stairs (v. 31-22:21); 4th, his colloquy
   with the Roman soldiers (vv. 22-29); 5th, his defense before the
   Sanhedrin (v. 30- 23:11); 6th, the plot to murder him (w. 12-22); 7th,
   the escape to Caesarea (vv. 23-35).

   As to Paul's vow, it is to be kept in mind that the Judaizing element
   in the church increased as its numbers increased, and while they had
   accepted the Lord Jesus Christ as Saviour, yet they were also zealous
   for the law of Moses. They can be sympathized with in this, considering
   their past history as Jews; but not when they attached a saving value
   to the law, or attempted to force its observance upon the Gentiles. To
   propitiate them and promote peace, Paul was tempted to compromise in
   the matter of this vow whatever it may have been, and he fell into a
   snare. It might be said in extenuation that the pressure was
   exceedingly strong upon him.

   Of course it was not these Judaizing Christians who set upon him in the
   temple, but out and out Jews who hated Christianity altogether, and to
   whom the opportunity had been given by the action of Paul in yielding
   to the prejudices of the others.

   His speech on the castle stairs constitutes: 1st, an account of himself
   as a Jew (vv. 1-5); 2nd, the story of his conversion (vv. 6-16), and
   third a declaration of his divine commission (vv. 17-21). In the story
   of his conversion some have found a difficulty in that Paul says his
   companions saw the light but heard no voice, while in chapter 9, Luke
   reports that they heard the voice. The explanation probably is that
   they heard the sound of the voice but were unable to understand the
   words. What he says of his divine commission here is not given in
   chapter 9, and is especially interesting and important on that account.
   It is a chapter of his inner life which otherwise never would have been
   known.

   In Paul's defense before the Sanhedrin some think he was acting in the
   flesh, and after his own will rather than in the Holy Spirit. This is a
   serious charge to make and great caution is necessary, but the
   circumstances supposed to justify it are the abruptness of his
   beginning without waiting to be questioned, and his apparently
   self-righteous spirit (23:1), his offensive epithet to the high priest
   (v. 3), and his cleverness in dividing the council (v. 6). If there be
   anything in such a supposition, we are all the happier for the evidence
   in verse 11, that it was all right once more between the Lord and
   himself before the next day arose.

   We need not continue our comments further in this case.

   Questions.

   1. Give the outline of this lesson.

   2. How would you explain the occasion for Paul's vow?

   3. Do you see clearly the distinction between Jews, and those here
   called Judaizers?

   4. Analyze Paul's speech on the castle stairs.

   5. What serious reflection is sometimes cast upon Paul at this crisis,
   and on what grounds?

   6. What Divine comfort or justification of Paul does the record
   contain?

PAUL A PRISONER AT CAESAREA

  Chapters 24-26

   There are three dignitaries of the Roman Empire before whom Paul now
   has a hearing -- Felix, Festus and Agrippa.

   The circumstances in the first instance show the great importance the
   Jewish leaders attached to the matter, since the high priest himself
   journeyed to Caesarea as an accuser of Paul, bringing with him not only
   a number of the elders but a Roman lawyer (34:1). The latter's
   indictment of Paul contains three counts, that of a political plotter,
   a religious heretic, and a violator of the temple (vv. 5, 6). Paul
   denies the first, admits the second, and challenges evidence of the
   third (vv. 12-20). "More perfect knowledge of that way" (v. 22), means
   that Felix knew much about Christ and Christianity though himself not a
   follower of the Nazarene.

   "Drusilla" was a sister of Agrippa of whom the next chapter speaks, and
   a daughter of the Herod who martyred James (c. 12). She was not a
   lawful wife of Felix, having deserted her own husband to live with him.
   Of course the plot to kill Paul when he should return to Jerusalem
   (25:3), was not known to Festus, which makes it the more remarkable
   that he decided to keep him in Caesarea, and shows the hand of God in
   the premises.

   Agrippa was king of Chalcis, holding the title by the grace of the
   Roman Emperor, and Bernice was his sister. The hearing before them was
   made a great state occasion (v. 23). Paul's opening words are courteous
   and tactful (26:2, 3). He reviews his past life as a Pharisee (vv. 4-1
   1). He recounts once more his heavenly vision, his conversion and
   commission (vv. 12-18). The last verse is a remarkably condensed
   statement of the Gospel, referring to (a), Man's condition by nature,
   blinded, darkened and under the power of Satan; (b), the power of
   divine grace to give liberty and light to him including forgiveness,
   and an inheritance among the saints; (c), the instrument of it all --
   faith in Christ. Next, Paul speaks of his unjust treatment at the hands
   of the Jews, and the protection of God accorded him. The verdict
   follows in verses 30-32.

   Questions.

   1. Name the Roman dignitaries of this lesson.

   2. Give the specifications against Paul.

   3. What biographical data can you give about Drusilla?

   4. How is the hand of God seen in the action of Festus?

   5. Give an exegesis of 25:18.

   6. What was the verdict of Festus and Agrippa?

A PRISONER AT ROME

  Chapters 27-28

   The reader is urged to add to the interest of this lesson by the
   further use of the map. The sea journey is marked by different stages
   -- from Adramyttium to Myra (vv. 1-5), from Myra to the Fair Havens
   (vv. 6-8), from Fair Havens to Melita or Malta (v. 6-28:1), from Melita
   to Syracuse (vv. 2-12), from Syracuse to Rhegium, Puteoli and Rome (vv.
   13-15).

   The most interesting stage is the third which covers the shipwreck, and
   of which it is said that "in all classic literature there is nothing
   which gives so much information of the working of an ancient ship."
   Moreover, "historical research has confirmed the facts of the chapter
   and identified the scene of the wreck." The narrative has often been
   used in an allegorical sense to portray the history of the church, and
   also the history of the salvation of a single soul, but into this we
   have not time to enter. Gaebelein has a striking observation on Paul's
   warning to the centurion and the shipmaster (27:11, 19) saying, "we can
   think of other warnings given through the great apostle, warnings
   concerning the spiritual dangers, the apostasy of the last days, the
   perilous times of seducing spirits and doctrines of demons. The
   professing church has forgotten these, for which she is drifting, cast
   about by every wind of doctrine and rapidly nearing the long-predicted
   ship-wreck." Alas! how true this is!

   The phrase "barbarous people" (28:2), is not to be understood as
   meaning savages, but simply foreigners to the Greeks. All who did not
   speak their language were called "barbarians." What a striking
   fulfillment of Mark 16:18 is found in verses 2-6! Read verses 15 and 16
   in comparison with Rom. 1:11-13, written years before, and be impressed
   with the different way in which Paul entered Rome from that which he
   expected. Note in verse 17 how consistent is his method of preaching
   the Gospel with the principle he laid down in Romans 1:16, "to the Jew
   first." Note too, his quotation of Isaiah 6 in verses 25-27, when the
   Jews turned their back upon his message, and how sadly those words of
   the prophet have been fulfilled in the history of their nation from
   that day to this. But the latter part of Romans 11 should be read in
   the same connection, to learn what God's gracious purpose is for that
   same people in the time to come. Verse 28 marks a larger beginning of
   the world-wide proclamation of the "salvation of God" among the
   nations. This proclamation however will one day close as that same
   chapter of Romans (11) foretells, when it will have come to pass that
   they too have judged themselves "unworthy of eternal life."

   Paul is now a prisoner in Rome where he remains for two years actively
   engaged not only in preaching the gospel by word of mouth, but
   expounding its deeper truths through the epistles he wrote from his
   prison house to the churches of Ephesus, Colosse and Philippi. There is
   reason to believe from his later pastoral epistles that he was
   liberated after his hearing before the Emperor, and once more took up
   his itinerary among the churches and in unevangelized parts. He was
   arrested a second time however, as we may gather from the same sources,
   when, according to tradition, he was beheaded in Rome for his testimony
   to the Gospel and the Saviour he loved.

   Questions.

   1. Name the stages of Paul's sea journey.

   2. How is the word "barbarous" explained?

   3. Have you read the latter part of Romans 11?

   4. What church epistles were written from Rome by Paul?

   5. What have history and tradition to say concerning the subsequent
   life of this great apostle?
     __________________________________________________________________

EPISTLE TO THE ROMANS

   INTRODUCTION AND THEME

   Chapter 1:1-17

   It is not known how, or when, the church at Rome was founded, but
   probably by Jews who received the Gospel in Jerusalem on the day of
   Pentecost (Acts 2). We shall see later that neither Paul nor any other
   apostle had as yet visited that metropolis, although Paul had a great
   desire to do so; and as another says, it was natural that "he should
   wish to announce before his coming the distinctive truths which had
   been revealed to and through him. He would desire the Christians in
   Rome to have his own statement of the great doctrines of grace so
   assailed everywhere by legalistic (Judaizing) teachers."

   He was now in Corinth doubtless on his third missionary journey
   (15:22-29), and Phoebe, a deaconess of the church at Cenchrea, the
   seaport of Corinth, was about to visit Rome (Rom. 16:1); a circumstance
   of which he avails himself to send this letter.

   1. It opens, as is usual in Paul's epistles, with a greeting or
   salutation (vv. 1-7), in which is given the author's name and spiritual
   relation to Jesus Christ, his official designation and the object of
   it, and an announcement of the church or persons addressed. It is Paul
   who writes, and he is a bond-servant of Jesus Christ. As such he has
   been made a messenger of the Gospel of God (v. 1). This Gospel, which
   means "good news" or "glad-tidings," was not altogether new because it
   had been promised through the Old Testament prophets (vv. 2 cf. Gal.
   3:8). It concerned the Son of God, Jesus Christ our Lord, an account of
   Whose Gracious Person and work follows (vv. 3-5). The testimony of this
   Gospel committed to Paul, was world-wide including them at Rome (vv.
   5-7).

   2. The salutation is followed by a thanksgiving (vv. 8-12) for the
   "faith" or standing in grace of the church at Rome (v. 8), which leads
   to an expression of the apostle's longing to visit them (v. 10); not
   merely for social reasons, but spiritual benefit (vv. 11, 12). It is
   here we learn that he had not visited them before, and that no other
   apostle had done so, for if so, the "spiritual gift" (v. 11) would
   doubtless have been imparted; while on the other hand it was a Pauline
   principle not to build on another man's foundation (Rom. 15:20, 21; 2
   Cor. 10:14-16).

   3. The thanksgiving is followed by a statement of the theme of the
   epistle, for it is more than a personal letter, a treatise, in short,
   on the great subject that had been committed to Paul (vv. 13-17). "Let"
   (v. 13), is obsolete English, meaning "hindered." "Barbarian" (v. 14),
   signifies "foreigner," the Latins (Rome) were foreigners to the Greeks.
   "Unwise" is to be taken only in a comparative sense. The Greeks
   regarded themselves as the "wise" people of the world, cultivated in
   human philosophy, while all others were unwise by contrast. That which
   Paul is ready to preach at Rome is the "Gospel" (v. 16), called as we
   saw in verse 1, "the Gospel of God." The words "of Christ," (v. 16),
   are omitted in the Revised Version. It is the "Gospel of God," i. e.
   "the widest possible designation of the whole body of redemptive
   truth." This might be called the theme of the epistle, unless we prefer
   to take that which is the essence of the Gospel as inferred from a
   later verse, "The Gift of God's Righteousness."

   This Gospel "is the power of God unto salvation to every one that
   believeth." The dynamic He uses to lift men out of the death of sin
   into the life of righteousness, for "salvation" means just that,
   including, as another puts it, "the ideas of deliverance, safety,
   preservation, healing and soundness." And the essence of its power lies
   in this, that "therein is revealed a righteousness of God by faith unto
   faith" (v. 17 R. V.). It is very necessary to understand that phrase "a
   righteousness of God," which is the key to the epistle, and does not
   mean the righteousness which God is in His own nature, but a
   righteousness which He gives to men freely, on the exercise of their
   faith in Christ. To quote Lange's Commentary, it is the rightness which
   proceeds from God, i. e., the right relation in which man is placed by
   a judicial act of God." Or to quote the Scofield Bible, the
   righteousness is "Christ Himself, Who fully met in our stead and behalf
   every demand of the law, and Who is, by the act of God, 'made unto us *
   * * * righteousness' (1 Cor. 1:30)."

   "As it is written, 'He that is righteous by faith shall live'" (Hab.
   2:4, Lange).

   Questions.

   1. By whom presumably, was the church at Rome founded?

   2. Why may Paul have wished to write this letter?

   3. What gave him the opportunity to send it?

   4. Divide this lesson into three parts.

   5. What leads us to think Paul had never visited Rome?

   6. What is the theme of the epistle?

   7. What other theme is preferred by some?

   8. What ideas does the word "salvation" include?

   9. Does "righteousness of God" mean what God is, or what God gives?

   10. Give the definitions of that phrase in Lange and the Scofield
   Bible.

MAN'S LOST CONDITION BY NATURE

  Chapters 1:18-3:20

   We saw in the last lesson that man if he would be saved must become
   righteous before God, and the righteousness which alone satisfies Him
   is that which He Himself supplies. We now learn what man's condition is
   which makes this a necessity. In other words this lesson, constituting
   the second general division of the epistle, gives us (1), a Divine
   declaration about sin (1:18-21); (2), shows it to be punitive and
   degenerative in its effects (vv. 22-23); and (3), teaches the
   universality of its extent (2:1-3:20).

   1. As to the Divine declaration about sin, we perceive that not only is
   there a righteousness from God revealed from heaven, but "a wrath of
   God" as well. The first gives the remedy, the second the penalty if the
   remedy is not applied. "Who hold the truth," might be rendered "who
   hold down the truth." That is, the truth of God, whose saving power
   might be known to men, is held down, does not get a chance to be known,
   because of man's unrighteousness (v. 18). This truth might be known by
   the facts of creation. Not that the Gospel of redemption is revealed in
   nature, but sufficient of God is thus revealed, i. e., His eternal
   power and Godhead, "to have kept men true to Him essentially," so that
   they are without excuse (v. 20). This is seen in what follows: Man once
   knew God, the story of Eden shows this; but he is now fallen from God,
   through his own ingratitude and conceited reasonings. The fall is
   moral, rather than intellectual, for his "foolish (senseless) heart" is
   "darkened" (vv. 18-21).

   2. Sin at once becomes punitive and degenerative. Observe the
   down-grade: failure to glorify God; ingratitude; vain reasonings;
   darkened moral nature; turned into fools: worshipping natural objects,
   men, birds, beasts, reptiles; given over to uncleanness in the
   dishonoring of their bodies among themselves (vv. 22-25 and practically
   to the end of the chapter). In passing, it should be said that the
   horrible details of this indictment against the Gentile world is
   established by the "classics" of Greek and Latin literature, showing
   that these things were true not merely of the low and ignorant, but the
   high and cultured of Paul's day. (See Testimonium Animae, or Greek and
   Roman before Jesus Christ, by E. G. Sihler, Ph.D.)

   3. This thought is now elaborated, which shows the philosophers and
   moralizers of Greece and Rome to be no better than the others (2:1-3).
   They were incapable of judging others; only God could do that. Who is
   no respecter of persons (vv. 6-11). His judgment would be just both as
   against the Gentiles and Jews. The former had not the revealed law as
   did the latter, i. e., they did not have the Old Testament scriptures,
   but would be judged by the law written in their hearts (vv. 12-16).

   Special attention is now given the Jews because they had the Old
   Testament scriptures, and while equally sinful with the pagan Gentiles,
   were yet trusting in their knowledge of the letter of the law as making
   them better than they (vv. 17-20). The answer assumed in the case of
   each question in verses 21-23 is affirmative, as is proven by the
   concluding verses of the chapter.

   4. Did this mean then, that the Jew had no advantage whatever over the
   pagan Gentile? No, for the reason in c. 3:1, 2. It was an advantage for
   the Jew to have the Scriptures even though some did not believe them
   (vv. 3, 4). Verses 5-8 are parenthetical, and the main question is
   taken up again at 9. The Jews are morally no better as a class than the
   pagans, as proven by the facts of history just alluded to (vv. 21-24),
   and by their own Scriptures (vv. 10-18 cf. with Ps. 14:1-3, 53:1, 5:9,
   10:7, 36:1). These were the things which their own "law" said, and said
   to them as Jews, because the Gentiles did not know that law, did not
   have the Old Testament scriptures. Therefore the "mouth," i. e., the
   boasting of the Jew was stopped as well as that of the Gentiles, and
   "all the world." Jew and Gentile, was "guilty before God" (v. 19). This
   proved that as the result of the works of the law no man could be
   accounted righteous before God, for as a matter of fact, the clearer
   one apprehended the law the more condemned as a sinner he became (v.
   20).

   Questions.

   1. What did the previous lesson teach us?

   2. What are we to learn from this lesson?

   3. Divide this lesson into three general parts.

   4. What two great things are revealed from heaven?

   5. Why are men without excuse for their ignorance of God?

   6. Name some of the steps in the downgrade of sin.

   7. What is the bearing of contemporaneous literature on Paul's
   indictment of the pagan world?

   8. By what two lines of proof are the Jews proven as guilty as the
   Gentiles?

   9. How would you interpret 3:20?

NATURE AND EFFECT OF THE GIFT OF RIGHTEOUSNESS

  Chapters 3:21-5:11

   1. If a righteousness were not obtainable by the works of the law as we
   saw in our last lesson, then a Jew especially, might well ask in
   surprise how it were obtainable? To which the apostle replies, that
   "now apart from the law a righteousness of God is manifested," (3:21 R.
   V.), i. e. a righteousness which may become man's without the keeping
   of the law. This righteousness he describes as (a) "witnessed by the
   law and the prophets," in other words, taught in the Old Testament as
   well as the New Testament; (b), obtained through faith in Jesus Christ
   (v. 22); (c), without respect of persons, Jew or Gentile (vv. 22, 23);
   (d) the free gift of God's grace (v. 24); (e), based upon the death of
   Jesus Christ (v. 25); (f), and its bestowment declarative of God's
   righteous character (vv. 25, 26). "His righteousness" in these last two
   verses does not refer as in the earlier instances, to the righteousness
   He gives, but the righteousness He is. It means that He is perfectly
   consistent with His own law and holiness in freely justifying a sinner
   who believes on Christ, because Christ has fully met every demand of
   the law on his behalf (10:4). In this connection "propitiation" should
   be understood clearly. It does not convey the idea of placating an
   angry God, but of "doing right by His holy law and so making it
   possible for Him righteously to show mercy" -- Scofield Bible. Christ
   so honored the law by enduring its righteous sentence that God who ever
   foresaw the cross, is vindicated in having "passed over" sins from Adam
   to Moses (5:13), and the sins of Jewish believers under the old
   covenant, and in justifying sinners under the new covenant.

   2. To appreciate chapter 4 go back to the phrase, "witnessed by the law
   and the prophets" (3:22). "The Law of the Prophets" was one of the
   names given by the Jews to the Old Testament. The "Law" meant the
   Pentateuch or the first five books of Moses and the "Prophets" the
   remainder of the Old Testament. Paul was showing that the salvation or
   justification by faith he preached was Old Testament truth, and in the
   present chapter he confirms the fact by the instances of David and
   Abraham. The illustration from Abraham is found in the "Law" and that
   from David in the "Prophets." Abraham's case is first treated (vv.
   1-4), and then David's (vv. 5-8). To Abraham he returns at verse 9,
   showing in what follows how justification is entirely distinct from
   ordinances. Verses 18-25 should be pondered because of their simple and
   picturesque presentation of the theme. Abraham believed God's testimony
   about Isaac in the face of nature to the contrary, and this faith "was
   counted to him for righteousness" (v. 22). We have only to believe
   God's testimony about Jesus Christ, Whom Isaac typified, to receive the
   same blessing in the same way. Verse 2 of this chapter must not be
   thought to contradict James 2:24, because these two scriptures are but
   two aspects of the same truth. Paul here is laying down the principle
   which James is applying; or to put it better, Paul is speaking of that
   which justifies man before God, and James of that which justifies him
   before man. The former alludes to what God sees -- faith, and the
   latter to that which man sees -- works. The one has in mind Gen. 15:6,
   and the other Gen. 22:1-19. -- Scofield Bible.

   3. There are three great results of justifying faith as indicated in
   chapter 5:1-11 -- peace with God, access unto God, and rejoicing before
   God (vv. 1, 2). The rejoicing is in three things, hope of the glory of
   God (2). tribulations (3), God Himself (v. 11). The rejoicing in
   tribulations is a theme full of interest. We rejoice because the
   tribulations of a justified man work "patience," the patience
   "experience," and the experience "hope," that "maketh not ashamed" (vv.
   3-5). The "experience" in this case is experience of the love of God
   Who comforts us in our tribulation, sanctifies it to us and delivers us
   from it. This experience assures us of His love for us, the Holy Ghost
   thus 'sheds it abroad in our hearts,' and in consequence of that
   assurance our hope of beholding and partaking of His glory grows the
   brighter. We know that we shall not be ashamed of, or confounded in
   regard to the fulfillment of that hope. Verses 6-10, important as they
   are and full of the riches of Christ, are in a sense parenthetical to
   the main line of teaching in this section. Bishop Moule suggests a
   rendering of verse 10 of great beauty -- "We shall be kept in His
   life."

   Questions.

   1. What is meant by righteousness "apart from the law"?

   2. What is meant by "witnessed by the law and the prophets"?

   3. How do you distinguish the "righteousness of God" (vv. 25, 26), from
   the same phrase as used earlier?

   4. How do you understand "propitiation"?

   5. What part of chapter 3 is illustrated by chapter 4?

   6. What is the meaning of "The Law and the Prophets"?

   7. Why is the phrase used in this case?

   8. What is the substance of chapter 4?

   9. How does Abraham's justification illustrate ours?

   10. Harmonize 4:2 with James 2:24.

   11. Name the three results of justifying faith.

   12. Name the three causes of rejoicing.

MAN IN RELATION TO THE FIRST ADAM AND THE SECOND ADAM

  Chapters 5:12-7:6

   1. "Wherefore" leads back to chapter 3, where the apostle is referring
   to the sinful condition of all men. It was by one man that sin entered
   the world bringing physical death as a penalty, and that all have
   sinned is proven by the fact that all have paid that penalty (v. 12).
   To be sure the law was not given to Moses till Sinai, but as "death
   reigned from Adam to Moses," it is evident that there was a
   transgression of another law than that written on stone, for "sin is
   not imputed when there is no law" (v. 13). For the nature of this other
   law compare again 2:15.

   2. But as sin came through the first Adam, so the gift of righteousness
   came through the second Adam. It was just one offence that brought the
   condemnation, but the gift of righteousness covers "many offences" (vv.
   16, 19). It was the giving of the law at Sinai that revealed how many
   these offences were (v. 20) for "by the law is the knowledge of sin"
   (3:20). Nevertheless, though sin was thus seen to abound, yet "grace
   did much more abound" (v. 20). "Sin" as used here is different from
   "sins," the former referring to our fallen nature, and the latter to
   manifestations of that nature.

   3. What Paul had said about grace abounding where sin abounded, might
   lead an uninstructed mind to infer that it put a premium on sin. Or in
   other words, if man were justified by faith only, what provision was
   made for a change of character? How did salvation by grace affect one's
   experience as well as his standing before God? Chapters 6 to 8 work out
   this thought as follows:

   (a) The believer is identified with Christ in His death and
   resurrection (6:1-10). The baptism into Jesus Christ (verse 3), is the
   pentecostal experience which becomes the birthright of every believer
   the moment he believes. He is then baptized by the Holy Spirit into the
   body of which Christ is the Head (1 Cor. 12:13); and being so baptized
   he is considered as one with Christ as any member of a human body is
   one with the head of that body. This means of course, that he is
   regarded in God's sight as having died when Christ died -- he was
   "baptized into His death." The sequel however, must be equally true,
   and he is regarded as having risen from the dead when Christ rose.
   Hence he is now in a legal or judicial sense walking before God "in
   newness of life." Being dead he "is freed from sin" (v. 7), i. e.,
   having legally died in Christ when Christ died just as every member of
   a body dies when its head dies, he has paid the penalty of his sin in
   Christ, and having now arisen in Christ after the payment of that
   penalty, "death hath no more dominion over him" (v. 9), he has not
   again to pay the penalty of sin.

   (b) It is now his duty to reckon this to be true, and no longer to
   allow sin to reign in his "mortal body" (v. 11). The way to accomplish
   this is not by efforts and resolutions on his part, but by yielding his
   new life unto God. He yields his new life by yielding the members of
   his body unto God -- his eyes, ears, tongue, hands, feet, brain, etc.
   (v. 13).

   (c) The result will be his deliverance from the dominion of sin -- God
   will see to it (v. 14). The old relation of the man to the law of sin,
   and his new relation to Christ are illustrated by the effect of death
   upon servitude (vv. 16-23). The old servitude was rendered to sin the
   end of which was death. But death in another form, i. e., crucifixion
   with Christ, has now intervened to free the servant from sin, and
   enable him to become the servant of God, with "fruit unto holiness and
   the end everlasting life" (v. 22). The relationship is next illustrated
   by marriage (7:1-6). Death dissolves the marriage relationship, and as
   natural death frees a wife from the law of her husband, so crucifixion
   with Christ sets the believer free from the law, or rather its penalty
   resting upon him on account of his sin.

   "Newness of spirit" and "oldness of the letter" (v. 6) are expressions
   requiring a word of comment as we meet with them again in another
   epistle. By the "letter" is meant the Mosaic law, and by the "spirit"
   the powers and relationships of the new life in Christ Jesus (cf. 2
   Cor. 3:6).

   Questions.

   1. What is the significance of "wherefore" at the beginning of this
   lesson?

   2. How is it proven that all men have sinned?

   3. Did you cf. 2:17?

   4. What is the distinction between "sin" and "sins"?

   5. What thought is it that chapters 6-8 are working out?

   6. What is the meaning of "baptized into Jesus Christ?"

   7. How may the dethronement of sin be accomplished in a believer?

   8. What two illustrations of this truth are employed in this lesson?

   9. Describe "oldness of letter" and "newness of spirit."

VICTORY AND SECURITY

  Chapters 7:7-8

   That part of chapter 7 on which we now enter is biographical, giving
   Paul's experience at a period when, though, regenerated, he was still
   living under the law and in ignorance of the deliverance to be had in
   Christ. It is a revelation that the believer possesses two natures --
   that of the first Adam received at his physical birth, and that of the
   second Adam received in regeneration by the Holy Spirit through faith.
   The man here described has been baptized into Jesus Christ, is
   judicially free from the law, and is walking in newness of life, and
   yet sin reigns more or less in his mortal body. How is he to be
   delivered from it? In chapter 6 Paul taught that it was by yielding
   oneself to God, as the result of which sin would not have dominion over
   him. In chapter 7 he shows in his own person the need of doing this,
   while in chapter 8 he describes the Divine process by which the change
   from defeat to victory is thus produced.

   1. He makes clear that the Christian believer is not made holy by the
   law (7:7-14). There was a time when, as a Jew, he thought he had kept
   the law (Phil. 3:6), but now as a regenerated Christian he had come to
   see the law in a new light, i. e., as spiritual, and that which was not
   sin theretofore now became so. Then he had thought himself "alive" in a
   spiritual sense, but now he perceived that he was really dead.

   2. He shows the conflict of the two natures under the law (vv. 15-25).
   He spoke of himself as "carnal" (v. 14), by which he meant that, as a
   believer, he was still more or less under the power of his fallen
   nature, i. e., he did things that were wrong and yet it was not the new
   Paul that was doing them but the old Paul, "sin that dwelleth in me"
   (vv. 17, 20). This "sin," this "old man" was like a dead body lashed to
   his back, was there no deliverance from it? He thanked God that there
   was such deliverance through Jesus Christ.

   3. This deliverance he now reveals (8:1-27). (a) It is through the Holy
   Spirit dwelling in the believer who sets him "free from the law of sin
   and death" (vv. 2-4). In his fallen state he was subject to a bias or
   tendency towards sin, the outcome of which was death. But now as a
   regenerated man that bias or tendency is broken. (b) The Holy Spirit
   also gives him a spiritual mind to desire this new freedom (vv. 5-10).
   (c) And the spiritual power to exercise the desire (vv, 11-13). (d) And
   the spiritual motive to lay hold of the power (vv. 14-25). (e) And the
   spiritual wisdom to appreciate the motive (vv. 26, 27). The spiritual
   motive to lay hold of the power of the Holy Spirit for a life of
   victory, is that of our relationship to God as His children, which
   implies joint heirship with Christ. This heirship is so glorious in its
   full manifestation that the whole creation is groaning for it, because
   it means its deliverance from bondage.

   4. The practical conclusion to be drawn from all this on the part of
   the believer is stated in verse 28, -- a conclusion which reaches into
   the glorified state (vv. 29, 30). The man Whom God has called in Christ
   to be his, is already considered "glorified," so certain is that event
   to follow in his experience. No wonder that the challenges of verses
   31-35 should follow. Read them in the Revised Version.

   Questions.

   1. How is the latter half of chapter 7 described?

   2. Of what is it a revelation?

   3. What does chapter 8 describe?

   4. What does 7:7-14 make clear, and how?

   5. What is shown in chapter 7:15-25, and how?

   6. By whom is deliverance from the power of sin wrought in the
   believer?

   7. Name the five-fold process by which this is done.

   8. What is the spiritual motive for a life of victory?

   9. Quote the practical conclusion of 8:28.

   10. How far does this extend in its application?

PARENTHESIS CONCERNING ISRAEL

  Chapters 9-11

   These chapters carry us back to the third where Paul proved the lost
   condition of the Jew as well as the Gentile. But if this were so it
   might be charged that the Old Testament promises to Israel had failed,
   which he now shows is not the case. His line of argument is threefold:
   first, some of Israel were already saved (c. 9); secondly, all of
   Israel might be saved but for unbelief (c. 10); thirdly, all of Israel
   would be saved ultimately (c. 11).

   1. Chapter 9 might be divided thus: (a) The apostle's solicitude for
   Israel (vv. 1-5), whose seven-fold privilege he names. There is a
   difficulty of interpretation in verse 3, which might be helped by a
   slight variation in the translation, which some have rendered: "I have
   great heaviness * * * for my brethren (for I myself were wishing to be
   accursed from Christ)." The thought may be that he is expressing
   sympathy with them in their spiritual darkness, because he was once in
   a like case, (b) The fact that some of Israel were saved (vv. 6-13).
   The Word of God had taken some effect for there were Israelites who had
   believed, and were now counted not only as Abraham's natural posterity
   but his spiritual children. This principle of selection was illustrated
   in the choice of Jacob over Esau. "Hated" (v. 13), must not be
   understood of arbitrary wrath, but only as expressing choice, (c) The
   sovereignty of God in such a choice is defended (vv. 14-24), for His
   mercy is under His sovereign will. The reference to Pharaoh must not be
   understood of arbitrary action on God's part, but as involving the free
   choice of the wicked monarch. God did not put forth effort to change
   that choice, so that the hardening of his heart was the penal
   consequence of his folly, (d) The Old Testament predicted the rejection
   of Israel and the calling of the Gentiles (vv. 25-33). (Cf. Hos. 1:10,
   2:23; Isa. 10:22, 23, etc.)

   2. The whole of chapter 10 shows that the rejection of Judah is due to
   their unbelief, i. e., to their desire to work out under the law a
   character or righteousness which would satisfy God, instead of
   accepting a righteousness from Him by faith (vv. 3, 4 cf. with v. 10).

   3. Chapter 11 shows that the setting aside of the nation has not been
   perpetual. In the first place, there was a remnant of the faithful even
   at the present time, of whom the apostle was one (vv. 1-6). Indeed,
   there always had been such a remnant. There was one in Elijah's day
   (cf. vv. 2-7 with 1 Kings 19:18). There was one in Isaiah's day (Isa.
   1:9). During the captivity there was such a remnant, and at the end of
   the 70 years a remnant returned to the land. Look at Luke 2:38 for one
   at the period of the first advent of Christ. There are believing Jews
   in our day who constitute such a class, and we have seen in our Old
   Testament studies that the prophecies focus on the deliverance of the
   remnant during the tribulation (Rev. 7:3-8). It is of the hopes and
   fears of this last-named that the Millennial psalms treat.

   In the second place this chapter indicates that the national blindness
   of the Jews had been foretold (vv. 7-10). But in the providence of God
   it gave an opportunity to the Gentiles (vv. 11, 12), which the latter
   are warned to profit by (vv. 13-22). hroughout this warning there are
   several intimations of the restoration of Israel as a nation (vv. 12,
   15, 16). This is what is meant by "their fullness," "the receiving of
   them," etc. The "first-fruit" and the "root" are Abraham, and the
   "lump" and the "branches" the offspring that came from him.

   Finally, it is definitely stated that the nation shall be restored (vv.
   23-36), by which is meant the faithful remnant at the end of the age.
   The "fullness of the Gentiles" (v. 25) means the completion of God's
   purpose in them at that time, i. e., the whole body of Christ, the
   Church, will have been called out from among them, and caught up to
   meet Him in the air (1 Thess. 4:13-18). Observe the reference to
   Christ's second coming in verse 26, and to the fulfillment of God's
   original promise to Abraham in verse 29. "Without repentance" means
   without a change of mind on His part.

   Questions.

   1. To what past of the epistle does this lesson carry us back?

   2. What possible charge is it intended to refute?

   3. Give the refutation in outline.

   4. Name the seven great privileges of Israel.

   5. How is 9:3 sometimes rendered?

   6. How is the hardening of Pharaoh's heart to be explained?

   7. What explains the rejection of Israel as a nation ?

   8. Trace the history of the remnant of Israel in the Bible.

   9. What is the meaning of the "fullness of the Gentiles"?

PRACTICAL APPLICATION

  Chapters 12-16

   1. In the sixth chapter Paul revealed the secret of experimental
   sanctification as the yielding of one's self unto God, in which case
   sin would not have dominion over one, while in the 8th he showed the
   Divine process of that sanctification as the work of the Holy Spirit in
   the believer. Having now finished the doctrinal part of his epistle, he
   returns to what he then said (c. 6), and exhorts to that yielding on
   the ground of the "mercies of God" of which he had been speaking
   throughout (12:1, 2). The presenting of our bodies is the same as the
   yielding of our members in chapter 6. This exhortation is followed by a
   promise that we shall not be "conformed to this world," but be
   "transformed by the renewing of your mind." In other words the Holy
   Spirit will do His work in us as the result of which we shall
   experience, i. e., do, the "good, acceptable and perfect will of God."

   2. The verses, and indeed the chapters that follow to the end of the
   epistle, indicate the ways in which this will should be done: (1) In
   the exercise of spiritual gifts as members of the body of Christ (vv.
   3-8); in our social duties as Christian brethren (vv. 9-16); (3) in our
   general conduct towards the world (vv. 17-21); (4) in our subjection to
   human governments (13:1-14); and (5) in our ecclesiastical relations
   concerning doubtful things (14:1-15:13).

   3. This last will repay further exposition. "Him that is weak in the
   faith," is the Christian brother with scruples on matters of Christian
   practice, such as the eating of meats and the observance of fast days
   (14:1-9). He is not to be denied fellowship on that ground, since he is
   thus walking out of regard to God's honor. On the other hand, he is not
   to judge the brother who does not see the particular matter just as he
   does. The whole question of judging or criticising one another then
   comes under review (vv. 10-11), after which the apostle turns to the
   consideration of the "strong" brother who does not possess these
   scruples. He has a right to his Christian liberty in the premises, but
   he should not press it to the point of "stumbling" his weaker brother
   (vv. 13-18), but seek peace (vv. 19-21). If he has the "faith" to
   believe that he is at liberty as a Christian to do thus and so, let
   that be a matter between him and God, but let him be careful lest in
   openly exercising that faith or Christian privilege he does not bring
   himself under self-judgment (v. 22). If he has a doubt about his
   liberty in the premises, he had better not "eat," as that will thus
   condemn him. To insist on his liberty when he is in doubt about it is
   "sin." The better plan is to follow Christ's example (15:1-4), which is
   the apostle's prayer for them (vv. 5-7). [The difficulty as to the
   strong and the weak had probably arisen between the Jews and Gentiles,
   which may explain the remaining verses of this section (vv. 8-13)].

   4. The epistle concludes as follows: (a) A reference to the apostle's
   special ministry to the Gentiles (15:14-21); (b) another expression of
   his desire and purpose to visit Rome (vv. 23-33); (c) individual
   remembrances, in which it is interesting to observe the references to
   Paul's personal acquaintances and relatives (16:1-16); (d) a warning
   and exhortation (vv. 17-20); (e) friendly greetings, a benediction and
   an ascription of praise to God (vv. 21-27).

   In this last, Paul incidentally mentions "my Gospel," and also "the
   mystery which was kept secret since the world began, but now is made
   manifest" (vv. 25, 26). Just what this "mystery" is as distinguished
   from the "Gospel," will appear more particularly in the epistles to the
   churches at Ephesus and Colosse, although chapter 6 of this epistle
   gave us an introduction to it in the believers' identification with
   Christ. The full truth of the mystery is found in a right conception of
   the church of Christ as distinguished from the kingdom of Israel, and
   the union of Jew and Gentile believers in this age in that mystical
   body of which Christ is the Head.

   Questions.

   1. To what chapter, and what thought in that chapter, are we carried
   back by the beginning of this lesson?

   2. What is the promise attached to the yielding of our bodies to God?

   3. What will be the result of the renewing of our minds?

   4. In what ways is our doing of the will of God to be shown?

   5. Who is meant by "Him that is weak in the faith"?

   6. Why should he not be denied Christian fellowship?

   7. What is the Christian obligation of the "weak" brother?

   8. What is the caution given to the strong brother?

   9. Give an outline of the conclusion of this epistle.

   10. What is the explanation of the "mystery" here named?
     __________________________________________________________________

FIRST CORINTHIANS

THE CAUSE AND CURE OF FACTIONAL DISPUTES

  Chapters 1-4

   This epistle was written by Paul probably during the latter part of his
   long visit to Ephesus, and it will add interest to its study to re-read
   Acts, chapters 18-20, which speak of his visit to both cities, Ephesus
   and Corinth. The occasion for its writing as given in chapters 1:11 and
   7:1, was a visit to Paul of members "of the house of Chloe," who
   brought a written communication to him as well as verbal reports of
   conditions in the Church. These conditions were not good, as indicated
   in their party divisions (cc. 1-4), their tolerance of gross immorality
   (cc. 5-6), their erroneous views in regard to marriage (c. 7), their
   abuse of Christian liberty (cc. 8-10), their disorderly conduct in the
   assemblies of worship (cc. 11-14) and their false teaching touching the
   resurrection of the dead.

   Indeed, as one carefully reads the epistle he wonders how such people
   could be Christians at all, until he recalls the distinction, made
   clear in the New Testament, between the believer's legal standing
   before God in Christ, and his actual walk or experience in it. As we
   saw in Romans, the moment one believes on Christ, he becomes justified
   from all sin, i. e., the condemnatory guilt of it is removed, he
   receives a righteousness from God which perfectly satisfies God, and he
   is adopted into the Divine family. But now the work of grace begins in
   Him by the Holy Spirit, in distinction from the work of grace wrought
   for him by Christ on the cross, and in the measure in which he comes to
   know the will of God through His Word, and yields himself thereto, he
   becomes more and more conformed to the image of Christ.

   These Corinthians may have been in Christ, but they were walking
   inconsistently, and the purpose of this epistle is to set them right,
   and to set us right through them.

   1. After the salutation (1:1-3) and the thanksgiving on their behalf
   (vv. 4-9), the apostle enters into the difficulty of their party
   divisions. Some were "Paulinians," some "Apollonians," some
   "Cephasites," and some, perhaps the most contentious of all,
   "Christites." Paul was innocent of fomenting these discords (vv.
   14-17), and so doubtless had been Apollos and Cephas, but the root of
   the matter lay in the false intellectualism of the Corinthians. They
   were Greeks for the most part, and the Greeks gloried in human
   philosophy and worldly wisdom, the application of whose principles to
   the teaching of Christianity had made all the trouble.

   2. In meeting the situation, Paul shows in three ways that the Gospel
   is not human wisdom (1:18-3:4): (a) by the mystery of the cross, which
   "is to them that perish foolishness, but unto us which are saved, the
   power of God." "The wisdom of the wise" had been unable to save men in
   the past, but the preaching of the cross had effectually accomplished
   it (vv. 18-25); (b) by the elements composing the Church, which were
   not for the most part the worldly-wise and great, but the opposite. God
   had made Christ to be unto them wisdom however, in the sense that He
   had become their righteousness, and sanctification and redemption (vv.
   26-31); (c) by the apostle's own example, who had not appealed to their
   intellectualism, but had simply preached Christ crucified (2:1-5). This
   last point must be guarded though, as there was danger of men esteeming
   the gospel to be destitute of wisdom of any kind; (d) it is therefore
   shown to be the wisdom of God (v. 7); which only the Spirit of God
   could reveal to men (vv. 8-1 1), but which had been revealed to Paul,
   and was being revealed through him to others (vv. 12, 13). Only the
   spiritually-enlightened however, were capable of receiving it
   (2:13-3:4).

   In the verses last indicated, Paul speaks of three classes of men, the
   "natural," the "spiritual" and the "carnal." The first is man
   considered as fallen and unsaved; the second, as he who is saved and,
   being filled with the Spirit, is walking in fellowship with God; the
   third is saved, but still walking "after the flesh," a "babe" in
   Christ.

   3. But the Corinthians had not only a false view of the Gospel,
   confounding it with human wisdom, but also a false view of their
   Christian teachers which had contributed to their divisions. Paul deals
   with this beginning at 3:5-4:2: (a) Christian teachers are simply
   ministers (3:5-11), whose reward depends on their faithfulness (vv.
   12-15); (b) the Church should not glory in them, for out of Christ
   their wisdom is foolishness, and in Christ, they are all alike the
   possession of the whole Church (3:16-4:2). In connection with the
   reference to rewards (3:14, 15), remember that the subject applies only
   to those who are already saved by grace, and it is grace to which any
   saved soul is indebted for reward.

   4. These divisions somehow involved a question of Paul's apostolic
   authority, and to its defence he applies himself to the end of the
   lesson: (a) all human estimates of men are inadequate, and for a just
   judgment we must await the Lord's second coming (4:3-5). Another calls
   attention here to the interesting point that four standards of judgment
   are referred to, those of our friends, the world, ourselves, and the
   Lord. Our own judgment is not to be depended upon absolutely, any more
   than that of other people; (b) the question of his authority had arisen
   out of the vanity of their hearts (vv. 6-8). They were "puffed-up" and
   vain-glorious now that he was absent from them, and having begun to
   apply their worldly wisdom to the Gospel, they felt that they could get
   along without him, and boasted of it. They felt themselves to be "full"
   and "rich," and reigning "as kings" without him. There is irony, and
   yet an earnest longing in the words, "I would to God ye did reign, that
   we also might reign with you," his allusion being to the second coming
   of Christ; (c) the apostles, himself doubtless being chiefly in mind,
   were objects of contempt and suffering to the world both of angels and
   of men (vv. 9-13) -- a testimony that other intelligences than
   ourselves, both good and evil doubtless, are interesting in the working
   out of God's purpose of redemption through His church; (d) His motive
   in thus writing was to warn them as his children in Christ, for which
   reason he was soon to send Timothy to them, and would ultimately visit
   them himself again. Upon their reception of this admonition would
   depend whether he would come to them "with a rod, or in love and the
   spirit of meekness."

   Questions.

   1. What is the theme of this lesson?

   2. When and where was this epistle written by Paul?

   3. What was its occasion?

   4. Describe conditions in this church.

   5. Harmonize these conditions with the Christian profession.

   6. In what did the root of their party divisions lie?

   7. In what three ways does the apostle meet the situation?

   8. How is the third point guarded?

   9. Discriminate among the three classes of men.

   10. What further had contributed to these party divisions?

   11. In what two ways is this met?

   12. How does Paul defend his apostolic authority?

THE SANCTITY OF THE HUMAN BODY

  Chapters 5-6

   1. One of the demoralizing things reported to Paul was the incest dealt
   with in chapter 5, and aggravated by the fact that the Church instead
   of excommunicating the offender had become "puffed up" over it! This
   was an illustration of what their worldly wisdom in the Gospel had
   resulted in (vv. 1, 2). Paul had already "judged" this person and
   directed the Church to come together and solemnly deliver him "to Satan
   for the destruction of the flesh that the spirit may be saved in the
   day of the Lord Jesus." This means (a) that Satan is an executioner of
   Divine punishment upon the saints in the present time, the saints who
   live in disobedience; (b) that the Church, considered as the body of
   Christ, has the authority to deliver such an one into his hands for
   that purpose; (c) that the punishment is limited to the flesh, the
   human body, and can not touch the soul; (d) that the object is to
   affect the soul indirectly, by bringing the disobedient to repentance,
   confession, and the experience of that spiritual cleansing which will
   be the means of keeping him saved "in the day of the Lord Jesus Christ"
   (cf. Luke 13:16; 2 Cor. 12:7; 1 Tim. 1:20). In other words, the
   punishment is the means of grace necessary to retain such a saint in
   the fellowship of God (vv. 3-5). Note "destruction" in verse 5, which
   is the Greek word used in 1 Thess. 5:3, 2 Thess. 1:9,1 Tim. 6:9, etc.,
   and does not mean annihilation. The bearing of this is important on the
   subject of the future retribution of the wicked.

   But before leaving the case of incest note the warning (vv. 6, 7), the
   exhortation (v. 8), and the added instruction (vv. 9-13). To permit sin
   to remain in the Church unrebuked would mean the spread of it. The
   Church was "unleavened" in that all who truly belonged to it had their
   guilt purged away by the sacrifice of Christ, therefore let them see to
   it that what was true of their legal standing before God, become true
   in actual experience. Paul had written them an earlier epistle of which
   we have no further record, but in which he had warned them not to keep
   "company with fornicators." This did not mean that they could shun such
   in the necessary business of the world, but that they must do so in the
   fellowship of the Church. They were not expected to act as judge in
   regard to the people of the world, but it was their duty to do so in
   the Church, hence the excommunication of this "wicked person" was
   demanded.

   2. The allusion to "judging" brings up the question of lawsuits in
   chapter 6. Saints should not bring their disputes before the world's
   courts because of the incongruity of it (vv. 2-4). The language gives a
   most exalted conception to the dignity of the Church when she shall be
   reigning with Christ in the ages to come. During the time being
   however, could they not find men among them competent to judge between
   their brethren? And if not, were it not better to suffer wrong?

   There is ground for thinking that the law-suit eliciting this rebuke,
   was linked in some way with the incest under consideration, as Paul now
   returns to the subject of the sanctity of the human body. The body is
   holy, (a) because in the sight of God it is washed, sanctified and
   justified. Therefore, while certain liberty in the use of it might be
   allowable to a Christian, it were inexpedient to press that liberty for
   the reason (as in Romans 14), that it would bring him under the power
   of carnality (vv. 9-12). But the body is holy, (b) because it is the
   Lord's. The worldly-minded Greeks considered the law of adjustment as
   settling the matter. Meats were for the belly, and so the belly must
   have been made for meats, on which principle they would justify the
   gratification of any bodily passion. But meats and the physical organ
   to receive and assimilate them were temporary and would be destroyed,
   while the body in its essentiality would be raised from the dead. This
   was true because our bodies are the members of Christ who was raised
   from the dead. How could we employ the body in fornication under such
   circumstances? (vv. 13-18). Finally, the body is holy, (c) because it
   is the temple of the Holy Ghost, for which reason, and because we "are
   bought with a price" we are to glorify God in our body (w. 19, 20). It
   is not the 7th commandment which the apostle invokes in this case, but
   the sacredness of the believer's new relationship to Jesus Christ.

   Questions.

   1. What is the sin dealt with in this lesson?

   2. What is the teaching of chapter 5:4, 5?

   3. What may be learned from the use of "destruction" in 5:5?

   4. What is the meaning of "unleavened"?

   5. What allusion shows the great dignity of the Church?

   6. Of what three grounds is the body holy?

   7. What is the meaning of chapter 6:13?

   THE CHRISTIAN AND MARRIAGE

   Chapter 7

   1. It seems a strange inconsistency that a church "puffed up" over an
   incestuous person in their midst, should have scruples about the lawful
   marriage of a Christian, but such seems to have been the case. Paul
   yields the point on which some insisted, that it was desirable for a
   Christian man to remain single (v. 1), at least at that period and in
   those circumstances, provided he could do so without sin. But as the
   temptation in that case would be strong, he advised marriage (v. 2),
   and also that married persons should live together as becometh the
   conjugal relationship (vv. 3, 4). Exceptions to this for religious
   reasons, should be but temporary, lest the same temptation should
   overtake them as the unmarried (v. 5). By this however, he meant not to
   command them to marry, but to assure them as Christians of permission
   to do so (v. 6). He himself was unmarried, but all men did not have the
   same gift of control in that particular as he (v. 7), hence the advice
   following (vv. 8, 9).

   Separation or Divorce.

   2. From the general subject of marriage, he proceeds to that of
   separation or divorce as between two parties who are believers, which
   he forbids (vv. 10, 11). As he quotes our Lord in this instance he
   doubtless has in mind Matt. 5:32, which makes the one exception of
   adultery. He next touches the question where one is a believer and the
   other an unbeliever (vv. 12-16). Here he is himself speaking because
   the particular aspect of the subject is one on which our Lord had not
   expressed Himself while in the flesh. This shows that he places his own
   words on the same level of authority as those of our Lord, thus making
   the strongest claim of inspiration for them. Two such persons, he
   teaches, were not to separate simply for religious reasons. If a pagan
   wife wished to remain with her husband who had become converted to
   Christianity, he was not to divorce her. And if a pagan husband wished
   to remain with his wife after she had become converted she was not to
   leave him. The unbelieving partner in either case would be "sanctified"
   by the other in the sense that the other might continue in the
   relationship without impairing his or her sanctification (cf. 1 Tim.
   4:5). The clause, "else were your children unclean," etc., is
   difficult, but may mean that such children were by the faith of the
   Christian parent brought into a nearer relationship to God than
   otherwise. It is to be remembered that this is where marriage was
   contracted before either husband or wife was converted. Christians are
   forbidden to contract such marriages. (cf. v. 39 with 2 Cor. 6:14).
   Continuing the theme, the apostle says, if the unbelieving partner
   departs let him or her depart: "a brother or sister is not under
   bondage in such cases." His meaning is again doubtful. Not under
   bondage to renounce the Christian faith, or not under bondage to remain
   unmarried, which? Both views have advocates, but the latter is to be
   accepted with caution and with the understanding that human courts have
   rights in the case which Christians are bound to respect (cf. Rom. 14).
   The interpretation of verse 16 depends somewhat on the accent in
   reading it. If emphasis be laid on "save," it is a plea to hold on to
   the unbelieving partner as long as possible in the hope that he or she
   may be saved. If it be laid on "knowest," it is to relieve the mind of
   the Christian partner from an undue anxiety in the premises.

   3. From the separation of married couples on religious grounds, the
   apostle digresses to speak of separation in other relationships for the
   same reason, applying it to Jews and Gentiles (vv. 18, 19), and to
   bondmen and freemen (vv. 20-24). The idea is that Christianity
   interferes only indirectly with existing institutions. It makes men
   free in but not from the responsibilities of their present positions,
   where those positions are not in themselves sinful. It teaches us to be
   indifferent in a sense to our external relations.

   Celibacy.

   4. Celibacy is the theme of verses 25-35, which the apostle opens by
   saying he is giving his own "judgment" or "opinion," having received
   "no commandment from the Lord." This means that the Holy Spirit has
   granted him no revelation or instruction on this particular point,
   which, while it qualifies the authority by which he speaks on it, does
   not qualify his inspiration. In other words, he is as truly inspired to
   say that he is simply giving his own opinion as he is inspired to say
   anything else. This has an important bearing on the whole question of
   inspiration, and is an assurance that where the apostle does not state
   to the contrary, he is always giving us the mind of the Holy Spirit. On
   general terms he would recommend celibacy because of the "present
   distress," i. e., the persecution and affliction being experienced by
   the church (vv. 25-27). While to marry was not sin for either sex, yet
   he would spare them in the trouble just ahead, and which would bear
   harder upon the married than the unmarried (v. 28). In this light the
   verses following are to be interpreted (vv. 29-35).

   5. But at verse 36 he is referring to a Christian father's
   responsibility as to the marriage of his virgin daughter. It was
   humiliation in a Greek household for such to "pass the flower of her
   age" unmarried, and if a father felt the need of doing so he might give
   her in marriage without incurring sin in so doing. Nevertheless, if he
   acts in the opposite way he is also doing well, or better (vv. 37, 38).

   6. The second marriage of widows is the last subject (vv. 39, 40),
   where the important clause is added that they are to marry "only in the
   Lord" -- Christians are at liberty only to marry Christians. Paul's
   opponents in Corinth who held a different view of this matter, claimed
   to be acting by the Spirit of God, hence the irony of the closing
   remark, which is an irrefutable testimony to the authority with which
   he spake, "I think that I also have the Spirit of God," (R. V.).

   To avoid misunderstanding, it should be said that we have not here the
   whole of the apostle's views on marriage, much less the whole of the
   New Testament teaching about it, but only so much as connects itself
   with the questions put to him at this time.

   Questions.

   1. What is here taught about marriage and the conjugal relation?

   2. What strong claim of inspiration is here made?

   3. What explanation of verse 14 is suggested?

   4. What of verse 15?

   5. How would you read verse 16?

   6. What is here taught concerning the relations of Christianity to
   existing institutions?

   7. Why does the apostle advise celibacy?

   8. How would you explain verse 36?

CHRISTIAN LIBERTY AND ITS ABUSE

  Chapters 8-10

   The Christian Church was composed largely of Gentiles, who, when they
   were pagans, worshipped idols, with animal sacrifices and feasts in the
   idols' temples. Having become Christians, their practices were
   discontinued, though pagan neighbors might occasionally invite them, in
   a social way, to join in such feasts. The question had arisen as to
   their Christian liberty to accept such invitations? A "liberal" party
   in the church not only favored it, but indeed regarded the acceptance
   of such invitations as necessary to testify their freedom in Christ.
   There is no such thing as an idol, said they, and hence Christians are
   as much at liberty to eat meat offered in sacrifice to idols as any
   other meat, and in an idols' temple as well as any other place.

   1. In reply, Paul admits the fact and the inference arising from it
   (8:4-6). They were at liberty to eat this meat and in an idol's temple,
   provided they had only themselves to consider. But there was their weak
   Christian brother, the man rot gifted with as much spiritual knowledge
   as they, and who, though trusting Christ for salvation, still had a
   lingering idea that "an idol was something in the world." If the
   "strong" brother, he who was spiritually enlightened, ate this meat in
   the idol's temple, the weak brother might do likewise, but what the one
   might do with impunity the other could not do without sin. Hence the
   liberty of the one became the stumbling-block of the other (w. 7-10).
   This made it serious for the strong brother to press his "knowledge,"
   or his "liberty" to that point (vv. 11, 12). Personally, Paul's example
   was different from this (v. 13).

   2. Continuing the reference to his own example in chapter 9:1-23, the
   apostle reminds them of the grounds on which he might claim all the
   liberty they had, or more. He was an apostle, he had seen Jesus Christ
   (Acts 9), they, the Corinthians, were the fruit of his ministry (vv. 1,
   2). He was at liberty to eat and drink as he pleased, to marry, and
   have a wife accompany him on his itineraries as others did (vv. 3-6).
   He had a right to claim pecuniary support from the churches in his
   labors on their behalf (vv. 7-14). But he had foregone all these
   privileges for the gospel's sake (vv. 15-18). For the same reason had
   he accommodated himself to Jewish prejudices (vv. 19-20), and to
   Gentile peculiarities (w. 21-23).

   The Christian Race.

   3. He shows that there is a practical motive for Christians acting on
   this principle (9:24-10:15), by employing an illustration from the
   Olympian games. Christian believers were like men running a race, but
   it was one thing to run and another thing to win the prize. Here again
   comes in the distinction between salvation and the rewards of
   faithfulness (see c. 3). The athlete knew the need of curtailing his
   liberty in certain directions in order to gain the race, and Paul
   appreciated the principle in spiritual things. Did he not deny himself
   he would be unfit for service, and lack of service meant, in the end,
   loss of reward (vv. 24-27). "Castaway" here does not mean loss of
   salvation, but loss of the opportunity to serve as one who is saved.
   The thought is continued in chapter 10, where a leaf is taken from the
   history of Israel. All the Hebrews originally were partakers of the
   same privileges -- the guiding cloud, the passage through the Red Sea,
   the manna, the smitten rock, type of our salvation through the smitten
   Christ (vv. 1-4). But many of them failed of the ultimate goal and
   never entered Canaan, because of their after conduct in the wilderness
   (vv. 5-11). A warning follows (v. 12) with accompanying encouragement
   (v. 13), and then an exhortation (vv. 14, 15).

   4. The practical motive however, is more than the thought of reward for
   fidelity, it is that of positive danger in the face of the opposite
   (vv. 16-23). This is suggested already in the story of Israel, but more
   than suggested in what follows. The idolatrous feasts are in contrast
   with the Lord's supper, the one the worship of demons, the other the
   true God, between which there can be no fellowship. One or the other
   must be renounced. To tamper with demons is to challenge Divine wrath,
   with which we are unable successfully to contend. While the exercise of
   the fullest Christian liberty in these matters may be lawful for me,
   says the apostle, nevertheless it is not expedient, it will not be
   found to edify or build me up in Christ, for which reason it will not
   be acted upon.

   5. The conclusion of the matter is: (a) do not be seeking your own
   advantage but another's (v. 24); (b) if the sacrificial meat is offered
   for sale in the public market, you may buy and eat it without
   compunction (vv. 25, 26); (c) if a pagan neighbor ask you for a meal at
   his private house you are at liberty to partake of it (v. 27); but (d)
   if in the course of the meal it is referred to as of a religious
   character, desist from eating, not for your own sake so much as that of
   the other (vv. 28-30). In other words, (e) act on the principle of
   verses 31, 32, and (f) follow my (Paul) example (10:33, 11:1).

   Questions.

   1. State in your own words the occasion Paul had for writing these
   chapters.

   2. What is the main argument Paul presses against the abuse of
   Christian liberty?

   3. In what respects did his example agree with his precept?

   4. What motive governed him?

   5. What is the significance of "castaway" in this case?

   6. What further motive does Paul refer to?

   7. How does he conclude, or sum up, the case?

   CHURCH DISORDERS

   Chapter 11

   1. This chapter begins properly at verse 2, and treats of disorderly
   conduct of the women in the church assemblies, and of the misuse of the
   Lord's supper. "Head" is used in the sense of source of dominion
   because it is that which directs the body, and the man is the "head of
   the woman" because she is under authority to him, the reference being
   to married women and their husbands. "The head of Christ is God," when
   Christ is considered in the mediatorial sense, and from the point of
   view of the God-man. Of course both men and women are equal in God's
   sight when salvation and all the spiritual blessings in Christ are
   under consideration (Gal. 3:18), but human society could not exist
   without certain distinctions. It is evident that from this standpoint,
   the Christian women at Corinth went too far, and misinterpreting their
   newfound liberty in Christ, were overstepping bounds in an unbecoming
   way. As F. W. Robertson expressed it, "large principles when taken up
   by ardent and enthusiastic minds, without the modifications of
   experience, are almost sure to run into extravagance, and hence the
   spirit of law is by degree reduced to rules, and guarded by customs."

   2. The offence of these women was praying and prophesying with
   uncovered heads, or rather unveiled faces, contrary to the custom of
   the times for both Jews and Gentiles, the headcovering being a symbol
   of the woman's subordination to the man. It is difficult to say what is
   meant by the man dishonoring his head, since it is uncertain whether by
   his "head" is meant the Lord Jesus Christ. And in the same way we do
   not know whether the "head" which the woman "dishonoreth" is her own
   head, or her husband regarded as her head. We only know that it is the
   true glory of every creature to fulfill the law of its being (vv. 3-6).

   3. The argument against this conduct on the women's part follows in
   verses 4-7: (a) the woman has present a visible superior in man created
   in God's image. He as the highest earthly being represents God's glory.
   Woman, as such, is not the representation of God's glory on earth, but
   to all inferior beings represents man's glory sharing his superiority
   over them (v. 7); (b) woman was created second to man as to substance
   (v. 8), and service (v. 9); (c) woman should consider the presence of
   the angels who are invisible spectators of Christian assemblies. This
   last is a mysterious subject, not merely that angels are present, but
   that women should exhibit modesty or the sign of subordination in their
   presence. Dean Stanley in his comment on this passage, thinks it may
   refer to evil angels and their unlawful intercourse with human flesh as
   spoken of in Genesis 6. Immodesty on the women's part might give them
   unholy opportunity, for as Robertson again says, "It is impossible to
   decide how much of our public morality and private purity is owing to
   the spirit which refuses to overstep the smallest bound of ordinary
   decorum."

   4. The apostle balances the whole subject as between man and woman in
   verses 11 and 12, and sums up so far as the latter is concerned by a
   couple of questions, the bearing of which is that the absence of a veil
   is uncomely (vv. 13-15). If however, they continue to be contentious in
   the matter notwithstanding his rebuke, he would have them know that
   their conduct is without precedent (v. 16).

   The Lord's Supper.

   5. It is not a far cry from this to the disorder associated with the
   Lord's supper, and which the apostle approached by a general statement
   (vv. 17-19). It should be said that the divisions here are not
   doctrinal so much as social cliques. They came together for a general
   meal prior to the Lord's supper, and made it a sort of indoor picnic.
   The rich brought plenty to eat and drink while the poor had nothing. If
   this was what they desired to do it should be done in their own houses
   and not in the general assembly. The original institution of the rite
   is now referred to and its significance enlarged upon (vv. 23-26). A
   warning follows (vv. 27-37), in which "unworthy" is not to be
   understood as discouraging penitent sinners from partaking of this
   blessed feast, but to be taken in the sense of "an unworthy manner." To
   be "guilty of the body and blood of the Lord" means to commit an
   offence against Him, while "damnation," (v. 29), is to be taken in the
   sense of judgment as illustrated in verses 30-32. "Not discerning the
   Lord's body" means not appreciating the significance of His atonement,
   or the mystical relationship in which they as believers stand toward
   Him their Head, and which the Lord's supper so peculiarly makes
   manifest. Their erroneous practice in this particular had brought
   chastisement of a physical kind upon them; from which if they had
   "judged" themselves by putting away the sin, they would have escaped.
   Nevertheless, it was a mercy of God that they were thus chastened,
   which showed that they were His children, and not the people of the
   world, for there is a great distinction between chastisement and
   condemnation.

   Questions.

   1. Where does this lesson begin, and of what two things does it treat?

   2. What does "head" mean, and what is the significance in each case of
   the "head of the woman," and the "head of Christ"?

   3. Can you quote Robertson as to the application of large principles?

   4. What was the particular offence of these women?

   5. Give the three-fold argument against their conduct.

   6. Define and describe the "divisions" referred to in the second case.

   7. What does each of the following expressions mean: "unworthy,"
   "guilty of the body and blood"; "damnation"; "not discerning," etc.?

   8. What two things does Paul discriminate in this lesson?

SPIRITUAL GIFTS

  Chapters 12-14

   The theme of this lesson is closely related to the preceding, for the
   church disorders included not only unbecoming conduct of the women in
   the public assembly, and an unworthy observance of the Lord's supper,
   but an unholy emulation in the matter of spiritual gifts.

   1. After a brief introduction (vv. 1-3), the apostle discusses the
   origin of these gifts as not natural to the believer, but the special
   bestowment of God. God the Father is the worker of them, God the Spirit
   their distributor, and God the Son the One on Whose behalf they are
   administered (12:4-6).

   2. As to their nature, there are nine -- wisdom, knowledge, faith,
   healing, miracles, prophecy, discerning of spirits, tongues and
   interpretation of tongues (vv. 7-11). Of course, the above means
   "wisdom" and "knowledge" in the things of God; "faith," not merely for
   the acceptance of Christ, which is assumed, but for special purposes or
   objects, "prophecy," not in the sense of foretelling, but
   forth-telling, speaking "to edification, exhortation and comfort"
   (14:3).

   3. The object and use of the gifts is for the profit of the whole body
   of Christ, into which believers have been baptized by the Holy Spirit
   (vv. 12, 13). They are in Christ what the foot, the hand, the ear, the
   eyes are in the human body (vv. 14-21). Hence honor, unity, sympathy,
   and mutual joyfulness should pervade and prevail (vv. 22-26). There are
   differences among these gifts, and the best are to be coveted, but all
   depend on the spirit in which they are exercised (vv. 27-31).

   4. This leads the apostle to speak of the abuse of the gifts of which
   the Corinthians had been guilty, and which consumes the whole of
   chapter 13. Of what value is any of these gifts to their possessors
   without "love," which is the meaning of "charity" in this chapter (vv.
   1-3). Love is now defined (vv. 4-7) and its supremacy and permanency
   affirmed (vv. 8-13). A time is coming when prophesying and speaking
   with tongues will be no longer required, and the knowledge we now have
   will appear childish in comparison with what we shall have, but not so
   with love, which, like faith and hope, is eternal. Therefore follow
   after love (14:1).

   Speaking With Tongues.

   5. Returning to the choice among the gifts the preference is given to
   prophesying (14:1-25), especially as compared with "tongues," because
   the latter had been the chief cause of the unholy emulation referred
   to, and also of gross disorder in the public assembly. The value of
   prophesying is stated in verse 3. "Tongues" should not be exercised
   unless an interpreter is present (v. 5), and for the reasons indicated
   (vv. 6-14). Paul's own custom or example is now stated (vv. 15-19), an
   exhortation follows (v. 20), and a declaration of the purpose of
   "tongues" concludes this part of the subject (vv. 21-25).

   "Tongues" are a sign not for believers but unbelievers, and not for
   their conversion evidently, but simply as a demonstration of Divine
   power. It is far different with prophesying, which practically is
   identical with preaching and testimony, for this serves both for
   believers and unbelievers.

   6. The order in which the gifts are to be publicly exercised in now
   given (vv. 26-35). The form of worship was very democratic, the people
   generally participating, reciting psalms, giving instruction, speaking
   with tongues, interpreting tongues, uttering a "revelation." As to this
   last, it would appear that until the New Testament was written, new
   revelations suited to the new dispensation were given to certain of the
   prophets. Care was to be taken that not more than two or three should
   speak in an unknown tongue, and not all at once, but one by one.
   Moreover, in the absence of an interpreter they should not speak at
   all. The same method should be followed by the prophets. Nor let any
   say when he felt a desire to speak, that he could not wait until
   another had concluded (vv. 32, 33).

   In such meetings when the whole church came together in one place,
   women were to keep silence. This is the interpretation the Scofield
   Bible puts on verses 34 and 35, but there is a difficulty here in the
   light of 1 Cor. 11, where women are not forbidden to pray and prophesy
   in public.

   7. The contentious spirit of the church is rebuked as in chapter 11.
   They were evidently seeking to establish a precedent of their own in
   these matters (v. 36), but that which Paul is writing to them is the
   commandment of the Lord (v. 37). Whatsoever they did was to be done
   "decently and in order," (v. 40).

   Questions.

   1. Name the seven divisions in the text of this lesson.

   2. Name the nine spiritual gifts.

   3. What is meant by "prophesy"?

   4. How should "charity" be rendered in chapter 13?

   5. Which of all the gifts is to be preferred, and why?

   6. What restriction is placed on "tongues" and why?

   7. What is the meaning of "revelation" in this case (v. 26)?

   8. What principle is to be maintained in the public gatherings?

RESURRECTION OF THE DEAD

  Chapters 15-16

   They were not only questions of casuistry that disturbed this church,
   but deeper ones -- especially that of the resurrection of the dead. We
   may gather the real nature of this difficulty by the manner of Paul's
   treatment of it.

   1. He dwells on the fact of Christ's resurrection (vv. 1-11), in which
   he furnishes incidentally a definition of the "Gospel" he preached.
   This consists of just three counts, Christ died for our sins, was
   buried, and rose again. The proof that he rose again is two-fold, the
   Old Testament scriptures (v. 4), and human witnesses. Just where or how
   the former testified to His resurrection is not apparent to the casual
   reader, but a student like Paul found it in both type and prophecy.
   Compare also Christ's words to the two disciples en route to Emmaus
   (Lk. 24). The proof from the human witnesses (514 in all) is given in
   detail (vv. 5-8). "Born out of due time," some would translate "before
   the due time," as though Paul were thinking of the national new birth
   of Israel which is to be. His conversion by the appearance of the Lord
   at Damascus (Acts 9), was an illustration' before the time of what will
   take place when the Lord reveals Himself to that people at the end of
   this age (Ezek. 20:35-38; Zech. 12:10-13:6; Rom. 11:25-27).

   2. Passing from the fact of Christ's resurrection he proceeds to the
   inference from and the importance of it (vv. 12-19). Christ having
   arisen, the fact of a resurrection can no longer be disputed (vv. 12,
   13, 16). To dispute it would render nugatory the whole scheme of the
   Gospel on which depended their salvation and future life (vv. 14, 17,
   18, 19). Strange that Christians should find it possible to question
   the resurrection of Christ, but still are there some inconsistent and
   ignorant enough to do so.

   3. The order of the resurrection follows (vv. 20-34). The resurrection
   of Christ insures that of all men (vv. 20-22), for both the wicked and
   the good, the unbelieving and the believing shall be raised, "some to
   everlasting life, and some to everlasting shame and contempt" (1 Jno.
   5:28, 29; 1 Tim. 4:10). But they will not be raised all at once. Christ
   is the first-fruits Whose resurrection has already taken place. The
   second installment of the resurrection will consist of true believers,
   and come forth at His second advent (1 Thess. 4:13-18). The third and
   last will consist of the rest of the dead which will come forth after
   the millennium and at the end of the world (v. 24 cf. with Rev. c. 20).
   The "kingdom" spoken of is that promised to David and his seed (2 Sam.
   7:8-17; Zech. 12:8; Lk. 1:31-33). It is that which was announced as "at
   hand" when Jesus Christ came (Mt. 4:17), but which was rejected by the
   Jews when they rejected Christ and crucified Him (Mt. 11:20; 21:42,
   43). At His second coming, and after the Church has been caught up to
   meet Him in the air, the King will restore the Davidic monarchy in His
   own Person, regather Israel, establish His power in the earth and reign
   with His church 1,000 years (Mt. 24:27-30; Acts 15:14-17; Rev.
   20:1-10). This is the kingdom which at the end of the millennium, will
   be delivered up to the Father, that God (i. e. the Triune God) "may be
   all in all" (v. 28). The subjection of the Son spoken of in this verse
   is not that of the Son as the Second Person of the Trinity, but as the
   Mediatorial King of the earthly kingdom. The language in verse 29 is
   difficult, but is evidently a challenge of some kind to their reason,
   like that which follows. Why should Christians expose themselves to the
   peril of their Christian testimony, as Paul himself was doing daily, if
   the resurrection of the dead were not a fact? Why not live to please
   the flesh? Alas! some seemed to be doing so whom he would warn (vv.
   30-34).

   The Nature of the Risen Body.

   4. Now comes the teaching as to the nature of the resurrection, i. e.
   the resurrection body (vv. 35-50), which, in a word, will be related to
   the mortal body as the harvest is related to the grain that is sown
   (vv. 35-38). That is to say, the body that is raised will be the same
   as to identity with that which was buried, but not the same in other
   respectsm -- it will be incorruptible, glorious, powerful, spiritual,
   "the image of the heavenly." Verses 45-49 are deeply interesting. "The
   first man Adam was made a living soul." i. e., he derived his life from
   another, even God. "The last Adam was made a quickening Spirit," gives
   a truer meaning by omitting the italicized words "was made," so as to
   read, "the last Adam a quickening (i. e., a life-giving) Spirit." He
   did not derive His life, but is Himself the fountain of life, and gives
   that life to others (Jno. (1:4; 5:21; 10:10; 12:24; 1 Jno. 5:12).
   Because He lives we shall live also.

   5. But all believers will not die (vv. 50-57). These verses should be
   read in connection with 1 Thess. 4:13-18, as they similarly teach that
   the bodies of living believers will be instantaneously changed from
   corruptibility and mortality to the opposite, at the coming of the
   Lord.

   6. The theme is concluded by a reference to the practical effects of
   the doctrine, which carries us into the 16th chapter as far as verse 4.
   It should confirm our steadfastness in the Christian faith, at the same
   time that it quickens our service (v. 58). A good outlet for this
   service in the case of the Corinthians is that named at the opening of
   chapter 16, the means of whose execution are detailed in verses 2-4.

   7. The concluding instructions and greetings in the epistle (16:5-22)
   hardly furnish material for another lesson, and may be included in
   this. Paul will not visit them at present though he is just across the
   Aegean Sea, but will pass through Macedonia first and come to them
   later, probably wintering there (vv. 5-9). He commends Timothy to them
   whose arrival en route to Ephesus they may expect (vv. 10, 11). Apollos
   is also referred to in brotherly terms (v. 12), though he had spoken
   plainly about him in the body of the letter. Those who had specially
   ministered to him are named (vv. 17, 18). The token of validity in his
   letter is important (v. 21). "Maranatha" means "Our Lord Cometh." With
   that hope before him he had begun his letter, and with that hope he
   laid down his pen. -- Synthetic Bible Studies.

   Questions.

   1. Divide chapter 16 into 6 parts.

   2. What is Paul's definition of the Gospel?

   3. How many eye-witnesses of Christ's resurrection does Paul indicate?

   4. What may "born out of due time," mean?

   5. When will the second and third installments of the resurrection army
   come forth, and of whom will they be composed?

   6. What is meant by "kingdom" (v. 24)?

   7. How will the resurrection body compare with the mortal body?

   8. Give the meaning of verses 51-53.

   9. What is the two-fold practical effect of the doctrine of the
   resurrection?
     __________________________________________________________________

SECOND CORINTHIANS

THE APOSTLE'S EXPLANATION

  Chapters 1-2:13

   Paul had left Ephesus where his first epistle had been written to this
   Church, had crossed into Macedonia, and was now in Philippi. (Cf. Acts
   19:23-20:1-3 with chapters 8:1-9:2 of this epistle.) The reception
   given his first letter had been generally favorable, but all had not
   submitted to his rebuke, and the adversaries who opposed his teachings
   before were more virulent than ever, now seeking to undermine his
   authority as an apostle. It was therefore with a two-fold purpose he
   wrote this second letter, to comfort some whom he had "made sorry" by
   his previous one, and to defend his character and authority against
   those who impugned both. For this reason, as Alford says, "we find
   consolation and rebuke, gentleness and severity, earnestness and irony
   succeeding one another at short intervals and without notice." To quote
   the Scofield Bible, his spiritual burdens were of two kinds, solicitude
   for the maintenance of the churches in grace as against the
   law-teachers, and anguish over the distrust felt towards him by Jews
   and Jewish Christians. The latter rejected the revelation through Paul
   of the doctrines of grace, grounding themselves, probably, on the
   kingdom teachings of our Lord (Rom. 15:8), seemingly oblivious that a
   new dispensation had been introduced by Christ's death. It was this
   that made necessary a defense of the origin and extent of his apostolic
   authority.

   The first seven chapters are taken up with an account of his principles
   of action; chapters 8 and 9 are an appeal for the collection for the
   poor saints at Jerusalem; and the remaining chapters are a straight out
   defense of his apostolic authority.

   The particular part assigned for this lesson is the writers explanation
   of his conduct with respect to his promised visit (see the close of the
   first epistle), and with respect to the case of incest (see c. 5 of the
   same).

   The customary salutation, or greeting, (1:1, 2), is followed by the
   usual thanksgiving (w. 3-7), in which the apostle mentions his
   sufferings for Christ's sake, and the relation they bear to this church
   as an example of patient endurance and Divine consolation. He enlarges
   on his sufferings, going into detail as to one particular, to magnify
   the power of God in his deliverance as from the dead (vv. 8-10).
   Tactfully he mentions his confidence in their interest in him (v. 11),
   arising, as it must, out of his faithful service on their behalf (vv.
   12, 13), which they for the most part were ready to acknowledge (v.
   14). Note the exception in this last verse, and its indirect allusion
   to his enemies, ("in part").

   At this point he begins his explanation of his change of mind about
   visiting them, of which his enemies had taken advantage. His first
   thought had been to go to Corinth direct from Ephesus, then north into
   Macedonia where he now was, and returning to Corinth proceed thence
   into Judea (v. 16). Passing by Corinth and going into Macedonia
   instead, was not a mere whim of his carnal nature, not an indication of
   trifling indecision or fear, but to spare them the further rebuke which
   must have fallen on them (1: 7-2:4).

   He next refers to his previous directions about the incestuous person,
   whom he now recommends to be forgiven and restored (vv. 5-1 1).

   Perhaps the last two verses (vv. 12, 13) suggest a further reason for
   his going into Macedonia before visiting Corinth.

   Questions.

   1. Have you examined the scripture passages referred to in this lesson?

   2. For what two-fold purpose was this epistle written?

   3. What is peculiar as to its literary style?

   4. What was the nature of Paul's spiritual burden?

   5. Give the general outline of the whole epistle?

   6. What is the particular theme of this lesson?

   7. Analyze the lesson by verses.

THE TRIUMPHS OF PAUL'S MINISTRY

  Chapters 2:14-4:7

   1. Pursuing the consideration of his principles of action, Paul now
   shows his ministry to have been a triumphant one, notwithstanding the
   opposition of his enemies (vv. 14-17). The triumph however, was of
   God's power and grace, and not in himself. Note the comparison between
   himself and the false teachers (v. 17).

   2. It was not only a triumphant ministry but one fully accredited by
   themselves (3:1-5).

   3. It was a spiritual ministry as distinguished from one of legalism
   (vv. 6-18). This is the meaning of "the letter killeth, but the spirit
   giveth life" (v. 6), the first referring to Judaism and the latter to
   the Gospel of grace. Not that Paul would disparage the former which was
   glorious in its revelation (v. 7), but the latter more so (vv. 8-15).
   Prof. Robertson in "The Glory of the Ministry" gives a beautiful
   exposition of the last-named verses. The glory of Moses was (1), a real
   glory -- "the ministration of death written and engraven in stones, was
   glorious"; (2), a hidden glory -- "Moses put a veil over his face; (3),
   a temporary glory -- "Israel could not steadfastly look to the end of
   that which is abolished"; (4), an overshadowed glory -- "if the
   ministration of condemnation be glory, much more doth the ministration
   of righteousness exceed in glory"; (5), a defective glory -- "Who hath
   made us able ministers of the New Testament; not of the letter but of
   the spirit"; (6), an ineffective glory -- "their minds were blinded."
   Verses 13 and 14 referring to Exodus 34:33-35, are rather obscure
   because of a wrong rendering of the Old Testament passage. The Revised
   Version indicates that the Israelites saw the glory on Moses' face as
   he spake; but when he had ceased, the veil was put on that they might
   not look on the end, i. e., the fading of that transitory glory. To
   quote Alford, they were permitted to see it as long as it was necessary
   to be seen as a credential of his ministry but then it was withdrawn.
   Thus the declaration of God's will to them was not in openness of
   speech, but interrupted and broken by intervals of concealment. This
   was not the case in the Christian dispensation of which Paul was a
   minister. -- Synthetic Bible Studies.

   4. It was an honest ministry (4:1-7), for the reason that the apostle's
   life harmonized with the truth he preached (vv. 1, 2); because it was
   Jesus Christ he preached and not himself (vv. 3-6); and because the
   power in which he preached was of God (v. 7).

   Questions.

   1. What four points concerning Paul's ministry are here named?

   2. How do you understand the distinction between the "letter" and the
   "spirit"?

   3. Give an analysis of 3:8-15.

   4. How does the Revised Version throw light on Ex. 34:35?

   5. On what grounds was Paul's ministry honest?

TRIAL OF PAUL 'S MINISTRY

  Chapters 4:8-5:21

   1. His Sufferings 4:8-15.

   "Troubled," "perplexed," "persecuted," "cast down" -- what a story!
   "Pressed on every side, yet not straitened," not so hemmed in but that
   he could still proceed with his work; "perplexed, yet not in despair,"
   bewildered like a man going in a circle, put to it, yet not utterly put
   out; "pursued, yet not forsaken," hunted like a wild animal, yet not
   abandoned to the foe; "smitten down, yet not destroyed," thrown to the
   ground but able to rise again -- "The Glory of the Ministry." But not
   merely resigned, he has come to rejoice in his sufferings because of
   his relationship to Jesus Christ (10, 11). For the meaning of these
   last-named verses, compare Col. 1:24; 1 Cor. 15:31; and Rom. 8:36.
   Indeed verse 11 is a sufficient comment on verse 10. Death (12) was
   working in Paul, physical death, but it was "working out for the good
   of the saints who were benefited by his ministry." He speaks this by
   the same faith which stirred the Psalmist (verse 13 cf. with Ps.
   116:10), and it is this faith that gives him the bright outlook for
   himself and his faithful hearers as expressed in verse 14, and which he
   amplifies in the next division.

   2. His Comfort 4:16-5:8.

   (a) Inward spiritual renewing day by day (16); (b) the relation between
   his earthly suffering and heavenly glory (17, 18); (c) which includes
   the resurrection of his body (5:1-4); (d) his confidence rests on the
   eternal purpose of God in his redemption, and the indwelling of the
   Holy Spirit in his soul (5); (e) so that he is always of good courage
   whether in his physical body or out of it (6-8).

   3. His Ambition 9-13.

   "Wherefore we labor," might be rendered "wherefore we are ambitious."
   "Present or absent" has reference to the Lord's second coming. Paul
   might be "present," i. e., in his physical body on the earth when He
   came, for like all true and intelligent disciples, he was expecting Him
   in his own generation; and yet he might be "absent," in the sense that
   he had passed out of the body in death. But in either event he must
   appear before his "judgment seat" when He came (10). This "judgment
   seat of Christ" is not that in Rev. 20, which is the last judgment and
   takes place at the end of the world, but it is one before which
   disciples, and they only, shall stand at the Second Coming of Christ.
   Notice that they are to "receive the things done" in the body. In other
   words, it is not for them a judgment unto condemnation because they are
   already by faith "in Christ Jesus" (Romans 8:1). It is not to determine
   the question whether they are saved or lost, which was settled the
   moment of their accepting Christ, but rather that of their reward or
   loss of the reward in the Kingdom of Heaven then to be manifested (1
   Cor. 3:11-15). "Terror" (verse 11), should be rendered "fear," and
   refers to the godly fear Paul had with reference to that judgment, his
   reverent desire to enter upon his reward, and which explained his
   earnestness as a soul-winner. God was his witness to this, and he
   trusted the church at Corinth also was. If so they might properly speak
   of it before his enemies (12) who were reflecting on him as one who was
   out of his mind (13).

   4. His Motive 14-21.

   "The love of Christ" here means primarily His love for us as indicated
   in what follows. "Then were all dead," should be, "Then all died," i.
   e., all true believers have died to the guilt and penalty of sin
   because they are members of Christ (Rom. 6). But they are now alive in
   Him in a new sense (v. 15), and being thus alive they are not to live
   for "themselves," their own satisfaction and glory, but for Him As a
   matter of fact this was Paul's governing principle, he says (16).
   "Henceforth know we no man after the flesh," means that his
   relationship to his fellow men is no longer that of his former
   unregenerated state. Indeed this includes that knowledge of Christ he
   then had concerning Whom he says, "Know we Him so no more." He knows
   Christ differently now from the way he knew Him before his conversion
   (Acts 9). This explains verse 17.

   Now all these new "things" come from God and are the consequence of our
   reconciliation to Him by Jesus Christ (18). This reconciliation is
   enlarged upon (19-21). God Himself was reconciled, God as manifested in
   Christ. And His method of reconciling men to Him was not to impute (or
   charge) their trespasses unto them. This act of grace He was able to
   express because He had imputed those trespasses unto His Son, mankind's
   substitute. Who had no sin. The ministry of this reconciliation had
   been committed unto Paul who, with his fellow-preachers, was an
   ambassador for Christ, the mouth-piece of God, beseeching men to accept
   the reconciliation thus wrought out for them, by accepting the
   Reconciler, Jesus Christ.

   Questions.

   1. Name the four principal subdivisions of this lesson.

   2. What five considerations ministered to Paul's comfort in the midst
   of his trials?

   3. To what event does "present or absent" have reference?

   4. Explain 5:10, and 16.

   5. Analyze verses 19-21.

HIS APPEAL TO THE CHURCH

  Chapters 6-7

   1. Not to Receive the Grace of God in Vain, 6:1-10.

   These Corinthians as believers on Jesus Christ, had received the grace
   of God in their justification and all which it implied; but they would
   have received it "in vain" did it not bring forth the proper fruit in
   their lives. That such is the meaning is evident by verse 3: "Giving no
   occasion of stumbling that our ministration be not blamed," which is
   the negative side. And by verse 4: "In everything commending ourselves
   as ministers of God," which is the positive side. Now follows a flight
   of eloquence in praise of Christian ministration (vv. 4-10). We use
   "ministration" rather than "ministry" because while Paul has himself in
   the foreground, he is not limiting what he says to "ordained
   ministers," but includes all Christians. Notice the rhetorical device
   in the grouping of the experiences by the use of the words "in," "by,"
   "as," (Greek, En, Dia, Hos). The first touches environment (vv. 4, 5).
   The second, conduct (vv. 6, 8). It was in the midst of such untoward
   environment to quote "The Glory of the Ministry," that Paul found the
   graces of the heart to grow "like orchids on the wild rocks." In this
   second group of experiences there is progress over the first. "By"
   suggests aggressive conflict in the spiritual sense -- "The atmosphere
   of conflict, the swing of victory." The third group is one of paradoxes
   (vv. 9, 10). Light and shadow interplay, and as the work quoted above
   says, "One can get a double report on almost any man's life unless he
   has been a nonentity." This is particularly true of a Christian, and in
   a good sense, since he must almost of necessity appear as one thing to
   the world and another to the household of God able to appreciate
   spiritual things.

   2. Not to be Unequally Yoked Together 6:7-11:1.

   This division is a continuation of the foregoing about receiving the
   grace of God in vain, and the great New Testament classic on Christian
   separation. To quote the Scofield Bible: Separation in Scripture is
   twofold; "from" whatever is contrary to the mind of God; and "unto" God
   Himself. The unequal yoke is anything which unites a child of God and
   an unbeliever in a common purpose (Deut. 22:10). Separation from evil
   implies (a) separation in desire, motive, and act, from the world, in
   the ethically bad sense of this present world-system (see Rev. 13:8);
   and (b) separation from believers, especially false teachers, who are
   "vessels unto dishonour" (2 Tim. 2:20, 21; 2 John 9-10). Separation is
   not from contact with evil in the world or the church, but from
   complicity with and conformity to it (John 17:15; 2 Cor. 6:14-18; Gal.
   6:1). The reward of separation is the full manifestation of the divine
   fatherhood (2 Cor. 6:17, 18); unhindered communion and worship (see
   Heb. 13:13-15), and fruitful service (2 Tim. 2:21), as world-conformity
   involves the loss of these, though not of salvation.

   3. Not to Reject the Apostle Himself and His Teachings 7:2-16.

   Note the seven reasons for this: For the 1st see verse 2; for the 2d
   verse 3; for the 3d verses 4, 14, 16; for the 4th verse 5; for the 5th
   verses 6, 7, 13; for the 6th verses 8 to 11; for the 7th verse 15.

   A brief word on verses 8-11: Paul regretted his previous letter because
   it had made them sorry; but now he did not regret it because it had
   made them sorry in the right way, "after a godly manner." They had
   sorrowed with a sorrow never to be regretted. Verse 11 shows in what
   manner this was true.

   Questions.

   1. For what three things did Paul appeal?

   2. What is meant by receiving "the grace of God in vain"?

   3. Why do we use the word "ministration"?

   4. What rhetorical device is here used?

   5. What does separation from evil imply?

   6. Name the seven reasons for Paul's personal appeal.

CONTRIBUTION FOR THE SAINTS

  Chapters 8-9

   The mother church at Jerusalem was passing through stormy days, and its
   common chest was replenished by all the daughter churches. Macedonia,
   in its poverty, had contributed liberally but the wealthy and
   flourishing Corinthians had been backward, and the apostle devotes
   nearly one-sixth of his present letter to arguments and pleadings for
   greater generosity on their part. He enjoins the duty of giving:

   1. By the example of the churches in Macedonia (8:1-4). They were poor,
   yet lavish. The effect of divine grace on their hearts.

   2. By the sense of congruity in the Christian life (8:7). They already
   abounded in other gifts such as faith, utterance and knowledge;
   liberality therefore was expected. Its absence would be a defect in the
   symmetry of their spiritual experience.

   3. As a proof of their love and gratitude to Jesus Christ (8:8, 9),
   who, though rich, yet for their sakes had become poor.

   4. In consideration of what they professed to be willing to do. Regard
   for their promises (8:10, 11).

   5. The offering would be appreciated not according to its size, but the
   spirit in which it was given (8:12).

   6. The care of the poor saints should not fall on a few but all should
   be equally burdened (8: 13-15).

   7. The apostle's honor was at stake (8:24, also 9:3, 4). He had boasted
   of their willingness.

   8. As they sowed they would reap (9:6).

   9. God was able to reward them (9:8-11).

   10. They would thus glorify God (9:13).

   11. They would thus secure the prayers and love of the saints (9:14).

   The foregoing is abbreviated from "Synthetic Bible Studies," but there
   is further homiletic value in the following division of the chapters in
   the Scofield Bible: The example of Macedonia (8:1-6); the exhortation,
   (vv. 7-15); the messengers, (8:9-16:5); the encouragement (vv. 6-15).
   From the same source we get a summing up of the Christian doctrine of
   giving, as follows:

   (1) It is a "grace," i. e. a disposition created by the Spirit (8, 7).
   (2) In contrast with the law, which imposed giving as a divine
   requirement, it is voluntary, and a test of sincerity and love (8:8-12;
   9:1, 2, 5, 7). (3) The privilege is universal, belonging, according to
   ability, to rich and poor (8:1-3, 12-15. Cf. 1 Cor. 16:1, 2). (4) It is
   to be proportioned to income (8:12-14, Cf. 1 Cor. 16:2). The O. T.
   proportion was the tithe, a proportion which antedates the law (Gen
   14:20). (5) Its rewards are (a) joy (8:2); (b) increased ability to
   give in proportion to that which has been already given (9:7-11); (c)
   increased thankfulness to God (9:12); (d) God and the gospel glorified
   (9: 13, 14).

   Questions.

   1. Have you carefully examined the eleven arguments for Christian
   giving?

   2. Divide the eleven arguments among the four homiletic divisions of
   the chapter.

   3. Summarize the doctrine of Christian giving.

DEFENCE OF HIS APOSTLESHIP

  Chapters 10-13

   At this point Paul begins his personal defence which concludes the
   epistle. And here we perceive more particularly that interchange of
   gravity and irony to which reference has been made, and which causes
   these chapters to be so difficult of explanation.

   The apostle's critics had reflected on his personal appearance (10:1,
   7, 10); on what they were pleased to consider his carnality (v. 3); his
   lack of eloquence (11:5) and his lack of dignity (11:7-10). We shall
   find it inconvenient to deal with these subjects otherwise than as they
   come before us in the chapters.

   Chapter 10. They said that in their presence he was "base" or "lowly,"
   but that absent he was bold as indicated in his letters (v. 1). He
   besought them therefore, to heed his words that he might not have
   occasion to be "bold" against them when he was present (v. 2). He had
   particular reference to some who regarded him as walking "according to
   the flesh." They would see that any spiritual weakness in his conduct
   did not show itself in the weapons or results of his spiritual
   conflicts with the enemies of the truth (vv. 3-6).

   They were looking on the outward appearance, despising him and
   conceitedly claiming some special relationship to Christ for
   themselves. He meets this by a presentation of his true claims, as to
   which he might go further without idle boasting and justify any
   expressions of apostolic power in his letters (vv. 7-11). In proof of
   this he appeals to facts including his work among them in Corinth (vv.
   12-14), and delicately intimates that when the present trouble was at
   an end, they would assist him to extend his ministry further (vv.
   15-18). (Cf. Romans 1:10; 15:28).

   Chapter 11. His pleadings continue because of his love for them and his
   fear of their beguilement. They were tolerating those who were
   preaching another gospel to them, and surely they might bear with him,
   since he was in no respect inferior to those "over-much" apostles (vv.
   1-6). Verse 2 is very interesting. For an explanation of "a godly
   jealousy" see Exodus 20:5, and Joshua 24:19. For "one husband" and
   "chaste virgin" see 1 Corinthians 1:12. The espousal in this case took
   place when they were converted to Christ, the presentation will take
   place when He comes again. Verse 3 is interesting from another point of
   view, since it shows that Paul regards the fall (Genesis 3) as
   historical. Note also that the tempter did not propose to take Eve's
   allegiance away from God entirely, but only to corrupt her faith, which
   was enough. At this point he refers to their assumed contempt because
   he had not demanded pay from them, explaining the reasons for his
   conduct (vv. 7-12), plainly characterizing the "false apostles" (vv.
   13-15). They have compelled him to boast (vv. 16-33) for which he
   apologizes. Verses 23-27 reveal a life of hardship far beyond anything
   told of Paul in the Acts. Verse 19 is ironical.

   Chapter 12. Here we come to "visions and revelations" vouchsafed to
   him. In these there could be no self-commendation, but only that of a
   man in Christ lifted out of his own individuality, and thought worthy
   of such grace on account of being in Christ. His only object in
   boasting of such an one was to bear witness to the supernatural life he
   was living and that such glorious things had been granted him. In
   behalf of himself he would boast only in his infirmities (vv. 1-6). --
   Lange. Verses 7-10 are self-explanatory except as to the nature of the
   "thorn in the flesh." It has been spoken of as "chronic ophthalmia,
   inducing bodily weakness and a repulsive appearance" (Galatians 4:15),
   but no one knows what it was. The Corinthians should not have made it
   necessary for him thus to speak of himself; they should have spoken on
   his behalf (v. 11), for the signs of an apostle were wrought by him
   among them (vv. 12, 13). The insinuation about his having ministered to
   them without monetary gain is once more referred to, in order to say
   that he will continue to do so. He is their parent, and parents lay up
   for the children (vv. 14, 15). Those he had sent to them had followed
   his example in this respect (vv. 16-18). The church, however, must not
   suppose that in what he was saying he was excusing himself to them. On
   the contrary he was doing all things for their edifying (v. 19), and in
   the hope that when he visited them the third time, it might not be with
   a rebuke and with sorrow because of their sin (vv. 20, 21).

   Chapter 13. He emphasizes the rebuke and chastening that await some on
   his third coming if they do not repent (vv. 1-10), closing with an
   exhortation (v. 11), salutation (vv. 12, 13) and benediction (v. 14).

   Questions.

   1. What is the general theme of this lesson?

   2. In what four ways had Paul's critics reflected on him?

   3. Why had Paul declined material support from the church at Corinth?

   4. What kind of apostles were these who were comparing themselves with
   Paul?

   5. What kind of life was Paul really living?

   6. Why should the Corinthians have commended Paul?

   7. With what does he threaten the church on his next visit?
     __________________________________________________________________

EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS

   INTRODUCTORY

   The Acts of the Apostles records that Paul visited the province of
   Galatia in Asia Minor twice, on his second and third journeys, but no
   mention was made of any particular city or town at which he stopped on
   either occasion. Acts 16:6, 18:23. It was on the third journey, and
   probably during his long stay at Ephesus, though some would say at
   Corinth, that this epistle was written. The occasion for writing it
   carries us back to the fifteenth chapter of Acts and the story of the
   first Church council held at that time. The Judaizing teachers there
   referred to tracked Paul's footsteps everywhere, seeking to circumvent
   the preaching of a free Gospel and teaching the need of circumcision
   and other observances of the Mosaic law in order to salvation. They had
   good soil to work on in Galatia, for the people seem to have been of a
   demonstrative and fickle mind. (1:6, 4:9, 4:15, 16, 5:15.) That this
   was the condition of things in the church, and that many had already
   fallen into the snare of seeking to supplement faith by works is
   further evident from 1:6-9, 3:3, 4:9-11, 5:3, etc. The object of the
   epistle, therefore, is to restore these people to the faith, and in the
   working out of that object the epistle becomes an inspired classic on
   that fundamental doctrine of Christianity, Justification by Faith.

   It would seem that the false teachers in order to undermine the
   confidence of the people in the Gospel itself, must first accomplish
   the same purpose with reference to the apostolic authority of Paul.
   They must first destroy his authority as an inspired apostle before
   they could weaken the foundations of the Gospel he preached. This they
   sought to do using Peter as a sort of comparison and contrast. The
   last-named preached no different Gospel from Paul, but being the
   apostle to the circumcision, i. e., the Jews, (Galatians 2:6-9),
   presented it from the Jewish standpoint, while Paul as the apostle to
   the uncircumcision did the same from the Gentile standpoint. We can see
   how there may have been some differences in the mode of presentation
   which gave opportunity to these unsanctified Jewish Christians to
   denounce Paul as unorthodox. They had an advantage also in that Paul
   was not one of the original twelve.

   The plan of the Epistle lends itself to a three-fold division. Chapters
   1 and 2 are of a personal character in which Paul defends his apostolic
   authority; chapters 3 and 4 are doctrinal, in which he defends the
   Gospel or the doctrine of justification by faith; while chapters 5 and
   6 are practical and contain the application of the doctrine to the
   daily life of the individual Christian.

   Questions.

   1. How often did Paul visit Galatia?

   2. What two cities have been named as the abode of Paul at the time of
   writing this epistle?

   3. Tell the story of Acts 15.

   4. Describe the Galatian people.

   5. What was the object of this epistle?

   6. What was the method of the false teachers?

   7. Name the three divisions of this epistle.

   PAUL'S DEFENCE OF HIS AUTHORITY

   Chapters 1-2

   Paul defends his authority in five ways. On the ground of

   1. His Divine call, 1:1.

   2. His Divine revelation of the Gospel, 1:11, 12.

   3. His independence of the other apostles, 1:15-24.

   4. His endorsement by the church, 2:1-10.

   5. His rebuke of Peter, 2:11-14.

   Speaking of his Divine call, some would say that his reference to
   manmade apostles has an application to the choice of Matthias in Acts
   1, though there may be a question about this. In like manner, his
   reference to the way in which he received the revelation of the Gospel
   recalls the circumstances of his conversion in Acts 9, as well as the
   experience referred to in verses 17 and 18 of this chapter. In the
   section treating of his endorsement by the church there is an allusion
   (chapter 2:1, 2), to the journey and its results spoken of in Acts 15
   at the time of the first general council of the church to settle the
   question of justification. Particular attention should be called to his
   bold and consistent attitude with reference to the circumcision of
   Titus (3-5), an allusion to which was made in our study of the Acts. It
   is noticeable, too, that Paul makes as much of his final endorsement by
   the church as of his independence of the leaders of the church prior
   thereto. He would give his adversaries no advantage over him, as if
   they should say he were too independent and could not be acknowledged
   by them until he had received the acknowledgment of the accepted
   authorities. His rebuke of Peter shows him to have been naturally the
   stronger character of the two, and in consideration of the fact that
   Peter was doubtless being quoted by his opponents, proves a convincing
   argument for his own authority.

   In verse 17 of chapter 2, the Scofield Bible has this illuminating
   footnote: "If we Jews, in seeking to be justified by faith in Christ,
   take our places as mere sinners like the Gentiles, is it therefore
   Christ who makes us sinners? By no means. It is by putting ourselves
   again under law after seeking justification through Christ, that we act
   as if we were still unjustified sinners, seeking to become righteous
   through law-works."

   Questions.

   1. Give the five arguments of Paul in defence of his apostolic
   authority.

   2. Recall the circumstances of His call to the Apostleship.

   3. Recall the circumstance of his endorsement by the church.

   4. What shows his tact in offsetting any advantage against him?

   5. Explain 2:17.

   JUSTIFICATION BY FAITH

   Chapters 3-4

   1. Having established his authority as an apostle, and his right to
   expound the Gospel he had received; Paul now enters upon the
   elucidation of the latter, or rather proceeds to the defense of its
   cardinal teaching. This is the doctrine that man is justified only by
   faith in Jesus Christ without the works of the law. The same doctrine
   was enlarged upon in Romans, only there he was expressing the Divine
   side of its truth while here he is showing the human side. There he
   taught that God justified man by giving him a Tightness or
   righteousness that satisfied His justice, here he teaches that man
   receives this blessing simply by believing on Jesus Christ. The false
   teachers had denied this and had led some of the Galatians back to the
   law of Moses both as (in part at least), the ground of their
   justification and the means of their perfection in holiness. Paul shows
   the untruthfulness and futility of this in the following way:

   1. By their own experience of the effects of faith in the Gospel,
   3:1-5.

   2. By the history of Abraham the founder of the Jewish Nation, 6-9.

   3. By the teachings of Old Testament Scriptures, 10-12.

   4. By the nature of the work of Christ, 13, 14.

   2. The first might be called the "argumentum ad hominem." It was
   evident to these Galatian Christians that they had received the Holy
   Spirit. But how had they come to receive Him, through observing the
   Mosaic law or the preaching of the Gospel? The answer, of course, was
   foreseen. It was as the result of Paul's preaching and not the
   observance of circumcision or anything else. Why then did they need to
   supplement the work of the Spirit by that of the flesh?

   The second argument is well adapted to refute the Judaizing teachers,
   since Abraham was the founder of their faith. And yet Abraham clearly
   was justified by believing on God and before he was circumcised.

   The argument from the teachings of Scripture requires no explanation,
   since the passages quoted plainly state that if one elects to be saved
   by the law and not by grace, he can only be save by keeping the whole
   of it. Circumcision nor ceremonialism of any kind were not enough.

   The work of Christ did away with all these things which only
   foreshadowed Him. He hath redeemed us from the curse of the law, why
   then dishonor His work and put ourselves voluntarily under that curse a
   second time? The whole argument is clear and convincing.

   3. But at this point the apostle supplements his argument by a brief
   disquisition on the

   Relation of the Law to the Promise.

   He anticipates a possible objection to his argument. It were as though
   some one should say: Granted that God saved Abraham or accounted him
   righteous on the ground of his belief in His promise; is it not true
   that 430 years after that promise to Abraham He gave the law to Moses?
   And was not this law to take the place of that promise as a ground of
   human righteousness? Paul answers. No. (Verses 15-18). His imaginary
   interlocutor then inquires, Why was the law given ? What purpose does
   it serve? Paul's reply discloses two points: -- (1), the law was given
   because of transgressions, etc., verse 19. As the transgressions of men
   multiplied and became aggravated, God was obliged to come to His people
   in an entirely new way, in a more distant revelation than existed in
   the time of the patriarchs. "The law was given, not so much in order to
   prevent transgressions, as to bring men under a more strict
   accountability for them, and a more plainly expressed curse." This
   brings us to (2), the law was our schoolmaster to bring us to Christ,
   verse 24. The Greek word for schoolmaster here means a faithful slave
   entrusted with the care of a boy from his tender years till puberty to
   keep him from physical and moral evil, and accompany him to his studies
   and amusements. He approached his charge with commands and
   prohibitions, and in a sense with limitations of his freedom. All this
   as a means to an end, viz: that the boy might be trained for mature
   age, and the assumption of that higher grade of life for which he was
   destined. (Lange). Thus the law leads men to Christ. It restrains and
   rebukes us, it shows us our sin and danger, it condemns us, and thus
   makes us feel the need of a Redeemer and prepares us to receive Him
   when presented to our faith. Compare Romans 10:4.

   4. Paul continues this general subject throughout chapter four,
   climaxing the whole in the allegory of Sarah and Hagar, (21-31). This
   is not to say that the story of Sarah and Hagar was not historical in
   Genesis, but only that the apostle uses the fact in an accommodated or
   allegorical sense for illustration. The design seems to be to show the
   effect of being under bondage of the Jewish law as compared with the
   liberty of the Gospel. Hagar and her son were treated with severity,
   cast out and persecuted, and became a fit representation of Jerusalem
   as it was in the time of Paul. Sarah and Isaac enjoyed freedom and
   sonship, and became correspondingly a fit representation of the New
   Jerusalem or the true kingdom of God. Which would these Galatian
   Christians choose, to remain under the freedom of the Gospel, or
   voluntarily put themselves into the bondage and under the yoke of
   Judaism?

   "The allegory is addressed to justified but immature believers, who,
   under the influence of legalistic teachers, "desire to be under the
   law," and has therefore no application to a sinner seeking
   justification. It raises and answers for the fifth time in this
   epistle, the question: Is the believer under the law?" -- Scofield
   Bible.

   Questions.

   1. What has the writer entered upon in this part of the epistle?

   2. What is the difference between Galatians and Romans as to the
   teaching about justification?

   3. Name the four direct arguments for justification by faith in Chapter
   3?

   4. Amplify the first argument.

   5. What is the title of the supplemental argument?

   6. For what two-fold purpose was the law given after the promise?

   7. How would you state the teaching of the allegory?

   PRACTICAL APPLICATION

   Chapters 5-6

   In applying the doctrine Paul urges his readers to stand fast in the
   liberty of Christ, (5:1-12), but in doing so not to abuse that liberty,
   (5:13-6:10). He mentions four ways in which it may be abused:

   Uncharitableness, 13-15.

   Uncleanness, 16-25.

   Pride, 26-6 : 5.

   Selfishness, 6-10.

   The first-mentioned warning or exhortation speaks for itself. They were
   to give over contending on this matter and everything else, and live in
   peace.

   The second is important as showing that sins of the mind (20), as well
   as of the body (19, 21), are classified as of the flesh; that the
   practice of such sins eternally disinherits (21), and that the Holy
   Spirit is given to believers for the purpose of overcoming them (17).
   Read this last verse in the Revised Version and see the different
   construction put upon the word "may" instead of "can" in the last
   phrase.

   The "pride" referred to in the third instance is spiritual pride; in
   which connection note the contrast between verses 2 and 5 of chapter 5.
   The Greek word for "burden" is not the same in both cases and the
   statements are not contradictory. In the first instance Paul tells them
   to bear with others' "burdens" of infirmity in sympathy; and in the
   second, that self-examination will make them feel they have enough to
   do with their own "load" of sin without comparing themselves boastfully
   with their neighbors.

   What in the fourth place is called selfishness, might be equally
   described as parsimony. Verse 6 seems to refer to the care they should
   evince for their spiritual teachers in their temporal concerns; and the
   reference to "sowing and reaping" in the following verses primarily
   alludes to the same thing.

   In closing the lesson note verse 11 for its bearing on 2 Thessalonians
   3:17.

   "How large a letter," really means "with how large letters." The
   apostle, as was stated in the treatment of 2 Corinthians, had a serious
   affliction of the eyes, a common disease in the East, which caused him
   to usually dictate his letters. He seems to have had no amanuensis at
   hand just now, but the urgency of the situation at Galatia make it
   necessary to write to them with his "own hand," even though with pain
   and difficulty.

   Questions.

   1. From the positive side, what application does Paul make of this
   whole epistle?

   2. From the negative side, what obligations does he lay upon his
   readers?

   3. What three great facts about sin are taught in Chapter 5:16-25?

   4. Explain the two-fold use of "burden" in Chapter 6?

   5. To what particular sin does Chapter 6:7, 8 refer?

   6. How would you explain 6:11?

   *The body of the teachings on this epistle is taken from the author's
   "Synthetic Bible Studies."
     __________________________________________________________________

EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS

   THE BELIEVER'S BLESSINGS IN CHRIST

   Chapter 1

   This is the first of what are called the "prison" epistles, because
   written by Paul while a prisoner at Rome, (cf. 3:1, 4:1, with Acts 28.)
   The others are Colossians, Philippians, and Philemon. The apostle wrote
   these with the chain upon his wrist.

   This also, (with Colossians), contains the profoundest truth God has
   been pleased to reveal to His people, even that of the Church
   considered as the body of Christ, "the mystery which was kept secret
   since the world began, but HOW is made manifest" (Romans 16:25, 26). To
   quote "Synthetic Bible Studies": "The Church is a body distinct from
   the Jews on the one hand or the Gentiles on the other. Neither is it
   identical with the kingdom, but separate from it. It is something
   unique, not heard of in the Old Testament, and especially given to Paul
   to reveal. It had its earthly beginning after Christ's ascension into
   glory. It will have its earthly ending when He comes again, and it is
   caught up to meet Him in the air (1 Thessalonians 4:13-18).
   Thenceforward the Church will reign with Him over the earthly kingdom
   to be set up. The Church is composed of both Jews and Gentiles, and is
   called The Body of Christ (cf. 1 Cor. 12:12-27; Col. 1:18, 24; 2:10,
   etc.)"

   1. The apostolic salutation, 1:1, 2, contains the first allusion to
   this "mystery" in the phrase "to the faithful in Christ Jesus." "In"
   Him, just as the members of our body are in us, i. e., vitally one with
   us.

   2. The thanksgiving in the next verse carries the thought further --
   "hath blessed us with all spiritual blessings in heavenly places in
   Christ." Note the past tense, "hath blessed," indicating that it is not
   something God is doing, or is about to do, but something He has done in
   the case of every believer, once and forever. Note the
   comprehensiveness of the work, "all spiritual blessings." There is no
   blessing God has purposed for the saint that is not already his
   potentially, in Christ. In the physical realm, the new-born infant is
   potentially the man, and all his earthly life is simply the working
   out, the developing of that which was his in the beginning; so in the
   spiritual sense of the saint in Christ. The phrase "in heavenly places"
   does not qualify this at all, since it does not mean that these
   blessings will not be ours, or not be realized in any sense, till we
   get to heaven. They are "in heavenly places" in the sense that their
   source, the One in Whom they are located, and from Whom they flow,
   Jesus Christ, the Head of the body, is in heaven.

   The Four Great Blessings.

   3. The verses following, 4-14, describe these blessings, of which there
   are four all-inclusive ones. First, the believer is "chosen" in Him
   (vv. 4-6). The period of choice was "before the foundation of the
   world"; the purpose, that "we should be holy and without blame before
   Him"; the ground, "the good pleasure of His will"; the object, or
   motive, "the praise of the glory of His grace." "Holy and without
   blame" does not mean merely that this will be true of us in the life to
   come, but that it is true now, not experimentally indeed, but
   positionally, or legally, as we stand before God uncondemned in Christ.
   Secondly, the believer is redeemed in Him (vv. 7-10). The redemption
   was necessary that thus by the removal of sin, the choice of God might
   become operative in our case. This redemption includes the forgiveness
   of our sins, and more. It means the revelation to us of the mystery of
   the Divine will (v. 9). Being now sons of God through His grace, we are
   given the mind of God. The Father reveals His purposes to His children.
   These are stated in verse 10. "The dispensation of the fulness of the
   times," is by some understood as the Millennial age which follows the
   present one; but there are others who think it refers to an age
   succeeding that and prior to Eternity. "That word 'fulness of the
   times,' seems to imply not only the fulfilment of the broken purposes
   and plans of past dispensations, (broken by man's sin), but also a
   duration of time in comparison with which all past ages shall be but as
   fragments, while this will be complete." Thirdly, the believer is
   inherited in Him (vv. 11, 12). Verse 11 should be read in the Revised
   Version. It is not only true that "we have obtained an inheritance" in
   God through Christ, but that God has obtained an inheritance in us. We
   are His purchased possession, and hence we may be persuaded that He is
   able to keep that which we have committed against , that day (2 Timothy
   1:12). Fourthly, the believer is "sealed" in Him (vv. 13, 14), the Holy
   Spirit Himself, Who dwells in the believer, being that seal. "In the
   symbolism of Scripture, a seal signifies a finished transaction (Jer.
   32:9, 10); ownership (Jer. 32:11, 12; 2 Tim. 2:19); and security,
   (Esther 8:8; Dan, 6:17; Eph. 4:30)" -- Scofield Bible.

   Prayer for Enlightenment.

   4. The apostle concludes the revelation of these blessings with a
   prayer for spiritual enlightenment on the part of his readers, that
   they may understand and appreciate their meaning (vv. 15-23). It is not
   enough that the Holy Spirit reveal a great truth like this to Paul, or
   inspire Him to record it, but the same Spirit must accompany it to the
   minds and hearts of his readers or hearers if it is to be effective in
   their faith and experience. They require "the spirit of wisdom and
   revelation" (v. 17), in order to know "the hope of His calling," "the
   riches of the glory of His inheritance in the saints," and "the
   exceeding greatness of His power to usward who believe" (vv. 18, 19).
   Their calling, these riches and this power have just been revealed in
   the preceding verses, but who can know them without the aid of the Holy
   Spirit? Consider the "power" for example. It is that which in Christ
   raised Him from the dead and set Him at the right hand of God, and put
   all things under His feet (vv. 20-22). This power will do the same for
   us who are in Christ. It will do so because He is the "Head over all
   things to the Church" (v. 22). Speaking in the physical sense merely,
   if one's head is raised from the dead and exalted to a place of power
   and dignity, every member of the body united to that head, living in
   it, and in which it lives, must necessarily be raised and exalted also.
   The head, in a physical sense, finds its completeness, its "fulness" in
   the body it governs and to which it gives life, and so in the spiritual
   sense, the Church of Christ, which is His body, is His "fulness" in the
   sense that He fills it all in all things (v. 23). How much we need the
   aid of the Holy Spirit to apprehend these things, and make them our
   glorious possession!

   Questions.

   1. What is the title of this lesson?

   2. Name the "prison" epistles, and state why they are so called.

   3. What is the great truth revealed in this epistle, and how does it
   compare with other features of inspiration?

   4. What is the Church, and its earthly history?

   5. Have you re-read 1 Corinthians 12:12-27?

   6. How would you illustrate the phrase "in Christ?"

   7. What is the sum of the believers blessings in Christ?

   8. Name these blessings in their order.

   9. What may be understood by "the fulness of the times"?

   10. What does a "seal" signify in the symbolism of Scripture?

   11. Explain the necessity for Paul's prayer in this case.

   12. Have you offered the same prayer for yourself?

   ADDRESS TO THE GENTILES

   Chapter 2

   This Church, like all the others, was composed of both Jews and
   Gentiles, but chiefly the latter. Paul is the apostle to the Gentiles
   and he never loses sight of this calling in his speaking or writing. It
   is especially necessary that he now address himself to them, because of
   the nature of the truth he is here revealing, which is the union of
   Gentile and Jew in the mystical body of Christ. The chapter shows us
   three things: (a) our condition by nature (vv. 1-3); (b), our change
   from nature to grace (vv. 4-10); (c), our condition by grace (vv.
   11-22).

   1. Our Condition by Nature vv. 1-3.

   "Dead in (or through) trespasses and sins." Spiritual death is meant,
   consisting in alienation from the life of God, being destitute of His
   Spirit (Eph. 4:18, 19). It continues after the physical dissolution of
   the body, and consists in external separation from God in conscious
   suffering (2 Thess. 1:9; Luke 16:23). The Scripture speaks of this
   latter as the second death (Rev. 2:11; 20:6, 14; 21:8). But in this
   life to be "dead in trespasses and sins" is equivalent to be walking
   "according to the course of this world" (v. 2); to be doing this is one
   with holding allegiance to Satan, "the prince of the power of the air,
   the spirit that now worketh in the children of disobedience." And there
   is no exception to the rule, for all mankind before they come to Christ
   have this manner of life. In other words, they are following after the
   desires of the flesh, their fallen nature, for which reason they are
   exposed to the wrath of God against sin (v. 3).

   2. Our Change from Nature to Grace vv. 4-10.

   God, and not ourselves, is the cause of this change. God in the going
   out of His mercy and love toward us (v. 4). The great instrumental
   means is Christ, and the method employed is to quicken, raise us up,
   and make us "sit together in heavenly places" in Him (vv. 5, 6).
   Observe the past tenses here. He "hath quickened us." Believers are
   already spiritually alive in Christ. He "hath raised us up." In the
   mind and purpose of God, believers are already physically raised from
   the dead. "Together" with Christ are they raised, the philosophy of
   which is seen as we retain in mind the illuminating figure of the human
   body. If, in the physical sense, one's head is raised from the dead,
   must not the same be true of all the members of His body? And so, in
   the spiritual sense, if Christ is the Head of the body His Church, and
   if He is risen from the dead, must not His whole body be risen? It is
   nothing to say that so far as believers are concerned this is not yet
   true in an experimental sense. The point is that in God's mind and
   purpose it is true, and with Him time is not counted. He hath "made us
   sit together in heavenly places in Christ Jesus." In other words, we
   who believe, are already exalted with Him. "Heavenly places," literally
   translated, is "the heavenlies," and means "that which is heavenly in
   contradistinction to that which is earthly." We are already in the
   "heavenlies" in Christ in the sense that (1), we are partakers of His
   heavenly nature (2 Pet. 1:4), and life (Col. 3:4; 1 Jno. 5:12); (2), we
   enjoy the same heavenly fellowship (Jno. 20:17; Col. 1:24; Phil. 3:10;
   Heb. 2:11; 1 Jno. 1:3); and (3), we have a heavenly inheritance (Rom.
   8:18-21; I Pet. 2:9; Rev. 1:5, etc.). The object of God in thus
   changing us from nature to grace is expressed in verse 7, and
   corresponds to chapter 1, verses 6, 12 and 14, "the praise of His
   glory," especially the glory of His grace. From the human side, all
   this comes to pass through faith -- "not of works" (vv. 8, 9). And
   indeed, on our part there can be no good works acceptable to God, until
   this change occurs. It is then we are created anew in order to bring
   forth such works (v. 10). This last is the present and earthly effect
   of our changed condition.

   3. Our Condition by Grace vv. 11-22.

   Verse 11 shows that Gentiles rather than Israelites are particularly in
   mind. Before becoming Christians they were "separate from Christ" (v.
   12 R. V.), in that they did not belong to the commonwealth, or nation,
   of Israel. Not belonging to Israel they were "strangers from the
   covenants of the promise" (R. V.). The "promise" was that of the coming
   of the Messiah, the Christ, in connection with which, and for the
   carrying out of which, God entered into many covenants, or agreements
   with Israel, as the Old Testament has shown us. To none of these
   covenants did the Gentiles bear any relation. Hence the latter were
   without hope in the world such as Israel had, and being without such
   hope, they were practically "without God." They were thus "afar off"
   from Israel in point of privilege and blessing, but now, being in
   Christ Jesus, they had been "made nigh" (v. 13). Christ had become
   their "peace," He had brought the Gentile and Jew together, by breaking
   down that which had separated them (v. 14), "even the law of
   commandments in ordinances" (v. 15). This He did by His death on the
   cross, having fulfilled the law in the ceremonial sense and kept it in
   the moral sense, on their behalf. He had thus made in Himself of the
   two men, Jew and Gentile, One New Man, by which is meant not an
   individual believer, but that mystical conception, Christ, spoken of in
   1 Corinthians 12:12. The Christ there, as we saw, meant not the
   Personal Christ, but the Personal Christ plus the Church considered as
   His body, the members of which are baptized into Him by the Holy
   Spirit. This is The Great Mystery of which Paul speaks here, and which
   he had been especially commissioned to reveal. How wonderful it is!
   Both these two classes, Jews and Gentiles, have been reconciled to God
   "in one body by the cross" (v. 16), in the sense that Christ's work on
   the cross took away the enmity between them both and God. He thus
   preached peace with God to both, to the Gentiles "afar off" from God,
   and to the Jews "that were nigh" in comparison with them as indicated
   in verse 12. These both. Jew and Gentile, now alike through Christ, had
   access by the Holy Spirit "unto the Father" (v. 18). The Gentiles, in
   comparison with the Jews, had been "strangers and foreigners," but were
   now "fellow-citizens with the saints." In verse 30 the figure is
   changed to a building to which Christ is the Chief Corner Stone. In Him
   "each several building" (R. V.), "groweth into a holy temple in the
   Lord" (v. 21). This holy temple Is "a habitation of God through the
   Spirit." Because the Holy Spirit dwells in every believer. He dwells in
   the whole company of believers, and this means that He dwells in the
   Church, which is His habitation (cf. Rev. 21:2, 3).

   Questions.

   1. Why is it specially necessary for the apostle to now address himself
   to the Gentiles?

   2. What three things are shown in this chapter?

   3. How do verses 2 and 3 explain being "dead in trespasses and sins"?

   4. What is God's method in changing men from nature to grace?

   5. What is the significance of the past tense in the working out of
   this method?

   6. What is meant by "heavenly places"?

   7. What object has God before Him in all this?

   8. Analyze verse 12.

   9. What is meant by "one new man"?

   10. Explain verse 18.

   AN EXPLANATORY PARENTHESIS

   Chapter 3

   At the beginning of this chapter, Paul is about to exhort the Church in
   a practical application of the doctrine he had expounded. Indeed, he
   has gotten as far as -- "For this cause I Paul, the prisoner of Jesus
   Christ for you Gentiles," when the divine impulse leads him to digress.
   This digression, covering the remainder of the chapter, is an
   explanation of the special ministry given him for the Gentiles (vv.
   2-4). This ministry was a "mystery" unrevealed in the Old Testament,
   for the reference to the "prophets" in verse 5 means the New Testament
   prophets particularly Paul himself. That the apostle is not referring
   merely to the gospel of salvation is clear because that was no
   "mystery" (Rom. 9:24-33; 10:19-21). what he is referring to is (v. 6),
   "that the Gentiles should be fellow-heirs, and fellow-members of the
   body," i. e., the body of Christ, the Church, of which he has been
   speaking. This unique "body" was a mystery "hid in God" from the
   beginning of the world (v. 9), whose revelation at this time was for
   the purpose stated in verse 10. That verse shows the Church to be "the
   lesson-book for the angels." They had seen God's ways in creation, and
   at the deluge, and in Israel, but here is something that not even the
   Scriptures had hinted at, that was never promised in the Old Testament,
   something kept entirely secret between the Father and the Son.

   Prayer for Strength.

   Some conception of the nature and greatness of this truth thus
   revealed, may be gathered from the prayer that follows. As that in
   chapter 1 was for spiritual enlightenment, this is for spiritual
   strength. "We have this treasure in earthen vessels," the apostle says
   in another place, and earthen vessels break easily, and are unable to
   stand too great a strain. To contain such a truth, we need the aid of
   the Holy Spirit, hence the language of verses 16 to 19. As Kelly puts
   it, "the prayer in chapter 1 was for a deep and real apprehension of
   their standing before God; here, it is rather for practical, inward
   power, by the Holy Ghost. In a word, it is here a question of actual
   state, of the affections having Christ within, of being rooted and
   grounded in love, that they might be thoroughly able (for so it means),
   to lay hold of that which is indeed measureless. The apostle does not
   say what it is of which they are to lay hold, for verse 18 has no
   ending. It brings you into infinity. It can be nothing else, indeed,
   than the grandeur of that "mystery" of the believer's oneness with
   Jesus Christ. All things are for the glory of the Son, and the saints
   in Him are to have the very highest place with Him over all."

   Hence the ascription (vv. 20, 21). In this, He does not say above all
   that we can ask or think, but all that we do ask or think. We can ask
   more than we do ask, because of "the power that worketh in us," i. e.,
   power of God. In chapter 1, we saw the power of God working for us;
   here, we see it working in us. There, it raised us from the dead; here,
   it gives us entrance into His love and fulness. No wonder the apostle
   exclaims, "Unto Him be Glory!"

   Questions.

   1. What is the literary character of chapter 3?

   2. What is the nature of this digression?

   3. That is meant by the "mystery"?

   4. What is the subject of this prayer in comparison with that in
   chapter 1?

   5. What added thought have we here concerning the Divine power in
   relation to the believer?

   THE CHRISTIAN'S WALK

   Chapters 4:1-5:21

   At 4:1 the apostle returns to the exhortation and practical application
   on which he had started at 3:1. The Ephesian Christians had been called
   with a holy calling (vocation) and now they were to "walk worthy" of
   it. "Walk" occurs five times in our lesson, giving completeness to it.

   1. Walk in Unity 4:1-16.

   The unity referred to, is that which has been made among Christians by
   the baptism of the Holy Spirit into Christ (vv. 3-6). It is not
   anything they are to make for themselves, or which they can make, but
   something they are to endeavor to "keep." The way to keep it is
   expressed in verse 2. The occasion for the exhortation is suggested in
   verses 7 and the following, which recall the strife in the Corinthian
   Church about spiritual gifts, only there the stress was laid on the
   gifts, while here it bears on the persons who receive the gifts, or
   rather who themselves are gifts to the Church (vv. 811). These
   apostles, prophets, evangelists, pastors and teachers are given for
   "the perfecting of the saints," their increase in the knowledge of
   Christ, and the latter in turn are to engage in ministering for the
   building up of the whole body (see the Revised Version). This is to
   continue till the body of Christ is complete, i. e., "till we all come
   ... a perfect (full grown) man" (v. 13). This "man" does not mean any
   individual man, but the "MAN" referred to in chapter 2:15, the "MAN"
   composed of the Personal Christ as the Head, and the members of the
   Church as His body. We Christians are all to "grow up into Him in all
   things, which is the Head, even Christ" (v. 15). Each member of the
   body has a part to perform in its development (v. 16).

   2. Walk in Purity 4:17-5:2.

   "Not as other Gentiles walk," in vanity, ignorance of God,
   lasciviousness (vv. 17-19), falsehood, anger, theft, idleness, corrupt
   speech, etc. (vv. 25-31). These things are to be "put off," or in other
   words, "the old man," i. e., our old fallen and corrupt nature is to be
   put off at the same time that "the new man," i. e., the new nature in
   Christ Jesus is to be "put on." This means as we have seen in Galatians
   5:16-25, that there should be an actual, experimental living of Christ
   in us, and by us, every day. But this is only to be obtained through
   the renewing of the spirit of our mind (v. 23). That is, the Holy
   Spirit must renew us day by day with strength to accomplish it
   (3:16-19).

   3. Walk in Love 5:2.

   This section really begins at 4:31, 32. Walking in love is being kind
   and tender-hearted to one another in Christ, which graces show
   themselves in the absence of bitterness and wrath, anger, clamor and
   evil-speaking. Christ Himself is an example, and His work for us the
   motive of this love.

   4. Walk in Light v. 8.

   This section probably begins at verse 3 and runs to 14. The darkness
   which is the absence of light is shown in the sins of fornication,
   uncleanness, covetousness, filthiness, foolish talking, and the like,
   with which we are to have no fellowship, but rather to reprove (v. 11).
   This very reproof is light (v. 13).

   5. Walk in Wisdom vv. 15-21.

   "Not as fools, but as wise, redeeming the time," or "buying up the
   opportunities" as it might be rendered. The wisdom spoken of is
   "understanding what the will of the Lord is" (v. 17), which can only be
   ours as we are "filled with the Spirit" (v. 18). When we are thus
   filled with the Spirit, our fellowship with one another in Christ, is
   one of 5:22-6:24 joy, gratitude, loving submission (vv. 19-21).

   Questions.

   1. What is the title of this lesson?

   2. What suggests it in the text?

   3. In what five ways is the Christian's walk outlined?

   4. What is the nature of the unity in which they are to walk?

   5. How may this unity be kept?

   6. What gifts are here referred to?

   7. For what purpose are they bestowed?

   8. How long is this work to proceed?

   9. What is meant by "man" in verse 13?

   10. What is meant by the "old man," and the "new man" in verses 22 and
   24?

   11. How can we put on the new man?

   12. What is the result of being "filled with the Spirit"?

   APPLICATION TO THE THREE CLASSES OF THE SOCIAL ORDER

   Chapters 5:22-6:24

   In the last lesson Paul spoke of the Christian's "walk" in general
   terms, but now applies the thought particularly (a), to wives and
   husbands (5:22-33); (b), children and parents (6:1-4); (c), servants
   and masters (vv. 5-9), summing up the whole in verses 10-18. The
   epistle concludes with a brief reference to his personal affairs (vv.
   19-22), and a benediction (vv. 23-24).

   Speaking of the application to the three classes of the social order,
   it is noticeable that the apostle begins with the duties of the
   inferior or subjected party in each case, an arrangement not
   accidental, as may be judged by comparing Colossians 3:18-4:1, as well
   as 1 Peter 2:18, and the subsequent verses. As another suggests, "one
   reason for this may be that the duties of submission and obedience are
   so incomparably important to all the interests of human life."
   Furthermore all these duties are here seen in special connection with
   the believer's standing in Christ.

   In the instance of wives and husbands, we are not to suppose that there
   is anything derogatory to the former in their submission, "since
   subordination and order are the great characteristics of God's
   workmanship." Christ is equal to God and yet as the Son He is
   submissive to the Father. Is that derogatory to Him? Of course, the
   reference here is to the saved woman, and one who so appreciates her
   stand in Christ as to feel the fitness of things resulting therefrom.
   -- Bishop W. R. Nicholson. Moreover, as the same spiritual teacher
   says, husbands are not directed to command but to love their wives. The
   right to command is implied but not enforced. The husband's love, on
   the other hand, includes every attention to his wife, the reposing of
   his confidence in her, and the enjoyment with her of their oneness in
   Christ. Under these reciprocal conditions submission is likely to be a
   delight. Verses 30 and 31 of this section are quoted from Genesis 2:23,
   24, which suggests a beautiful type of the Church as the bride as well
   as the body of Christ (2 Corinthians 11:2, 3).

   In the instance of children and parents, observe that the former are
   addressed as though they were present in the church assemblies where
   this letter was read, and expected to give their personal attention to
   it, to understand it, and obey its teachings the same as their adult
   associates. Observe too, that they were saved children, and able to
   appreciate their obligation to obey their parents because with them
   they were "in the Lord." One such inspired declaration as this is an
   all-sufficient answer to much of that newer pedagogy in our Sunday
   schools which leaves the supernatural almost out of account.

   Children need the Word of God as much as their parents do, and if it be
   given to them clear and simple, the Holy Ghost is able to illuminate it
   to their understandings and apply it to their hearts. They who are
   substituting something else in its place in our Sunday schools are
   assuming a responsibility from which the wise may well shrink. Observe
   finally, in this connection, that fathers are not to be unduly severe
   with their children, but to temper and qualify their government as
   becometh them that are in the Lord.

   In the instance of servants and masters, the former are to be
   understood as slaves, but not necessarily of an inferior race. They may
   have been captives taken in war, and in many respects the equal of
   their masters, and yet they were to be obedient, "as unto Christ." They
   were in Him just as their masters were, but this would not alter the
   relation they bore to them, for Galatians 3:28 has reference to
   salvation in Christ, and does not contravene the established relations
   of life. But there are obligations for the Christian masters also (v.
   9).

   In the previous lesson we dwelt on the Christian's walk, but now we
   come, in the summing up of the article, to the Christian's warfare
   (5:10-18). The Scofield Bible divides these verses thus: the warrior's
   power (v. 10); the warrior's armor (v. 11); the warrior's foes (vv.
   12-17), and the warrior's resource (v. 18).

   Questions.

   1. What three classes of the social order are named?

   2. Why presumably, does the apostle begin with the duty of the
   subjected party first?

   3. Show that there is nothing derogatory in the subjection of a wife to
   her husband.

   4. Under what conditions is such submission likely to be a delight?

   5. What inferences are to be drawn from the address to "children"
   chapter 6:1?

   6. What caution does this suggest to Sunday school teachers?

   7. Have you looked up the reference to Galatians 3:28?

   8. To what does that reference refer?

   9. What new idea about the Christian is suggested in the summing up of
   the epistle?

   10. Analyze verses 10-18.
     __________________________________________________________________

EPISTLE TO THE PHILIPPIANS

   INTRODUCTORY

   As we saw earlier this is one of the "prison" epistles of Paul, written
   at Rome where he was awaiting a hearing before Nero because of his
   witness for Christ (Acts 28). Its occasion is stated in chapter
   4:10-18. Epaphroditus had brought him the gifts of the church at
   Philippi, and now that he was returning to Macedonia he is commissioned
   with this letter of appreciation and loving instruction. It has
   sometimes been called the epistle of Christian experience, as it deals
   with conduct rather than doctrine, and yet there is doctrine in it too,
   precious and important.

   For the history of the Church, read again Acts 16. It is probably nine
   years since the events of that chapter, and Paul has visited the Church
   twice since that time. But how it has grown! Now it has "bishops and
   deacons," it is full of love and good works; it is affectionately
   mindful of Paul -- and yet it has some trouble too, a tendency to
   separate into cliques, as we shall see. And there were also emissaries
   of error there, false professors and pharisaic disciples all this comes
   out in the text.

   The Scofield Bible indicates the divisions by chapters thus: Taking as
   the key-verse 1:21, "For me to live is Christ and to die is gain,"
   Chapter 1 reveals "Christ as the believer's life, rejoicing in
   suffering"; Chapter 2, "Christ the believers pattern, rejoicing in
   lowly service"; Chapter 3, "Christ the believer's object, rejoicing
   despite imperfections"; Chapter 4, "Christ the believer's strength,
   rejoicing over anxiety."

   Questions.

   1. Where, and under what circumstances was this epistle written?

   2. What was its occasion?

   3. How has it sometimes been designated?

   4. Where do we find the history of the church at Philippi?

   5. What is called the key-verse of this epistle?

   6. Classify its chapters according to this key-verse.

   JOY IN SUFFERING

   Chapter 1

   1. The epistle opens with the customary salutation or greeting (vv.
   1-2). Timothy is named with Paul, not that he is a co-writer, but a
   co-worker in Philippi, and hence known to the Church. He is however,
   Paul's companion in Rome at this time. Note the important expression
   "in Christ Jesus," which was explained in Ephesians. Note the advanced
   development of the Church "bishops and deacons" or "overseers and
   working-helpers."

   2. Then comes the thanksgiving (3-8). Note the Christian fellowship
   expressed in verse 5, the Philippian church being particularly active
   in co-operating with Paul. The thought is carried forward into verse 7,
   verse 6 being a parenthesis. Their long consistency in Christian
   service leads Paul to feel convinced that they were planted on the rock
   which could not be shaken. They would certainly see the glory of Christ
   (v. 6).

   3. Returning to the thought of his love for them, note his four-fold
   prayer on their behalf: (a) that their love (for one another) might
   abound; (b), that they might approve the excellent things, or rather
   "try the things that differ" (R. V.); (c), that they might be sincere
   and not stumbling-blocks to others; (d), that they might be filled with
   the fruit of righteousness.

   4. A further division begins at verse 12, where the apostle speaks of
   his position and circumstances in Rome in language justifying the title
   of the lesson. His sufferings as a prisoner have proven beneficial to
   the Gospel, in that it is known "in all the palace" and outside, that
   he has committed no crime but is there because of the Messiah of
   Israel, the Saviour of the world (v. 13). This knowledge is spreading
   in two ways (vv. 14-17). The contentious preachers are troubling him
   personally, but nevertheless the Gospel is spreading through their
   contention (v. 18) and he rejoices. These will be a blessing to him in
   the end, through the fulness of the Holy Spirit in answer to their
   prayers. Of this he will not be disappointed, he feels sure (v. 20).

   5. A fifth division suggests itself at verse 21, where passing from his
   present experiences to his future hope, he glides naturally into a vein
   of exhortation. His "consciousness and experiences of living are so
   full of Christ," and hence so full of blessing, that the act of dying
   to be with Christ would be only to increase his blessing (vv. 21, 23).
   If he lives however, being acquitted at his trial, he will have more
   fruit in earthly labor for Christ (v. 22). It is difficult which to
   choose, but he is confident that the Lord's will is for him to remain
   with them longer (vv. 24-27). However, whether he returned to them or
   not let their conduct be ordered right. Let them be steadfast, united
   and courageous (vv. 27, 28). To their enemies this will be an evidence
   of the perdition that awaits them, but to themselves an evidence of
   their salvation. This is a great boon that has been granted them to
   suffer for Christ, as he, Paul, had suffered and was now suffering.

   Questions.

   1. Why is Timothy named with Paul in the salutation?

   2. Analyze Paul's prayer.

   3. How would you explain verse 21?

   4. How would you explain verse 28, last clause?

   JOY IN SERVICE

   Chapter 2

   1. Expressed in Unity.

   We here touch the weak point in the spiritual life of this church -- a
   tendency toward dissension and separation. It is sad, as another says,
   that this tendency "is not least likely to be operative where there is
   a generally diffused life and vigor" in a church, just as a state of
   lukewarmness may favor an outward tranquility. Paul plies his arguments
   against it, saying in effect, if there is any such thing as comfort
   drawn from our common union in Christ, any such thing as fellowship in
   the Holy Spirit, or human tenderness and compassion, show it toward me,
   by giving up your pride and self-will and becoming of one mind.

   2. Expressed in Humility vv. 5-11.

   This leads to a deeper note. Unity presupposes humility, and here the
   great example of Jesus Christ is used. "Being in the form of God." (v.
   6) is translated by Bishop Moule, "in God's manifested Being
   subsisting," (cf. John 17: 5). "Thought it not robbery," he translates,
   "reckoned it no plunderer's prize," i. e. "He viewed His possession of
   the fulness of the Eternal Nature as securely and inalienably His own."
   And so "made Himself of no reputation," or so made Himself void by His
   own account (v. 7). The idea is, that so sure was His claim of Deity,
   that with a sublime unanxiety He could empty Himself of the
   manifestation and exercise thereof to take "upon Him the form of a
   servant." We should be careful to note however, that, as the Scofield
   Bible says, "nothing in this passage teaches that the Eternal Word
   (John 1:1) emptied Himself of either His divine nature or His
   attributes, but only of the outward and visible manifestation of the
   Godhead." "He stripped Himself of the insignia of His majesty" --
   Lightfoot. Taking "the form of a servant" means assuming our human
   nature; and then He stooped even lower i. e. unto death, in obedience
   to His father. And lower yet, "even the death of the cross" (v. 8),
   unimaginable as to its pain, and so humiliating that to the Jews it was
   the symbol of the Divine curse, and to the Romans so degrading, that
   Cicero said it was far from their bodies not only, but their
   imaginations. But think of the reward of such humility (vv. 9-11). The
   "Name Which is Above Every Name" is His "not only as He is from all
   eternity, but as He became also in time, the suffering and risen
   Saviour of sinners." Of this whole passage Bishop Moule well says,
   "Nothing but the orthodox creed, with its harmonious truths of the
   proper Godhead and proper Sonship of the Lord Christ, can possibly
   satisfy the apostolic language about His infinite glory on the one
   hand, and His relation to the Father on the other."

   3. Expressed in Watchfulness vv. 12-16.

   "Work out your own salvation" means "develop" it. It had been given to
   them in Christ, and now they were to set themselves to the "business of
   the spiritual life." But to quard against the thought of personal
   ability or merit in the premises, they are reminded of the Divine
   indwelling (v. 13), by Whose power it is that progressive as well as
   immediate sanctification is secured. The "fear and trembling" does not
   indicate a suspicion lest the salvation will be taken from them, but
   the solemn watchfulness to be exercised lest they grieve the Spirit of
   God (Ephesians 4:30).

   Three Great Human Examples.

   The chapter closes with great human examples following the Divine one
   -- Paul himself (vv. 17, 18), Timothy (vv. 19-23), Epaphroditus (vv.
   24-30).

   Paul fears his reference to having "run in vain" (v. 16) may be
   misunderstood, and he assures them that if his life were poured out on
   their behalf, it would be well worth while because of their service of
   faith. He views them in their consecration as a burnt-offering to God,
   upon which his own life-blood might be poured out as a drink-offering
   (cf. Numbers 15:5). How sad the thought in verses 20, 21! The other
   Christians who were by him and whom he might send, were pleading
   excuses of one kind and another, but they knew Timothy of old, and
   could trust him (vv. 22, 23). It was necessary however, for him to
   return Epaphroditus to them, who had brought their gifts of love to his
   prison-house (v. 25), and who had been very sick (v. 27), occasioned in
   some way by his fidelity to them in his service for Paul. Such men as
   he were to be held "in reputation."

   Questions.

   1. What was the weak point in this church?

   2. How would you interpret verses 1 and 2?

   3. Who is the great Example of humility?

   4. What caution is necessary in the interpretation of verses 6-7?

   5. In what sense is verse 9 to be applied to Christ?

   6. How are we to understand verse 12?

   7. Name the three great human examples of unselfish devotion to Jesus
   Christ.

   JOY IN PRAYERS

   Chapter 3

   1. This chapter opens with a warning against the Judaizing teachers
   whom we have met before (vv. 1-3), and who followed Paul everywhere
   teaching that the keeping of the ceremonial law of Moses was necessary
   to salvation. The "dogs," the "evil workers" and the "concision" of
   verse 2 all refer to them, the last word being a parody of what
   circumcision meant in the Old Testament. These false teachers were not
   the true circumcision, or the true Israelites, who are described in
   verse 3.

   2. This reference to the true circumcision leads Paul to speak of
   himself (vv. 4-14). If any spiritual value lay in pedigree or outward
   zeal, he might well claim it (vv. 5, 6); but his estimate of these
   things since his conversion to Christ is expressed in what follows. He
   counts them not merely worthless but ruinous, being a "loss," "a
   robbery of the true blessing." "That I may win Christ" (v. 8) might be
   rendered "that I might win." "He thinks the past over again," says
   Bishop Moule. "The righteousness which is of God by faith" (v. 9) is
   expounded in our treatment of Romans 1:17. "That I may know Him" (v.
   10), means with an inward spiritual intuition, as the One Whose
   resurrection assures me of justification and coming glory, for Whom I
   daily take up the cross of suffering, being thus brought more and more
   into harmony ("conformity") with that surrender He made in achieving my
   salvation. The outcome of this knowledge is an attainment "unto the
   resurrection out from the dead" (v. 11, R. V.). The reference is to the
   first resurrection, that of the saints which takes place at Christ's
   second coming (1 Cor. 15:23; 1 Thes. 4:16; Rev. 20:4-6. This is that
   for which Christ had laid hold of Paul at his salvation, and toward
   which he was ever pressing (vv. 12-14).

   3. The reference to himself and his purpose eventuates in an
   exhortation (vv. 15-21). "Perfect" (v. 15), means not sinlessness which
   Paul himself had not reached (v. 12) and which no saint reaches in this
   life, but rather "Christian maturity and entirety of experience," which
   those in Christ as long as these Philippians were should have known.
   "Thus-minded," means of the same mind as Paul, who rested immovably on
   Christ for His acceptance with God, and pressed forward without rest in
   the path of obedience. Did they not see eye to eye with him on all
   these matters it would yet be revealed to them (v. 15), but in the
   meantime let them fully live up to the light they had (v. 16). From the
   above it will be seen that Paul has in mind another class of false
   teachers besides the legalists (Judaizers). These were those with false
   notions of holiness, who so presumed on the atoning merits of Christ as
   to disclaim any need of seeking conformity to His life. They walked as
   enemies of Christ, though professing His name, and indulged in gross
   sins (vv. 18, 19) on the ground that it made no difference if their
   spirits soared in a higher region. This was the teaching of a false
   philosophy known as "Gnosticism" of which we shall learn more in
   Colossians. Some of the "Gnostics" were ascetics while others were
   libertines both practices springing from the same root of error, viz: a
   wrong conception of the human body in the scheme of redemption (cf. 1
   Corinthians 6:12-20). To both schools, spirit was good and matter evil;
   but one sought to wear out the body by beating and abusing it, while
   the other let it have its own way as that which was soon to perish.
   These all minded "earthly things," but the true Christian the heavenly
   things (v. 20). The latter is a citizen of the heavenly city, where he
   will be forever with the Lord (1 Thessalonians 4:17), and is therefore
   'obliged by his nobility' to live as one who belongs to and represents
   it. When our Lord comes out of that city for us, He will not destroy or
   annihilate our present bodies, but wonderfully change them like unto
   His own "glorious body" (v. 21).

   Questions.

   1. With what does this chapter open, and why?

   2. What does the apostle count "loss"?

   3. What does "perfect" mean in verse 15?

   4. Define "Gnosticism."

   5. Give an interpretation of verse 21.

   JOY IN ANXIETY

   Chapter 4

   1. The chapter opens with another exhortation to unity, but this time
   in a specific case (vv. 1-3). Two Christian women, probably
   deaconnesses, like Phoebe (Romans 16:1), were at variance. The spirit
   of self had got in and Paul pleads with them to come together again,
   and pleads with his "true yokefellow," whoever he may have been, to
   help them do it.

   2. This leads to a statement of a great truth about self-will (vv.
   4-9). In the first place, to "rejoice in the Lord" is an antidote to
   self-will (v. 4). In the second place, the absence of mere self-will in
   a Christian should "be known to all men," i. e. it should be a reality
   in his life, and for the reason that the Lord is always "at hand" to
   help and to calm his spirit. In the third place, since the occasion of
   the Christians self-will is likely to be some cause for anxiety about
   himself, he is to remove this by telling it to the Lord (v. 6). Thus
   God's peace will garrison his heart, keeping it as with a sentinel from
   being invaded by disquiet, giving rise to self-will. The Christian who
   thus draws his strength from God is able to act on the advice of verse
   8, and to follow the example of Paul in verse 9. How wonderful the
   grace of God in Paul, when he might dare to remind them of himself in
   these respects, not in egotism, but in sober and blessed fact!

   3. The remainder of the letter is taken up with personal matters. The
   church at Philippi had contributed to the apostle's physical needs
   through the ministration of Epaphroditus. They had aided him in his
   necessity before; but sometime had elapsed since they had done so,
   because they "lacked opportunity" (v. 10). The apostle was not
   complaining. He had not wanted anything, not because he had much, but
   because he had learned to do with little (vv. 11, 12). This was not a
   natural gift of his, but a supernatural enduement (v. 13). Nevertheless
   the kindnesses of the Philippians were appreciated, and especially
   because they were the fruit of Paul's ministry among them, which
   ultimately would bring reward to them "abound to your account" (vv.
   14-17). This would be true because they did it for him in the Name of
   the Lord, Who would supply all their need (vv. 18, 19).

   Note in the closing salutation, "They that are of Caesar's household"
   (v. 22), which means Christian believers "gathered from the retainers
   of the palace." Quoting Lightfoot, "the household of Caesar" embraced a
   vast number of persons in Rome and in the provinces, all of whom were
   either actual or former slaves of the Empire, filling every description
   of office more or less domestic." It should be added that they were not
   necessarily of inferior races, but captives taken in war, just as the
   Hebrews, were made to serve at the court of Babylon. "Their
   associations and functions," adds Lightfoot, "give a noble view of the
   power of grace to triumph over circumstances, and to transfigure life
   where it seems most impossible."

   Questions.

   1. Explain verses 1 to 3.

   2. State in your own words the inspired teaching about "self-will."

   3. State in your own words Paul's feeling about the ministrations of
   this church to him.

   4. Who are meant by "Caesar's household"?

   5. How is the "power of grace" illustrated in them?

   Colosse was an important city of Phrygia in Asia Minor, east of
   Ephesus. It is not definitely known that Paul visited it, and yet it is
   assumed he did so on his third journey. The epistle was written while
   he was a prisoner at Rome (4:8) and sent by Tychicus, (4:7, 8).
     __________________________________________________________________

EPISTLE TO THE COLOSSIANS

   INTRODUCTION

   Colossians bears a somewhat similar relationship to Ephesians as that
   of Romans to Galatians. That is, it makes a pair with that epistle, the
   two being written almost simultaneously. It was sent by the same
   messenger also (compare Ephesians 6:21, 22) and contains some of the
   same expressions (compare 1:4 with Ephesians 1:15, and 1:14 with
   Ephesians 1:7). See also the prayers in the two epistles and the
   references to the Body of Christ.

   The central theme of Colossians is Christ, while that of Ephesians is
   the church. In the first-named we have the Head of the Church, and in
   the last-named the body of the church, and both are seen exalted on
   high. (Colossians 1:18, Ephesians 2:6). Perhaps it would be well to
   designate the theme of the epistle as, "The Headship of Christ," or
   "The Believers' Union or Identification with Christ."

   Definition of Gnosticism.

   It was occasioned by the fact that the spiritual life of the church was
   threatened by false doctrine, a mixture of Judaism (2:16) and Oriental
   mystic speculation (2:18). That there were Jews in large numbers in
   that region is certain, says Bishop Nicholson*, and that there was a
   Jewish sect precisely answering to the false doctrine condemned in this
   epistle is certain. The sect was the Essenes, who, unlike the Pharisees
   and Sadducees, do not appear in the Gospel narratives, because their
   principles withdrew them from the daily life of the Jewish people and
   immured them in convents. They were essentially a Gnostic sect, and
   Gnosticism, under whatever variety, was characterized by three
   features: (1) An exclusive spirit. The word means one who claims
   pre-eminent knowledge. It was an intellectual caste, with a process and
   oaths of initiation. (2) Speculative tenets on creation, evil,
   emanations, angels. Creation was not by the Supreme God, according to
   them, since He could have nothing to do with matter which is inherently
   evil, but must have been by one or more of angelic emanations from Him.
   Those emanations or angels are to be worshipped. (3) Ethical practice.
   Either a rigid asceticism, because of matter being the abode of evil,
   or unrestrained licentiousness, on the principle of not condescending
   to care at all about a thing so inherently evil as matter.

   Paul assails the exclusive spirit of intellectual caste (1:28), and as
   in his other epistles, insists upon the free offer of the Gospel to all
   men, but now from a different point of view. Here it is as opposing
   intellectual exclusiveness, and not, as in Galatians, national
   exclusiveness. "Perfection" was a great Gnostic word, and that word the
   apostle here appropriates to the position in Christ of every believer.
   He also attacks the speculative tenets of angelology and the idolatrous
   practice of angelolatry (1:15-19; 2:18), opposing to them both the true
   ideas of Christ in His Person and His mediation. And he utters his
   condemnation of a very peculiar ethical practice (Col. 2:16, 23),
   protesting not alone against "holy days, new moons, and Sabbaths"
   (strictly Jewish observances), but against the asceticism with regard
   to "drinks," and the "neglecting of the body" (which was wholly of
   Gnostic origin): and opposing to both of these Jewish and Gnostic
   practices the believers' life in Christ.

   It has been well said that "the Colossian heresy was no vulgar
   falsehood. At the bottom of it there was an earnest, unsatisfied desire
   of the soul; a sense of need unrequited; an aching void the world had
   never filled. In its doctrine of the mediation of angels and the
   consequent removal of God from contact with the inherent evil of
   matter, it claimed to honor the supreme majesty of the Deity, and at
   the same time to show forth its own humility, as shrinking amid the
   evils of human nature, from any direct converse with God; while yet in
   its asceticism it honored itself and ministered to the pride and vanity
   of self-righteousness. It was human nature as essentially displayed
   everywhere and in all ages; the circumstances and the particular tenets
   ever changing, but the affectation of humility and the proud,
   self-righteous spirit ever remaining the same. And thus it is that the
   Colossian heresy was an anticipation of the errors of today, and that
   the apostles' confutation of it supplies the needed instruction for
   ourselves."

   *Oneness with Christ, a practical commentary on the Epistle of the
   Colossians.

   Questions.

   1. Have you examined the map for Colosse?

   2. Define the relationship of this epistle to Ephesians.

   3. How does its theme differ from Ephesians?

   4. What two forms of false doctrine is here touched upon?

   5. Describe the Essenes.

   6. What three features characterized "Gnosticism"?

   7. What makes this epistle of practical value to-day?

   THE DOCTRINAL PART

   Chapter 1

   The chapter divides itself into a salutation (vv. 1,2); a thanksgiving
   (vv. 3-8); a prayer (vv. 9-14), and a threefold declaration concerning
   Jesus Christ (15-29). This declaration sets forth His Godhead (vv.
   15-17); His reconciling work (vv. 18-23), and the mystery of His
   indwelling in the believer, and hence in the church which is His body.

   1. The salutation is scarcely distinguishable from those considered in
   the preceding epistles.

   2. The thanksgiving is for the faith of the church, their love to the
   saints, and the hope laid up for them in heaven (vv. 4-5). "In all the
   world," (v. 6), does not mean literally in every place, but is used
   simply as expressing the proper area of the preached Gospel, in which
   sense it was the whole world. The reference to Epaphras (v. 7) leads
   some to think that he, rather than Paul, had planted this church, but
   if so, he was doubtless a fruit of Paul's labors at Ephesus.

   3. The prayer is a single petition, but it has a great scope, "that ye
   might be filled with the knowledge of His will in all spiritual wisdom
   and understanding" (v. 9). This knowledge of God's will as revealed in
   His Word, applied to them by the wisdom of the Holy Spirit, would
   enable them to "walk worthy of the Lord unto all pleasing" (v. 10). And
   this walk would show itself in four ways: fruitfulness, growth,
   patience and thankfulness (vv. 10-12). The thankfulness would be
   expressed for their share of "the inheritance of the saints in light."
   They were sufficiently assured of it to give thanks for it, because
   they had been delivered "from the power of darkness, and translated
   into the kingdom of His dear Son" (v. 13). This was something that they
   knew, and they were not walking well-pleasing unto the Lord, if they
   did not know it, and were not continually praising Him for it.

   The Godhead of Christ.

   4. This reference to the Kingdom of Jesus Christ, leads to the thought
   of His Person and Glory. "The image of the invisible God" (v. 15) means
   more than a likeness. Two men are alike but one is not the image of the
   other. On the other hand, the head on a coin is not only a likeness of
   the sovereign but his image -- a copy of him derived from and
   representing him. So Christ is the representation of His Father because
   derived from Him (Philippians 2:6; Hebrews 1:3). There are then three
   teachings in this phrase, "Christ is the Son of God, He is the Eternal
   Son of God, He is God," (Nicholson). His eternal Sonship is seen in
   that He is not called the Son merely by reason of His incarnation, but
   as the image of God "prior to all creation," as the next phrase may be
   rendered. It was not the incarnation which made Him the image of God,
   but being His image, the incarnation brought Him, so to speak, within
   our grasp. Moreover, a corroboration that He was "before all creation,"
   is set before us in the next two verses.

   5. This declaration concerning His Godhead is followed by one
   concerning His reconciling work (vv. 18-23). He is not only the Head of
   the universe as God, but the Head of the church as the God-man. And He
   is the Head of the church, because He is the beginning of the church.
   And He is the beginning of the church because He is the first-born from
   among the dead (v. 18), for the church is made up of raised ones like
   Himself. Now are they raised in a spiritual sense by faith, but when He
   comes again they will be raised in the bodily sense and glorified with
   Him. Being thus Head of the universe and Head of the church, the first
   in creation and the first in grace, in all things He has the
   pre-eminence, "for it pleased the Father that in Him should all fulness
   dwell" (v. 19), i. e. the whole fulness of the Godhead (see 2:9).

   The Gnostics taught that a fragment of the Deity was given to the
   various Divine emanations or angels, who, according to their false
   philosophy, were generated from the Supreme Deity. The fragment became
   less and less, in proportion as any one of these emanations was removed
   from the Deity, but still each had a fragment. A smaller fragment was
   found in man also. The Greek word for "fulness" was "pleroma." Paul
   takes this word, and wresting it from their perversion of it,
   "appropriates it to Christ in the utmost extent of its significance."
   Inasmuch as in Him all the fulness of the Godhead dwelt, therefore it
   was possible "by Him to reconcile all things unto Himself" (v. 20), to
   bring them out of the deranged condition in which they were on account
   of sin into harmony with Himself.

   Reconciliation Through Christ.

   "'Reconciliation' is that effect of the death of Christ on the
   believer, which, through Divine power, works in Him a thorough change
   toward God from enmity and aversion to love and trust. It is never said
   that God is reconciled. God is propitiated (Romans 3:25) but the sinner
   is reconciled (2 Corinthians 5:18-21)." -- Scofield. This
   reconciliation is true not of all things absolutely, but of "all THE
   things," or to give the exact order in the Greek, "THE all things,"
   which it pleased God thus to reconcile. These things are those of earth
   and heaven, we perceive, but not hell (cf. Matthew 25:46; Revelation
   20:10). Among these especially, are men who believe on the Lord Jesus
   Christ (Mark 16:16). They were once alienated from God and enemies to
   Him, but now are they reconciled by Him (v. 21), through the sacrifice
   of Christ, and presented "unblameable and unreprovable to His sight"
   (v. 22). This means that such is the position of the believer now, on
   the earth, the moment he believes on Christ (see our comment on
   Ephesians 1:4). The proof of it is that he is continuing in the faith
   (v. 23), "Preached to every creature under heaven," means among all
   mankind, in all countries, in contrast to Judaism, for example, which
   was limited to one nation.

   Christ Dwelling in Us.

   6. We now come to the still deeper mystery of Christ's indwelling in
   the believer (vv. 24-29). Paul had spoken of his ministry (v. 23),
   which caused him suffering (v. 24). This suffering had been endured on
   their account, but he rejoiced in it nevertheless. "The afflictions of
   Christ in my flesh," means probably his own afflictions, and yet also
   Christ's, on the principle that the Head suffers in the sufferings of
   His members (Acts 9:4, 5; Matthew 25:40, 45; 1 Corinthians 12:12; 2
   Corinthians 1:5). "He was going on to endure whatever remained of the
   afflictions which God had appointed for him to endure," in the exercise
   of his ministry for them. His was a special ministry, a dispensation of
   God had been given him "to fully preach the Word of God." This included
   the revelation of the mystery expressed in the words, "Christ in you,
   the hope of glory" (v. 27). This mystery is something more than the
   gospel of our salvation, for that had not been "hid" in the Old
   Testament. It is an altogether unique blessing, belonging only to the
   church of this dispensation, and is the indwelling of Christ. And note
   that this indwelling itself is not the "glory" spoken of but the hope
   of the glory. The glory includes our resurrection bodies; our new
   hearts in "unhindered development of Christly life"; our coming back
   with Christ again to earth, and sharing in the triumphs of His
   re-appearing; our sitting with Him on His throne as He has sat down
   with His Father on His throne; and finally the glory which shall endure
   "to all the generations of the age of the ages" (Ephesians 3:4), for
   when at length the millennial church shall have been transferred to her
   place among the glorified, then shall there be "a new heaven and a new
   earth." Oh, the glory of being a Christian!

   Questions.

   1. What title do we give to this chapter?

   2. Divide the chapter into three main parts.

   3. What three-fold declaration about Christ does it contain?

   4. What is the meaning of the phrase "in all the world"?

   5. What is the single petition of Paul's prayer?

   6. In what way are Christians to "walk worthy of the Lord"?

   7. For what should the thankfulness of Christians be ever expressed?

   8. What is the difference between a likeness and an image?

   9. Why may we speak of Christ as the Eternal Son of God?

   10. How did Christ come to be the Head of the church as well as the
   universe?

   11. What was the teaching of the Gnostics about the nature of the
   Deity?

   12. Define reconciliation.

   13. To what is this Divine reconciliation limited?

   14. What is meant by the "afflictions of Christ in my flesh"?

   15. Describe in a phrase the ministry Paul was commissioned to reveal.

   16. What are some of the things which the promised glory includes?

   THE POLEMIC PART

   Chapter 2

   The Apostle spoke (1:24, 28, 29) about the suffering entailed by his
   ministry, and the labor endured to present "every man perfect in Christ
   Jesus." Of course, he means every Christian man, and by "perfect in
   Christ Jesus," so far as the present life is concerned, he means, not
   perfect in the sense of faultless or sinless, but perfectly justified,
   and sanctified, and perfectly made meet for glory in Him. The word
   "perfect" is here borrowed from the heathen mysteries and appropriated
   to the Gospel in condemnation of them. Perfection such as that of which
   he speaks is not found in them, but in Christ.

   The word "every" used three times in 1:28, is important -- warning,
   teaching, presenting every man. It harmonizes with the word "all"
   before "wisdom" in the same verse, and strikes at the Gnostic
   exclusiveness to which reference has been made. In the wisdom of God in
   Christ there are no restrictions as to persons or subjects, the whole
   Christ is preached to every man, and every man has the same opportunity
   to possess "the riches of the glory."

   The subject of the apostle's suffering and toil is carried over into
   chapter 2, the first three verses of which really belong to chapter 1.
   The latter part of verse 2 reads in the Revised Version: "That they may
   know the mystery of God, even Christ, in whom are" etc. In other words,
   Christ Himself is the mystery of God, "as incarnating the fulness of
   the Godhead and all the divine wisdom and knowledge for the redemption
   and reconciliation of man." Now the reason of Paul's conflict on behalf
   of these Colossian Christians is that they may not be enticed away from
   this precious truth by the false (Gnostic) teachers (4-7). nor enslaved
   by their empty philosophy (8-15), nor judged in their Christian liberty
   (16, 17), nor robbed of their reward (18-23).

   1. "Lest Any Man Should Beguile You With Enticing Words,"

   or beguile you by false reasoning in persuasive discourse. The only
   safeguard against this is stated in verse 6. They had "received Christ
   Jesus," and now they are to "walk" in Him, to put forth all their
   energies as consciously in Him. And to encourage them to do this the
   apostle calls attention to the good that is among them for their
   comfort (5).

   2. "Beware Lest Any Man Spoil You Through Philosophy and Vain Deceit,"

   i. e., enslave, lead you away as his prey. Paul does not characterize
   all philosophy in these terms but only the philosophy which is empty
   deceit, i. e., the philosophy of these Gnostics, somewhat like that of
   modern times standing under the names of Spinoza, Herbert Spencer and
   others. It is according to the tradition of men and has no support from
   revelation. Such teaching is after the world and not "after Christ." In
   Christ we are "complete," and need nothing more since Christ is God (9,
   10). We are "complete" or "filled full" in Him in the sense that His
   merits. His righteousness. His preciousness, His life. His Sonship, His
   heirship, His glory, have all been made over to us by Divine grace
   through faith (Rom. 8:10-18; 28-39). -- Nicholson. In detail, we are
   circumcised in Him (11) i. e., in a spiritual sense, and need not the
   ritual circumcision as the false teachers claimed. We Christians
   possess all that was symbolized by that rite, i. e., the putting off pi
   our fallen and corrupt nature. This took place when we died in Christ
   and were "buried with Him in the baptism" (12), i. e., the baptism of
   the Holy Spirit (1 Cor. 12:13; Rom. 6:4). And having thus died and been
   buried with Him, we are risen again in Him, and are walking before God
   "in newness of life" (Rom. 6:4). What then do we require of man-made
   philosophies? Think what God does, in and through Christ, for the soul
   He saves! (a) He quickens, i. e., makes us alive in a spiritual sense;
   (b) He forgives all our transgressions; (c) He blots out "the
   handwriting of ordinances that was against us." These "ordinances" are
   His decrees written on the tables of stone in the ceremonial law of
   Moses, and in our moral nature. In them we find our own handwriting
   that is "against us," for we assent to the fact that the law is good,
   and that it is our obligation to obey it. Nevertheless, God blots this
   out, cancels the bond, erases the signature, pays the debt. --
   Nicholson. (d) He gets such a victory for us over all our spiritual
   enemies as is expressed in verse 15. The principalities and powers of
   darkness seized upon the human nature of Christ our substitute, as if
   to prevent Him from going to the cross and dying for our redemption.
   But He overcame them, "made a show of them openly," by rising from the
   dead, and in His triumph we triumph.

   3. "Let No Man Therefore Judge You."

   "The apostle is here striking at the practical error of the false
   teachers as expressed in their excessive ritualism and vigorous
   asceticism." Eating and drinking were referred to in the Mosaic law,
   but the Gnostic went far beyond that as we may judge further from Rom.
   14:2 and 1 Tim. 4:2, 3. "The Sabbath" (16) is referred to from the
   Jewish point of view. "The rest of one day in seven as expressive of
   the law of creation, and as supplying the principle which underlies the
   fourth commandment, he does not here include." He does not merely
   forbid the observance of these things but going further, forbids
   Christians to let any one "judge" them, or take them to task concerning
   them. These things are not a basis of judgment concerning our standing
   in Christ, but on the contrary, so far as they are part of the
   Levitical system, they are only the shadow cast in advance of the work
   of Christ. "The body" the substance, "is of Christ" (Heb. 10:1). The
   ancient Jew took the shadow as foretelling the body, but the modern
   ritualist takes the shadow instead of the body."

   4. "Let No Man Beguile (rob) You of Your Reward."

   In verses 18-23 we have "a description of one whose views of the truth
   are diametrically opposed to those taught by the apostle in verses 9,
   10." (a) He takes delight in "humility and worshipping of angels." This
   is the mock humility such as we see in the Roman Catholic Church, as
   though Christ were too high for these false teachers and they must have
   lower beings for mediators, (b) He "dwells" or takes his stand upon
   "those things which he hath seen" (18, R. V.). In other words, he does
   not walk by faith but judges by his natural experiences. For instance,
   an uninfluential man cannot enter the presence of a human king except
   as some one introduces him, so Christ, although a Godman, is in the
   judgment of this false teacher, too high for human fellowship except
   through lower mediation. And yet there is a slightly different
   interpretation suggested by Sir William Ramsey. He thinks the force of
   "intruding into" is gotten only when regarded as a quoted word, and a
   sarcastic reference to an act by which, once on a time, the false
   teacher had symbolically expressed his choice of a so-called "New Life"
   in the heathen "Mysteries."

   These were the things he had "seen," and he was now taking his stand
   upon them, urging them as needful in the Christian life. If the
   Christians at Colosse aspired to be "perfect" they must enter upon a
   higher course of asceticism, self-denial and humiliation after these
   heathen mysteries. (c) This false teacher is "vainly puffed up by his
   fleshy mind," by the mind of his fallen and corrupt nature, (d) He does
   not hold the "Head," i. e., he has no clear and definite views
   concerning Christ as the Head of the Church which His body. In other
   words, he may be a professing Christian, but he is not a member of the
   true church of Christ.

   The practical inference or conclusion follows in verses 20-23, which it
   will be more convenient to deal with in the succeeding lesson.

   Questions.

   1. Why is this lesson called the "Polemic" part of the epistle?

   2. What is the meaning of "perfect in Christ Jesus"?

   3. In what sense is Christ "the mystery of God"?

   4. What four-fold reason is given for Paul's conflict?

   5. How are we "complete" in Christ?

   6. What was symbolized by circumcision?

   7. If we are true Christians when was our fallen and corrupt nature put
   off?

   8. Explain "blotting out the handwriting."

   9. Explain verse 15.

   10. What is meant by "judge you," verse 18?

   11. How would you explain "intruding," verse 19?

   12. What is the practical conclusion in verses 20-23?

   THE HORTATORY PART

   Chapters 2:20-4

   1. The Christian being "dead with Christ," is dead "from the rudiments
   of the world"; in other words, worldly methods of obtaining
   "perfection" are something with which he has nothing to do. Why then
   should he act to the contrary, "after the commandments and doctrines of
   men"? (20, 22). Why should he ascribe salvation or any part of it, to
   things which "perish with the using"? Why should he come under a law
   which says "touch not, taste not, handle not," as though it possessed
   sanctifying grace? As one who is saved, there are many things he will
   not touch, nor taste, nor handle, as the next chapter indicates, but
   this is different from attaching a meritorious value to such things, as
   these false teachers did. Such things have "a show of wisdom" in men's
   eyes perhaps, but are of the nature of "will worship," self-imposed
   ordinances, and nothing more. No neglect of the body, no asceticism of
   this kind can extirpate evil appetites or get rid of sin (23).

   2. On the other hand, the Christian having "risen with Christ" as we
   have seen, let him seek, i. e., set his mind on things above (3:1, 2),
   For these things, compare Matthew 6:33, Phil. 3:20. To seek them means
   to inquire about and ask for them, as they are revealed in Holy
   Scripture. The encouragement to do this is found in verses 3 and 4 (cf.
   1 John 3:1-3).

   3. The Christian who does this will soon be exhibiting the fruit of it
   in a life of real holiness as distinguished from the counterfeit
   recommended by the Gnostics. This holiness will show itself in two
   ways, by a putting off (5-11) and a putting on (12-17). The true
   Christian realizing his risen life with Christ will "mortify" put to
   death the members of his body, in the sense that he will eschew the
   things named in verses 5-9. He will do this through the power of the
   Holy Spirit who dwells within him, and by whom he is "renewed in
   knowledge after the image of Him that created Him." Verse 11 means that
   this "new man" is not depending on the distinctions therein indicated,
   all of which are obliterated in Christ. But the true believer will not
   only put to death the things named, but clothe himself with a heart of
   compassion, kindness, humility, meekness, long-suffering, forbearance,
   forgiveness, love, peace and thankfulness.

   4. We have said that this would be done through the power of the Holy
   Spirit dwelling in the believer, but the instrument He uses is the
   "Word of Christ" (16), i. e., the Holy Scriptures. The believer in
   whose heart that dwells richly, will ever be acting on the principle of
   verse 17.

   5. The apostle new applies all this to the three classes of the social
   order (3:18 4:1). as he did in Ephesians, to which lesson the student
   will turn.

   6. The conclusion of the epistle is an appeal for prayer (4:2-4);
   counsel as to conduct toward the world (5, 6); personal matters
   including commendations of and salutations from fellow workers (7-15);
   directions concerning the epistle (16); a charge to one of the elders
   (17), and the benediction (18) Note how aptly the subject of prayer is
   introduced, following as it does the opening up of the whole subject of
   practical holiness. How shall we obtain the power to practice such
   holiness without prayer for the Holy Spirit's aid? Note that while the
   brotherhood of Christ is a world in itself, yet the Christian has
   responsibilities toward others (5). To "walk in wisdom" with reference
   to the unconverted means Gospel knowledge applied in common sense. It
   means the "conscious blessedness of the life of the Christian as a
   visible fact," but no "stage effects" no self-conceit and no more
   oddities. The Christian should evince a true sympathy with all genuine
   human interests while yet in earnest for the salvation of souls. He
   should "redeem the time," or "buy up the opportunity," in the sense of
   knowing just when and how to act in such cases with reference to the
   world around him. Speech "alway with grace, seasoned with salt" (6)
   means the right adaptation and point in our remarks in addressing the
   unsaved, as indicated in the last clause of the verse. The allusion to
   Laodicea (13, 15, 16) brings to mind that of 2:1, and gives occasion to
   say that it, and Hierapolis and Colosse lay very near each other. It is
   interesting to note that an epistle had been sent there as well as to
   Colosse, though we have no further record of it. Moreover, the
   circumstance that the epistles were to be interchanged is a hint as to
   the way in which the church of the first century determined the Canon
   of the New Testament. There was in other words, a circulation of the
   inspired teachings, and a searching into them by all the Christians in
   every place.

   Questions.

   1. Interpret in your own words verses 20-23.

   2. In what two ways is true holiness exhibited?

   3. What does verse 11 mean?

   4. What connection in thought is there between verses 16 and 17?

   5. What does "walk in wisdom" mean?

   6. What is meant by speech "seasoned with salt"?

   7. What hint have we here as to the determination of the Canon of the
   New Testament?
     __________________________________________________________________

FIRST THESSALONIANS

   REMINISCENT

   Chapters 1-2:16

   For the story of the founding of this Church by Paul, examine Acts 17.
   We call the first section of the epistle the reminiscent part, because
   the apostle is referring to what had taken place in Thessalonica at
   that time.

   1. It opens with the usual salutation 1:1, in which Silas and Timothy
   are named with Paul, not as co-writers, but co-workers with him when in
   that city, and so known to the church.

   2. The thanksgiving follows, 2-4, in which is mentioned a triad of
   graces (3) that had been produced in these young Christians, testifying
   assuredly to their election of God (4).

   3. Next comes a testimony to the church of the deepest interest (5-10).
   Through receiving the Word of God in the Holy Ghost, they had become
   imitators of Paul and of the Lord (6) to such an extent that all the
   saints throughout Greece were reaping a blessing from their lives (7).
   Travelers passing from them to other parts, were carrying the news of
   what God had done for them, so that Paul's own witness was made
   unnecessary (8). It was an evidence of his ministry among them as the
   result of which they had "turned to God from idols" (a "work of
   faith"); "to serve the living and true God" (a "labor of love"); and to
   wait for His Son from heaven" ("patience of hope"). The explanation of
   it all is found in verse 5.

   4. The testimony to the church leads to a testimony concerning himself
   (2:1-16), not for his own praise, but the magnifying of the grace of
   God in Him. In verse 5 of the previous chapter, he had shown that the
   wonderful result of the gospel among them was explained by the power of
   the Holy Ghost, with which it had been preached; and this power, in
   turn, was explained by the "manner of men we were among you for your
   sake." Again, in verse 9, he referred to the "manner of entering in we
   had unto you," while in chapter 2, he expatiates upon it. In other
   words, "the manner of man" he had been was expressed (a) by courage and
   devotion (cf. verses 1 and 2 with the story in Acts 16). (b) by
   faithfulness and impartiality. His preaching had not been of deceit
   (error), uncleanness, guile, flattery, covetousness, or vainglory. The
   gospel had been committed to him by God, as a sacred trust; and since
   to God he must give account of his stewardship, he ministered it not to
   please men but God, "which trieth our hearts" (3-6). (c) by kindness
   and affection. His gentleness was like that of a mother nursing her
   children (see R. V.) His affection was shown in the self-denying labor
   of tent-making in which he engaged to earn his living, that he might
   "not be chargeable" to them for his support (7-9). (d) in holiness and
   consistency of life (10-12). No wonder therefore that they received his
   message as the "Word of God" and not the word of men (13); nor that it
   should have affectually wrought in them as it did "in the churches of
   God in Judea" (14-16).

   Questions.

   1. Have you read Acts 16 and 17 in connection with this lesson

   2. Why is this lesson called "Reminiscent"?

   3. Why are Silas and Timothy named?

   4. What triad of graces was seen in these young Christians?

   5. How do you explain 1:7?

   6. What is the theme of chapter 2?

   7. How had Paul's Christian character been exhibited among the
   Thessalonians?

   8. What was the result?

   PERSONAL AND CONGRATULATORY

   Chapters 2:17-3

   1. Paul's Desire to Revisit the Church (2:17-19).

   Satan hindered in the execution of this desire in ways indicated in
   Acts 17, viz, by stirring up opposition on the part of the Jews.
   Observe the teaching here as to the personality of Satan, his hatred of
   the true church, and the power he has to use agents in opposition to
   it. Paul's desire to visit the church is explained by his interest in
   the saints (19). Observe here the reference to the Second Coming of
   Christ, and the teaching of Paul that he would then meet his converts,
   and know and rejoice over them in the Lord's presence. What an answer
   to the question so often raised, Shall we recognize each other in the
   future life?

   2. Timothy's Mission to the Church 3:1-5.

   Refer to Acts 17 and observe the circumstances under which Paul was
   left at Athens. Driven out of Thessalonica and Berea, by persecution,
   the brethren had sent him there. Observe the reason why Timothy was
   returned to Thessalonica; to establish and comfort the young saints
   (2). Their affliction arising out of their faith was great, and though
   they had been warned of it (4), yet they might have succumbed under it,
   and Paul's labor on their behalf would in that sense have been "in
   vain" (5).

   3. Timothy's Report of the Church 6-10.

   Their faith was firm, their love warm, their remembrance of Paul keen,
   and he was comforted. This was life for him, to know that his children
   in the faith stood "fast in the Lord." (8).

   4. Paul's Prayer for the Church 11-13.

   That he might see them again and that their love might increase toward
   one another, and toward all. But all this would be fulfilled in
   permanent perfection only at the Coming of Christ (13).

   Questions.

   1. What are the four main points of the lesson?

   2. How did Satan hinder Paul?

   3. What light does this lesson throw on the question of future
   recognition of believers?

   4. Why did Timothy return to Thessalonica?

   5. What was the nature of his report to Paul leading to the writing of
   this letter?

   HORTATORY AND INSTRUCTIVE

   Chapters 4:1-5:12

   Timothy reported some things that called for exhortation and
   instruction. In the first place, fornication was indulged in by some
   who had no proper understanding of its sinfulness (4:1-8). This
   inconsistency is probably explained by the circumstance that the church
   was composed of Gentiles chiefly, rather than Jews. (See Acts 17 and
   compare such passages in the epistle as 1:9). Paganism, out of which
   they came, knew not the meaning of "sin," and as for "fornication" it
   may be said to have been part of their religion, just as the grossest
   licentiousness is now connected with certain forms of heathen worship.
   Under these circumstances these young Christians may have been slow to
   apprehend their duty in the premises and the real meaning of
   "sanctification." This exhortation had its effect, however, for in
   Paul's second epistle to the church he does not mention the offence.

   In the second place, the imminency of our Lord's return which had taken
   hold of this church, had reacted in some cases in the direction of
   idleness (9-12). If He were coming so soon, why such carefulness as to
   physical necessities? The answer is practically that of John Wesley,
   that if one knew He would come to-morrow, the duties of to-day should
   be performed just the same. "Study (or be ambitious) to be quiet,"
   attend to your business, work for two reasons: (a) that you may be able
   to pay your honest debts, especially to the world's people with whom
   you deal, and (b) that you yourselves may have your physical
   necessities supplied (12).

   The Dead and the Living Saints at Christ's Coming.

   But the chief difficulty in the church was doctrinal, arising also out
   of a misapprehension about the Lord's Second Coming. The difficulty
   concerned the relation of the dead to the living saints at His coming
   (13-18). There was a fear that the departed would be at some
   disadvantage in the matter of time when that event took place. But Paul
   teaches (a) that the dead saints will return with Christ(14); (b) that
   their bodies shall be raised first (15, 16): (c) that the translation
   of the living saints shall then follow (17, 18). In other words,
   something like that which took place in the lives of Enoch and Elijah
   in earlier dispensations, will take place in the life of the whole
   church, i. e., the true body of Christ in the present dispensation.
   Paul taught this "by the word of the Lord" (is), which means not any
   word which our Lord spake" on the subject while on earth, but a special
   revelation vouchsafed to Paul after He had arisen from the dead.

   The subject is continued into the 5th chapter where the first three
   verses treat of the condition of the world when Christ comes, and the
   next eight are an exhortation to the church. The world will be taken
   unawares, but the church should not be so taken (4, 5). To guard
   against this the church should be wide awake concerning this doctrine
   and the hope of His coming (6-8). The reason for this is that while
   "wrath" awaits the world in that day, "salvation" in the fullest sense
   awaits the church (9). Whether we are "awake," i. e., alive on the
   earth when He comes, or "asleep" and come with Him, we shall "live
   together with Him" as the close of the preceding chapter indicated.

   Questions.

   1. What three subjects called for exhortation and instruction?

   2. How do we explain the presence of "fornication" in this church?

   3. What reason is there to believe that Paul's words were heeded?

   4. What probably led to idleness?

   5. How does Paul meet the situation?

   6. What was the doctrinal difficulty in this church?

   7. What three things does Paul teach about the second coming of Christ
   for the church?

   8. What shows that the world will be unprepared for His coming?

   CONCLUSION

   Chapters 5:12-28

   This is a brief lesson, but the text is sufficiently distinct from the
   foregoing to warrant separate treatment. It is hortatory and
   instructive as that was, but exhortation prevails.

   "Them which labor among you" (12) are doubtless the elders of the
   church Paul had set over them. "To know them" is the same as "to esteem
   them" (13). But this esteem is associated with a joint responsibility
   with them for the proper discipline of the church (14, 15). "The
   feeble-minded," has reference not to intellectual but spiritual
   defectiveness -- not strong in the qualities of faith and hope and
   courage.

   Joy should be perpetual (16) because it does not depend on outward
   circumstances, but an inward condition. Prayer should be "without
   ceasing" (17), not in the sense that nothing else was to be done, but
   that this should be the habit. The true believer talks with God more
   continually and intimately than with any human being however near and
   dear. "Thanksgiving" always accompanies prayer (18) "This is the will
   of God * * * concerning you," may mean the thanksgiving itself, or it
   may mean the experience which calls for it. Note that we are not
   commanded to be thankful for everything, but in everything. Of course,
   only the true believer is here in mind, as indicated by the expression
   "in Christ Jesus." (See our lessons in Ephesians and Colossians).

   The next four verses have a close relationship. "Prophesying" (20), as
   we judge from 1 Cor. 14, was apt to be despised in comparison with
   other spiritual gifts; but to despise it in the sense that its proper
   exercise was restricted would be to "quench the Spirit" (19) and thus
   "limit the Holy One of Israel." To be sure, there was a danger of false
   teaching coming in by that channel, but the remedy is in verse 21,
   especially in view of the general caution in verse 22, which should
   read "avoid every form of error." The prayer of verse 23 is beautiful
   and convincingly determining that man is a trinity. Some think that
   Paul is here again expressing his conviction or hope of an imminent
   return of our Lord, and praying for their "spirit and soul and body" to
   be kept entire, intact, i. e., without death until then, though the
   next verse rather raises a question as to that.

   Note the authority and importance attaching to an inspired letter of
   this kind (27).
     __________________________________________________________________

SECOND THESSALONIANS

   THE THANKSGIVING

   Chapter 1

   This epistle was written by Paul soon after the previous one, and for a
   reason not very different. Acts 17 shows that Paul emphasized the
   second coming of Christ at Thessalonica, which is corroborated by 1
   Thess. 1:10. It grew out of this that the anxiety was felt touching the
   relation of the dead to the living saints at His coming, which was
   dealt with in 1 Thess. 4:13-5; 12. But another error arose from the
   same source which was fostered by false teachers. These had even forged
   a letter in Paul's name, claiming that "The Day of the Lord" had
   already come, alarming many and leading them astray (2 Thess. 2:1, 2).
   To meet this Paul writes this second letter, the chief interest in
   which begins at the "Thanksgiving" for their growing faith and
   abounding love (1:3). All this was in the midst of persecutions and
   afflictions endured because of that faith (4), and was a token to them
   that God had counted them worthy of the kingdom of God which was to be
   set up when Christ came (5). The church would be at rest with Christ in
   that "Day" when those who afflicted her would themselves be afflicted
   (6, 7). But the "Day" Paul now has in mind does not synchronize
   precisely with the coming of the Lord for His church as taught to 1
   Thess. 4:13-18. In other words, to rehearse what has been taught in
   other parts of this Commentary, the second coming of Christ is an act
   of two scenes. There is a "coming" for His church when the latter shall
   be caught up to meet Him in the air, and then, after an interval, how
   long or short it is impossible to say, there is a "coming" or a
   "revelation" in judgment on the unbelieving and wicked nations of
   Christendom that are left behind. It is this latter aspect of the
   Second Coming, that associated with judgment, which the Old Testament
   prophets are ever speaking of as "The Day of the Lord." They say
   nothing about His coming for His church, as indeed they say nothing
   about the church, but focus their attention upon the end of the age,
   when only Israel and the Gentile nations will be on the earth and the
   church shall have been taken away.

   That Paul is speaking of this here is indicated in verses 7-10. The
   Lord Jesus will be "revealed from heaven with the angels of His power"
   (R. V.), "rendering vengeance." This shall take the form of
   "everlasting destruction from the face of the Lord and from the glory
   of His power." This is not annihilation, it is well to observe, but
   conscious separation from Him. And the time it will take place is "When
   He shall have come to be glorified in His saints" (10). The Greek
   second Aorist is used here, indicating that the event spoken of, the
   glorifying of Christ in His saints shall have taken place. In other
   words, it is after the translation of the church, as we understand it,
   that "the Day of the Lord" is ushered in with its attendant judgments.

   The apostle closes his allusion to these matters with the prayer of
   verses 11, 12.

   Questions.

   1. What can you recite as to the occasion for this epistle?

   2. What shows the boldness of the false teachers in this case?

   3. For what does Paul thank God on behalf of these Thessalonian
   Christians?

   4. Of what were their afflictions a token?

   5. What can you recite about the second coming of Christ?

   6. What do you understand by "The Day of the Lord"?

   7. When will it be ushered in?

   THE REVELATION OF THE MAN OF SIN

   Chapter 2

   At this chapter we have the reference to the false teachers and their
   teaching. The first two verses should be read in the Revised Version
   which brings out the meaning clearer, for what the false teachers said
   was, that "The Day of the Lord is now present." Therefore what the
   Apostle announces to take place before that "Day" comes, does not apply
   to the coming of Christ for His church, (an event which, so far as we
   know, may be very near), but to the judgments that are to fall on the
   ungodly after the church has been taken away. Such is the significance
   of verses 3 and 4.

   That which is to take place is (a) "a falling away," an apostasy in
   Christendom, and (b), the revelation of "the man of sin" (or
   lawlessness). This "man of sin," who was foretold by Daniel, by
   Zechariah, and by Christ Himself as we have seen, is described as
   opposing and exalting himself against "all that is called God," in the
   sense that he gives out that he himself is God, and men are ready to
   believe him. "The temple of God" (4) as we have seen (Daniel 9; Matt.
   24), is the Jewish temple re-erected in Jerusalem, for the Jews are to
   return there, at first in an unconverted state so far as the acceptance
   of Jesus as their Messiah is concerned.

   The apostle had informed the Thessalonians of these things when he was
   with them (5), and furthermore that a restraining power was holding
   back the full development of this "man of sin" until his time came (6).
   Just what this power is we are left to conjecture, but doubtless it is
   the Holy Spirit who dwells in the church. Imagine the church translated
   out of the earth, and the ascent of the Holy Spirit in consequence, and
   what restraining power would be left to hold back the hordes of
   wickedness in the earth, and prevent Satan from having his way in the
   full development of "the man of sin"? The doom of the latter is given
   in verse 8, and an added description follows in verses 9 and 10. Satan
   gives him his power, but he is able to deceive only those who "received
   not the love of the truth" (10). The truth was revealed to them and
   rejected, for which reason that moral and spiritual weakness which made
   them a prey to the delusion, fell upon them as a Divine judgment (11,
   12). There is a solemn warning here for those who are being tempted by
   Spiritualism, The New Thought, Christian Science and kindred teaching.

   It is a relief to turn to the apostle's address to the true believer in
   verses 13-15, and as we close the lesson let us for ourselves offer the
   prayer of verses 16 and 17.

   Questions.

   1. Have you read verses 1 and 2 in the Revised Version?

   2. What did these false teachers teach ?

   3. To what event do verses 3 and 4 apply, in general terms?

   4. What two things must transpire prior to The Day of the Lord?

   5. What is intended here by "the temple of God"?

   6. Who presumably, is holding back the full development of this
   apostasy?

   7. What is the doom of "the man of sin"?

   8. What class of people only will he be able to deceive?

   9. What warning have we here?

   10. Have you offered the prayer of verses 16 and 17?

   CONCLUSION

   Chapter 3

   The concluding chapter consists of an exhortation to pray for its
   author (vv. 1, 2), an expression of his confidence in the faithfulness
   of those he is addressing (vv. 3-5); a command to them concerning their
   separation from the unfaithful (vv. 6-11); a command to the unfaithful
   themselves (12-15), a benediction and a superscription (vv. 16-18).
   There is but one thing for which Paul would have them pray on his
   behalf viz. that he may be "delivered from unreasonable and evil men."
   These men were in the church in the visible sense, not the invisible,
   for they did not have "the faith" (R. V.) It was these more than the
   people outside who were hindering the Word from running and being
   glorified.

   What a sweet thought that is in verse 5, "the patient waiting for
   Christ." It is the only the scoffer, walking after his own lusts who
   says, "Where is the promise of His Coming"? (2 Pet. 3:3, 4).

   Let us not through any undue impatience be classed with them. He "will
   come and will not tarry" (Heb. 10:3, 7).

   The unfaithful ones are the same as he addressed in 1 Thessalonians
   4:10-12, and who evidently did not heed that exhortation. And yet, they
   might be saved men notwithstanding (see verse 15).

   The token of validity (v. 17) is interesting in the light of 2:2.
   Hereafter the forger will have to be doubly bold.

   No questions are required for this lesson.
     __________________________________________________________________

FIRST EPISTLE TO TIMOTHY

   INTRODUCTORY

   We now reach the Pastoral Epistles* of which there are three, 1 and 2
   Timothy and Titus. They are so called because their contents are
   chiefly directions regarding the pastoral work of ministers. It is
   evident that they deal with persons and things belonging to a late
   period in the Apostolic Age. The heretics mentioned in them indicate
   this. These are of a Jewish character, for they profess to be teachers
   of the law (1 Timothy 1:7), and are described as of the circumcision
   (Tit. 1:10), and as causing men to attend to Jewish fables (3:9). And
   yet they are not the same Judaizing teachers with which we became
   acquainted in Acts (15), and Galatians, or even Colossians. They have
   progressed further on the "down grade," and "are involved in a total
   apostasy from God and from good." They had lost all true understanding
   of the law (1 Tim. 1:7); had repudiated a good conscience (19); had
   become hypocrites and liars (4:2); were branded with immorality (4:2);
   of corrupt minds, using religion to better themselves in the world (1
   Tim. 6:5; Tit. 1:11) ; subverters of the faith (2 Tim. 2:17);
   victimizing foolish persons to their ruin (2 Tim. 3:6); confessing God
   with their mouths, but denying Him in their works, abominable and
   disobedient, and for every good work reprobate (Tit. 1:16). A dark
   catalogue this, corroborating the teaching of 2 Thessalonians as to the
   working already of the apostasy in the church. The false doctrines
   attacked by Paul in his earlier epistles were now bearing fruit in
   laxity of life and morals.

   Date of the Epistles.

   It is clear from the foregoing that the date of these epistles must
   have been later than the period of Paul's history covered by the Acts,
   and that they were probably written after his liberation from
   imprisonment. There is reason to believe that he was imprisoned a
   second time, and in the interval between the first epistle to Timothy
   and that to Titus were written, while the second to Timothy followed
   during the second imprisonment, as it is thought.

   Following Alford, Paul, after the imprisonment mentioned in the Acts,
   journeyed eastward as he anticipated in his letters to Philemon (22),
   and the church at Philippi, 1:26; 2:24. He visited Ephesus again, and
   doubtless took further journeys West occupying three or four years. At
   Ephesus he left Timothy and passed into Macedonia (1 Tim. 1:3), from
   which he wrote him the first epistle. Not far from this time he must
   have visited Crete in company with Titus and have left him there to
   complete the organization of the churches. This will appear when we
   come to the study of the epistle to Titus, which it is thought was
   written somewhere in Asia Minor, and when Paul was on his way to winter
   at Nicopolis in Greece. It was at this place he was arrested again
   probably, "as implicated in the charges made against the Christians
   after the fire in 64 A. D., and sent to Rome." Once more in that city,
   he is treated no longer with the courtesy of his former residence there
   but as an ordinary criminal (2 Tim. 2:9). All his Asiatic friends
   avoided him except Onesiphorus (2 Tim. 1:16). Only Luke was with him.
   Timothy is entreated to come to him before winter (2 Tim. 4:21). He is
   expecting execution (2 Tim. 4:6). and in view of it he writes his
   second epistle to Timothy, about A. D. 67 or 68.

   History of Timothy.

   For the beginnings of Timothy's history you will need to recur to the
   sixteenth chapter of the Acts. He was converted perhaps on the occasion
   of Paul's first visit to Lystra, since it was on his second visit he
   was chosen to be his traveling companion. He accompanies Paul
   throughout that second missionary journey, wintering with him at
   Corinth, and seems to have been with him pretty steadily, except for
   the commissions on which he was occasionally sent (Acts 19:22; 1 Cor.
   4:17, 16:10), not only throughout the second, ,but the third journey as
   well. About A. D. 62 or 63 he was with the Apostle while the latter was
   a prisoner at Rome (Col. 1:1; Philemon 1; Philippians 1:1). In 66 or
   67, after that imprisonment, he was left by Paul in charge of the
   church at Ephesus. It was while he was here that he received the first
   epistle or letter from Paul. A year later it may be, the second was
   written, when Paul was again a prisoner, and Timothy repairs to Rome to
   visit him, after which nothing further is heard of him.

   In his character he was a very earnest and consecrated man, and yet
   timid and diffident, and hesitating to deal with certain difficulties
   of his work. Compare here 1 Corinthians 16:10; 1 Tim. 4:12; 5:23; 2
   Tim. 1:5, 7; 3:10.

   Questions.

   1. Name the Pastoral Epistles and state why they are so called.

   2. To what period do they belong, and why is it so believed?

   3. Describe the heresies therein referred to.

   4. Give Paul's history between the close of the Acts and the writing of
   2 Timothy.

   5. Give an outline of Timothy's history.

   *The lessons on the Pastoral Epistles, except the questions, are taken
   from the Author's Synthetic Bible Studies.

   CHIEFLY PERSONAL

   Chapter 1

   1. The Salutation, 1:1, 2. In this notice the beautiful designation of
   our Lord Jesus Christ as "Our Hope." He Himself is our Hope. And when
   we remember that these words were written by Paul in his later years,
   they are all the more affecting. And notice the designation given
   Timothy in verse 2. What bearing has this upon the proposition that he
   probably owed his conversion to Paul's labors?

   2. A reference to Timothy's mission at Ephesus, 3, 4. We have referred
   to the circumstance of his being left there by Paul, in our
   introduction. It seems to have necessitated urging on Paul's part. What
   language indicates as much? What charge was he to lay upon the teachers
   at Ephesus? In what two directions (especially Jewish) were they
   inclined to digress from the Gospel? What would be likely to be the
   outcome of such digression?

   3. A description of the false teachers, 5-7. In this description it
   will be noted that the root of the offense, was in swerving from love,
   for such is the correct translation of the word "charity" in verse 5.

   4. A description of the true use of the law, 8-11. These false teachers
   pretended to discourse of the law, by which is meant the law of Moses,
   without really knowing the subject on which they spoke. The law did not
   apply to those who were saved under the Gospel, but it had the same
   bearing as ever to the unbeliever.

   5. A digression to the circumstances of his own conversion, 12-17. This
   springs from his allusion to the Gospel in verse 11, a Gospel committed
   to his trust as a steward to proclaim. He does not spare himself in
   extolling the grace of God toward him (13-15), and he uses his own
   history as an example and encouragement to the worst of sinners (16).

   6. A personal charge to Timothy, 18-20. This charge is the single one
   to fight the good fight of faith, to which he is stimulated by two
   considerations. The first is the "prophecies which went before" on him,
   the supernatural predictions of his future ; and the second, the
   failure of some who had started in the fight with him and fallen back.
   The good fight of faith in his case is that which was personal to
   himself, and that which concerned his ministry. It Is not the conflict
   of the Christian life in general which Paul refers to so much, as that
   of a leader in the church against the opponents of a pure Gospel.

   Questions.

   1. What title is given Jesus Christ in this lesson?

   2. What led to the defection of these false teachers?

   3. How does Paul consider his ministration of the Gospel?

   4. What is meant by the fight of faith in Timothy's case?

   5. How many questions are in the body of this lesson, and how many have
   you answered satisfactorily?

   CONCERNING PUBLIC PRAYER

   Chapters 2-3

   Chapter 2 is taken up with regulations concerning public prayer. First,
   he directs that intercessory prayer he made for all men (verses 1-7).
   What class of men is especially singled out (2)? What selfish motive on
   the part of the church should induce such intercessory prayer? And yet
   what higher motive is suggested (4)? What does this verse suggest as to
   the object of such intercession so far as those in authority are
   concerned? On what ground may such intercession be made (5, 6)? It
   seems evident that intercession was not being made in this church at
   Ephesus. Perhaps persecution at the hands of the authorities had caused
   it to be less earnestly conducted, or perhaps a party spirit had
   something to do with it; at all events the church needed to be stirred
   up to it, and Timothy to get them doing it. This was part of the good
   warfare he was to wage.

   Second, he refers to the way men should pray (8). "Everywhere" may
   refer to every place the worshippers were in the habit of assembling in
   Ephesus. There may have been several bodies of believers there meeting
   in different places. The fact that men without distinction of
   ministerial functions were to pray is significant. Not only were the
   deacons, or elders, or presbyters, or bishops, to pray, but the "men"
   were to pray. There is no priesthood in the church except the common
   priesthood of believers. But how were they to pray? "Lifting up" the
   hands was a Jewish custom in prayer and seems to have been adopted in
   the church.

   But what kind of hands were the men to hold up? "Holy hands" are those
   not stained with sin (Psalm 25:4: 26:6: James 4:8). If we regard
   iniquity in our hearts God will not hear us. "Without wrath and
   doubting" might read without wrath and disputing or contention. No
   religious disputes, no outbreaks in daily life could be permitted where
   prayer was to be engaged in.

   All expositors are agreed that "I will" of verse 8 should be carried
   over to verse 9. The latter then would read, "In like manner, I will
   that the women adorn themselves," etc. What, in this case, would be the
   force of the expression "in like manner"? Is it meant, as A. J. Gordon
   asks, that he would have the men pray in every place, and the women "in
   like manner" be silent? Or would he have the men lifting up holy hands,
   and the women "in like manner" adorning themselves? So unlikely is
   either of these that many expositors supply the word "pray" in verse 9
   to complete the sense. The two verses would then harmonize like this:
   "I will therefore that men pray everywhere lifting up holy hands, and
   in like manner, I will that women pray in modest apparel," etc., to the
   end of verse 10. Compare 1 Corinthians 11:5.

   At verse 11 there is a translation, and the Apostle passes on to
   something new. What is that new thing about women he now takes up? Not
   her relation to public prayer, but her relation to her husband,
   especially in the matter of public teaching in the church. The command
   to silence here suggests 1 Corinthians 14:34, 35, where the context
   shows that there were various forms of disorder and confusion in the
   church assemblies, especially the making remarks and asking questions
   about the words of others, from which women, who seem to have been the
   chief offenders, were enjoined.

   But what about teaching? "I suffer not a woman to teach." To teach and
   to govern are the special functions of the presbyter or elder. The
   teacher and pastor, named in the divine gifts to the church (Ephesians
   4:11), are considered by some to be the same; and the pastor is
   generally regarded as identical with the bishop. Now there is no
   instance in the New Testament of a woman's being set over a church as
   bishop, or teacher or ruler. What then if we say it is to this, to
   which Paul here refers?

   The reason why woman is placed in subjection to man as stated by Paul
   in verses 13 and 14 is sufficiently plain, but there is a mystery about
   verse 15. Certainly it does not mean that the mere act of child-bearing
   saves a woman, which would contradict the primary truth of the Gospel
   that we are saved by faith and not works. As a matter of fact,
   moreover, the word for child-bearing here includes more than the act of
   giving birth, and means the proper nurture and training of children.
   Conybeare & Howson's note of this reads: "The apostle's meaning is,
   that women are to be kept in the path of safety, not by taking to
   themselves the office of the man (taking part in the assemblies of the
   church), but by the performance of the peculiar functions which God has
   assigned to their sex."

   Chapter 3 is a charge to Timothy concerning the selection and the
   duties of church officials. First, he treats of bishops or overseers
   (1-7). It is to be remembered that the word "bishop" here is the same
   as "presbyter" or "elder" elsewhere, and does not mean a higher and
   distinct order of the ministry. See Titus 1:5, compared with verse 7 of
   the same chapter. Secondly, he treats of deacons (8-13). Then, to quote
   Alford, he brings these directions to a close by a solemn statement of
   their object and glorious import (14-16).

   Questions.

   1. What probably explains the occasion for these instructions about
   prayer for rulers?

   2. What illustrates the common priesthood of believers?

   3. How might the difficulties in verses 9-15 be explained?

   4. What about verse 15 especially?

   5. Does the proposed definition satisfy you?

   6. What is the particular theme of chapter 3?

   7. How many orders of the ministry are here taught?

   CONCERNING FALSE TEACHERS

   Chapter 4

   In verses 1-6 these false teachers are foretold and described. At what
   period are they to appear? Notice that this agrees with Paul's
   teachings to the Thessalonians about the apostasy. It also has a
   bearing upon the current question as to whether the world is growing
   better or worse. That question is too vast for mortal to answer, and we
   can only fall back upon what God says about it. In this and in other
   places, He has told us what to expect as the end of the age draws near,
   and it is for us to square our understanding and conduct accordingly.

   Notice the detail of the Holy Spirit in describing these false
   teachers. They shall be under what kind of influence (verse 1)? What
   two leading tenets of their system are mentioned in verse 3? How does
   the Apostle contradict these teachings in verses 4 and 5? Here we need
   to guard against the disposition to limit the application of this false
   teaching to Roman Catholicism. Celibacy and abstinence from meat
   suggest that phase of Christianity, but the teachings of the occult
   sciences, Christian Science included, enlarge our horizon considerably
   in estimating what the Holy Spirit meant in this case.

   Verses 7-16, or perhaps beginning at verse 6, may be regarded as an
   exhortation to Timothy himself to that steadfastness and growth in his
   Christian life and calling so imperative in view of the false teaching
   he was called upon to combat, the germ of which had already sprung up.
   How does verse 7 indicate that, in Paul's estimation, these heresies
   were mere "abstract speculations without any connection with the
   historical realities and practical tendencies of Christianity"? The
   reference to "bodily exercise" in verse 8 is interesting. According to
   many it had reference to the physical abstinence from certain food,
   from marriage, etc., referred to above, which the heretics commended,
   but which Paul condemned. According to others, he means the gymnastic
   exercises so much in vogue with the Greeks, especially the Olympic
   games. He would have the youth Timothy appreciate that the exercise
   begins with the inner man.

   Questions.

   1. What bearing has this chapter on the questions whether the world is
   growing better or worse?

   2. To what current heresies besides Roman Catholicism may Verses 1-6
   apply?

   3. How does Paul feel about these heresies in his day?

   4. In what way may the reference to bodily exercise be explained?

   MATTERS ECCLESIASTICAL AND SOCIAL

   Chapters 5-6

   Chapter 5 gives directions concerning Timothy's management of Church
   affairs, first, as to his behavior towards the older and younger
   members of the flock, of both sexes (1, 2). Secondly, as touching
   widows (3-16). By "widows indeed," verse 3, Paul means those who had no
   near relatives to support them (see verses 4 and 5), and who were
   trusting in God (verse 6). At this point the Apostle turns from the
   widows themselves to the persons whose duty it was to support them (8),
   returning to the widows again, for the purpose of treating the subject
   from a different point of view, viz: that of the church deaconess, as
   many expositors believe (9, 10). The younger widows were not to be
   inducted into this office from the likelihood that, desiring to marry
   again, they should thus become unfaithful to their covenant (11, 12),
   and also for the reason named in verse 13. Of course, Paul does not
   mean that it was sinful for young widows to marry a second time, or he
   would not have recommended it in verse 14, but that it was a breach of
   their faith to Christ after having betrothed themselves to Him, so to
   speak, for this service. Verse 16 recurs to verse 4, about the
   pecuniary support of widows by their relatives that the Church may be
   relieved of the burden.

   Third, he speaks of Timothy's relation to the elders, i. e,, the
   presbyters of the Church (17-22). The Greek word for elders here is the
   same as in verse 1, but while in that case elder men merely were
   intended, here the context shows an official distinction. The
   directions concern the pecuniary provision for these Church ministers
   (17, 18), the esteem in which they should be held (19), and yet the
   impartiality with which they should be treated in the event of
   wrongdoing (20, 21). In the same connection, Timothy receives a caution
   about the selection of men for that office (22). The chapter draws to
   an end with advice to Timothy in regard to his health. It seems quite
   irrelevant to the main subject and yet was suggested doubtless by the
   command at the end of the preceding verse. Speaking of the irrelevancy,
   it is worth while quoting Dr. Paley that it affords a strong incidental
   proof of the genuineness of the epistle. It is incredible that an
   imposter forging the name of Paul should give a direction like this, so
   remote from everything else discussed. "Nothing but reality," he says,
   "the real valetudinary situation of a real person, could have suggested
   it."

   Two other verses follow, perhaps intended to restrain Timothy from
   hasty judgments, referred to in verse 22, in the selection of men for
   the ministerial office. There are some men whose faults are very
   apparent, but others who can be known only by an after judgment. With
   reference to the latter great circumspection on the part of Timothy is
   urged. The same facts, however, apply to good works as well as evil, so
   that Timothy might be consoled in the thought that if he had
   unwittingly overlooked some of the latter class, they would sooner or
   later come to the light.

   In the final chapter ecclesiastical matters give place to those of a
   different character. The "servants" in verses 1 and 2, are
   bond-servants. After laying down the law in relation to them, Paul
   digresses into a criticism of those who teach otherwise concerning them
   (3-5). It surprises us to learn of the hypocrisy of these false
   teachers even in those early days, since the Apostle speaks of them as
   using godliness for a way of gain. A show of Christian life for them
   was a lucrative business, (compare Titus 1:11). This digression leads
   to another, for the reference to godliness and gain brings up the whole
   question of earthly riches in the life of the disciple (6-10). There is
   a sense in which true godliness does bring gain, if it be mingled with
   contentment, but contentment takes wings in the case of those whose
   condition is outlined in the verses following. The warning against this
   sin associated with the love of money leads to an earnest exhortation
   to Timothy personally, and a doxology springing out of it, when the
   theme is returned to again for a charge concerning the rich (17-19).
   The epistle concludes with another personal address to Timothy to keep
   the trust committed to him, avoiding the errors before enumerated.

   There is much in this epistle of deep practical value to-day, and
   especially applicable to ministers, Sunday-school teachers, Christian
   workers and Church leaders of every kind. May the Holy Spirit Himself
   apply it to us!

   Questions.

   1. What three classes of directions are given Timothy in Chapter 5?

   2. Who are meant by "widows indeed"?

   3. What is the instruction about elders?

   4. What incidental proof of genuineness does Chapter 5 afford?

   5. To what depth did the hypocrisy of the false teachers go?

   6. How is the question of earthly riches treated?

   7. To whom is this epistle of practical value?
     __________________________________________________________________

SECOND EPISTLE TO TIMOTHY

   PERSONAL TO TIMOTHY

   Chapter 1

   When Paul addressed his earlier letter to Timothy, the latter was in
   Ephesus, and there are reasons to believe he was still there.

   Paul was now a prisoner in Rome for a second time, awaiting a hearing
   before the Emperor, and he was not being treated with the consideration
   shown him on the earlier occasion (Acts 28), but like a common
   prisoner. The immediate occasion for this letter grew out of this, for
   he is anxious to have Timothy and Mark as his companions (1:4, 4:9,
   etc.). He is conscious that his death by martyrdom could not long be
   delayed, for these were the days of wicked Nero, and not knowing
   whether he should see Timothy again, or not, he was desirous of adding
   still further to the instructions he had given him.

   There is reason to believe that Timothy required these encouragements
   in a marked degree. His character was not of the stuff that Paul's was
   made of. He suggests the diffidence of Jeremiah in the Old Testament,
   without some of the redeeming qualities he possessed. For references to
   the lack of courage of Timothy, see 1:5, 7; 3:10.

   1. Salutation, 1:1, 2.

   2. Thanksgiving, vv. 3-5.

   In this thanksgiving on Timothy's behalf, there is a reference to his
   spiritual history which seems to have come down in his mother's line.

   3. Exhortation, vv. 6-14.

   The exhortation which follows, and which has grown out of the
   remembrance of Timothy's past life and the piety of his ancestors,
   contains three or four natural divisions.

   (a) An exhortation to firmness in the faith (6-8). This can be
   cultivated, stirred up. It is inherent in the spiritual gift he
   received from God at the time he was set apart to the ministry, and is
   not consonant with tearfulness, the moral cowardice to which he seems
   to have been addicted, but is evinced rather in the exercise of
   suitable discipline in the spirit of love (Revised Version), and in
   boldness of testimony even to the point of suffering.

   (b) This exhortation enforced by the character of the Gospel and the
   mercy of God (9-1 1).

   (c) Finally, the Apostle cites his own example (12-14), He suffers for
   his testimony, and is not ashamed of it; he is willing to suffer, he
   counts it worth while, in the light of his faith. Let Timothy profit in
   word and deed by what he sees in him.

   4. Description of False Brethren, vv. 15-18.

   This exhortation to Timothy gathers force from the circumstance that
   some who professed fealty to Christ have been guilty of defection, if
   one may judge by their desertion of Christ's servant in his trial (15).
   Their action, however, serves to bring out the stronger the love of
   another brother for whom he prays (16-18).

   Questions.

   1. Locate both Paul and Timothy at this time.

   2. State the possible reason for this epistle.

   3. Analyze Timothy's character and temperament.

   4. Divide the chapter into 4 parts.

   5. Analyze the exhortation in the chapter.

   INSTRUCTING A TEACHER OF TEACHERS

   Chapters 2-4:8

   The instruction may be divided into three or four parts.

   (a) He is instructed concerning his duty as a teacher of teachers
   (2:2), but in that connection is again exhorted to firmness, or rather
   to strength and "hardness," which are practically the same (verses 1
   and 3). What figure of speech does Paul use to illuminate his theme?
   What particular lesson would be drawn from it (verse 4)? What second
   figure does he use at verse 5? Here is a reference to the Olympian
   games. How must a man have contended in order to win the crown? What
   third figure is used at verse 6? What reward does the faithful
   husbandman receive? It is easy to see from these illustrations the
   direction in which this young minister required encouragement and
   warning. He must separate himself from the world, strive faithfully and
   obediently, and work diligently to receive the blessing. In this
   connection, what fact was he to keep in mind (8)? Note how Paul once
   more digresses to his own example. He *was not laying upon Timothy any
   burden he did not himself bear. Indeed, on behalf of the Gospel just
   spoken of, he suffered "hardship," (for so the word "trouble" should be
   translated in verse 9), and he also endured (10). For whose sake was it
   done? And why? Speaking of the "eternal glory" the elect were going to
   obtain, was it an assured experience for them (11-13)?

   (b) Again, in this instruction to Timothy as a teacher of teachers, he
   is directed to caution them about idle and foolish words (14). But no
   sooner is this dictum laid down than he is once more exhorted as in the
   other case, to be the kind of teacher he would have others be. To what
   is he exhorted in verse 15? What do you suppose that expression means,
   "Rightly dividing the word of truth ?" In reply, note the three classes
   of peoples into which Paul divides mankind in 1 Corinthians 10:32. Do
   you not think that "rightly dividing the word of truth" must mean
   giving to each of these their "portion of meat in due season"? But how
   can this be done where one is ignorant of the dispensational teaching
   of the Bible, which we are trying to emphasize in this Commentary? What
   is to be avoided in this teaching (verse 19)? To what physical disease
   is that kind of foolish teaching likened in the next verse? How careful
   we need to be not to allow our study of dispensational truth to become
   fanatical gangrene! How much we need the wisdom from above, the balance
   of mind and heart which the Holy Spirit alone can supply!

   But we need not pursue our inquiries into this chapter further. The
   same mingled exhortation, instruction and warning continue throughout,
   and can be brought out by the student through questioning and patient
   waiting for the answer to suggest itself as above.

   (e) Proceeding to chapter three, Timothy receives instruction
   concerning the last times, i. e., the times at the end of the present
   age. What kind of times does the Spirit of God, say they will be (1)?
   The word "perilous" is in the Revised Version "grievous." What shall
   constitute their grievous character (2-5)? What class of persons are
   designated as influenced by these things, and why (6, 7)? How does the
   Apostle seek to strengthen Timothy against these things by his own
   example (10-13)? And what exhortation does he now receive (14-16)? What
   tribute to the Holy Scriptures is in verse 15? And how is their
   authority and infallibility affirmed in the following verse? The
   Revised Version renders this verse a little differently, but this is
   one of the places where the King James translation is to be preferred
   not only as the stronger, but also the more scholarly of the two. To
   what "charge" to Timothy does this illusion to the Holy Scriptures lead
   (4:1, 2)? What consideration adds solemnity to that charge (1)? What
   consideration make that charge to be necessary (3, 4)? What office is
   Timothy to exercise in addition to that of an overseer and teacher in
   order to "make full proof" or fulfil his ministry (5)? What
   consideration personal to Paul, adds solemnity to this exhortation
   (6-8)?

   Questions.

   1. How many of the questions in the text of the lesson have you
   answered?

   2. How often does Paul allude to his own example?

   3. Can you quote 1 Corinthians 10:32?

   4. Can you quote 2 Timothy 3:16?

   5. What was Timothy to be besides an evangelist?

   PERSONAL TO PAUL

   Chapter 4:9-22

   We have now passed beyond the portion of the epistle devoted to
   instruction and reached that in which the writer deals with personal
   matters (4:9-22). An aged prisoner in Rome, awaiting trial, and almost
   certain execution, he is, alas! forsaken by many who should have stood
   by him. Demas has left him, Crescens, and even Titus. He wishes Timothy
   to hasten to his side. and to bring Mark with him. It has all been made
   up with Mark since the sad affair in Acts 13. He needs his cloak too,
   and parchments. He can not at this moment forget that man Alexander. Is
   he the Alexander named in Acts 19? Doubtless. Timothy is warned against
   him, for he is still in Ephesus.

   Paul has had one hearing before Caesar and another is coming. At the
   hearing, however, he was sadly deserted by his friends. O! the grief of
   defection! Nevertheless the Lord stood by him, and He will continue to
   do so. Friends are saluted at Ephesus. Hasten Timothy, I want you.

   No questions are called for as following this lesson.
     __________________________________________________________________

EPISTLE TO TITUS

   HIS COMMISSION

   Chapter 1

   The epistle to Titus was written prior to the second to Timothy.
   Alford, and others, suppose that after Paul's liberation from prison
   (see Acts 28), he journeyed eastward as anticipated in Philemon 22 and
   Philippians 1:26, 2:24, and visited Ephesus again. Other journeys to
   the West followed, occupying three or four years, during which time, he
   visited Crete in company with Titus, leaving him there to complete the
   organization of the Church in that neighborhood. This Church had
   probably been founded prior to this time, and now the same heresy is
   beginning to show itself as in the church at Ephesus over which Timothy
   had been set.

   The epistle to Titus was probably written from some point in Asia Minor
   where Paul was stopping on his way to winter at Nicopolis in Greece
   (3:12), Crete is a small island to the west of Cyprus and where the
   waters of the Mediterranean and Aegean Seas meet. No account is found
   in the Acts as to the circumstances under which the Church originated
   there, but it is probable the Gospel was borne to the island by the
   Jewish converts at Jerusalem on the Day of Pentecost.

   Of Titus himself little is known. The earliest references to him are in
   Galatians, where we learn that he was a Gentile, probably one of Paul's
   converts, who accompanied him and Barnabas to Jerusalem at the first
   council (Acts 15). See Galatians 11:1-4. He is mentioned again in 2
   Corinthians, where he seems to have been sent by Paul on a mission to
   Corinth from Ephesus (2 Corinthians 8:6, 12:18). See other references
   to him in that epistle, in chapters 2 and 7. For a number of years he
   is lost sight of after this, until we now find him at Crete. His later
   career does not seem to have been all that it might have been so far as
   his loyalty to the Apostle is concerned, if we may judge from 2 Timothy
   4:10. During Paul's second imprisonment at Rome he seems not to have
   remained with him. The epistle may be outlined thus:

   1. The Salutation, 1:1-4.

   2. The Commission to Titus, vv. 5-9.

   In these verses it will be seen that the duties of Titus at Crete were
   substantially those of Timothy at Ephesus Reference to that will throw
   light on this.

   3. The Description of False Teachers, vv. 10-16.

   The need of elders and overseers such as Paul had indicated, was seen
   in the heresies that were in the Church, and which were of the same
   character as those mentioned in the epistle to Timothy. The errorists
   were chiefly Jews (10). The language in verses 12 and 13 is striking,
   since Paul there quotes from one of their own poets against them
   (Epimenides), whose witness is borne out by Livy, Plutarch, Polybius
   and Strabo, who speak of the Cretan's love of gain, natural ferocity,
   fraud, falsehood, and general depravity. Titus did not have an easy
   place to fill, and his work ought to bring comfort to Christian workers
   under not very different surroundings to-day.

   There is a statement in verse 15 that calls for particular attention,
   "To the pure all things are pure" is an aphorism greatly abused. To
   understand it, turn back to 1 Timothy 4:4. The reference here in Titus
   is the same as there, (and in Romans 14:20), to the eating of meats
   which the Jewish law forbade on ceremonial grounds. The Jewish
   professing Christians referred to previously as false teachers, were
   seeking to impose these customs upon the converts from Gentilism, and
   Paul was withstanding them by saying, as he had contended all along,
   and as God had taught Peter in Acts 10, that there was nothing of this
   kind unclean in itself. That is, it was not sinful for a Christian to
   eat such things. The "pure" means those who are sanctified by faith,
   true believers on the Lord Jesus Christ. Such are not bound by the
   Jewish commandments in eating and drinking, but are at liberty to eat
   all the creatures of God set apart for their use, without sin. How
   monstrous in the light of the true meaning of the words, for people to
   employ them as a permission to look at obscene pictures in art
   galleries, and listen to lewd stories, and read impure books, and
   witness impure plays. These actions on their part testify that they are
   not the "pure" Paul has in mind, but the defiled and the unbelieving,
   referred to later in the same verse. "They profess that they know God,
   but by their works they deny Him."

   Questions.

   1. Locate Crete.

   2. Give the history of Titus.

   3. Describe the Cretans.

   4. Explain the phrase, "To the pure all things are pure."

   5. How are these words frequently misapplied?

   CONCERNING CHURCH MEMBERS

   Chapters 2-3

   Paul now enters upon instructions to Titus as in the case of Timothy
   concerning different classes in the Church. Aged men are first spoken
   of, verses 1, 2. It is sound doctrine that these be of the character
   described. Aged women are next referred to (3), and tinder cover of
   that exhortation comes an illusion to the younger women (4, 5). Titus
   does not exhort the young women directly on the themes indicated, but
   indirectly through the older women. A hint for Christian workers in our
   own time, and especially in slum districts, where discretion is to be
   observed between the sexes. The young men come in for treatment next
   (6), to whom Titus, himself a young man, was to set the right example
   (7, 8). Then follows an exhortation for servants, where bond-servants
   or slaves are meant (9, 10). "The duties of these last, and indeed of
   all classes, are grounded on the moral purpose of God in the Gospel
   concerning us" (11, 14). These last-named verses are full of strong
   meat, and will bear close analysis. See what the Christian's hope is,
   in verse 13. Observe the two-fold object which Christ had in view in
   the work of the Cross, verse 14, and the obligation it lays upon
   believers, verse 12.

   Pastors will find a fine outline here for an expository discourse on
   "Four Great Things": (a) A great revelation (11); (b) A great
   obligation (12); (c) A great inspiration (13) ; (d) A great salvation
   (14).

   All these classes are now put in mind of their obligations with
   reference to the civil powers, and to outsiders and unbelievers
   generally (3:1-3); an exhortation affording another opportunity of
   contrasting the present state and condition of believers with that in
   which they were prior to their salvation. Here we find a precious
   declaration of Gospel truth which should be learned by heart (4, 7).
   The theme is salvation. How not was it effected? How was it effected?
   What period of time? What is the result? The eighth verse might be
   included as showing the obligation of the saved growing out of their
   salvation.

   Another sermon is suggested here on "Salvation from Start to Finish."
   (a) Our condition by nature (3); (b) Our change from nature to grace
   (4-6); (e) Our condition by grace (7, 8).

   Titus was to constantly affirm these things, avoiding other things and
   subjects that might come up (9). What a lesson for the ministers of our
   own time! Finally, he is directed how to deal with these false teachers
   and their followers (10, 11).

   The remainder of this chapter is taken up with personal directions and
   commissions.

   Questions.

   1. What hint for Christian workers is found in this lesson?

   2. Analyze 2:11-14.

   3. Analyze 3:3-8.
     __________________________________________________________________

EPISTLE TO PHILEMON

   Philemon, like some other of the epistles, is not located in the canon
   chronologically. It will be seen to have been written by the Apostle
   while a prisoner at Rome, and the supposition might be that the second
   imprisonment was meant, because it follows 2 Timothy. But it was
   addressed to Philemon, beyond doubt, on the earlier occasion. See verse
   22 as a hint of this. In verse 23 Epaphras is named as one known to
   Philemon, who, according to Colossians 1:7, and 4:12, was a minister at
   Colosse, and perhaps Philemon and his household were members of his
   flock. As Philemon owed his salvation to Paul, (verse 19), we may
   believe that the latter had made his acquaintance during his stay in
   Ephesus and its vicinity, (Acts 19, 20), for Colosse was in that
   neighborhood.

   Philemon had a slave named Onesimus who seemed to have run away from
   his master, perhaps having stolen from him besides (18), and had found
   his way to Rome, and was thrown into the way of Paul. We would rather
   say God led him into the way of Paul. Perhaps he had known Paul when he
   lived with Philemon at Colosse. At all events, the circumstances are
   changed now, and under the power of a burdened conscience, and perhaps
   the condition in which he finds his old friend as a prisoner, he is
   moved to give more earnest heed to the message, is converted and is
   rejoicing in the Lord.

   But one of the first duties of the converted man, is confession and
   restitution of wrong. Onesimus knows this and is ready to return, but
   shrinks from doing so unless he shall have some document to show the
   genuineness of the change wrought in him, and some plea from the friend
   of both his master and himself that may intercede for him and what a
   loving letter Paul writes.

   Outline of the Epistle.

   The epistle begins with the salutation, verse 1-3. "The church in thy
   house," is mentioned, showing that in the primitive times the
   gatherings of Christians were in private homes.

   Now comes the Thanksgiving, 4-7. Paul had good reason to remember
   Philemon in thanksgiving and prayer, for see what kind of man he was!

   Following the thanksgiving is revealed the reason for the letter, the
   plea for Onesimus, 8-21. He pleads though he might command (8, 9).
   Onesimus has been converted by him while a prisoner in Rome (10).

   Onesimus means "profitable," but he had not been profitable to his
   master theretofore, he had belied his name. He had now, however, become
   profitable to both Philemon and Paul (11). Paul would like to have kept
   him, he was so profitable to him, only he had not the mind of Philemon
   on the subject, and did not feel at liberty to do so (12-14). He was
   returning now to Philemon in a new relationship (15, 16). It were worth
   while to have lost him for a while to get him back forever! What a
   striking testimony that saints shall know each other in the life to
   come! But he was now coming back not merely as a slave, but a beloved
   brother! This does not mean that the old relationship as master and
   slave should be dissolved (see 1 Corinthians 7:17-24), but only that it
   should now be continued under these more blessed circumstances. Observe
   how delicately Paul pleads for him on the ground that he is now his
   (Paul's) brother (16, 17). Paul is willing to assume whatever pecuniary
   responsibility might be attached to his running away, but tactfully
   insists that if Philemon considers, he will regard himself as still in
   the Apostle's debt (18, 19).

   Following the plea, the letter concludes with personal allusions, and
   the benediction {22, 25). Who of the brethren named in verse 24 were
   with Paul in his second imprisonment? Which one did he ask to come unto
   him? See 2 Timothy.

   Its Place in the Canon.

   If some ask why such a personal letter should find a place among the
   inspired books of Holy Scripture, it would seem sufficient to refer to
   the glimpses it affords of the social intercourse of Christians in the
   primitive days. But there is something else here, viz: Christianity
   does not rashly interfere with existing institutions, even when they
   are inimical to its principles. Philemon was not bidden to give
   Onesimus his freedom. Does Christianity, then, countenance human
   slavery? Nay, wherever Christianity has made headway, slavery has
   fallen. The truth makes free. The union of believers in Jesus Christ
   promotes love to one another, and love ministers to freedom.

   There is still another lesson to be drawn. As Paul found Onesimus
   wandering from his master's house, so the Lord Jesus Christ found us
   wandering from God. As Paul pleaded for the restoration of Onesimus,
   asking that what he owed might be placed to his account, so Jesus
   Christ acts as our Advocate with the Father, having borne our sins. As
   Philemon received Onesimus on Paul's account, so God has received us,
   and made us what we never were before, "profitable" unto Him "created
   in Christ Jesus unto good works which he hath before prepared for us to
   walk in them."

   Questions.

   1. State what you know of the acquaintance of Paul and Philemon.

   2. State what you know of the history of Onesimus.

   3. State the four divisions of this epistle.

   4. What reason is suggested for its appearance in the canon?

   5. What moral lesson is found in it?

   6. What spiritual analogies does it suggest?
     __________________________________________________________________

EPISTLE TO THE HEBREWS

   INTRODUCTORY

   In the case of Hebrews there is uncertainty as to the authorship. It
   may have been written by Paul, or Apollos, or some one else, we can not
   tell absolutely. There is also uncertainty as to the Church. While
   Jewish Christians are in mind, yet there is no positive knowledge as to
   where they were located, whether at Jerusalem, Alexandria, or Rome. But
   while uncertainty exists as to these particulars, there can be none as
   to the reason for writing the epistle. No one can read it carefully
   without perceiving a two-fold object, viz: to comfort the Christians
   under persecution, and to restrain them from apostasy on account of it.
   And the persecution must have been very severe, judging by the nature
   of the temptation to which it gave rise. For the apostasy contemplated
   was not like that of the Galatians, the supplementing of faith by the
   works of the law, but the renunciation of that faith altogether and the
   return to Judaism. It is the assumption that the temple was still
   standing with its glorious history and magnificent priesthood, and that
   the followers of Moses were allowed to pursue their religion in peace.
   All this was different from the outward meanness and poverty, and
   tribulation of those seeking to follow the Nazarene.

   Theme.

   There were many lines of argument open to the Apostle (for convenience,
   we assume the writer to be Paul), by which to counteract this tendency
   towards apostasy, but he chooses only one, viz: Christianity is
   superior to Judaism as seen in its Founder, Christ. The tempter is
   represented as urging that Judaism was introduced by "the goodly
   fellowship of the prophets." "Christ is superior to the prophets!"
   Judaism was ministered to Israel through angels. "Christ is superior to
   the angels!" Judaism owes its position to Moses. "But Christ is
   superior to Moses!" Judaism is associated with the divinely-instituted
   priesthood of Aaron. "Christ is superior to Aaron !" These are the main
   points, but the whole revolves around the single argument already
   indicated. And yet the Apostle does not go straight on with his
   argument. He makes a digression, sometimes at the close of a division
   of his theme, and sometimes in the middle of it, warning his hearers,
   comforting or exhorting them to steadfastness in the faith. This we
   shall see as we proceed.

   General Outline.

   The general outline of the epistle is something like this: (1), Christ
   is shown to be superior to the prophets 1:1-3; (2), Superior to the
   angels, 1:4, 2:18; (3), Superior to Moses, 3:1-19; (4), Superior to
   Joshua, 4:1-16; (5), Superior to Aaron, 5:1, 10:18. These divisions
   with the parenthetic warnings and exhortations make up the book.

   Questions.

   1. What two uncertainties exist as to this epistle?

   2. What was the two-fold occasion for its writing?

   3. What was the nature of the temptations in this case?

   4. What is the single theme of the epistle?

   5. Of what does it consist beside argument?

   6. Give the general outline.

   CHRIST AND THE ANGELS

   Chapters 1-2

   While in these chapters, the comparison is chiefly between Christ and
   the angels, yet they open with an important contrast between Him and
   the prophets (1:1-3, in which His superiority is seen in seven
   particulars:

   He is God's Son;

   He is Heir of all things;

   He made the worlds;

   He is the Express Image of God;

   He Himself purged our sins;

   He upholds all things;

   He is sat down at the right hand of God.

   The "Express Image" of God is equivalent to "God." Our comment on Col.
   1:15 will aid here, or compare this same epistle 10:1, where "image" is
   used for the very substance of that which is referred to, though in the
   Greek it is not so strong a word as that in the lesson.

   Christ however is superior to the angels in five particulars: (a), they
   have the name of angels. He the Name of Son (1:4, 5); (b), they are
   worshippers, He is the Worshipped (v. 6, R. V.); (c), they are
   creatures. He the Creator (7-12); (d), they are the ministers of
   salvation, He is its Author (13, 14); (e), they are subjects in the age
   to come, He is its Ruler (2:5-9). The amplification of the last thought
   is majestic, bringing out the four steps in the work of the Redeemer
   from His incarnation until His ultimate triumph over every foe. For a
   little while was He lower than the angels, i. e., during His earthly
   humiliation; now He is crowned with glory and honor; during the
   millennium will He be set over the works of God's hands, and finally in
   the age that follows will all things be put under His feet (6-9). For
   all this His suffering was necessary, not for His own sake but our sake
   (v. 10). We have become sons of God through faith in Him, in which
   sense He that sanctifieth and we who are sanctified "are all of one,"
   i. e., our origin is from God. This explains the verses that follow to
   the end of the chapter.

   In this lesson we meet with the digressions spoken of, one occurring in
   the middle of the argument, chapter 2:1-4, and another at its close,
   2:9-18. The first is warning, the second comfort. If the earlier
   dispensation, that of Judaism, punished every transgression and
   disobedience, how shall we escape if we neglect this greater light, the
   heavenly origin of which was demonstrated by witnesses confirming and
   being themselves confirmed? And then, on the other hand, think of your
   privileges! your exaltation to the position of "brethren," and your
   claims upon the Lord of glory as your true High priest, faithful,
   merciful, capable and sympathetic.

   Questions.

   1. Name the seven particulars in which Christ is superior to the
   prophets.

   2. What is the equivalent of the words, "Express Image of God"?

   3. Name the five particulars in which Christ is superior to the angels.

   4. Bring out the four steps in the work of the Redeemer.

   5. What is the meaning of the phrase "All of one"?

   6. What two "digressions" are found in this lesson?

   COMPARED WITH MOSES AND JOSHUA

   Chapters 3-4

   The superiority of Christ to Moses is shown in chapter 3, the
   comparison in which case runs in two parallel lines of two members
   each:

   (1) Moses a servant over God's house, 3:5.

   (2) Christ a Son over His own house, 3:6.

   That is an interesting phrase, "Whose house are we," (verse 6),
   suggesting a plan for a sermon. In what sense are believers Christ's
   house?

   He built them -- "without Him was not anything made that was made."

   He bought them -- "Ye are not for your own, for ye are bought with a
   price."

   He occupies them -- "Ye in me and I in you."

   As in the preceding instances we have a digression at this point in the
   nature of warning (7-19). In the first reading omit the parenthesis
   after "wherefore" (3:7) down to the close of verse 11, which will
   simplify the thought. The idea is that because of the greater
   importance of the New Testament revelation over that of the Old
   Testament as evidenced in the superiority of the Messenger, we should
   take heed lest through unbelief we fall away from God, as did Israel in
   the wilderness. They tempted God, and as a result, the males over
   twenty years of age were not permitted to enter into the rest of Canaan
   (16-18). The Holy Ghost used that sad episode in their early history as
   a warning to them at a later time, i. e., in David's day (vs. 7, etc.,
   cf. with Ps. 95:8-11), and it was just as applicable now to these
   Hebrew Christians. Therefore, they should exhort one another against
   "the deceitfulness of sin" and to steadfastness in the faith.

   The allusion to the rest of Canaan naturally leads to a comparison of
   Christ with Joshua in chapter 4, which may be outlined thus: (a),
   Israel failed of God's rest through unbelief (3:16-19); (b), We
   Christians may fail of God's rest through unbelief (4:1, 2); (c), This
   rest is not Canaan however (3-9); (d), but the rest of faith in God
   through Christ (v. 10); (e), which is to be diligently sought (11-13).
   The proof that this rest is not Canaan is two-fold: (a), it was spoken
   of long before Canaan was revealed, even at the creation of the world
   (3-5); and (b), it was spoken of long after Israel had entered Canaan
   as something still to be had. This last thought is brought out clearer
   in the R. V. where "Jesus" of verse 8 is translated "Joshua," which has
   the same meaning.

   It is important to understand what this rest is. In the first place, it
   is God's rest and not our rest. And God's rest does not mean cessation
   from work on His part, but rather his joy and delight in that work as
   good and perfect. In this sense He rested from creation on the seventh
   day, a rest which was marred by sin, but now the new rest of which He
   speaks is that of redemption, typified by Israel's deliverance from
   Egypt and entrance into Canaan. As a matter of fact God rests in Christ
   as the Redeemer and Restorer of fallen man, and where He rests there
   only can we rest. It is not death that can be rest to us, but only
   Christ, and this because the secret of our unrest is sin and He only
   can take away sin in every aspect of it. Of course, the perfect
   enjoyment of this rest is still future. "There remaineth a rest for the
   people of God." It is not a rest of inactivity, but of peace and
   harmony with all that is within and around us. Glory to God for this
   expectation! The sense in which we are diligently to seek it (11), is
   not that of self-righteous works on our part, but a carefulness not to
   fall into unbelief. The relation of the words that follow in this
   chapter (12-16) with those preceding, seems in general terms to be
   this: The Christian is to rest in faith, and labor to enter into the
   rest that remaineth, but this means that he must be guided and
   instructed by the Word of God, and upheld and encouraged by the
   sympathy and intercession of His Great High-priest.

   Questions.

   1. State the two parallel lines of comparison between Christ and Moses.

   2. In what senses may it be said that we are Christ's "house"?

   3. Explain the warnings in verses 7-19.

   4. Give an outline of Chapter 4.

   5. What two facts prove that "rest" other than Canaan is intended?

   6. How would you explain the "rest"?

   7. When will this "rest" be perfectly entered upon by the Christian?

   8. In what sense are we to seek it?

   9. What relation do the concluding verses of the chapter bear to the
   preceding?

   CHRIST AND MELCHISEDEC

   Chapters 5-7

   It has already become evident to the careful reader that the author of
   this epistle is particularly desirous to bring out the comparison
   between the priesthood of Christ and that of Aaron. He approached it at
   the close of chapter 2, (17, 18), and was on the point of making the
   comparison (3:1) when he was led into the digression about Moses (2-6),
   and then Joshua (4:4-11). But he returns to it again at the close of
   chapter 4 (see 14-16), and at the beginning of chapter 5 clears the way
   for its discussion by the dictum that Christ was a priest. This is
   necessary to be proven before he can advance, and he proves it in two
   ways. Christ was a priest (a), in that he possessed our human nature
   with its capacity for sympathy (1-3), and (b), in that He received the
   Divine Appointment to that office as Aaron did (4-10). His appointment
   however, was after another order than Aaron -- that of Melchisedec (6,
   10), of whom he will speak later after another digression of warning
   and encouragement.

   Teaching About Apostasy.

   This digression covers 5:12-6:29, and consists (a), of an explanation
   as to why they should be so seriously tempted to apostatize (v. 11-14).
   They had become "dull of hearing," spiritually deaf to the appeals of
   the Gospel. They had been in the faith long enough to become teachers
   of others, and yet they themselves needed teaching again, even in the A
   B C of the Scripture. They were still babes in Christ, as indicated by
   their lack of experience in the word, (b), The offset to this, or the
   remedy for their situation, was to grow in grace and Divine knowledge
   (6:1-3). To leave "the principles of the doctrine of Christ does not
   mean to discard the foundation of the Gospel but rather to build upon
   it. "Perfection" refers not to sinlessness but to full growth in the
   knowledge of Christ. "Repentance for dead works" means those not
   wrought for God's glory. "Faith towards God," was so primary that once
   experienced it were inconsistent to think of its being "laid" again.
   "The doctrine of baptisms" may mean "washings," "ablutions," after the
   purifying of the Jews. "Laying on of hands" was a symbolic act among
   the Jews connected with prayer and invoking the divine benedictions.
   Note that "the resurrection of the dead" with "eternal judgment," which
   some professing Christians in these day affect to doubt, was considered
   a primary doctrine of the New Testament Church. The six particulars
   here named were fundamental, and yet as Dr. Saphir says, they did not
   set before these Hebrew Christians with sufficient fullness the truth
   of which they stood in need to keep them from apostasy, and to
   strengthen them in their sore temptation, (c). The peril of their
   situation is set forth in verses 4-8. Some think these "present the
   case of a Jewish professed believer who turns back from Christ after
   advancing to the very threshold of salvation," but who never
   experienced real faith. But we differ, and hold the opinion that a true
   believer is meant. It is not said however, that such an one will be
   lost (indeed the opposite is shown to be the case (v. 9), but this
   warning is given to keep him from being lost, (d). Their encouragement
   in the premises follows (9-20). They were bringing forth the fruit of
   the Spirit, let them thus continue in well-doing (10-12). Their
   salvation was secured by the divine promise confirmed by the divine
   oath (12-18). Nay more, they had laid hold upon the hope, which as an
   anchor of the soul had entered into that which is within the veil.
   Jesus Himself was their hope, and He had entered there "an high-priest
   forever after the order of Melchisedec."

   Melchisedec a Type.

   We are now brought back again to Melchisedec, who is described and
   compared with Christ (7:1-3). For his historical record see Gen.
   14:17-20. He is a type of Christ in his office as a king-priest (cf.
   Zech. 6:12, 13); in his name, "king of righteousness" (Isa. 11:5); and
   his location, "king of Salem," i. e., peace (Isa. 11:6-9). Also in the
   fact that he had "neither beginning of days nor end of life." This last
   does not mean that it was literally so in his case, but that so far as
   the record went it appeared so. Compare here John 1:1; Rom. 6:9; Heb.
   7:23-25 After this description and comparison the inspired writer shows
   the superiority of his order to that of Aaron in seven particulars
   (4-24): Abraham gave him tithes (4-6), he blessed Abraham (6-7); he was
   an undying priest, i. e., so far as the record goes he did not see
   death (8); the unborn Levi (or Levitical priesthood) paid him tithes in
   the person of Abraham (9-10); the permanence of his priesthood,
   continued by Christ, implied the abrogation of the whole Levitical law
   (11-19); His priesthood was founded on an oath (20-22); it was
   intransmissible, not being vacated by death (23, 24). The whole
   argument is summed up in verses 25-28.

   Questions.

   1. What seems to be the chief purpose of the author?

   2. Indicate his approaches to it.

   3. In what two ways is Christ shown to be a priest?

   4. Name four main divisions of the digression in this case.

   5. What is the meaning of these words or phrases: "Perfection,"
   "Repentance for dead works," "the doctrine of baptisms"?

   6. What is the object of the warning in 6: 4-6?

   7. In what ways is Melchisedec a type of Christ?

   8. Name the seven particulars in which his order shows superiority to
   that of Aaron.

   THE PRIESTHOOD OF CHRIST AND THAT OF AARON

   Chapters 8-10:18

   1. Christ is a priest of a better covenant than Aaron. Chap. 8.

   Better not morally, but efficaciously, i. e., established on better
   promises (6), in the sense (a), that they are written on the heart
   rather than tables of stone (10); (b), that they are universal in their
   application and not limited to a single people, Israel (11); (c), that
   they bring with them eternal forgiveness.

   2. Christ is a priest of a better tabernacle. Chap. 9: 1-14.

   (a), It is not a material but a spiritual structure (11);

   (b), It is not hallowed by the blood of beasts but by His own blood
   (12);

   (c), It stands not for temporary but eternal redemption (12-14).

   3. Christ is a priest of a better sacrifice. Chap. 9:15-10:18.

   (a), Not a sacrifice of calves and goats (19) but the sacrifice of
   Himself (9:23);

   (b), Not a sacrifice to be repeated every year (25) but offered only
   once (9:26);

   (c), A sacrifice which does away with the covenant of the Old Testament
   and establishes that of the New (10:5-9).

   The reference to the sacrifice offered but once is worked out richly:
   first, the fact is stated (9:24-26); secondly, an inference is drawn
   from it (10:1-3); third, the fact is emphasized anew (4-13), and
   finally its precious truth is applied (14-18).

   Questions.

   1. In what sense is the covenant of Christ's priesthood better than
   that of Aaron?

   2. In what sense is it established on better promises?

   3. In what sense is Christ a priest of a better tabernacle?

   4. In what sense is He a priest of a better sacrifice?

   5. Have you tried to work out in detail the exposition of Chapters
   9:24-10:18?

   TRIUMPHS OF FAITH

   Chapters 10:19-12:29

   This lesson covers one of the many digressions alluded to and is first,
   an exhortation (10:19-25); secondly, a warning (26-31), and thirdly, an
   expression of comfort (32-39). This last touches on the principle of
   faith and gives occasion for an exhibition of its triumph in the lives
   of the Old Testament saints that makes the 11th chapter rank with the
   most notable in the Bible.

   1. The exhortation (10:19-25) keeps in mind that these Hebrew
   Christians were sorely tried by persecution and seriously tempted not
   merely to backslide, but to apostatize, i. e., give up Christianity
   altogether and return to Judaism again. The inspired writer is seeking
   to restrain them from so doing by the argument that Christianity is
   superior to Judaism as seen in its Founder, Christ. All that was
   symbolized in Aaronic priesthood is realized in Christ's priesthood.
   The Aaronic priest passed through the veil of the temple into the Holy
   Place, while Christ through His suffering humanity passed for believers
   into glory. The Aaronic priests were purified from ceremonial
   defilement by being sprinkled with blood (Ex. 29:21, Lev. 8:30), and
   washed in the laver of pure water, but the Christian believer's sins
   are so surely put away that as priests unto God they may draw near in
   fullness of assurance. Therefore they should hold fast the confession
   of their faith and provoke, urge, one another to love and to good
   works, the means of doing which was best found in the sacred assemblies
   which they were not to forsake.

   2. The warning (26-31) does not call particularly for explanation.

   3. The comfort (32-39) is notable for its reference to the reward to be
   realized by the believer at the second coming of Christ. Verse 37 might
   be rendered "for yet but a very very little while," showing that the
   Christians of that generation were expecting Him in their own day,
   which should be true of every generation. Speaking of "faith" in verse
   38, Farrar says it is "introduced with the writer's usual skill to
   prepare for the next great section of the epistle."

   What Faith Does.

   Entering on that section the same author remarks that it would have
   been fatal to the peace of mind of Jewish converts, such as here
   addressed, to feel that there was a chasm between their Christian faith
   and the faith of their past life. Hence the inspired writer shows that
   there is no discontinuity of that kind. Their faith was identical with,
   though transcendantly more blessed than that which had sustained the
   patriarchs, prophets and martyrs of their nation. Verse 1 of chapter 11
   defines faith rather in its effects than its essence; i. e., it tells
   what it does, bringing the assurance of things hoped and the proof of
   things not seen. In verses 2 to 40 we have the fruit of faith, or its
   effect, in detail. In 12:1-4 we have the testimony of faith, in 5-11
   its comfort, in 12-17, its duty, in 18-24 its encouragement, and in
   25-29 its warning.

   It is noticeable that passing from particular to general illustrations
   of faith, we have in 11:32-34 those of active, and in 35-38, those of
   passive faith, most of which are gathered from the books of Joshua,
   Samuel, Kings and Chronicles, though doubtless the time of the
   Maccabees is also in mind. Verses 39 and 40 may be paraphrased thus:
   these all had good witness borne to them through their faith, but still
   they did not see the fulfillment of the one great promise, which
   awaited the dispensation to follow.

   The "witnesses" of 12:1 are not "spectators" of us on earth, but
   "testifiers" to us of what faith can do. In other words they are those
   of the preceding chapter from whose lives we are to learn. The
   remainder of the verse is athletic in its figures of speech. The
   athlete lays aside every heavy or dragging article of dress, and so we
   should throw off "the clinging robe of familiar sin," "looking unto
   Jesus" not only as a higher example of faith than any previously named,
   but as "the author and finisher of our faith." From Him our faith
   comes, and by Him it is sustained to the end.

   The reference to Esau 16, 17 is ambiguous, and may mean that so far as
   his father Isaac was concerned, there was "no place of repentance," in
   the sense that Isaac had no power to change his mind and alter his
   promise. Or it may mean that Esau could not avert the earthly
   consequences of his folly, or regain what he had once flung away. And
   another says, "the text gives no ground for pronouncing on Esau's
   future fate, to which the inspired writer makes no allusion whatever."

   Notice six particulars, some try to discover seven, in which Mt. Sinai
   and Mt. Zion are contrasted in verses 18-24.

   Questions.

   1. Divide the chapters of this lesson into four main parts.

   2. Give in your own words the substance of the exhortation.

   3. How does 11:1 define "faith"?

   4. Give an outline analysis of chapters 11 and 12.

   5. What books of the Bible furnish most of these examples of faith?

   6. How would you explain 12:1?

   7. How would you explain the reference to Esau?

   8. Do you find six or seven particulars of comparison in verses 18-24?

   CONCLUDING EXHORTATIONS

   Chapter 13

   Farrar thinks that the exhortations of this chapter being mostly of a
   general character, probably formed a characteristic feature in all the
   Christian correspondence of this epoch interesting if true.

   1. Brotherly Love, Verses 1-3.

   A virtue undreamed of until the time of Christianity, but peculiarly
   necessary among members of a persecuted sect like these Hebrew
   Christians. (Cf. Rom. 12:10; 1 Thess. 4:9; 1 Peter 1:22; 1 John
   3:14-18). Here it was expected to take a very practical turn, made
   necessary by the absence of places of public entertainment like our
   hotels and boardinghouses (Rom. 12:13; Tit. 1:8; 1 Tim. 3:2; 1 Peter
   4:9). For illustrations of the latter part of verse 2 see Gen. 28:2-22;
   Judges 13:2-14; also Matt. 25:35-40. If Paul was the writer of this
   epistle, how particularly touching is the reference in verse 3? "Being
   yourselves also in the body," may be related to what he says to the
   Colossians (1:24; see comment).

   2. Chastity, Verse 4.

   Light is thrown on the meaning here by the R. V. (cf. Acts 15:20; 1
   Thess. 4:6). The Gospel of Christ introduced a wholly new conception of
   the sin of fornication which among the heathen was not regarded as a
   sin.

   3. Contentment, Verses 5 and 6.

   "Conversation" here means "your turn of mind," let it be "free from the
   love of money." The rest of the section gives a good reason for such
   trustfulness.

   4. Steadfastness and Heavenly-mindedness. Verses 7-16.

   Verse 7 is rendered in the past tense in the R. V. "them that had the
   rule over you," which is more consistent with the words "whose faith
   follow." "The end of their conversation" means "the outcome of their
   life and testimony." Their "faith" is expressed in the terms of verse
   8, to which the readers are further exhorted in verse 9. The close of
   verse 9 points back again to the Jewish ceremonials they had left and
   to which some of them were being tempted to return again. Such
   sacrificial altars they did not require as they had a better one (10).
   Christ Himself is the Christian's "altar" as well as that which is upon
   it. On Him the Christian feeds in a heavenly and spiritual sense. Verse
   13 is another of the many exhortations for these Jewish Christians to
   separate themselves from their past at whatever cost for Jesus' sake,
   while verse 14 offers the encouragement for them to do it (cf. Phil.
   3:20). The sacrifices we have to offer through Christ are not the
   bodies of beasts, but thanksgiving and good works (15:16).

   5. Spiritual Obedience, Verse 17.

   6. Prayer for the Writer, Verses 18, 19.

   7. Benediction, Verses 20, 21.

   8. Conclusion, Verses 22, 25.

   Questions.

   1. What is Farrar's idea about these exhortations?

   2. What two practical applications of brotherly love are indicated in
   the lesson?

   3. How are we to understand verse 4?

   4. Why may true Christians be content?

   5. What summing up of the Christian's faith is found in verse 8?

   6. How would you explain verses 9 and 10?

   7. What sacrifice has the Christian to offer?

   8. Memorize the benediction of verses 20, 21.
     __________________________________________________________________

EPISTLE OF JAMES

   INTRODUCTORY

   We have now reached that part of the New Testament containing the
   General or Catholic epistles. They are so called because addressed not
   to any particular individual or Church, but to the Church at large. And
   yet this is not true of all of them, not true of this one, which is
   addressed to a particular class of Christians named in the first verse.

   There are three persons named James in the New Testament. One was the
   brother of John, another the son of Alpheus, and a third the brother of
   our Lord, who is commonly supposed to be the author in this instance.

   A peculiar interest attaches to the fact that, as the brother of our
   Lord, he did not believe on Him as the Messiah up until the
   resurrection perhaps. Compare John 7:5 with Acts 1:13, and 1
   Corinthians 15:7. His conversion may have taken place at the time
   mentioned in the last named Scripture, which, if so, accounts for his
   presence with the Church as shown in the reference to the Acts.

   As to his religious character, he was a very strict Jew, a faithful
   observer of the law, both moral and ceremonial, without, of course,
   relying upon it as a ground of salvation. He gave Paul and Barnabas the
   right hand of fellowship in their work among the Gentiles, but
   personally he remained attached to the Jewish form of Christianity. His
   place in the Christian scheme was to win over the Jewish people, and no
   one probably was better fitted for this than he.

   Persons Addressed.

   The epistle is addressed "to the twelve tribes scattered abroad," which
   proves its Jewish designation; but that they were Christian Jews is
   shown in the salutation, where James styles himself "a servant of Jesus
   Christ."

   As to their social condition they seem to have been composed of rich
   and poor, the tendency of some of the former being to oppress and
   despise the latter, as we shall see. Like all the other classes of
   Christians, they were passing through trial, and like them, too, more
   or less under the influence of false teachers. The doctrine of
   justification only by faith was being perverted among them, and from
   various points of view, their condition was unsatisfactory. The writer
   comforts them in their trial, but rebukes them for their sins, and
   seeks to give them instruction concerning the matters in which they
   were in error.

   The style of the epistle is vivid, sententious and yet rich in graphic
   figure. There is not the logical connection found in Paul's writings,
   the thoughts rather arranging themselves in groups strongly marked off
   from one another; but yet the writer goes immediately into his subject,
   and with the first sentence beginning a section says at once what is in
   his heart. The first words of each section might almost serve as a
   title for it, while that which follows is the development, ending
   usually in a kind of recapitulation. (How to Study the New Testament,
   second section, pp. 163, 164).

   *The Comments on this epistle are taken from Synthetic Bible Studies.

   Questions.

   1. What is the meaning of "Catholic" epistles?

   2. Describe the three persons named "James."

   3. Give a sketch of the supposed author of this epistle.

   4. Describe the persons addressed.

   5. Describe the style of the epistle.

   INSTRUCTION CONCERNING TRIAL

   Chapter 1

   "Temptations," in verse 2, is in the sense of trials (see Revised
   Version margin). Why should they be received with joy (verse 3)? In
   what spiritual condition will such a reception and use of trial result
   (4) ? What will effectually aid in that direction (5, 8) ? Along what
   lines of trial were they being exercised (9, 11)? Notice that the poor
   man is to find comfort in his truly high estate in Christ, while the
   rich man is to find comfort in a truly humble spirit before God in view
   of the facts referred to.

   But there are two kinds of testings which come upon believers, those
   already spoken of as "trials," whose source is divine, and whose
   purpose is strengthening and purifying, and those now brought into view
   as out and out "temptations," not from God, but from themselves. What
   reward comes to the disciple who successfully encounters these (12)?
   What is their immediate source and outcome (13. 15)? What three
   arguments are presented in verses 13, 17 and 18, to show that God is
   not the author of these temptations? On the ground, then, that we have
   our good from God, and our evil from ourselves, what lesson is drawn
   (19, 20)? Speaking of our being "swift to hear," whose words has the
   writer in mind (21)? What shows, however, that the "hearing" he has in
   mind is a very practical experience (22, 25)? Speaking of our being
   "slow to speak," how does he emphasize its importance (26)? In what
   does "pure religion" consist other than in mere talk (27)? Remember
   that James is talking to believers in Christ, to those who supposably
   have "religion," and he is merely instructing them how it should be
   manifested. Men are not saved by benevolence and kindness to the
   widowed and the orphaned, or even by strenuous efforts after a pure
   life, but by Christ, who bore their sins in His own body on the tree;
   yet they show that they are saved by such works as these spoken of in
   the text.

   Questions.

   1. In what sense is "temptation" (v. 2) to be understood?

   2. How are the rich and the poor comforted?

   3. How many kinds of testings come on believers?

   4. How would you explain verse 27?

   RESPECT OF PERSONS AND FAITH AND WORKS

   Chapter 2

   We next have some instruction or admonition concerning respect of
   persons, or the relation of the rich and the poor, 2:1, 13. This would
   seem to be connected with the trials of the poor mentioned in chapter
   1. It not infrequently happens that the people who complain of the
   abundance of the rich, are the most obsequious in their conduct, as if
   they expected something from them as a result. Perhaps it was so here.
   Or it may be, that this instruction laps on more closely to what had
   been said about "pure religion," and visiting the fatherless and
   widows, and keeping one's self unspotted from the world, 1:27.

   Respect of persons was incompatible with these things. Note that the
   Revised Version translates "have" of verse 1 by "hold." These two
   things could not be held at one and the same time. What instance is
   given of holding it (2, 3) ? Of what wrong would they be guilty in such
   a case (4)? What kind of judges would such partiality show them to be
   (same verse)? What would demonstrate the unwisdom as well as unkindness
   of such partiality (5)? What would show their meanness of spirit (6)?
   Their disloyalty to their Saviour (7)? On what principle should they
   exercise themselves toward rich and poor alike (8)? How were they in
   danger of violating this principle (9)? What fundamental truth about
   sin is enunciated in this connection (10, 11)?

   3. Some instruction on the relationship of faith and works, 2:14 26. If
   the subject of respect of persons grew out of the declaration about
   "pure religion" at the close of chapter 1, there is reason to believe
   the same of the present subject.

   Before considering the verses, it may be well to remark on a criticism
   sometimes made that James is here contradicting Paul. The latter
   insists upon faith without works, while the former insists upon works
   with faith. But there is no contradiction, because Paul is laying down
   the principle of salvation, while James is showing the working of that
   principle in the life. Paul as well as James insists upon a faith that
   brings forth fruit, and was himself a fine example of it. The epistle
   of James was written at an early period, before Paul's epistles were,
   generally known and before the council at Jerusalem (Acts 15), which
   may account for this treatment of the subject of faith from a different
   standpoint to that made necessary by the admission of Gentiles into the
   church.

   Observe the change the Revised Version makes in the last clause of
   verse 14. "Can THAT faith save him?" Faith saves, James declared, but
   it is not the kind of faith which produces no fruit. It is not dead
   faith, but living faith. What illustrations of a fruitless faith are in
   verse 16? And verse 19? What illustrations of a fruitful faith are
   given in verses 21-25. Read carefully verse 22, which teaches that
   Abraham's faith was simply shown to be faith, a perfected thing by his
   obedience to God. So our faith in Christ can hardly be called a saving
   faith if it works no change in our lives and produces no results.

   Questions.

   1. What two things are discoursed of in this lesson?

   2. What presumably, led the writer to speak of the first?

   3. Which seems more likely from the context, that "Assembly" (v. 2)
   means a plan of worship or a lawcourt?

   4. What indicates that James is not contradicting Paul in regard to
   justification by faith?

   5. What is the test of saving faith?

   CONTROL OF THE TONGUE

   Chapter 3

   The third chapter contains instruction or admonition concerning the
   control of the tongue, 3:1-18. Just as the instruction in the other
   instances grew out of something written in the first chapter, so also
   here. He had exhorted them to be "swift to hear and slow to speak";
   following that he had showed them how to hear in the sense that they
   must be doers of what they hear; and now he would show them how to be
   slow of speech in the sense that they should "set a watch before their
   mouths and keep the door of their lips."

   "Masters" in verse 1, is really "teachers." This shows the direction of
   their temptation to talk too much. They affected teaching, after the
   manner of those rebuked by Paul in his letters to Timothy and Titus.
   There was danger in their doing this, as verse 1 indicates. A heavier
   responsibility rested upon teachers than upon the taught, and there was
   the likelihood of stumbling in that capacity (v. 2).

   Note how he speaks first, of the power of the tongue (3-5). What three
   illustrations does he employ? Secondly, he speaks of the evil of the
   tongue (6). How is it described? What does it do? Whence the source of
   its iniquity? Thirdly, he speaks of its uncontrollableness (7, 8). With
   how many wild, and subtle, and strong things, does he compare it in
   this regard?

   After speaking the tongue in general terms, how does he apply the
   subject to the present condition of things (9, 10) ? By the use of what
   similes does he seek to better it (11, 12)? What is the relation
   between wisdom and speech (13)? What does the strife of tongues
   indicate as to the condition of the heart (14)? What is the source of
   such strife (is)? Its product (16)? How does true wisdom compare with
   it as to its source, character, and effects (17, 18)?

   The questions in the text of this lesson render unnecessary any at the
   end.

   WORLDLY MINDEDNESS

   Chapters 4-5

   Like other divisions of this epistle this is so connected with the
   last, and grows out of it so naturally, that it is difficult to say
   where the division occurs. The writer had been speaking of envying and
   strife in expression through the tongue, and now puts in his plow
   deeper to show their source in the antecedent condition of the heart.
   "Lust" is not to be taken in the limited sense of sensuality, but in
   the broader sense of worldly pleasure or gratification of any kind.

   Verse 2 presents difficulty. Consistency makes it necessary to suppose
   that James is here addressing Christians as throughout the epistle, and
   yet how incongruous to think of Christians committing murder to gratify
   their desires! Luther translated "kill" by "hate," and doubtless
   expressed the real meaning by so doing, although, to quote Neander,
   "James used the stronger expression in order to designate with the
   utmost precision the nature of that evil which, whatever may be the
   outward form of manifestation, is still the same."

   Nor let it be thought strange that such persons should be referred to
   as engaging in prayer (v. 3), for nothing is more common than for
   worldly-minded Christians to supplicate heaven for the gratification of
   desires entirely selfish, giving no consideration either to God's
   pleasure, or the well-being of their neighbors. How plainly James
   reveals the cause for the non-results of such prayers!

   What names does he bestow upon these worldly-minded Christians (4)? How
   does the language of this verse indicate that he has in mind adulterers
   in the moral and spiritual sense -- professing loyalty to God and yet
   consorting with the world? What shows the incompatibility of such
   things? Verse 5 should be read in the Revised Version, showing that the
   Holy Spirit who dwells in the believer is not a spirit of envy. What
   was their hope under such circumstances of sin, and in what direction
   should they look for deliverance (6)? What prerequisite was necessary
   to obtain this grace (6-10)? How did the want of humility show itself
   in their prayers (11, 12)?

   But this worldly-mindedness took to itself various forms, and James
   addresses himself to another in the verses following. What false
   reliance is spoken of in verse 13? How is it rebuked (14)? What advice
   and admonition is given (15, 16)? It was not enough for them to know
   this truth, how does he teach them the need of acting upon it (17)?

   What further application of worldly-mindedness follows in chapter 5?
   Who are addressed now? What warning is given them? "Ye have laid up
   your treasure in the last days," is the way verse 3, last sentence,
   should be rendered. How vividly it applies to-day!

   Are we not nearing the last days, and are not treasures heaping up as
   never before? What three charges are laid against the rich here (4, 6)?
   Fraud, voluptuousness, injustice! How awful to think of these things
   under the cloak of Christianity! Or shall we say that James is here
   referring to the rich outside the Christian church altogether? It is
   difficult to say. Notice carefully, however, the judgments coming upon
   these rich people. What miseries indeed!

   The epistle closes as it began, with comfort for the tried and
   oppressed, verses 7-20. What hope is set before the oppressed laboring
   men (7, 8)? How different from the strike and the boycott? If the rich
   of our day be at fault, are not the poor equally so, the Word of God
   being the standard? What examples of long-suffering patience are set
   before them in verses 10 and 11?

   What closing recommendations and exhortations are set before all
   concerning oaths (12)? Concerning heavenly-mindedness in the opposite
   experiences of life (13)? What specific directions concerning the sick
   (14-16)? What testimony to the efficacy of prayer? How is it
   illustrated (17, 18)? With what statement of the believer's privilege
   and obligation does the epistle close (19, 29)?

   Questions.

   1. How would you connect this lesson with the last?

   2. What does "lust" mean?

   3. What difficulty is presented in this lesson?

   4. What hinders prayer?

   5. Who are meant by spiritual adulterers?
     __________________________________________________________________

FIRST EPISTLE OF PETER

   THE LIVING HOPE

   Chapter 1:1-12

   The opening of this epistle reminds us of Paul in its salutation,
   verses 1 and 2. Here we have the author's name -- Peter, his official
   designation -- an apostle of Jesus Christ, and a characterization and
   location of the people addressed -- "strangers scattered throughout"
   the provinces of Asia Minor named. This last phrase is rendered in the
   Revised Version, "sojourners of the dispersion," which indicates that
   they were chiefly Jewish Christians not at home in their own land. But
   nevertheless, they were at home with God, for they are spoken of as
   "elect," or chosen ones, and it is interesting to note the operation of
   the Three Persons of the Godhead in their election -- the Father, the
   Son and the Holy Spirit. The first, called them, the Second redeemed
   them, the Third satisfied or set them apart for God forever.

   The salutation is followed, as also in Paul's epistles, by the
   thanksgiving (3-12), which contains as well a statement of the theme of
   the epistle which w' is, "The Living Hope." Seven things are told us of
   this Living Hope: (1) Its source, "the abundant mercy of God"; (2) its
   ground, the new birth, "begotten again"; (3) its means, "the
   resurrection of Jesus Christ," involving His death, of course; (4) its
   nature, "an inheritance," etc.; (5) its security, "reserved" for us,
   "who are kept" for it; (6) its consummation "in the last time," which
   as is shown later, means not the end of the world, but of the present
   age which synchronizes with the Second Coming of Christ; (7) its
   effect, joy, "wherein ye greatly rejoice." This rejoicing is
   experienced even in the midst of trial (v. 6), because that trial will
   redound to our "praise, and honor and glory" at Christ's Second Coming.
   "The end of your faith" (v. 9), means that at which faith aims or in
   which it results, which the apostle says the believer is now
   "receiving," now bearing off as a prize in the present earnest of the
   Spirit he enjoys, in the present peace of reconciliation, in his
   growing sanctification and eager anticipation of eternal joy.

   The closing part of this section (9-12) is a strong declaration of the
   supernatural character of the Holy Scriptures. The "Salvation" just
   referred to had been prophesied of in the Old Testament, concerning
   which its writers had sought and searched diligently. That for which
   they searched was the time of the sufferings and subsequent glory of
   Christ. The Holy Spirit had led them to write of that time, and now the
   same Spirit revealed into them the meaning of what they had written. He
   instructed them that they had written not for their own age but this
   age, when that which they had written was being preached in the
   demonstration of the same Holy Spirit (v. 12). We thus see that the
   Holy Spirit inspired the Scriptures, reveals their meaning, and
   accompanies their preaching and teaching, or else that preaching or
   teaching is in vain.

   Questions.

   1. Give the details of the "Salutation."

   2. Who are meant by "strangers" here?

   3. What is the theme of the epistle?

   4. Name the seven things spoken of it.

   5. Explain verse 9.

   6. What three-fold relation does the Holy Spirit bear to the Holy
   Scriptures?

   OBLIGATIONS OF THE HOPE -- UPWARD

   Chapters 1:12-2:10

   "Wherefore" at the beginning of this lesson shows that as the result of
   what has gone before something is expected. They who have been begotten
   again to this Living Hope have obligations arising from it.

   1. The first is Hope (13-16). The difference between "hope" in verse 13
   and that in verse 3 is, that there it represented the believer's
   standing or position before God in Christ, and here his experience and
   exhibition of it. Having been begotten again unto a Living Hope, he is
   now to hope for it with all sobriety and concentration of mind. As he
   does so hope it will affect his character and conduct (14), for no
   longer will his daily life be run in the mould of his former desires in
   sin, but will be holy as God is holy (15, 16).

   2. The second is Fear (17-21), godly fear, of course, not the fear of a
   criminal before a judge, but that of an obedient child in the presence
   of a loving father. Two motives are given for it, one, the thought of
   judgment, (17), and the other, the cost of our redemption (18, 19). The
   judgment is not to determine the question of salvation, which is
   settled for believers as soon as they accept Christ, but to determine
   their fidelity as disciples and the place of reward awaiting them in
   glory.

   3. The third is Love (22-2:3). Believers have "purified their souls,"
   not in an absolute experimental sense, but in the judicial sense that
   they now have a right standing before God. This they did "in obeying
   the truth" of the Gospel, which they were enabled to obey "through the
   Spirit"; in other words, by the aid of the Holy Spirit. Being in this
   position they are able to "love one another," and being able to do it
   imposes the obligation to do it. (22). The thought is extended in the
   next verse which reveals that believers are "brethren" in that they
   have all been "born again" by the one "seed," which is the
   incorruptible Word of God. The "love" they are to exercise toward one
   another is defined in the opening verses of chapter 3, and in order to
   obtain the strength to exercise it they are to draw on the Word of God.
   That which instrumentally brought them into life will sustain them in
   it continually (2, 3).

   4. The fourth is Praise (4-10. The Lord Jesus Christ referred to in
   verse 3, is "a Living Stone," Whose life has been communicated to
   believers, making them "living stones" (5). They thus form a spiritual
   temple, and, abruptly changing the figure, they are the "priesthood" in
   the temple. As such they have spiritual sacrifices to offer (5), the
   chief of which is to "show forth the praises of Him Who" redeemed them
   (9, 10).

   These four obligations of "The Living Hope" are referred to as the
   "upward" ones in the sense that, with one exception, they are due to
   God directly. The exception is that of "Love" which is due to God
   indeed, but exercised indirectly through the brethren. The obligations
   following in the epistle are for the most part outward toward the
   world, and inward toward one another as fellow-believers,
   fellow-members of the family of God or of the Body of Christ.

   Questions.

   1. What is the significance of "Wherefore"?

   2. Name the four "obligations" in this lesson.

   3. Why are they called "upward"?

   4. What is the difference between "hope" in verse 3 and in verse 13?

   5. What are the two motives for godly fear?

   6. Expound in your own words 1:22-2 13.

   7. Do the same with 2:4-10.

   OBLIGATIONS OF THE HOPE -- OUTWARD

   Chapters 2:11-4:6

   The writer had dropped his pen, but takes it up again at verse 11. To
   "abstain from fleshy lusts that war against the soul," is limited and
   defined in the next verse. The pagans round about were speaking against
   the Christians as evil-doers. Their increasing numbers were emptying
   the Pagan temples, and threatening in so doing, not only the Pagan
   religion but the state itself, for the Romans worshipped the state in
   the person of the emperor, and at this time Rome controlled the world.
   The duty of the Christians, therefore, was to have their conduct so
   seemly and consistent in the eyes of their watchful and jealous
   neighbors that by their "good works," those neighbors might in the day
   of their visitation by Divine grace glorify God for them.

   There were two ways in which this seemliness was to show itself, or
   rather two obligations to be borne by the Christians toward the pagans,
   one was submission (2:13-3:7), and the other testimony (3:8-4:6).

   The submission was comprehensive in scope, covering the three classes
   of the social order: governmental (13-17), industrial (18-25), conjugal
   (3:1-7).

   The testimony was to be marked by four things: readiness, intelligence,
   meekness and consistency of life (3:15, 16).

   The last point calls for amplification because of some obscurity in the
   text that follows. It is the writer's desire all through the epistle to
   use the example of Christ to enforce his exhortations. For example, in
   chapter 2 (18-25), household servants are urged to patience under even
   unjust treatment by their Pagan masters on the ground that when Christ
   "was reviled," He "reviled not again," "but committed Himself to Him
   that judgeth righteously." And so here it is said that it is better to
   "suffer for well-doing than for evil doing" (17). Why? Because Christ
   so suffered even unto death (18), but was quickened and raised from the
   dead; and even more, has "gone into heaven and is on the right hand of
   God, angels and authorities and powers being made subject unto Him"
   (22). We Christians should arm ourselves with the same mind" that He
   had (4:1). We, too, should be willing to suffer in the flesh. He who
   has this purpose in his heart "hath ceased from sin" in the sense
   indicated in verses 2-4; i. e., he will separate himself from all
   evil-doers even if he suffer for it so far as his life in the flesh is
   concerned. There were some indeed, who had suffered even unto death
   (6); but it was to this end that the Gospel had been preached to them
   while they were alive, that they might know that, though they were thus
   judged, thus treated according to the will of men as regards the flesh.
   yet they would live by the will of God as regards the spirit. And, of
   course, as Christ triumphed over His enemies and entered into glory,
   the same would be true of them.

   A further difficulty appears at 3:19, where Christ in triumphing over
   His enemies is represented as preaching "unto the spirits in prison."
   "Preaching" here is not the word commonly used for preaching the
   gospel, but means "to herald" or "to proclaim." That which Christ
   heralded or proclaimed was His triumph over His enemies through the
   Cross (Col. 2:13-15. "Spirits" presumably, does not refer to men but
   angels, the evil angels who "kept not their first estate, but left
   their own habitation," "in the days of Noah." (See our comments on Gen.
   6: 8, and compare also 2 Peter 2:4, 5, and Jude 6, 7).

   Questions.

   1. Explain 2:11, 12.

   2. Name the two "outward" obligations of "The Living Hope."

   3. Name the three kinds of submission enjoined.

   4. In what four ways was the testimony to be marked?

   5. Explain 4:1-6.

   6. Explain 3:19, 20.

   OBLIGATIONS OF THE HOPE -- INWARD

   Chapters 4:7-5:14

   1. Hospitality, 4: 7-11.

   by which we understand spiritual rather than physical hospitality,
   though the latter need not be excluded from the thought. Verses 10 and
   11 for example, suggest 1 Cor. 12; Rom. 12:3-8; Ephesians 4:7-16, etc.,
   in which Paul is teaching the duty of the members of the Body of Christ
   to minister to one another of their spiritual gifts without judging.

   2. Patience, vv. 12-19.

   Verse 12 shows that the opposition to the Christians at this time was
   exhibited in more than a "speaking against" them as earlier passages
   record. "The fiery trial among you" is the rendering of the Revised
   Version it was already there. Verse 13 is characteristic of Peter, who
   always throws forward the fact of the present suffering of Christians
   unto the light of their future glory, for which reason he is called the
   apostle of hope (cf. 1:3, 7, 11; 5:1, 4, 10). If Christians were
   unwilling to suffer for righteousness' sake it was an evidence of a low
   spiritual state. Let them remember therefore, that time of judgment he
   had referred to in 1:17.

   3. Fidelity, 5:1-4.

   In this instance "elders," in the sense of pastors are particularly
   addressed, when once more the heavenly glory is brought forward as a
   motive for their conduct.

   4. Service, vv. 5-11.

   "Elder" in this instance has reference, not to office, but age. The
   younger members of the flock, and indeed all of them, are to gird
   themselves with humility "to serve one another" (R. V.). Fear should
   move them to do this, "for God resisteth the proud." The hope of reward
   should move them, for He "giveth grace to the humble," hence the
   exhortation of verse 6. It costs something to humble one's self. It
   makes us anxious about our possessions or our position in life, but let
   us cast that anxiety upon God, for it is His business to care for us
   (7). "It matters to Him about you," is a literal and beautiful
   rendering of that verse. But there is another reason for humbling
   ourselves in service the activity of the evil one (8, 9). It is he who
   would restrain us from doing it. Be watching out for him at such a
   time, resist him in the comfort of knowing that you are not alone in
   such experiences. Moreover, the conflict will not be for long, and
   glory follows (10).

   Questions.

   1. Name the four "inward" obligations of The Living Hope.

   2. Define "spiritual" hospitality.

   3. How is Peter sometimes designated, and why?

   4. What motives should move us to serve one another?

   5. Give a literal translation of 5:7.
     __________________________________________________________________

SECOND EPISTLE OF PETER

   FALLING FROM GRACE -- A WARNING

   Chapter 1 Second Peter is the first of the New Testament books as to
   the canonicity of which there is any doubt. It was not mentioned by the
   earliest Christian writers, but this may be accounted for by the
   lateness of its appearance, and the fact that it was not addressed to
   any local church with an interest in and facility for making its
   existence known.

   On the other hand there are points of genuineness, such as similar
   expressions to those in first Peter, similar views of prophecy, the
   writer's testimony to his presence at the transfiguration, etc., all of
   which substantiate the Petrine authorship. We cannot consider the
   subject at any length -- enough to know that the book has been regarded
   as canonical by the whole church, with isolated exceptions, for sixteen
   or seventeen centuries at least.

   Its Object.

   Before analyzing the epistle let us consider its object which was to
   warn and to exhort (3:17, 18). And this warning was against falling
   from grace, while the exhortation was in the direction of growing in
   grace. A working outline will be found in considering:

   1. The enforcement of this warning and exhortation (1:2-11).

   2. The ground of it (1:12-21).

   3. The occasion of it (2-3).

   1. As to the enforcement notice three points:

   (a) The source of growth, 2-4. This source is God Himself. Grace and
   peace are multiplied in us through the knowledge of Him (v. 2), but
   that is not all. His divine power grants unto us how many other things
   that pertain to the same end (v. 2)? And through what channel do they
   come (same verse)? By this knowledge of God we become possessed of
   certain things, what are they (4)? And through the possession of these
   promises of what do we come to partake? But what antecedently has
   become true of us? How does "the corruption that is in the world"
   control men so that they can not partake of the divine nature (same
   verse)?

   (b) The lines of growth, 5-7. If we are to be preserved from falling
   from grace in what general directions should we be careful to grow in
   grace? We have obtained faith from God, in other words, and by this we
   have been declared righteous in a judicial sense, but what now, are we
   to add to this faith, or "supply in it," to quote the Revised Version,
   in order to perfect assurance? The list of the virtues follows, of
   which one or two require a word of explanation. "Virtue," for example,
   is not chastity, but "Courage," perhaps moral courage to confess our
   faith before men. And "temperance" is not moderation in the use of
   intoxicated drinks merely, but in every line of conduct,
   self-restraint, in other words. Moreover, the word "charity" is to be
   interpreted by "love" as in 1 Corinthians 13.

   (c) The need of growth, 8-1 1. The necessity for "diligence" in these
   matters is seen in what follows. It is the presence of these things in
   our lives that makes us fruitful in Christ, and bears testimony to the
   power of His cleansing blood (8, 9). Moreover, they produce the
   strength of assurance of our salvation (10), and secure that that
   salvation shall be a triumphant and glorious one (11).

   Ground of the Warning.

   Passing from the apostle's enforcement of his warning and exhortation
   to the ground of it, 12-21, we find it built upon the truth of the
   Gospel. And this is set before us along two lines of evidence:

   (a) The testimony of Peter himself 12-18. In introducing this he speaks
   of his object (to stir them up), his motive (his approaching decease),
   and his purpose (to prepare a record of these things, which, by the
   way, is supposed to be contained in the Gospel of Mark). But now, what
   is his testimony? That is, to what particular fact of Gospel history
   does he bear witness (16)? What kind of witness is it (same verse)?
   What did he see and hear? Do you remember who were with him? How does
   he interpret the transfiguration, that is, of what greater event does
   he speak of it as a foregleam?

   (b) The testimony of the Old Testament prophets, 19-21. Verse 19 should
   read: "Wherefore we have the word of prophecy made more sure." It does
   not mean that the Old Testament prophets are more sure than the New,
   but that such words as his strengthen the prediction spoken before.
   How, then, should we regard the Old Testament prophecies (19)? What
   does he say of their origin (for so should "interpretation" be
   understood in verse 20)? And when he says those prophecies were not of
   any "private" origination, what does he mean, as gathered from verse
   21? Does not this strongly corroborate Paul in 2 Timothy 3:16.

   Questions.

   1. What distinguishes this epistle in the canon?

   2. What strong evidence is there to its canonicity?

   3. State its object or purpose.

   4. Give its outline.

   5. How many questions in the text of the lesson have your answered
   satisfactorily?

   OCCASION OF THE WARNING

   Chapters 2-3

   We now consider the last division which treats of the occasion for this
   warning and exhortation, chapters 2 and 3. In brief, this occasion was
   the incoming of false teachers in the church, 2:1, whose success is
   predicted in verse 2; whose punishment is certain and dreadful, 3-9;
   and whose description follows in verses 10-22.

   We shall not enter upon this description in detail, and, indeed, it
   presents many difficulties of interpretation. The presence of such
   teachers, in the visible church, is almost inconceivable, but we should
   recall what Christ said about wolves in sheeps' clothing. Their leading
   characteristics are carnality (10), presumption (10-12), reveling (13),
   and covetousness (14-16), but it is clear that the first-named played
   the largest part in the power exercised over their followers. Just what
   the features of this uncleanness were may come before us when we reach
   Jude, whose epistle contains the same picture of false teachers in
   about the same words.

   Character of the False Teaching.

   No portion of this epistle is more important than the last on which we
   now enter, and which, in connection with the description of the
   teachers describes their teaching. The latter focuses upon the second
   coming of Christ, chapter 3.

   In the first place notice the second verse concerning the authority of
   the New Testament as compared with the Old, and how the apostle places
   his writings on a par with the prophets.

   What period is being referred to (3)? Remember that "the last days"
   means the last days of the present age, not the end of the world. What
   is the subject of the scoffing marking the period spoken of (4)? Of
   what fact do the scoffers seem to be in practical ignorance (5, 6)? How
   will the next cosmic catastrophe differ from the last (7)? The
   reference in verse 7 is to the end of the world, but this will not be
   reached till a thousand years after the coming of the Lord. How does
   this fact seem to be alluded to in verse 8? For what reason is the
   coming of the Lord delayed (9)? To what period does verse 10 refer? We
   have seen (2 Thessalonians), the distinction between the coming of
   Christ for His church, and the introduction of "The Day of the Lord"
   which follows. This "day" begins and ends with judgment as Revelation
   reveals, although between the two series of judgments the millennium
   intervenes. We have been taught that the prophets see events in space
   rather than in time, often overlooking intervening occurrences between
   the objective points. In this way the church period is not alluded to
   in the Old Testament, while in the present instance Peter says nothing
   about the millennium. What application does he make of these words
   (11-12)? What hope is set before the believer (13)? With what warning
   and exhortation does he close (17, 18)?

   Questions.

   1. What was the occasion for the warning?

   2. Name some characteristics of the false teachers.

   3. What is meant by "the last days"?

   4. When does "the Day of the Lord" begin and end?

   5. How do the prophets see events?
     __________________________________________________________________

FIEST EPISTLE OF JOHN

   GOD IS LIGHT

   Chapters 1-2:28

   First John is addressed to no particular church or individual, but it
   is thought that the apostle had in mind a cycle of churches like the
   seven of Asia (see Revelation 1). It is likely that the Christians to
   whom he wrote were of Gentile rather than Jewish origin, as judged by
   the few references to the Old Testament, and by such allusions as that
   in chapter 5:21.

   The epistle was written later than the Gospel by the same author, as
   gathered from the circumstances that an acquaintance with its facts is
   presupposed, and also because the words of Christ are cited if known.

   The occasion of its writing seems to have been the presence of false
   teachers, as we judge from passages, of which 2:18-26 and 4:1-6 are
   examples. And, indeed, we learn from the writers of church history that
   at a very early period there were three classes of heretics as they
   were called, (1) The Ebionites, who denied the Deity of Christ; (2) the
   Docetists, who denied His humanity; (3) the Cerinthians, who denied the
   union of the two natures, human and divine, prior to His baptism.

   The Theme is stated to be "Fellowship with God" in chapter 1:3, 4, and
   the idea is presented to us not in a progression of thought, but after
   the manner of the law of recurrence, which we have come to recognize in
   other instances. Perhaps it might be said rather, that the apostle
   gives us three distinct cycles of thought, which form in their
   combination a beautiful picture of truth, and a cumulative application
   of the main line of instruction. For example, God is light (1:5), hence
   fellowship with God depends on our walking in the light. Again, God is
   righteous (2:29), hence fellowship with God depends on our doing
   righteousness. And finally, God is love, (4:7, 8) hence fellowship with
   God depends on our possessing and manifesting love.

   Introduction 1:1-4.

   In the introduction three thoughts are set before us concerning the
   apostleship of Christ, which may be thus expressed:

   The proofs of the apostleship, viz: to have seen and heard Christ,
   verse 1.

   The character of the apostleship, viz : the declaration of Christ,
   verse 2.

   The object of the apostleship, fellowship in Christ, verses 3, 4.

   What peculiar expressions in the opening chapter of John's Gospel are
   recalled by the first verse? What bearing has this upon the statement
   that the Gospel was first written? Against which of the heresies,
   previously mentioned, do these words seem directed? How does the
   Revised Version translate verse 2. especially the phrase "that eternal
   life"? Against which of the heresies does these words, as given in the
   Revised Version, seem directed?

   2. First Cycle of Thought 1:5-2:28.

   What is the first message that John declares to them (5)? If "God is
   light," how is fellowship to be maintained with Him, (6, 7)? If
   fellowship is to be maintained by walking in the light, how may we walk
   in the light?

   1. By perceiving and confessing sin in the faith of Jesus Christ
   (1:8-2:2).

   2. By keeping God's commandments (3, 8).

   3. Especially the commandment of love to the brethren (9, 11).

   4. This keeping of God's commandments is incompatible with the love of
   the world (15-17).

   5. It is incompatible with fellowship of false teachers (18-28).

   Notice how this last corroborates the remarks concerning the nature of
   the heresies in John's time. Notice the peculiar title ascribed to
   Christ in verse 20. How does this verse and verse 27 harmonize with
   John 15:6, and Acts 2:32, 33? What then is the unction believers have
   received from Christ?

   Questions.

   1. To what churches probably was this epistle addressed?

   2. Why is its origin dated later than the fourth Gospel?

   3. Name and define the three classes of heretics in mind.

   4. State the theme and the manner of its treatment.

   5. Give the main outline.

   6. How may we walk in the light?

   GOD IS RIGHTEOUS

   Chapters 2:29-4:6

   The second cycle centers around the thought that "God is righteous"
   (2-29), hence fellowship with God depends on doing righteousness.

   Observe that in the working out of the proposition the apostle speaks
   of three things:

   1. The motive for doing righteousness, viz: the hope we have through
   our sonship to God (3:1-10).

   2. The test of doing righteousness, viz: love to the brethren
   (3:11-18).

   3. The reward of doing righteousness, viz: assurance of salvation
   (3:19-4:6).

   Referring more at length to the "motive," notice that our sonship to
   God includes likeness to Christ in His manifested glory (2). Notice
   that the evidence of the sonship is bound up with expectation of His
   coming, and the holiness of living it begets (3) Verses 3-8 continue
   the thought "of Christ s holiness, and His work on the Cross to make it
   possible in our experience. Verse 9, has presented difficulty to some.
   "Whosoever is born of God," is taken by many to refer only to the new
   nature in the believer which does not sin. Others interpret the word
   "commit" in the sense of practice (compare Galatians 5:21) (Revised
   Version). It is one thing to fall temporarily into sin as a consequence
   of sudden temptation, and another thing to practice it, i. e., to live
   in continual transgression. This no regenerated man does. The teaching
   of this verse should be balanced with that of 1:8, where the apostle is
   speaking to the same persons as in the present instance.

   Referring to the "test" of doing righteousness, it is peculiar that
   brotherly love should be insisted on again as in the case of walking in
   the light. But it will be found to have an equally prominent place in
   the third cycle of thought, thus stamping this epistle as peculiarly
   the epistle of love. It speaks of God's love toward us and our love
   toward Him, but either side of that truth with John always runs into
   the corresponding one of love toward one another in Christ. Notice what
   hinders the flow of this love, verse 12. Notice its importance as
   demonstrating our spiritual condition, verse 14. Notice the spiritual
   application of the sixth commandment, verse 15. Notice the practical
   way this love should be demonstrated, verses 16-18.

   Referring to the "reward" of righteousness as consisting in the
   assurance of salvation, notice the number of times and the different
   relations in which that word "know" is employed. This is the
   "assurance" epistle all the way through as well as the epistle of love,
   and it is more than a coincidence that these two things go together.
   See how assurance of salvation depends upon our having a good
   conscience and a warm heart in Christ (19-21). See how this assurance
   carries with it a corresponding assurance in prayer (22-24). See,
   again, that this is the evidence of the abiding life in Christ (24),
   and that just in the measure in which we are pleasing our Heavenly
   Father as Jesus did, will we receive the witness of the Holy Spirit to
   that fact as He did. Finally the Christian who thus lives obediently
   has his assurance increased in the testimony to his overcoming of
   temptation. He will not be carried away by false doctrines or deceived
   by any anti-Christ (4: 1-6).

   Questions.

   1. How is the thought of this lesson worked out?

   2. How would you interpret 3:9?

   3. What peculiar stamp is on this epistle?

   4. What name might be given it from another point of view?

   5. What lessons are here taught about assurance?

   GOD IS LOVE

   Chapters 4:7-5:21

   What is the third characteristic of God which John reveals (7, 8)? If,
   then, God is love, how is fellowship to be maintained with Him (same
   verses)? In the working out of the thought that fellowship with God is
   maintained by experiencing and exercising love, notice (1), how His
   love was particularly manifested toward us (9, 10), and (2), how our
   love toward Him should be manifested (11, 12), Third, notice how such
   love implies fellowship (13-16). Fourth, notice how it effects our
   spiritual life, begetting assurance, (17-18). Fifth, notice how its
   absence destroys fellowship (19-21). Sixth, notice how the experience
   and exercise of love is only another aspect of walking in the light and
   doing righteousness (5:1-4). Seventh, notice that the basis and source
   of this love, is faith in Christ (5-12). In conclusion, notice how many
   things we may thus know. Verses, 13, 15, 18, 19, 20.

   A simpler outline of this last division which some might prefer is: (a)
   the reason for love, God's love toward us (4:9-11); (b) the source of
   love, God's dwelling in us (4:12-16); (c) the rest or confidence of
   love, boldness in the day of judgment (4:17-19); (d) the fruit of love,
   loving the brethren (4:20-5:12).

   The conclusion of the epistle verses 13-21, is easily to be interpreted
   in the light of what has preceded it.

   Questions.

   1. Can you name the seven divisions of the first treatment of this
   lesson?

   2. Can you name the four divisions of the second treatment?

   3. Have you considered all the things which the Christian may know?

   4. Do you appreciate why John is called the apostle of love?
     __________________________________________________________________

SECOND EPISTLE OF JOHN

   The second epistle of John is addressed to whom? The word "lady" in the
   Greek is Kyria, which may be translated as a proper name, and perhaps
   in this case it should be so understood. Kyria was a common name among
   the Greeks and refers here, it may be, to some notable saint in the
   neighborhood of Ephesus, to which John ministered in his old age. The
   letter is brief, for the writer is soon to make a visit to this sister
   in Christ and to speak with her face to face (12).

   1. The Salutation, verses 1-4, is interesting for three or four things:

   (a) The deep humility of the writer.

   (b) The tender regard for the sister to whom he writes.

   (c) The solicitude for the honor of Jesus Christ.

   (d) The insight into the spiritual condition of this sister's
   household.

   2. The burden message of the letter follows, 5-11. This burden is the
   old one of John -- love. But love in the New Testament means not a
   passion, not an emotion, a life. An abiding principle influencing for
   righteousness, this is Christian love. Is not that what John says here
   (6)? And see how the idea is emphasized in verse 7. Not to love is not
   to hold to the truth in doctrine and to practice it in life. False
   teachers do not love. They may be amiable in their social relations,
   but they have not this Gospel love. They are deceivers, and love and
   deceit do not go together. And mark the central fact of that truth
   which constitutes love the confession that Jesus Christ is come in the
   flesh. This strikes at the Jew's denial of Jesus, certainly, but also
   how can Christian Science, which denies the material body confess this?
   Changing the language again to conform to the Revised Version, we see
   that they are the deceivers and the anti-Christ in spirit who fail to
   confess that He "cometh in the flesh." It is Christ's second coming
   John has in mind as truly as His first coming.

   In the light of the above consider the warning in verse 8. There is
   danger of believers losing something which belongs to them. That
   something is "a full reward." Compare Luke 19:1527; 1 Corinthians
   3:11-15; 2 Peter 1:21; 1 Corinthians 3:11-15; 2 Peter 1. See Matthew
   16:27; Revelation 22:12. Does not the comparison of these passages bear
   out verse 7 as rendered by the Revised Version?

   What is it to transgress as given in verse 9? By the "doctrine of
   Christ" is not meant merely the things He taught while in the flesh,
   but the whole doctrine concerning Him, i. e., the whole of the Old and
   New Testaments. To deny the truth concerning Christ is to deny His
   first and His second coming, and He who denies this "hath not God." He
   may speak much of the "Father," but he only has the Father who has the
   Son. To have the One you must have the Other, (9).

   Observe how strenuous we should be in maintaining this doctrine (v.
   10). The command "receive him not into your house," is relative. It
   means not that we are to deny him meat and shelter altogether, if he be
   in need of them, but that we are not to fellowship him as a brother.
   Even our personal enemies we are to bless and pray for, if they hunger
   we are to feed them and if they thirst give them drink. But those who
   are the enemies of God by being enemies of His truth, we are to have
   nothing to do with in the capacity of fellow-Christians. We must not
   aid them in their plans or bid them God speed. How would such a course
   on our part involve us (11)?

   The apostle closes with that allusion to his visit already referred to,
   and a greeting from Kyria's elect sister. Did this mean her sister in
   the flesh or only in the faith? And in this last case was it the
   apostle's wife?

   Questions.

   1. How may we translate "lady" and to whom may it refer?

   2. Can you discover in the text the four points under the "Salutation"?

   3. What is the message of this letter?

   4. What is Christian love?

   5. What is its central fact?

   6. Who are spiritual anti-Christs?

   7. Have you examined the parallel scriptures on the subject of
   "reward"?

   8. What is meant by the "doctrine of Christ"?

   9. Explain "receive him not into your house."
     __________________________________________________________________

THIRD EPISTLE OF JOHN

   Gaius is a name frequently alluded to by Paul, but whether this were
   the same individual as any of those is problematical. In any event he
   seems to have been a convert of John (v. 4). Another form of the name
   is Caius and this was a very common name indeed.

   What distinction in spiritual things is ascribed to Gaius (2)? His soul
   was prospering even if his bodily health and his business were not, but
   the apostle is interested in other things as well. The Christian should
   be careful of his health, and it is compatible with a deep spiritual
   life that he should have a successful business.

   As to the Christian character of Gaius, three particulars are named:
   (1) He possessed the truth (3). (2) He walked in the truth, i. e., his
   life and conduct measured up to the light he had received from God, (3,
   4). (3) As walking in the truth he was "careful to maintain good
   works," especially in the distribution of his means (5, 6). It is
   noticeable that his "faithfulness" in this regard is mentioned. It was
   not a spasmodic thing on his part, but a steady flow of grace through
   him. His breadth of disposition is also mentioned since his giving was
   not limited to those he knew but extended to those he did not know (5).
   Some recipients of his bounty are referred to in verse 6, and a journey
   mentioned toward the expense of which he was contributing (6). All this
   is very realistic, and brings the life of the church in the first
   century "up to date" as we sometimes say.

   One or two facts are given concerning the recipients of Gaius' gifts
   equally honoring to them, (7). Look at the motive of their journey,
   "His Name's sake," and at the spirit actuating them "taking nothing of
   the Gentiles," i. e., the heathen. Whatever the journey was, they might
   have been assisted in it pecuniarily by those who were not actuated by
   a love for His name, but their conscience would not permit them to
   receive such aid. How valuable this example. And what a close
   relationship it bears to the teaching of the second epistle about
   fellowshipping with heretics. How should such loyal and self-denying
   workers as these be treated in the church, and why (8)?

   The Worldly Character of Diotrephes.

   Here we have another type of the professing Christian in the worldly
   character of Diotrephes, 9-11.

   What seems to have been his besetting sin (9)? How this experience of
   John recalls that of Paul in the churches of Corinth, Galatia and
   Thessalonica? In what manner did John intend to deal with him (10)?
   Does this recall anything similar in apostolic authority on Paul's
   part? How does verse 10 reveal the worldliness and insincerity of
   Diotrephes? What an awfully overbearing, autocratic, unholy man he must
   have been! How did he get into the church?

   What advice is given Gaius in verse 11? How does this testify to the
   relation between faith and works ? What opposite kind of example is set
   before him in verse 12? How many kinds of witnesses testify to the
   Christian character of Demetrius? One can not help wondering if this
   were the Demetrius of Acts 19. Such trophies of grace are by no mean
   unusual, Paul was such an one.

   Note the similarities in the conclusions of this epistle and the one
   previously considered (13, 14), suggesting that they may have been
   penned at the same time.

   The Scofield Bible has an interesting note here, saying that
   "historically, this letter marks the beginning of that clerical
   assumption over the churches in which the primitive church order
   disappeared. It also reveals the believers' resource in such a day.
   John addresses this letter not to the church, but to a faithful man in
   the church for the comfort of those who were standing fast in the
   primitive simplicity. Second John conditions the personal walk of a
   Christian in a day of apostasy; and Third John the personal
   responsibility in such a day of the believer as a member of the local
   church."

   Questions.

   1. Analyze the Christian character of Gaius.

   2. What two features marked his faithfulness?

   3. Tell something of the character of the two other men named.

   4. What epoch does this epistle mark?

   5. Distinguish between second and third John.
     __________________________________________________________________

EPISTLE OF JUDE

   The writer of Jude, evidently not an apostle, calls himself a "servant
   of Jesus Christ and brother of James." Which James? There were two
   whose brother he might have been, the son of Alpheus and the brother of
   our Lord, and the general opinion is in favor of the last-named.

   1. The first division is the salutation, 1, 2. Notice the Revised
   Version: "them that are called, beloved in God the Father, and kept for
   Jesus Christ." Why kept for Him? How much this suggests as to His
   coming glory and the part believers will take in it? 2. The object
   follows, 3, 4. What is that object as stated in verse 3? Notice that
   according to the Revised Version the faith delivered to the saints was
   delivered "once for all." "Faith" here is to be taken in the sense of
   that body of Christian doctrine which forms the substance of the truth
   concerning "our common salvation." It is used synonymously with
   "Gospel." This was delivered to the body of the church, at the
   beginning of its history as a complete revelation in itself (Revelation
   22:18, 19). It is a sacred deposit to be preserved in its integrity,
   defended and earnestly contended for. The necessity for this defense is
   seen in verse 4. "Foreshadowed" in that verse should be "forewritten,"
   i. e., the false teachers referred to had been predicted as coming in
   among the flock. Our Lord had spoken of them, and so had all His
   apostles. The nature and outcome of their teaching as suggested by
   "lasciviousness" is particularly noticeable.

   False Teachers.

   3. The third division deals with the false teachers, and we have first,
   a revelation of their punishment (5-7). From this their position as
   professed disciples would not save them any more than it saved the
   Israelites brought out of Egypt, when they afterward sinned against
   light (5); or the angels referred to in Peter's epistles and Genesis
   (6); or Sodom and Gomorrah (7). Do not fail to observe the class of
   sins prominent in these instances, especially the two last-named, and
   their relationship to "lasciviousness" already spoken of. While the
   erroneous teachings were intellectual, yet their power was augmented by
   carnality of the grossest kind.

   4. The description of the teachers follows, (8-13). Observe in verse 8
   that they not only defile the flesh but speak evil of dignitaries, by
   which may be meant both civil and ecclesiastical superiors. And there
   is a strange illustration in verse 9, that throws light on the burial
   of Moses recorded in Deuteronomy. Why that mystery? Why should God have
   buried Moses, and kept the place a secret? Why should Satan have
   desired possession of that body? Did his fore-knowledge of what should
   take place on the Mount of Transfiguration (Mt. 17) have aught to do
   with it? And further, shall we say with some, that Moses in the flesh
   is to be one of the two witnesses named in Revelation 11, and did Satan
   seek thus to frustrate God's purposes concerning the last days? And
   then the contention of Michael, how that brings to mind the teaching in
   Daniel concerning him as the prince that stands for Israel! What a
   bearing all this has on the teachings of the New Testament about the
   dominions, and principalities and powers of the air (see Ephesians 6).

   Further analysis of these teachers is afforded in verse 11. With what
   three Old Testament individuals, each conspicuous for his self-willed
   and rebellious spirit, are they compared? How strange that such could
   have any standing in the Christian church were it not that we discover
   their successors at the present day. Read verse 12 in the Revised
   Version. "Spots in your feasts of charity," should be "hidden rocks in
   your love-feasts." These "love-feasts" were the Christian gatherings on
   the first day of the week for the "breaking of bread," and the presence
   of such would-be leaders in those assemblies suggested the perils of
   hidden rocks to mariners. What care were required to avoid disastrous
   contact with them. "Feeding themselves without fear," should be,
   "Shepherds that without fear feed themselves." It is characteristic of
   the heretical teacher that he is thinking of himself rather than the
   flock.

   Six terse descriptions of these teachers may be given as follows:
   Visionary, 8, 9; Ignorant, 10, 11; Deceptive, 12, 13; Ungodly, 14, 15;
   Selfish, 1618 ; Schismatic, 19.

   5. The description of the teachers is followed by a reference to the
   foreknowledge of them (14-16). Here is a quotation from Enoch in verse
   14, on which we say a word. There is an apocryphal book in which it is
   found, but it is thought to have been of a later date than Jude, and
   that its author probably quoted from our epistle. How interesting to
   learn that Enoch, before the deluge, had his mind carried out in the
   Spirit to the Second Coming of Christ! And how perfectly his words
   agree with the later prophets, concerning that event!

   The True Church in Contrast.

   6. The reference to the false teachers gives way to a description of
   the true church in sharp contrast with the false (17-25).

   It begins with a caution (17-19). To which of the apostles is he here
   referring, do you think? How does he describe these ungodly persons who
   have found their way into the visible Church? That word "sensual" is in
   the margin of the Revised Version, "natural" or "animal." It is a case
   of unregenerated Christians with whom the Church is still plentifully
   supplied.

   The caution is followed by an exhortation (20, 21). "Build," "pray,"
   "keep," "look," are the four corner posts defining the possessions of
   the Christian life. What is peculiar about the exhortation to pray? In
   Romans 8 we have revealed that the Holy Spirit prays in us, but here we
   are to pray in Him. Are these contradictory teachings? Is it not true
   that the Holy Spirit is our life, and also our spiritual atmosphere? In
   what are we to keep ourselves according to this exhortation? Does this
   mean God's love to us or our love to Him? How better can we keep
   ourselves in His love to us, and the consciousness of our love to Him
   than by building ourselves up on our most holy faith, and praying in
   the Holy Spirit? What do you suppose is meant by "looking for the mercy
   of our Lord Jesus Christ unto eternal life"? In the light of the
   previous teaching about the appearing of His glory, may it not refer to
   that?

   The exhortation is followed by instruction concerning soul-winning (22,
   23). The Greek text, especially in verse 23, is obscure, but the
   teaching calls for compassion on our part, and an effort to save the
   sinner while hating the sin.

   7. The benediction and ascription follow. What two things is God able
   to do for believers in His Son? No wonder that we should ascribe unto
   Him through Jesus Christ "glory and majesty, dominion and power
   throughout all ages."

   Supplemental.

   Jude is particularly a Scripture for these times, and has been called
   "a picture of the last days," and "a preface to Revelation," as it
   shows the drift of the apostasy which makes the awful judgment of the
   book to be necessary.

   R. V. Miller points out how it refers to all the more important
   articles of the Christian faith, (a). The Trinity, inasmuch as we have
   God the Father, (v. 1), Jesus Christ the Son, in several verses, and
   the Holy Spirit (v. 20); (b), the Deity of Christ, Who in half a dozen
   verses is called LORD; (c), the historicity of the Old Testament, whose
   miraculous events are used to illustrate the teaching and give point to
   the warnings as though they were actual occurrences (vv. 5-11); (d),
   the existence and power of a personal Satan against whom even the
   archangel himself dare not bring a railing accusation (v. 9); (e), the
   existence of angels and spirits (vv. 6, 7); (f), the certainty and
   fearfulness of future retribution (vv. 6, 7, 13); (g), the Second
   Coming of Christ (vv. 14, 15).

   Questions.

   1. How is the author of this epistle distinguished from some others?

   2. Name the seven main divisions of it.

   3. How is "Faith" (v. 3), to be understood?

   4. What different ideas are suggested by the "mystery" in verse 9?

   5. What was said in the lesson about verse 14?

   6. Name the four corner posts of the Christian life?

   7. What makes this epistle particularly applicable to, or useful in,
   these days?

   8. What seven important articles of the Christian faith does it
   emphasize?
     __________________________________________________________________

THE BOOK OF REVELATION

   INTRODUCTORY OR "THE THINGS WHICH THOU HAST SEEN"

   Chapter 1

   In this book we return to the atmosphere of the Old Testament, at least
   after the third chapter, at which point the apocalyptic part begins
   with a narration of events synchronizing with "the Day of the Lord."

   The authorship is ascribed to John, who wrote the Gospel and three
   epistles bearing his name, and who at this time, about 95 A. D., had
   been banished by the Roman Emperor, to the Isle of Patmos in the Aegean
   Sea (1:9). The date is in dispute, some placing it as early as Nero, 64
   or 65, but the preponderance of opinion is in favor of the later period
   of Domitian.

   The opening chapter consists (1), of the Preface, verses 1-3, and a few
   questions will put us in possession of it. Whose revelation is it? Of
   course, the reference here is to Jesus Christ considered as the
   God-Man. Whence did He receive this revelation? For whom was it given
   to Him? And for what purpose with reference to them? To which of His
   servants was it representatively sent? And through what agency? What
   did this servant do with the revelation thus committed to him (verse
   2)? "Things which must shortly come to pass" has puzzled some, and
   given rise to the opinion that the predictions have been fulfilled in
   the course of history from that time. However, while some of them have
   been fulfilled in the history of the seven churches of Asia, for
   example, the bulk of them are still future. "One day is with the Lord
   as a thousand years."

   (2) The Salutation follows, 4-8. The seven churches in Asia were
   probably those over which John had particular charge. But it was a
   mistake to suppose that the readers were limited to those churches. To
   quote Alford, "The number seven itself can hardly have been chosen
   except as symbolical of universality, according to the writer's
   practice throughout the book."

   Observe the allusion to the Trinity. "Him Which is, and Which was, and
   Which is to come," identifies God the Father. "The Seven Spirits before
   His Throne," God the Holy Ghost; "Jesus Christ the faithful witness,"
   God the Son. Compare for the Seven Spirits, Isaiah 11:2-5.

   (3) The salutation is followed by the Preparatory Vision John received,
   and which constituted his authority to write, 8-16. This vision was
   that of the Person of the glorified Christ. For the candlesticks,
   compare Rev. 1:20; Matt. 5:14-16; the clothing, Isa. 11:5, 61:10; Eph.
   6:14; Rev. 19:8; the white head and hair, Dan. 7:9; Matt. 17:1, 2; Acts
   22:6-8; 2 Peter 1:16-18; Rev. 22:5; the eyes of fire, 2 Tim. 1:7, 8;
   Heb. 12:29; the feet of brass, Prov. 1:24-28; Isa. 48:4; Luke 13:25-27;
   the voice of many waters, Dan. 10:6, Rev. 14:2, 3; 19:6; the seven
   stars, Dan. 12:3; Mal. 2:7; Rev. 1:20, 12:1; the two-edged sword, Eph.
   6:17; Heb. 4:12; the keys, Isa. 22:20-22; Matt. 16:19; Luke 11:52; Rev.
   3:7, 20:1; Matt. 28:18; John 20:22, 23; 1 Cor. 12:4, 8.

   (4) The vision concludes with the general command to write, 17-20, in
   the terms of which (19) there is outlined the three major divisions of
   the book. "The things which thou hast seen," refer to the Patmos vision
   just considered; "the things which are," refer to the things then
   existing, i. e., the churches, and particularly the seven churches of
   Asia; "the things which shall be hereafter," or literally "after
   these," means, as we think, after the Church period ends. As the first
   division covers chapter one, so the second covers chapters two and
   three, and the third practically the rest of the book. The last
   division, as suggested by W. J. Erdman, falls into a series of six
   sevens with five parenthetical passages making, with the church
   division, seven sevens. The six sevens are: (a) the seals, 4:1-8:1; (b)
   the trumpets, 8:2-9:19; (c) the personages, 12:1-14:20; (d) the vials,
   15:1-16:21; (e) the dooms, 17:1-20:15; (f) the new things, 21:1-22:21.

   Questions.

   1. What peculiarity about the interpretation of this book is stated in
   the first paragraph of the lesson?

   2. What is said about its date?

   3. State the four main divisions of the chapter.

   4. Have you examined its symbolism in the light of the parallel
   passages named?

   5. Name the three major divisions of the book as indicated in verse 19?

   6. Name the six sevens of the third division.

   THE SEVEN CHURCHES, OR THE THINGS WHICH ARE

   Chapters 2-3

   No agreement exists as to the application of "angel" in the address to
   each of these churches, but as the word means "messenger," it may refer
   to those sent by the churches to interview the apostle at Patmos (cf.
   Phil. 4:18). Of course, the seven churches existed at this time in
   Asia, and yet the epistles have not only a local application to them,
   but apply representatively to the whole Church everywhere at that time.

   Many also think they have an application prophetically to "the
   spiritual history of the Church at large from that day to the end of
   this age," when the true Church, which is the body of Christ, will be
   caught up to meet Him in the air. In this respect, they bear a close
   relation to the seven parables of Matt. 13 to which the student will
   refer. The apostasy in Christendom outlined in that chapter in Matthew,
   began in the apostolic days (2 Thess. 2), and has been increasing ever
   since, and will culminate in the "man of sin" at the end of this age
   after the true Church has been translated. It is the course of this
   apostasy that is thought to be again outlined here prophetically in the
   epistles to the seven churches. One reason for this view is that we
   discover a gradual decline from the fervor of the first love of the
   Ephesian Church, or the Ephesian period of the Church, to the lukewarm,
   spewed-out-of-the-mouth condition of Laodicea.

   Seven Periods in the Church.

   The seven periods in the history of the Church as outlined in these
   epistles have been interpreted thus: The epistle to the church at
   Ephesus represents the spiritual condition of the first period of the
   Church universal from the ascension of Christ to the close of the first
   century, the apostolic era. The epistle to Smyrna represents the second
   period, or the martyr Church, from the death of John to the rise of
   Constantine, 100-311 A. D. The third, Pergamos, from the state Church
   under Constantine to the rise of the papacy (Pope Gregory I, 311-590.
   The fourth, Thyatira, from the rise of the papacy to the reformation,
   590-1517. The fifth, Sardis, the Protestant Churches from the
   reformation to the rise of Methodism, 1517-1755. The sixth,
   Philadelphia, the Missionary period, 1755, to somewhere near the
   present time. The seventh, Laodicea, from the present time to the
   Second Coming of Christ.

   "Nicolaitanes" (2:6-15), has taken to mean an early heretical sect by
   that name, but the application is doubtful. The word comes from nikao,
   "to conquer," and laos, "the people" or "the laity," and may refer to
   the earliest notion of a priestly order of the "clergy," separating the
   equal priesthood of all believers into a few who were "priests," and
   the great majority who were not. In the earlier period represented by
   the epistle to Ephesus it was only "the deeds of the Nicolaitanes"
   which were referred to, but in the later period represented by
   Pergamos, the "deeds" had developed into a "doctrine." "The doctrine of
   Balaam" (2:14; 2 Pet. 2:5; Jude 11), was his "teaching Balak to corrupt
   the people who could not be cursed" (Num. 20:5, 23:8, 31:15, 16), by
   tempting them to defile themselves by marrying the heathen, and
   represents the union of the Church with the world which is spiritual
   adultery. "Satan's seat" is in the world (2:13, cf. with John 12:31,
   14:30, 16:11). "That woman Jezebel" (2:20) brought idolatry into
   Israel, and suggests Romanism with its pagan ceremonies. "Sardis"
   stands for the Reformation period or Protestantism which grew out of
   it, in the sense that it is so largely profession without life.
   "Philadelphia" is the true church within the professing church, whose
   history overlaps that of Laodicea, or rather runs parallel with it for
   a while.

   Little space is left to speak of the structure of the epistles, but
   quoting Archbishop Trench, it will be seen that there are certain forms
   fundamental to all of them; (1) an order to write, (2) a glorious title
   of the speaker, (3) an address to the Church, (4) a command to hear,
   (5) a promise to the faithful. It is further interesting that the title
   of the speaker, Christ, has in every instance two main features. First,
   it is taken from the imagery of the preceding vision, and secondly, it
   always seems to harmonize with the state or condition of the Church
   addressed.

   Questions.

   1. What may the term "Angel" mean in these epistles?

   2. In what sense are the epistles to be regarded as prophetical?

   3. Have you referred to Matthew 13?

   4. How usually have been divided the seven periods in the history of
   the Church?

   5. Give the interpretation of "Nicolaitanism," "Balaamism," and
   "Jezebelism."

   6. Which two epistles find a realization in the present Church period?

   7. Describe the literary form of the epistles.

   THE SEVEN SEALS, OR THE THINGS WHICH SHALL BE HEREAFTER

   Chapters 4-8:1

   It is assumed that the true Church is not upon the earth at the
   beginning of chapter 4, but that the translation of 1 Thess. 4:16-18
   has taken place. Christendom is here, but the Church is with the Lord
   in the air. To some this may seem a bold assumption, but not to those
   who have pursued the study of the earlier books in this commentary. To
   them it will appear natural and proper that the Church should have been
   "caught up" before the judgments herein enumerated are poured forth. We
   cannot rehearse the proof of this, but it is significant that after
   chapter 3, the word "church" is not again found in this book. At the
   close of that chapter (v. 21), Christ appears seated with His Father on
   His Throne, "from thence expecting till his enemies be made His
   footstool" (Heb. 10:13). The call to John to "come up hither" (4:1), is
   also indicative of the fulfillment of 1 Thess. 4:16-18, and, in a
   figure, set before us what will be true of the whole Church in that
   day.

   The Throne, the Lamb and the Book.

   Coming to the text we have in chapters 4-5, the vision of the Throne,
   the Lamb and the Book, which constitutes an "Introduction" to what
   follows. The vision of the Throne is limited to 4:1-3, the enthroned
   elders verses 4 and 5, and the four living creatures (R. V.) 6-8. It is
   commonly felt that the elders represent the glorified Church, but there
   is no agreement as to the interpretation of the living creatures. It is
   notable however, that in this chapter both the elders and living
   creatures worship the Lord because of creation (9-11), and that
   redemption is not named until the next chapter. The seven sealed book
   (5:1-4), is the revelation of the judgments to follow and seems even to
   be identical with the judgments themselves. This last thought is
   suggested by what follows, when Christ in His kingly character comes
   forward and opens the book (5-7). It is He only who prevails to open
   the book either in the sense of making its contents known or bringing
   its judgments to pass. His adoration follows on the part of the living
   creatures and the elders (8-10), the angels (11, 12), and the whole
   universe (12, 14). Redemption is here praised, for it is as Redeemer of
   men that He has obtained this prerogative of judge of men. Verse 9
   should be read in the Revised Version, which does not include the
   living creatures in redemption but limits it to men.

   Six Seals Opened.

   The "Introduction" is followed by what Erdman calls the "Progression,"
   or advance movement of the narrative (chapter 6), in which the
   judgments are seen actually to take place. "Come and see" in each case
   should be limited to "Come" (R. V.), for the words are not a command to
   the seer, but to the judgment. He is not called upon to observe what is
   about to come, but that which is about to come is commanded to "Come."
   The rider on the white horse (2) was identified with Christ in
   Synthetic Bible Studies, but the author now considers it more
   consistent to identify him with the "man of sin," and at that
   particular period in his career when, at the beginning of Daniel's
   seventieth week (Dan. 9:24), he takes the power into his hands as the
   head of the federated nations of the Roman Empire. As the result of his
   rule peace is taken from the earth as symbolized by the red horse (3,
   4); famine follows the black horse (5, 6), and pestilence and death
   "over the fourth part of the earth" (7, 8). All this time there are
   faithful witnesses for Christ, who will not bow the knee to the
   impostor, and who suffer martyrdom in consequence (9-11). Their day of
   vengeance is coming, but not until their number is complete. The
   opening of the sixth seal brings this hour near (12-17). The student is
   requested to compare this chapter with Matt. 24, where the same period
   is covered prophetically, and the same events referred to.

   Saved Remnants.

   We now reach the first "parenthesis" spoken of in the first lesson,
   (chapter 7). There is no progression in this parenthetical part
   although it is both retrospective and prospective in its application.
   It tells of certain "sealed" ones, and others, who were in the great
   tribulation and came out of it, and in that respect it is prospective,
   and yet it points back to the fifth seal in which respect it is
   retrospection. In other words, according to the law of recurrence with
   which we became familiar in the Old Testament, chapter 7 gives in
   detail what verses 9-11 of chapter 6 gave in outline; it tells who the
   martyrs are and figuratively, how they are preserved. There appears to
   be a saved remnant of Jews (1-8), and also of Gentiles (9-17).

   The Great Tribulation.

   This is that period of unexampled trouble predicted in so many places
   in the Old Testament. It involves the whole earth (Rev. 3:10), and yet
   distinctively applies to the Jews who in a national capacity will at
   this time have returned to Palestine, though still unconverted so far
   as their acceptance of their Messiah is concerned (Jer. 30:7). Its
   duration is 3 1/2 years, or the last half of Daniel's seventieth week
   (Dan. 9:24-27). The "man of sin" will be in power (Matt. 24:15; 2
   Thess. 2:4) for Satan will have come down to earth having great wrath
   (Rev. 12:12, 13:4, 5, &c.). And yet it will be for some a time of
   salvation as chapter 7 shows, a salvation brought about by the
   suffering no doubt, and by the transcendent event of the Church's
   rapture which will have previously taken place. At the close of the
   tribulation Christ will come in glory with His saints, delivering
   Israel, judging the Gentile nations, destroying the "man of sin,"
   binding Satan, and introducing His millennial reign on the earth.

   Questions.

   1. Where is the true Church supposed to be at the beginning of this
   lesson?

   2. Give some reasons for believing this.

   3. What do chapters 4 and 5 constitute?

   4. What does the 7-sealed book represent?

   5. What word describes chapter 6?

   6. With what earlier chapter in the New Testament is this compared?

   7. What word describes chapter 7?

   8. Name the two classes of saved ones in the "Tribulation."

   9. Define "The Great Tribulation."

   10. What great event follows that period?

   THE SEVEN TRUMPETS

   Chapters 8:2-11:19

   We have here another illustration of the law of recurrence, for in
   these chapters we are going over the ground of the last, though certain
   features are being added which were not then revealed. In other words,
   it is still the "Tribulation Period."

   1. Introduction, 8:2-5.

   In the previous lesson the "Introduction" included the vision of "The
   Throne, the Lamb and the Book," while here it is the revelation of the
   angel and the incense. There is no satisfactory interpretation of this
   feature any more than of the "silence in heaven" revealed previously.
   Some would say that "the prayers of all saints" are those of the
   martyrs of the earlier chapter crying out for avenging, not for their
   own sakes but that the honor of God might be maintained in the face of
   His enemies. The "incense" is identified with the intercession of
   Christ on their behalf, and the answer is symbolized in what follows
   not only in verse 5, but all which results therefrom in the remainder
   of this chapter and the next.

   2. Progression 8:6-9:21.

   The first trumpet (8:7) symbolizes a judgment falling on the earth
   through the ordinary powers of nature. The "blood" may be caused by the
   destructive power of the large hailstones. The second trumpet (8, 9)
   symbolizes judgments resulting from extraordinary powers of nature,
   volcanic and marine? The third (10, 11), seems to point to suffering
   superinduced by superhuman agencies "a great star from heaven." Is it
   identical with the allusion to Satan (12:7-9)? The fourth (12, 13) is
   suffering caused by the diminished influence of the heavenly bodies,
   while the fifth and sixth trumpets (9:1-21) again specifying superhuman
   agencies, indicate their tormenting power as particularly directed
   toward men. In the other instances while humanity felt the infliction
   yet it was indirect, whereas here it is direct.

   3. Parenthesis 10-11, 14.

   In chapter 10, the revelation of the "mighty angel" and the "little
   book" does not easily lend itself to any definite interpretation. Some
   identify the "angel" with our Lord Himself, and make the "little book"
   mean the supplemental revelation of the "beast" soon to follow (13)
   together with the whole story of the awful period of his reign. Chapter
   11 is plainer. It refers to Jerusalem during the reign of the "beast"
   or "man of sin," "forty and two months" being equivalent to the last 3
   1/2 years of Daniel's 70th week already referred to. The "two witnesses
   testifying with supernatural power" during this time have been
   identified with Moses and Elijah returned to the earth in the flesh for
   that ministry.

   Verse 6 strikingly parallels the illustrations of their earlier power,
   while the mysterious manner in which they were taken away from earth,
   the one buried by God's own hand and the other translated having never
   seen death, add their contribution to the probability of this
   application of the chapter.

   4. Consummation 11:15-19.

   Corresponds somewhat to the ending of the revelation of the seven seals
   (8:1); i. e., it seems to bring us up to the end or final climax, and
   yet to halt just short of it in order to retrace the ground for fuller
   detail.

   Throughout these visions frequent allusions are made to the destructive
   forces of the heavens, "the power of the air," and also to conflicts of
   armies on the earth which suggests modern methods of warfare. Military
   airships stagger men not so much by their spectacle as by their
   slaughter. They seem to be faint gray linear objects silhouetted
   against the sky, but some of them carry torpedoes, and are able to
   pursue a battleship and send it to the bottom. Was Tennyson "also among
   the prophets," when he wrote:

   Men, my brothers, men the workers, ever reaping something new;

   That which they have done but earnest of the things that they shall do;

   For I dipt into the future, far as human eye could see,

   Saw the vision of the world, and all the wonder that would be;

   Saw the heavens filled with commerce, argosies of magic sails.

   Pilots of the purple twilight, dropping down with costly bales;

   Heard the heavens fill with shouting, and there rained a ghastly dew

   From the nations' airy navies, grappling in the central blue;

   Far along the world-wide whisper of the south wind rushing warm,

   With the standards of the people plunging through the thunder storm.

   Till the war drum throbbed no longer, and the battle flags were furled

   In the parliament of man, the federation of the world.

   Questions.

   1. What familiar law of rhetoric is illustrated in this lesson?

   2. How do some interpret what we call the "Introduction"?

   3. Interpret the six trumpets.

   4. How do some interpret the "little book"?

   5. Locate the forty and two months.

   6. With whom are the two witnesses identified?

   7. What modern invention of warfare is suggested by a part of the
   foregoing vision?

   8. What modern poet is quoted?

   THE SEVEN PERSONAGES

   Chapters 12-14

   1. Introduction (The Woman and the Dragon) 12.

   The seven personages of this division as identified by Erdman, include
   the woman, the child, the dragon, the archangel, the remnant (of
   Israel), the ten-horned beast, and the two-horned beast or false
   prophet, the first four being found in this chapter. The woman
   represents Israel it is believed, and the man-child to whom she gave
   birth, the Messiah. The dragon is Satan, whose ten horns represent the
   10 kingdoms of the Roman Empire when in that day they shall be
   federated under the "beast" of the next chapter. The 7 heads are not so
   easily interpreted, though with Benjamin Wills Newton, it may be
   thought that they stand for seven systems: commercial, industrial,
   social, military, educational, political, and ecclesiastical, which
   will contribute to the unity or federation just named. The rule of the
   man-child refers to the millennial reign of Christ, and his being
   "caught up," to His ascension including in the thought the translation
   of the Church to be with Him as the body of which He is the Head. The
   "wilderness" is the Gentile nations among which the faithful remnant of
   Israel will be preserved during the tribulation, 1260 days. Verses 7-12
   call for little comment as the event of which they speak synchronizes
   with the period of the Tribulation, and indeed accounts for it. Satan's
   enmity against Israel is revealed in verse 13, the aid she receives
   from some of the Gentile nations, verse 14, and his futile attempts at
   her destruction, verses 15, 16. When Satan sought to frustrate God in
   His plan for Israel in Egypt he "cast out of his mouth water as a
   flood," i. e., the Egyptian army, but "the earth opened her mouth and
   swallowed up the flood," and shall we say that the closing verses of
   chapter 12 point to an event not dissimilar from that of the Red Sea?

   2. Progression (Tribulation period) 13.

   The "sea" represents the Gentile nations, and the first "Beast," the
   last form of Gentile dominion in the earth. In the first three verses
   we have the ten-kingdom empire, but in 4-10 the emperor himself is
   designated, who is emphatically the "beast." The three animals,
   leopard, bear, and lion, recall Daniel 7 as symbols of the empires
   which preceded the Roman and all of whose characteristics entered into
   the qualities of that empire, and will be reproduced in the final form
   of Gentile rule (Scofield Bible). The "wounded" head which "was
   healed," the same authority refers to one of the ancient forms of
   government of the Empire, that of absolutism, which for a period ceased
   to exist and will be revived again at the end. But consistency demands
   that if the 7 heads be taken to represent 7 influential systems
   contributing to the federation of the empire under the "beast," then
   the wounding of one head must be the temporary destruction of one of
   those systems, and its healing the restoration of it again to its
   former place. Newton regards this as the ecclesiastical system, and as
   pointing to the time when all religious influences will be suddenly
   swept away, while Satan has another system ready to be substituted for
   it, whose great high-priest is the second "beast" now to be described.

   The second "beast" (13:17-18) is the last ecclesiastical head of the
   federated empire as the first "beast" is the last civil head. Many
   regard the second "beast" otherwise known as the "False Prophet," (Rev.
   16:13), as the Anti Christ, rather than the first "beast," and probably
   this is true. "For purposes of persecution he is permitted to exercise
   the power of the first or emperor-"beast." "666" is man's number in
   distinction from 7 which is God's number, and the reference to it is
   designed to comfort the remnant in that awful day, when they may take
   heart in the thought that powerful as he is, yet he is a man only and
   not God.

   3. Parenthesis (The First Fruits and the Three Angels) 14:1-13.

   The 144,000 on Mt. Zion are another picture of the saved remnant of
   Israel (see chapter 7). The mission of the first angel with "the
   everlasting gospel" is interpreted to mean that gospel which will be
   proclaimed at the end of the "Tribulation" immediately preceding the
   judgment of the nations (Matt. 25:31). As Scofield says, "It is neither
   the gospel of the kingdom nor the gospel of grace. Its burden is
   judgment, not salvation, and yet it is good news to Israel and others
   who, during the Tribulation have been saved (Ps. 96:2-13; Isa. 35:4-10;
   Luke 21-28; Rev. 7:9-14). The mission of the second angel will be seen
   in fulfillment in chapter 18, and that of the third in chapter 19.

   4. Consummation (The Harvest and the Vintage) 14-20.

   The "harvest" (14-16) is thought to refer to the judgment on the
   Gentile nations, while "the vine of the earth" is applied in the same
   way to Israel. For the first compare Matt. 25: 31-46, and the second,
   Matt. 24:29-51.

   Questions.

   1. Name the seven "Personages" of this lesson.

   2. Give in your own words an interpretation of the imagery of chapter
   12.

   3. Do the same with chapter 13.

   4. Do the same with chapter 14.

   5. What two views are given of the symbolism of the 7 heads?

   THE SEVEN VIALS

   Chapters 15, 16

   The law of recurrence finds a further illustration here for we are
   still in the "Tribulation" period, the latter half of Daniel's
   seventieth week, and are looking upon the features of that day of
   judgment.

   1. The "Introduction" includes the whole of chapter 15, being the
   revelation of the "overcomers" and the seven angels. No one can read
   this without being struck by its likeness to the song of Moses after
   Israel's deliverance from Pharoah at the Red Sea. (Ex. 15.)

   2. The "Progression" is set before us in the revelation of the six
   vials (16:1-12), which are doubtless literal plagues to be visited upon
   the followers of the "beast" and upon his throne, and which also
   suggest the story of Israel's deliverance from Egypt (Ex. 5-11).

   3. The "Parenthesis" is the gathering of the Kings (13-16). The drying
   up of the Euphrates may be taken literally, though it is difficult to
   say just who are meant by "the kings of the east." Some regard the
   passage as paralleled by Ezekiel, chapters 38-39, which reveal the
   rising of Russia and her allies against the Roman federation sometime
   during the period, or approximate to the period, we are now
   considering. It is to be noted here that the great battle of verse 14
   is not described, although its issue is announced (17-21), cf. also
   Zechariah 14:1-3.

   4. The "Consummation" (17-21) synchronizes with the judgment on the
   city of Babylon -- literal Babylon, rebuilt as the seat of the "beast"
   on the plain of Shinar, Isaiah 13-14.

   Questions.

   1. What law of rhetoric is again illustrated in this lesson?

   2. What Old Testament parallel is suggested?

   3. How may the six vials be interpreted?

   4. What Old Testament prophecy is recalled by chapter 16:12?

   5. Have you re-read the passage in Zechariah?

   6. Have you reviewed our lesson on Isaiah 13-14?

   THE SEVEN DOOMS

   Chapters 17-18

   The seven dooms are those of Babylon, the beast, the false prophet, the
   kings, the dragon, Gog, and the dead. This lesson will be limited to
   chapters 17 and 18, both of which speak of Babylon but in different
   ways, and to understand which, it is necessary to keep in mind that
   every city may be conceived of from two points of view, material and
   moral. The streets and parks, the buildings, the docks and market
   places, these are Chicago; but her politics and government, her
   commerce and industry, her educational and religious systems, these
   things which have made her what she is, constitute Chicagoism. The one
   is the city materially, and the other the city morally considered. This
   distinction is seen in Babylon and Babylonianism; chapter 15:3
   revealing the doom of the city material, and chapter 17 that of the
   city moral.

   1. Introduction (The Harlot and the Beast) 17.

   The "Harlot" is Babylon from the moral side, i. e., Babylonianism, or
   in other words, the summing up in that figure of the prevailing worldly
   systems that enter into the final federation of the Gentile nations.
   The "waters" represent those nations, cf. verses 1 and 18. The "beast"
   we have already identified as the federated Roman Empire, though
   sometimes the personal head of that empire himself, verses 3 and 8. The
   "mystery" is interpreted in the sense that the nations contribute to
   the supremacy of the "harlot," i. e., to Babylonianism, and benefit by
   it, and yet do not recognize it. "Drunken" is explained by the
   circumstance that the latitudinarianism, the breadth, the laxness of
   Babylonianism tolerates all schools and theories of religion inimical
   to God and the Bible like Romanism, Mohammedanism, Hinduism, &c., which
   have shed the blood of the saints in all the centuries. The "seven
   mountains" are related to the woman as the "seven heads" are to the
   beast, i. e., the systems of authority or power, the politics,
   government, commerce, industry, education, religion, etc., making the
   one totality. The "seven kings" is explained by Newton by the remark
   that God has allowed "executive power" in the prophetic earth to be
   exhibited in seven different forms, although there will be yet an
   eighth form before the end comes. By the "prophetic earth" is meant the
   nations clustering around the Mediterranean which, with their allies
   and dependencies, constitute the Roman Empire of the Caesars, and will
   constitute the federation at the end under the "beast." The history of
   this "executive power" commenced with Nimrod and concludes with the
   "beast," both of whom stand connected with Babel or Babylon. The whole
   of these seven forms of "executive power" include, "the native Monarchy
   of Nimrod, the theocracy of Israel, the despotism of Nebuchadnezzar;
   the aristocracy of Persia, the military monarchy of Alexander, the
   empire of the Caesars, and the constitutional monarchies of modern
   Europe. The sixth, that of the Caesars, was existent when this
   revelation was given ("one is," verse 11), the seventh is now in vogue,
   and the eighth (verse ii) will be that of the "beast." The teaching of
   verses 16 and 17 seems to be that the kings reigning over the ten
   kingdoms that will form the federation at the end, will find
   "Babylonianism," i. e., the systems which control in their several
   kingdoms, to be a hard yoke upon them, especially so as these systems
   increase in influence with the increase of democracy which is always
   hateful to kings. It is to be rid of "Babylonianism" that they
   temporarily unite to "give their power and strength unto the "beast."
   As Newton says, "Gladly will they take refuge under the arm of one whom
   Satan strengthens for dominion, and join in destroying a system which
   has really made them its slaves." The system of Babylon will be
   destroyed (chapter 17), but the city itself with all its wealth of
   greatness will for a time continue, (chapter 18), the "beast" reigning
   over it until the hour of its dooms and his doom shall come together.

   2. Progression (18), the Doom of the Material City.

   But a pause should be made here to prove the application to a literal
   city of Babylon rebuilt on the plain of Shinar. This is necessary when
   so respected an authority as the Scofield Bible says, "The notion of a
   literal Babylon to be rebuilt on the site of ancient Babylon is in
   conflict with Isaiah 13:19-22." Those who have studied that chapter in
   this commentary will have seen reasons for the opposite view. The
   language of Isaiah chapters n and 14 seems to demand the rebuilding of
   Babylon for their fulfillment. But the reason the Scofield Bible holds
   this view, IS partly explained by its interpretation of the preceding
   chapter. "Two Babylons are to be distinguished in the Revelation," it
   says, "ecclesiastical Babylon which is apostate Christendom, headed up
   under the papacy; and political Babylon, which is the beast's
   confederated empire, the last form of Gentile world-dominion.
   Ecclesiastical Babylon is 'the greatest harlot' and is destroyed by
   political Babylon." This commentary agrees that two Babylons are to be
   distinguished, and that the Babylon of chapter 17 is "apostate
   Christendom." But it holds that "apostate Christendom" includes
   Protestantism as well as the papacy, and is in fact, the sum of the
   seven systems already indicated, one of which is ecclesiastical. It may
   be that ere the "beast" comes into power, Protestantism will become
   effaced and the papacy be the only ecclesiastical system to be reckoned
   with, but as to this we have no light. "The language of Revelation 18,"
   the Scofield Bible goes on to say, "seems beyond question to identify
   'Babylon' the 'city' with 'Babylon' the ecclesiastical centre, viz:
   Rome"; but we do not see it that way, and are inclined to agree with
   another, that there will be "a certain logical conclusion of the
   history of the times of the Gentiles. The civilization and culture of
   the world will again become atheistic and man centered, and having
   described a circle, its cradle (Babylon) will become its grave."

   In the study of chapter 18 one is impressed with the large place
   commerce is to hold in the greatness of that city. The merchants and
   ship masters are her chief mourners (compare Zech. 5:5-11).

   Questions.

   1. Name the seven "dooms."

   2. In what two ways is "Babylon" to be conceived of?

   3. Define the terms "Babylonianism," "Mystery," "Drunken," "Seven
   Mountains," and "Seven Kings."

   4. What is meant by the "prophetic earth"?

   5. Name the seven forms of executive power.

   6. Why is "Babylonianism" destroyed by the "Beast"?

   7. Have you reviewed the lesson on Isaiah 13 and 14?

   8. Have you reviewed the lesson on Zechariah 5?

   THE SEVEN DOOMS, Continued

   Chapters 19-20

   1. Continuing the last lesson we begin this with what we have come to
   recognize as the "Parenthesis" (19:1-10), and which in this case is
   composed simply of four "allelujah's," two of which are retrospective
   and refer to the fall of Babylon, and two prospective touching on the
   marriage supper of the Lamb and the inauguration of the kingdom. The
   Lamb's "wife" spoken of in verse 7, is the bride (Rev. 21:9) or the
   Church, identified with the "heavenly Jerusalem" (Heb. 12:22, 23), and
   is to be distinguished from Israel, the adulterous and repudiated
   "wife" of Jehovah yet to be restored (Isa. 54:1-10; Hos. 2:1-7), who is
   identified with life on the earth (Hos. 2:23). "A forgiven and restored
   wife could not be called either a virgin (2 Cor. 11:2, 3) or a bride."
   -- Scofield Bible.

   2. The Consummation of this "seven" covers the remainder of the lesson
   (19, 11-20, 15), the first event being the coming of the Lord in glory
   (19:11-16). We have seen Him as already come for His Church which has
   been caught up to meet Him in the air, but this vision is that of His
   departure out of heaven with His Church and His holy angels preparatory
   to the judgment on the Gentile world-power headed up in the "beast"
   (Dan. 2:34, 35). "The day of the Lord," of which the Old Testament
   prophets speak, now begins. The second event in this period is the
   battle of Armageddon (17-19, cf. 16, 14). "Armageddon" refers to the
   hill and valley of Megiddo, west of the Jordan in the plain of Jezreel.
   At this place the Lord will deliver the Jewish remnant besieged by the
   Gentile world power under the "beast" (cf. 16: 13-16; Zechariah
   12:1-9).

   The third event is the doom of the "beast" and the "false prophet"
   (20). For the prophetic history of the "beast" cf. Dan. 7:24-26, 9:27;
   Matt. 24:15, and 2 Thess. 2:4-8. The "false prophet" has been
   previously referred to as the ecclesiastical head of the federated
   empire as the "beast" is the political head, and some would identify in
   him the Anti-Christ of 1 John 4, and other Scriptures. The fourth event
   is the doom of the kings (21). The fifth is the binding of Satan during
   the Millennium (20:1-3). The sixth, the first resurrection and the
   Millennial age (4-6). "The thrones and they that sat upon them,"
   represent the raised and glorified saints in their capacity as judging
   and reigning (cf. Matt. 19:28, 1 Cor. 6:2; Rev. 3:21). "The souls of
   them that were beheaded" are the martyrs of the Tribulation period
   united to the Church in Millennial glory. The "thousand years" is the
   Millennial period intervening between the first and second resurrection
   (Luke 14:13, 14; Jno. 5:29; 1 Cor. 15-52).

   The seventh event is the loosing of Satan at the close of the
   Millennium and the doom of Gog and Magog (7-9). Here Satan is again
   seen (this time in his own person) at the head of a final effort to
   overthrow the kingdom of God on earth. In the Millennial age sin still
   will be in the hearts of men except as they are regenerated, and Satan
   will find good soil to work in when his liberty is restored. The
   identity of "Gog and Magog" is not revealed, but their purpose is
   clearly indicated in verse 9. The eighth event is the doom of Satan
   (10) who, being cast into the lake of fire and brimstone, is not to be
   conceived of as then reigning in hell. This idea is borrowed from
   Milton but is not in the Bible. The ninth event is the doom of the
   unbelieving dead and the last judgment (11-15). The "dead" in this case
   exclude all the redeemed at least up until the translation of the
   Church, who have been in glory with Christ during the "thousand years."
   But they include all the wicked dead from the beginning of the race
   until the end of the world, for this is the last judgment.

   Note the distinction between "books" and "another book." The wicked and
   unbelieving have always chosen to be justified by their deeds rather
   than by faith in Christ, and the "books" represent the record of those
   deeds. The outcome (15) shows the fallacy of their trust for the deeds
   of none were sufficient to justify. Only those "found written in the
   book of life" are saved.

   There are three great judgments of mankind to be noted: (1) That of
   believers when Christ comes for His Church (2 Cor. 5:10) when not their
   salvation, but their rewards in glory are to be determined; (2) that of
   the living Gentile nations on the earth at the beginning of the Day of
   the Lord (Matt. 25:32), with which is closely connected the judgment of
   Israel (Ezek. 20:37); and (3) this last judgment with which the history
   of the present earth ends.

   "The second death" and the "lake of fire" are identical terms (Rev. 20:
   14) and are used of the eternal state of the wicked. It is "second"
   relatively to the preceding death of the wicked in unbelief and
   rejection of God; their eternal state is one of eternal "death" (i. e.,
   separation from God) in sin (John 8:21, 24). That the second death is
   not annihilation is shown by a comparison of Rev. 19:20 with Rev.
   20:10, for after one thousand years in the lake of fire the beast and
   false prophet are still there, undestroyed." -- Scofield Bible.

   Questions.

   1. Describe the "Allelujahs."

   2. Distinguish between the "wife" of the Lamb and the "wife" of
   Jehovah.

   3. Name the nine events in their order under the head of the
   "Consummation."

   4. Give the history of "Armageddon."

   5. Describe and distinguish the last judgment.

   6. Define the "second death."

   7. What proves that it is not annihilation?

   THE SEVEN NEW THINGS

   Chapters 21-22

   According to Erdman, the seven "new things" are the new heaven, earth,
   peoples, city, temple, luminary, paradise.

   1. The "Introduction" in this case covers the first two, the new heaven
   and the new earth (1-8). Following "Synthetic Bible Studies" observe
   the sequence of events suggested by verse 1: In the present time, we
   have the Church, in the Millennium will be the kingdom, and after that
   the new world where God shall be all in all (cf. 1 Cor. 15:23-28).
   Man's soul is redeemed by regeneration through the Holy Spirit now, his
   body shall be redeemed at the resurrection, and his dwelling-place at
   the creation of the new heaven and earth. "And there shall be no more
   sea." The sea is the type of perpetual unrest, and its absence after
   the metamorphosis of the earth answers to the unruffled state of solid
   peace which shall then prevail. A "river," and "water" are spoken of in
   the next chapter, but no sea.

   In the descent of the holy city upon the earth as the tabernacle of God
   (2-8), are revealed some wondrous and precious things. Always
   distinguish between this New Jerusalem out of heaven, and that earthly
   Jerusalem in which Israel in the flesh shall dwell during the
   Millennium. The one will be done away with when the other comes. This
   new Jerusalem will be God's dwelling place with men in the new earth.
   It is the antitype of the tabernacle in the wilderness, and is also the
   same Greek word as that used of Christ's tabernacling among us (John
   1:14). He was then seen in the weakness of the flesh, but at the new
   creation he shall be seen in the glory of his Godhead.

   2. That which stands for the "Progression" in this instance is the
   revelation of the New Jerusalem (21:9 22:5). All the details of this
   city suggest glory, beauty, security and peace. In the Millennium,
   literal Israel in the flesh dwelling in Jerusalem, is the antitype of
   the Old Testament earthly theocracy; but in this, the eternal age, the
   heavenly Jerusalem is the antitype of the Church, composed of Jews and
   Gentiles. This idea seems to be suggested by the names of the twelve
   tribes and the twelve apostles written upon the gates and the
   foundations. The fact that no temple is seen in this city is
   remarkable, and suggests that the means of grace cease when the end of
   grace has come. Uninterrupted, immediate, direct communion with God and
   the Lamb will then be enjoyed. The student will be struck by the
   comparison evidently intended to be drawn between the picture in
   chapter 22:1-4, and the story of the garden of Eden and the expulsion
   of our first parents.

   3. The "Consummation" is the epilog of the book (6-21), in which there
   is nothing more solemn than verse 11, which emphasizes the thought that
   "the punishment of sin is sin, just as the reward of holiness is
   holiness." "Eternal punishment is not so much an arbitrary law as a
   result necessarily following in the very nature of things as the fruit
   results from the bud." In this connection notice the allusion to the
   eternity of sin in verse 15. May God quicken us who know these things
   to do our duty in bearing witness to them, that some by all means may
   be saved. This duty is set before us in verse 17, and "He which
   testifieth these things saith, surely, I come, quickly. Amen. Even so,
   Come, Lord Jesus!"

   Questions.

   1. Name the seven "new things."

   2. Give the sequence of events as outlined in 1 Cor. 15:23-28.

   3. Interpret the reference to the "sea."

   4. How would you distinguish between the earthly and the New Jerusalem?

   5. Of what two things is the latter the antitype?

   6. How is this suggested?

   7. What significance may be attached to the absence of a temple? 8.
   What two awful things about sin are here taught?
     __________________________________________________________________

                                    Indexes
     __________________________________________________________________

Index of Scripture References

   Genesis

   [1]1   [2]1   [3]1   [4]2:23   [5]2:24   [6]3   [7]3   [8]3   [9]3:6
   [10]3:15   [11]3:15   [12]3:15   [13]3:15   [14]3:15   [15]3:21
   [16]4:13   [17]4:14   [18]5:1   [19]5:28   [20]6   [21]6   [22]6
   [23]6:12   [24]6:24   [25]9:4   [26]9:6   [27]9:6   [28]10:5   [29]11
   [30]11   [31]11   [32]11:5   [33]12   [34]12   [35]12:6   [36]12:7
   [37]13:15   [38]13:16   [39]14:7   [40]14:17-20   [41]14:18-20
   [42]14:20   [43]15   [44]15:6   [45]15:6   [46]15:7   [47]15:13
   [48]15:13   [49]15:14   [50]15:18   [51]15:18   [52]16:16   [53]17:1
   [54]18   [55]18:17   [56]19:3   [57]19:15   [58]20:2   [59]22:1-19
   [60]22:2   [61]27:45   [62]28:2-22   [63]29:15-35   [64]31:54
   [65]32:23-33   [66]32:28   [67]33:18-20   [68]35:2-4   [69]35:19
   [70]38   [71]38:11   [72]47:11   [73]48:5   [74]48:7   [75]48:7
   [76]49   [77]49   [78]49   [79]49   [80]49:8   [81]49:10

   Exodus

   [82]3   [83]3:14   [84]4:22   [85]4:22   [86]5   [87]7:5
   [88]10:21-23   [89]12   [90]12   [91]12   [92]12:7   [93]12:13
   [94]12:25   [95]12:28   [96]12:37   [97]12:38   [98]13   [99]13:2-10
   [100]13:9-16   [101]13:11-16   [102]13:12   [103]13:13   [104]14:19
   [105]15   [106]15:16   [107]16   [108]16:8   [109]16:10   [110]16:31
   [111]16:33   [112]17   [113]17:5   [114]17:5-7   [115]17:6
   [116]17:8-14   [117]17:14   [118]18:12   [119]19:1   [120]19:5
   [121]19:5   [122]19:12   [123]19:15   [124]19:16-18   [125]20:5
   [126]20:5   [127]20:5   [128]21:14   [129]21:32   [130]22:26
   [131]23:20-23   [132]23:34   [133]25   [134]25:10-22   [135]25:15
   [136]25:17   [137]25:18   [138]25:21   [139]25:22   [140]25:22
   [141]26:31   [142]28:26-30   [143]28:41   [144]29:21   [145]29:27
   [146]31:13   [147]32   [148]32:6   [149]32:25   [150]32:26-28
   [151]33   [152]33   [153]33:2   [154]33:9-11   [155]33:16
   [156]33:20   [157]34   [158]34   [159]34:5   [160]34:12   [161]34:22
   [162]34:22   [163]34:33-35   [164]34:35   [165]37:7   [166]37:8
   [167]38:8   [168]40:34

   Leviticus

   [169]2:13   [170]3:7   [171]4:35   [172]7:31   [173]7:32   [174]7:34
   [175]8:30   [176]10   [177]10:10   [178]10:11   [179]12:3   [180]12:8
   [181]14   [182]14:3   [183]14:4-7   [184]14:8   [185]14:9
   [186]14:10   [187]16   [188]16:21   [189]16:27   [190]17:3
   [191]17:4   [192]17:7   [193]17:11-14   [194]17:14   [195]18:9
   [196]19   [197]19:9   [198]19:10   [199]19:15   [200]19:16
   [201]19:31   [202]20:24   [203]20:27   [204]23   [205]23:3
   [206]23:3   [207]23:12   [208]23:13   [209]23:18   [210]23:33
   [211]23:34   [212]24:5   [213]24:5   [214]24:6   [215]24:6
   [216]24:7   [217]24:9   [218]24:16   [219]25   [220]25:20-22
   [221]25:23   [222]25:23   [223]25:25   [224]25:25   [225]25:34
   [226]25:93   [227]26:33-35   [228]27   [229]27:28   [230]27:29

   Numbers

   [231]1   [232]1:3   [233]2   [234]2:50   [235]2:53   [236]3
   [237]4:14   [238]4:15   [239]5   [240]6   [241]6:5   [242]6:5
   [243]7:9   [244]8   [245]9:6-13   [246]10:29   [247]12   [248]12
   [249]13:31-33   [250]14:24   [251]14:33   [252]15:1-12   [253]15:5
   [254]16:40   [255]17:10   [256]18   [257]18:3   [258]18:16
   [259]18:16   [260]18:21   [261]19:11   [262]20   [263]20:5
   [264]20:23   [265]21:31   [266]23   [267]23:23   [268]24:17
   [269]24:20   [270]25   [271]26:54   [272]27:1-11   [273]27:21
   [274]27:21   [275]27:21   [276]28   [277]28:7-15   [278]28:9
   [279]28:10   [280]32   [281]32:41   [282]33:54   [283]34:5
   [284]35:7   [285]35:8   [286]35:9-32   [287]35:21   [288]35:22
   [289]35:33   [290]36:78

   Deuteronomy

   [291]1:2   [292]1:9   [293]1:13   [294]1:19-40   [295]1:23
   [296]1:36   [297]1:45   [298]2:1-8   [299]2:16   [300]2:36
   [301]3:3-16   [302]3:14   [303]4:12   [304]4:15   [305]4:15
   [306]5:12   [307]5:13   [308]5:15   [309]5:15   [310]5:16   [311]5:32
   [312]5:33   [313]6:1-8   [314]6:4-8   [315]6:9   [316]6:10   [317]7:2
   [318]7:2   [319]7:3   [320]7:6   [321]7:9   [322]7:20-17   [323]8:3
   [324]9:15-21   [325]10:4   [326]11:16   [327]11:16   [328]11:17
   [329]11:17   [330]11:18-21   [331]11:25   [332]12:4-7   [333]12:12
   [334]12:15-24   [335]12:17   [336]12:18   [337]13:51   [338]14:3
   [339]14:21   [340]14:22   [341]14:23   [342]14:28   [343]14:29
   [344]15:12   [345]16:16   [346]16:21   [347]17:16   [348]18
   [349]18:9   [350]18:9-22   [351]18:10   [352]18:11   [353]18:18
   [354]18:18-22   [355]19   [356]19:16-19   [357]20:5   [358]20:8
   [359]20:10-13   [360]20:13   [361]21:17   [362]21:18-21   [363]22:10
   [364]23   [365]23:3   [366]23:5   [367]23:22   [368]24:16
   [369]24:19-21   [370]25:5   [371]25:5   [372]25:5-10   [373]25:17-19
   [374]25:18   [375]25:19   [376]25:25   [377]28:1-15   [378]28:68
   [379]30:1-10   [380]30:9   [381]31:15   [382]32:11   [383]32:12
   [384]32:17   [385]32:21   [386]33   [387]33:8-11   [388]33:10
   [389]33:27   [390]33:28

   Joshua

   [391]2:9-11   [392]2:15   [393]3:3-8   [394]7   [395]7:1   [396]7:5-9
   [397]7:17   [398]8:33   [399]8:34   [400]9:3-27   [401]9:23-27
   [402]11   [403]15:4   [404]15:14   [405]15:60   [406]15:63
   [407]19:1-9   [408]19:9   [409]19:15   [410]20   [411]21:1-42
   [412]24   [413]24:2   [414]24:3   [415]24:14   [416]24:15
   [417]24:19

   Judges

   [418]1:16   [419]1:16   [420]1:21   [421]2:28   [422]3:4   [423]3:8
   [424]4:3   [425]4:4   [426]4:11   [427]4:16   [428]4:17   [429]5:14
   [430]6:1   [431]6:1   [432]6:8   [433]6:26   [434]9:7   [435]9:7
   [436]9:23   [437]10   [438]11   [439]12:15   [440]13:2-14   [441]13:5
   [442]13:19   [443]13:23

   Ruth

   [444]3:9   [445]4:4   [446]4:10

   1 Samuel

   [447]2:2   [448]2:30   [449]4:11   [450]6:21   [451]7:2   [452]7:2
   [453]7:2   [454]7:15-17   [455]8:7   [456]10:2   [457]13   [458]15
   [459]15   [460]15   [461]15:1   [462]15:6   [463]15:15   [464]15:29
   [465]15:30   [466]17:12   [467]18   [468]21:13   [469]22:1
   [470]23:1-15   [471]23:1-15   [472]24   [473]24:3   [474]24:16
   [475]27:8   [476]28:10   [477]31   [478]31:12

   2 Samuel

   [479]1:1   [480]3:4   [481]3:28   [482]3:29   [483]5   [484]5:4
   [485]5:5   [486]5:11   [487]6   [488]6:1   [489]6:2   [490]6:6-13
   [491]7   [492]7   [493]7   [494]7   [495]7:2   [496]7:8-17   [497]8:2
   [498]8:4   [499]8:12   [500]8:17   [501]10:4   [502]10:5   [503]10:5
   [504]11   [505]11   [506]12   [507]12   [508]14:14   [509]15
   [510]15   [511]16:5-14   [512]16:12   [513]21   [514]21   [515]22

   1 Kings

   [516]1:32   [517]2:27   [518]3:1   [519]4:4   [520]4:29-32
   [521]4:32   [522]5:33   [523]6:1   [524]6:1   [525]7:8   [526]8:9
   [527]9:20-21   [528]9:24   [529]11:9   [530]12   [531]12   [532]12
   [533]12:27   [534]12:28   [535]16:9   [536]16:26   [537]16:34
   [538]18   [539]18:28   [540]19   [541]19   [542]19:15   [543]19:16
   [544]19:18   [545]19:19   [546]21   [547]21:27-29   [548]22
   [549]22:4   [550]22:15-23   [551]22:23   [552]22:51

   2 Kings

   [553]2   [554]8:26   [555]9:21-26   [556]9:30-37   [557]10:2
   [558]10:11   [559]10:15   [560]14   [561]14   [562]14:25   [563]14:25
   [564]15:12   [565]15:29   [566]17:1-8   [567]17:6   [568]17:24-41
   [569]17:31   [570]18   [571]18   [572]18   [573]18:1-4   [574]18:22
   [575]19:21   [576]19:35   [577]19:35   [578]19:37   [579]20
   [580]20:12   [581]20:12-19   [582]22   [583]22:8   [584]22:8
   [585]23:13   [586]23:15   [587]23:15-18   [588]23:16   [589]23:32
   [590]24:1   [591]24:2-7   [592]24:8   [593]24:8-16   [594]24:11-16
   [595]25:11   [596]25:18   [597]25:18

   1 Chronicles

   [598]1   [599]1:32   [600]1:43-50   [601]2:9-20   [602]2:22
   [603]5:1   [604]5:1   [605]5:2   [606]6:18   [607]6:33   [608]6:33
   [609]6:34   [610]6:60   [611]9:2   [612]12:33-34   [613]13
   [614]15:1-14   [615]15:11   [616]15:12   [617]15:17   [618]15:27
   [619]16   [620]16   [621]16   [622]16:39   [623]21   [624]21:3
   [625]21:5   [626]21:28-22:5   [627]21:29   [628]22:3   [629]29:2-7

   2 Chronicles

   [630]1   [631]1:16   [632]2:14   [633]2:17   [634]2:18   [635]2:18
   [636]3:1   [637]4:1-6   [638]6:13   [639]8:2   [640]9:29   [641]11:12
   [642]11:12   [643]11:13   [644]11:13   [645]12:16   [646]15:9
   [647]18   [648]21   [649]21:17   [650]22:8   [651]23:19   [652]24
   [653]24:21   [654]26   [655]28:20-22   [656]29   [657]29:21-31
   [658]33:11-19   [659]35:15   [660]113:12

   Ezra

   [661]2:41   [662]2:43   [663]3:8-13   [664]4:5-24   [665]4:6
   [666]7:17

   Nehemiah

   [667]2   [668]6:16   [669]9:12   [670]9:17   [671]9:17   [672]12:27
   [673]12:27   [674]13:1

   Esther

   [675]2:3   [676]2:9   [677]6:8   [678]8:8

   Job

   [679]1   [680]1   [681]1:5-8   [682]2:6   [683]3:3-5   [684]6:5
   [685]10:9   [686]14:4   [687]14:4   [688]19:25-27   [689]19:29
   [690]25   [691]27:20   [692]29   [693]32:8

   Psalms

   [694]1   [695]1   [696]1   [697]2   [698]2   [699]2   [700]2   [701]2
   [702]2   [703]2   [704]2:8   [705]3   [706]3   [707]3   [708]3
   [709]4   [710]5   [711]5:11   [712]6   [713]7   [714]7   [715]7
   [716]8   [717]8   [718]9   [719]10   [720]10   [721]10   [722]11
   [723]11   [724]12   [725]13   [726]14   [727]14:1-3   [728]14:53
   [729]15   [730]15   [731]15:2   [732]16   [733]16   [734]16:10
   [735]17   [736]17:4   [737]17:4   [738]18   [739]18   [740]19
   [741]19   [742]19:12   [743]19:12   [744]19:13   [745]20   [746]20
   [747]20:5-7   [748]20:7   [749]20:7-9   [750]22   [751]22   [752]22
   [753]22:1   [754]22:22   [755]23   [756]24   [757]24   [758]24
   [759]25   [760]25:4   [761]26   [762]26   [763]27   [764]28:3
   [765]29   [766]29   [767]30   [768]31   [769]31   [770]31   [771]31
   [772]31:11   [773]32   [774]32   [775]32   [776]32   [777]33
   [778]33:6-9   [779]34   [780]34:7   [781]34:20   [782]35   [783]37
   [784]37   [785]37:1-9   [786]38   [787]38   [788]38:4   [789]40
   [790]40:6-8   [791]41   [792]41   [793]41:9   [794]42   [795]42
   [796]42   [797]42   [798]42:7   [799]44   [800]44   [801]44:1-8
   [802]45   [803]45   [804]45   [805]46   [806]47   [807]50
   [808]50:15   [809]50:15   [810]50:21   [811]51   [812]51   [813]51
   [814]51   [815]51   [816]51:5   [817]52   [818]52   [819]52:1-3
   [820]53   [821]57:5   [822]62:12   [823]65   [824]67   [825]68
   [826]68   [827]69   [828]69   [829]69:24   [830]69:25   [831]69:25
   [832]72   [833]73   [834]73   [835]73   [836]74   [837]74   [838]75
   [839]77:16-20   [840]78   [841]78:14   [842]78:15   [843]78:16
   [844]80   [845]80:1   [846]82   [847]84:10   [848]85:9   [849]85:10
   [850]86   [851]86   [852]88   [853]88:7   [854]90   [855]90   [856]91
   [857]91   [858]93   [859]93   [860]95:8-11   [861]95:10
   [862]96:2-13   [863]99:6   [864]99:7   [865]101   [866]102   [867]103
   [868]103:7   [869]103:12   [870]104:2   [871]105:9   [872]105:13-15
   [873]105:39   [874]106:33   [875]106:37   [876]107   [877]107
   [878]109   [879]109:8   [880]109:13-15   [881]110   [882]110
   [883]110   [884]110   [885]111   [886]112   [887]112   [888]113
   [889]113   [890]113   [891]114   [892]116:10   [893]117   [894]118
   [895]119   [896]119   [897]119:29   [898]121   [899]122   [900]122:6
   [901]124   [902]126   [903]126:1   [904]129   [905]132   [906]132
   [907]133   [908]134   [909]134   [910]135   [911]135:4   [912]136
   [913]137   [914]137   [915]139   [916]139   [917]139:20   [918]141:2
   [919]142   [920]142   [921]142   [922]147   [923]147   [924]148

   Proverbs

   [925]1:24-28   [926]3:5   [927]3:5   [928]3:6   [929]3:6   [930]5:31
   [931]10:1   [932]10:27   [933]15:1   [934]16:7   [935]16:33
   [936]19:9   [937]20:27   [938]23:7

   Ecclesiastes

   [939]4:13   [940]7:29   [941]12:7

   Isaiah

   [942]1:5   [943]1:6   [944]1:9   [945]1:9   [946]1:9   [947]2
   [948]2:2   [949]2:2-4   [950]2:11   [951]3:16-24   [952]4:5
   [953]5:1-7   [954]5:18   [955]6   [956]6   [957]6   [958]6
   [959]6:1-4   [960]6:9   [961]6:9   [962]6:10   [963]6:10   [964]7:11
   [965]7:14   [966]7:14   [967]7:14   [968]7:14   [969]7:19   [970]7:20
   [971]8:14   [972]8:15   [973]8:18   [974]9:1   [975]9:2   [976]9:6
   [977]9:6   [978]9:6   [979]9:6   [980]9:7   [981]10:22   [982]10:22
   [983]10:23   [984]11:2-5   [985]11:5   [986]11:5   [987]11:6-9
   [988]11:10-12   [989]11:11   [990]11:11-16   [991]11:12   [992]11:61
   [993]13   [994]13   [995]13   [996]13:19-22   [997]14   [998]14:1
   [999]14:2   [1000]17:5   [1001]17:8   [1002]22:20-22   [1003]22:20-25
   [1004]27:12   [1005]28:15-18   [1006]28:21   [1007]31:3
   [1008]35:4-10   [1009]35:5   [1010]35:6   [1011]36   [1012]37:38
   [1013]40   [1014]42:1   [1015]43:2   [1016]43:10   [1017]43:25
   [1018]44   [1019]48:4   [1020]49:6   [1021]49:13   [1022]50
   [1023]53   [1024]53   [1025]53   [1026]53   [1027]53:4   [1028]53:5
   [1029]53:7   [1030]53:9   [1031]53:9   [1032]53:9   [1033]53:10
   [1034]53:11   [1035]54:1-10   [1036]54:5   [1037]57:15   [1038]58:3-7
   [1039]59:20   [1040]60:17   [1041]61   [1042]61   [1043]61:1-3
   [1044]61:2   [1045]61:2   [1046]61:2   [1047]61:10   [1048]62:4-7
   [1049]62:5   [1050]62:5   [1051]63:8   [1052]63:9   [1053]63:9
   [1054]63:17   [1055]64:6   [1056]65:25   [1057]200:44   [1058]200:45

   Jeremiah

   [1059]1:9   [1060]2:2   [1061]2:2   [1062]2:8   [1063]4:2
   [1064]7:31   [1065]8:8   [1066]11:13   [1067]11:21   [1068]12:1-4
   [1069]13:7   [1070]15:16   [1071]16:6   [1072]16:41   [1073]17:9
   [1074]17:13   [1075]18:1-4   [1076]18:1-6   [1077]19:5   [1078]20:1-6
   [1079]21   [1080]22   [1081]22:13-19   [1082]23:3-8   [1083]25:12
   [1084]25:12   [1085]25:12-14   [1086]25:13   [1087]26:18
   [1088]26:19   [1089]27   [1090]27   [1091]27   [1092]27   [1093]27
   [1094]30:7   [1095]31:9   [1096]31:15   [1097]31:22   [1098]32:7
   [1099]32:9   [1100]32:10   [1101]32:11   [1102]32:12   [1103]34
   [1104]34   [1105]34:5   [1106]39:4   [1107]40   [1108]40   [1109]40
   [1110]40   [1111]40   [1112]49:7-22   [1113]52:6   [1114]52:12-24

   Lamentations

   [1115]2:9

   Ezekiel

   [1116]1:1   [1117]1:2   [1118]1:26   [1119]1:27   [1120]2:9
   [1121]2:10   [1122]12:13   [1123]16:10-13   [1124]17:19-23
   [1125]18:20   [1126]18:20   [1127]19:1-9   [1128]20:35-38
   [1129]20:37   [1130]22:7-15   [1131]22:27   [1132]28:22   [1133]32:4
   [1134]33:31   [1135]36:26   [1136]36:27   [1137]37   [1138]37
   [1139]37   [1140]37:21-25   [1141]39:10

   Daniel

   [1142]1:1-6   [1143]2   [1144]2   [1145]2   [1146]2:3   [1147]2:4
   [1148]2:34   [1149]2:34   [1150]2:34-36   [1151]2:35   [1152]2:36-45
   [1153]2:44   [1154]2:48   [1155]4:13   [1156]4:17   [1157]4:20
   [1158]4:22   [1159]4:23   [1160]5:3   [1161]5:7   [1162]7   [1163]7
   [1164]7   [1165]7:8   [1166]7:9   [1167]7:9   [1168]7:11   [1169]7:13
   [1170]7:14   [1171]7:24-26   [1172]7:25   [1173]9   [1174]9   [1175]9
   [1176]9   [1177]9   [1178]9   [1179]9:24   [1180]9:24-27
   [1181]9:24-27   [1182]9:24-27   [1183]9:25   [1184]9:25   [1185]9:25
   [1186]9:26   [1187]9:26   [1188]9:27   [1189]9:27   [1190]10
   [1191]10:5   [1192]10:6   [1193]10:6   [1194]11   [1195]11:32
   [1196]12:3

   Hosea

   [1197]1:2   [1198]1:10   [1199]1:10   [1200]1:11   [1201]2:1-7
   [1202]2:14   [1203]2:14-16   [1204]2:14-23   [1205]2:15   [1206]2:15
   [1207]2:19   [1208]2:23   [1209]8:11   [1210]9:3   [1211]11:1
   [1212]13:10   [1213]13:11

   Joel

   [1214]1:14   [1215]2   [1216]2   [1217]2   [1218]2:28   [1219]2:28
   [1220]2:29   [1221]3   [1222]3:1-8   [1223]3:17   [1224]3:18

   Amos

   [1225]1:13   [1226]3:4-6   [1227]5:16-18   [1228]6:10   [1229]8:11
   [1230]8:11   [1231]8:11   [1232]8:12   [1233]8:12   [1234]8:12
   [1235]9:9-14   [1236]9:11-14

   Jonah

   [1237]3:5

   Micah

   [1238]4:7   [1239]4:11   [1240]5:2   [1241]5:2   [1242]5:2
   [1243]5:4-15   [1244]7:19

   Nahum

   [1245]2:2

   Habakkuk

   [1246]2:4   [1247]2:12

   Zephaniah

   [1248]3:14   [1249]3:17   [1250]3:19

   Zechariah

   [1251]3:8   [1252]4   [1253]4:6   [1254]4:7   [1255]5   [1256]5:5-11
   [1257]6:12   [1258]6:13   [1259]6:13   [1260]7:5   [1261]8
   [1262]9:9   [1263]11:12   [1264]11:12   [1265]11:13   [1266]11:15-17
   [1267]12:1-9   [1268]12:8   [1269]12:8-14   [1270]12:10   [1271]12:10
   [1272]12:10-13:6   [1273]12:11   [1274]13:1   [1275]13:1   [1276]13:8
   [1277]13:9   [1278]14   [1279]14:1-3   [1280]14:1-5   [1281]14:8
   [1282]16   [1283]21

   Malachi

   [1284]1:7   [1285]1:8   [1286]1:8   [1287]1:13   [1288]1:14
   [1289]2:7   [1290]2:7   [1291]2:11-16   [1292]2:14-15   [1293]2:15
   [1294]3:1   [1295]3:1   [1296]3:3   [1297]3:5   [1298]3:6   [1299]3:8
   [1300]3:8-10   [1301]3:10   [1302]4:2   [1303]4:2   [1304]4:5
   [1305]4:5-6   [1306]4:6

   Matthew

   [1307]1:1   [1308]1:3   [1309]1:23   [1310]1:23   [1311]2   [1312]2
   [1313]2:2   [1314]2:5   [1315]3   [1316]3:1-11   [1317]3:2
   [1318]3:7   [1319]3:13-17   [1320]4   [1321]4:1-11   [1322]4:6
   [1323]4:12-22   [1324]4:17   [1325]5:3   [1326]5:11   [1327]5:13
   [1328]5:13   [1329]5:14-16   [1330]5:16   [1331]5:20-48
   [1332]5:21-26   [1333]5:27-32   [1334]5:32   [1335]5:33-37
   [1336]5:38-48   [1337]6:33   [1338]8   [1339]8   [1340]8:1-4
   [1341]8:4   [1342]9:1   [1343]9:15   [1344]9:21-24   [1345]9:36
   [1346]10   [1347]10:28   [1348]10:32   [1349]10:35   [1350]10:36
   [1351]11   [1352]11:10   [1353]11:14   [1354]11:20   [1355]11:25
   [1356]11:25-27   [1357]12:1-13   [1358]12:3   [1359]12:14-21
   [1360]12:27   [1361]12:37   [1362]12:38   [1363]12:38   [1364]12:42
   [1365]13   [1366]13   [1367]13   [1368]13   [1369]13   [1370]13
   [1371]13:8   [1372]13:38   [1373]13:38   [1374]13:39   [1375]13:53-58
   [1376]15:13   [1377]15:18-20   [1378]15:21-28   [1379]16   [1380]16
   [1381]16:11   [1382]16:12   [1383]16:17   [1384]16:19   [1385]16:21
   [1386]16:27   [1387]17   [1388]17:1   [1389]17:2   [1390]18:15-18
   [1391]19   [1392]19:1-9   [1393]19:3-9   [1394]19:3-9   [1395]19:3-9
   [1396]19:8   [1397]19:8   [1398]19:17   [1399]19:17   [1400]19:28
   [1401]19:28   [1402]20:20   [1403]20:23   [1404]20:28   [1405]21
   [1406]21   [1407]21:5   [1408]21:12   [1409]21:13   [1410]21:15
   [1411]21:16   [1412]21:42   [1413]21:43   [1414]22:1   [1415]22:2
   [1416]22:15-22   [1417]22:23-33   [1418]22:25   [1419]22:34-40
   [1420]22:34-40   [1421]22:37-40   [1422]22:37-40   [1423]22:42-45
   [1424]23   [1425]23   [1426]23:15   [1427]23:29-35   [1428]23:33
   [1429]23:36-38   [1430]24   [1431]24   [1432]24   [1433]24   [1434]24
   [1435]24   [1436]24   [1437]24:3-8   [1438]24:14   [1439]24:15
   [1440]24:15   [1441]24:15   [1442]24:22   [1443]24:27-30
   [1444]24:29   [1445]24:29-51   [1446]24:30   [1447]25   [1448]25
   [1449]25:14-30   [1450]25:31   [1451]25:31   [1452]25:31-46
   [1453]25:31-46   [1454]25:32   [1455]25:35-40   [1456]25:40
   [1457]25:41   [1458]25:45   [1459]25:46   [1460]26   [1461]26:46
   [1462]26:58   [1463]27:5   [1464]27:29   [1465]27:46   [1466]27:56
   [1467]27:57-68   [1468]28   [1469]28   [1470]28:2   [1471]28:8-10
   [1472]28:8-10   [1473]28:9   [1474]28:18

   Mark

   [1475]1   [1476]1:1   [1477]1:2   [1478]2   [1479]2   [1480]2:1
   [1481]2:22   [1482]2:23-28   [1483]2:25   [1484]2:27   [1485]3:21
   [1486]3:29   [1487]5   [1488]7:1-4   [1489]7:1-4   [1490]7:3
   [1491]7:31-37   [1492]8:15   [1493]9:11   [1494]9:50   [1495]10
   [1496]10:35   [1497]10:45   [1498]12   [1499]12:28-34   [1500]14
   [1501]14   [1502]15:15   [1503]15:37   [1504]15:40   [1505]15:42
   [1506]16:16   [1507]16:18

   Luke

   [1508]1   [1509]1:17   [1510]1:17   [1511]1:28-35   [1512]1:31
   [1513]1:31-33   [1514]1:31-35   [1515]1:32   [1516]1:33
   [1517]1:46-55   [1518]1:73   [1519]1:76   [1520]2   [1521]2:24
   [1522]2:30   [1523]2:36   [1524]2:37   [1525]2:38   [1526]3:1-6
   [1527]3:1-20   [1528]3:2   [1529]4:1-13   [1530]4:14-32   [1531]4:16
   [1532]4:16-20   [1533]4:16-20   [1534]4:21   [1535]4:25   [1536]4:25
   [1537]4:26   [1538]4:26   [1539]6:3   [1540]8:2   [1541]9:46
   [1542]10   [1543]10:20   [1544]10:39   [1545]11:9   [1546]11:13
   [1547]11:31   [1548]11:52   [1549]13:16   [1550]13:25-27
   [1551]14:13   [1552]14:14   [1553]15:10   [1554]16:23   [1555]16:31
   [1556]16:31   [1557]16:31   [1558]17:3   [1559]17:4   [1560]17:31-33
   [1561]18:8   [1562]18:35   [1563]19   [1564]19:1527   [1565]20:2
   [1566]21   [1567]21:20-24   [1568]21:24   [1569]21:24   [1570]22
   [1571]22:3   [1572]23:46   [1573]23:55-24:9   [1574]24   [1575]24:4
   [1576]24:5   [1577]24:13-31   [1578]24:27   [1579]24:34
   [1580]24:36-43   [1581]24:41   [1582]24:44   [1583]24:46

   John

   [1584]1   [1585]1   [1586]1:1   [1587]1:1   [1588]1:1-14   [1589]1:12
   [1590]1:13   [1591]1:14   [1592]1:15-51   [1593]1:17   [1594]1:18
   [1595]1:18   [1596]1:23   [1597]1:33   [1598]1:33   [1599]1:33
   [1600]1:34   [1601]1:45   [1602]1:46   [1603]1:51   [1604]1:51
   [1605]1:51   [1606]2:13-16   [1607]3   [1608]3   [1609]3   [1610]3:2
   [1611]3:2   [1612]3:5   [1613]3:14   [1614]3:14   [1615]3:15
   [1616]3:15   [1617]3:15   [1618]3:16   [1619]3:16   [1620]3:16
   [1621]3:16   [1622]3:29   [1623]3:29   [1624]3:34   [1625]4
   [1626]4:9   [1627]4:19-24   [1628]4:42   [1629]5:16   [1630]5:17
   [1631]5:21   [1632]5:22   [1633]5:28-29   [1634]5:43   [1635]6:31-58
   [1636]6:37-40   [1637]6:38   [1638]6:51-58   [1639]7:5   [1640]7:22
   [1641]7:23   [1642]7:37-39   [1643]7:39   [1644]7:39   [1645]7:42
   [1646]8:12   [1647]8:21   [1648]8:24   [1649]8:38-44   [1650]8:43
   [1651]8:44   [1652]8:44   [1653]8:56   [1654]8:58   [1655]8:58
   [1656]9:3   [1657]9:41   [1658]10   [1659]10:11   [1660]10:17
   [1661]10:18   [1662]10:18   [1663]10:18   [1664]11:51   [1665]12:1-8
   [1666]12:5   [1667]12:14   [1668]12:31   [1669]12:31-33
   [1670]13:1-17   [1671]13:10   [1672]14   [1673]14:1-3   [1674]14:6
   [1675]14:6   [1676]14:16   [1677]14:16   [1678]14:16   [1679]14:17
   [1680]14:21   [1681]15:6   [1682]15:17-25   [1683]15:26   [1684]16:13
   [1685]16:13-15   [1686]17   [1687]17:15   [1688]17:19   [1689]18
   [1690]18:9   [1691]18:31   [1692]19:19   [1693]19:25   [1694]19:25
   [1695]19:30   [1696]19:30   [1697]19:30   [1698]19:33   [1699]20:1
   [1700]20:2   [1701]20:11-18   [1702]20:14-18   [1703]20:17
   [1704]20:19   [1705]20:19-24   [1706]20:22   [1707]20:22
   [1708]20:23   [1709]20:31   [1710]21:7

   Acts

   [1711]1   [1712]1   [1713]1:5   [1714]1:9   [1715]1:11   [1716]1:13
   [1717]1:18   [1718]1:18   [1719]1:20   [1720]1:22   [1721]2   [1722]2
   [1723]2   [1724]2   [1725]2   [1726]2   [1727]2:1   [1728]2:1-4
   [1729]2:1-4   [1730]2:1-4   [1731]2:2   [1732]2:4   [1733]2:25-31
   [1734]2:32   [1735]2:33   [1736]2:33   [1737]2:34   [1738]2:38
   [1739]2:38-42   [1740]2:41-47   [1741]3:19-21   [1742]3:19-21
   [1743]3:22   [1744]3:23   [1745]4:8   [1746]4:12   [1747]4:12
   [1748]4:25   [1749]4:25   [1750]4:27   [1751]4:27   [1752]4:31
   [1753]5   [1754]5:1   [1755]5:3   [1756]5:4   [1757]6:3   [1758]6:5
   [1759]7   [1760]7   [1761]7:2   [1762]7:2-4   [1763]7:16
   [1764]7:20-29   [1765]7:38   [1766]7:55   [1767]7:58   [1768]8:16
   [1769]8:32   [1770]9   [1771]9   [1772]9   [1773]9   [1774]9
   [1775]9   [1776]9:4   [1777]9:4   [1778]9:5   [1779]9:5   [1780]9:20
   [1781]10   [1782]10   [1783]10   [1784]10:9-15   [1785]10:34-46
   [1786]10:38   [1787]10:38   [1788]10:46   [1789]12:12   [1790]12:15
   [1791]13   [1792]13:10   [1793]13:20   [1794]13:20   [1795]13:21
   [1796]13:28   [1797]13:33   [1798]13:46   [1799]14:11-18   [1800]15
   [1801]15   [1802]15   [1803]15   [1804]15:1-29   [1805]15:7-19
   [1806]15:14-17   [1807]15:14-17   [1808]15:14-17   [1809]15:16
   [1810]15:17   [1811]15:20   [1812]15:21   [1813]15:38   [1814]16
   [1815]16   [1816]16   [1817]16:6   [1818]16:18   [1819]17   [1820]17
   [1821]17   [1822]17   [1823]17   [1824]17:26   [1825]17:27   [1826]19
   [1827]19   [1828]19   [1829]19   [1830]19:6   [1831]19:22
   [1832]19:23-20:1   [1833]19:39   [1834]20   [1835]20:24   [1836]21:20
   [1837]22:3   [1838]22:4   [1839]22:6-8   [1840]22:19   [1841]22:20
   [1842]22:28   [1843]23:6   [1844]24:10   [1845]24:11   [1846]24:14
   [1847]28   [1848]28   [1849]28   [1850]28   [1851]28:26   [1852]28:27

   Romans

   [1853]1:10   [1854]1:11-13   [1855]1:16   [1856]1:16   [1857]1:17
   [1858]1:17   [1859]1:22   [1860]1:28   [1861]2:25   [1862]2:29
   [1863]3:18-25   [1864]3:19   [1865]3:19-25   [1866]3:21   [1867]3:22
   [1868]3:22   [1869]3:24-25   [1870]3:25   [1871]3:25   [1872]3:25
   [1873]3:25   [1874]3:26   [1875]4   [1876]4:4-8   [1877]4:17
   [1878]4:20   [1879]4:23-25   [1880]4:23-25   [1881]4:25   [1882]5
   [1883]5:1   [1884]5:1   [1885]5:12   [1886]5:12-21   [1887]5:19
   [1888]6   [1889]6:1-11   [1890]6:4   [1891]6:4   [1892]6:9   [1893]7
   [1894]7:7-11   [1895]7:7-14   [1896]7:11   [1897]7:18   [1898]8
   [1899]8:1   [1900]8:3   [1901]8:3   [1902]8:4   [1903]8:7   [1904]8:7
   [1905]8:8   [1906]8:9   [1907]8:9   [1908]8:9-15   [1909]8:10-18
   [1910]8:18-21   [1911]8:18-23   [1912]8:19-22   [1913]8:20
   [1914]8:20-22   [1915]8:26   [1916]8:26   [1917]8:26   [1918]8:28
   [1919]8:30   [1920]8:33   [1921]8:34   [1922]8:34   [1923]8:36
   [1924]8:37   [1925]9:1-5   [1926]9:1-5   [1927]9:14-22   [1928]9:20
   [1929]9:21   [1930]9:24-33   [1931]9:32   [1932]9:33   [1933]10:4
   [1934]10:4   [1935]10:5   [1936]10:9   [1937]10:9   [1938]10:10
   [1939]10:10   [1940]10:19-21   [1941]11   [1942]11   [1943]11
   [1944]11   [1945]11   [1946]11:1-5   [1947]11:5   [1948]11:5
   [1949]11:25   [1950]11:25   [1951]11:25-27   [1952]11:25-29
   [1953]11:26   [1954]11:26-27   [1955]11:27   [1956]11:29
   [1957]11:29   [1958]11:29   [1959]11:29   [1960]12:1   [1961]12:1
   [1962]12:3-8   [1963]12:10   [1964]12:13   [1965]12:20   [1966]12:21
   [1967]13:1-7   [1968]13:1-7   [1969]14   [1970]14   [1971]14
   [1972]14:2   [1973]14:20   [1974]15:2   [1975]15:8   [1976]15:9
   [1977]15:20   [1978]15:21   [1979]15:28   [1980]16:1   [1981]16:1
   [1982]16:6   [1983]16:25   [1984]16:26

   1 Corinthians

   [1985]1:3   [1986]1:7   [1987]1:12   [1988]1:18-31   [1989]1:23
   [1990]1:24   [1991]1:26-29   [1992]1:27   [1993]1:27   [1994]1:27
   [1995]1:28   [1996]1:28   [1997]1:30   [1998]2   [1999]2:9-12
   [2000]2:9-14   [2001]2:11   [2002]2:14   [2003]2:14   [2004]3:11
   [2005]3:11-15   [2006]3:11-15   [2007]3:11-15   [2008]4:4   [2009]4:9
   [2010]4:16   [2011]4:17   [2012]5   [2013]5:1-5   [2014]5:1-5
   [2015]5:1-5   [2016]5:6-8   [2017]5:7   [2018]5:7   [2019]5:7
   [2020]5:7-8   [2021]5:8   [2022]5:12   [2023]5:13   [2024]6:2
   [2025]6:2   [2026]6:11   [2027]6:11   [2028]6:12-20   [2029]6:19
   [2030]6:19   [2031]6:19   [2032]6:20   [2033]6:20   [2034]7
   [2035]7:17-24   [2036]7:32   [2037]7:33   [2038]9:1   [2039]9:1
   [2040]9:20   [2041]9:20   [2042]9:27   [2043]9:27   [2044]10
   [2045]10:1-5   [2046]10:1-11   [2047]10:4   [2048]10:4   [2049]10:4
   [2050]10:6   [2051]10:11   [2052]10:17   [2053]10:19   [2054]10:20
   [2055]10:23   [2056]10:31   [2057]10:32   [2058]10:32   [2059]11
   [2060]11:5   [2061]11:23   [2062]11:28-32   [2063]11:30-32   [2064]12
   [2065]12   [2066]12:3   [2067]12:3   [2068]12:4   [2069]12:8
   [2070]12:12   [2071]12:12   [2072]12:12-27   [2073]12:12-27
   [2074]12:13   [2075]12:13   [2076]12:13   [2077]12:13   [2078]12:13
   [2079]12:13   [2080]12:13   [2081]13   [2082]14   [2083]14   [2084]14
   [2085]14:34   [2086]14:35   [2087]14:37   [2088]15   [2089]15
   [2090]15:5   [2091]15:7   [2092]15:20   [2093]15:20-22
   [2094]15:22-28   [2095]15:22-28   [2096]15:23   [2097]15:23
   [2098]15:23-28   [2099]15:23-28   [2100]15:25   [2101]15:27
   [2102]15:28   [2103]15:31   [2104]15:45-47   [2105]15:45-49
   [2106]15:50-53   [2107]15:58   [2108]16:1   [2109]16:1   [2110]16:1
   [2111]16:1-2   [2112]16:2   [2113]16:2   [2114]16:2   [2115]16:2
   [2116]16:10

   2 Corinthians

   [2117]1:5   [2118]1:9   [2119]1:10   [2120]2:14   [2121]3:6
   [2122]3:7-18   [2123]3:18   [2124]4:6   [2125]4:7   [2126]5:8
   [2127]5:9   [2128]5:9   [2129]5:10   [2130]5:14   [2131]5:14
   [2132]5:15   [2133]5:15-17   [2134]5:17   [2135]5:17   [2136]5:17
   [2137]5:18-21   [2138]5:21   [2139]5:21   [2140]5:21   [2141]5:21
   [2142]6:11   [2143]6:11   [2144]6:12   [2145]6:14   [2146]6:14
   [2147]6:14-18   [2148]6:14-18   [2149]6:17   [2150]6:17   [2151]6:18
   [2152]6:18   [2153]7:1   [2154]7:1   [2155]7:1   [2156]7:9
   [2157]8:6   [2158]8:7-9   [2159]8:12   [2160]10:14-16   [2161]11:2
   [2162]11:2   [2163]11:3   [2164]11:3   [2165]11:3   [2166]11:5
   [2167]11:24   [2168]11:24   [2169]12:7   [2170]12:11   [2171]12:12

   Galatians

   [2172]1:1   [2173]1:8   [2174]1:12   [2175]1:13   [2176]1:14
   [2177]1:17   [2178]2   [2179]2:2   [2180]2:6-9   [2181]2:8
   [2182]2:11-15   [2183]3:8   [2184]3:14   [2185]3:18   [2186]3:23-25
   [2187]3:24   [2188]3:24   [2189]3:24   [2190]3:28   [2191]3:28
   [2192]3:29   [2193]4:1-3   [2194]4:1-5   [2195]4:1-5   [2196]4:4
   [2197]4:4   [2198]4:5   [2199]4:5   [2200]4:9   [2201]4:15
   [2202]4:21-31   [2203]5:16-25   [2204]5:21   [2205]6:1   [2206]6:2
   [2207]11:1-4

   Ephesians

   [2208]1:4   [2209]1:4-6   [2210]1:7   [2211]1:7   [2212]1:11
   [2213]1:11   [2214]1:12   [2215]1:13   [2216]1:14   [2217]1:15
   [2218]1:15-23   [2219]1:20-22   [2220]1:23   [2221]2:1   [2222]2:1-10
   [2223]2:3   [2224]2:5   [2225]2:5   [2226]2:6   [2227]2:6   [2228]2:6
   [2229]2:10   [2230]2:11-18   [2231]2:11-18   [2232]2:12
   [2233]2:20-22   [2234]2:21   [2235]3   [2236]3:2   [2237]3:4
   [2238]3:6   [2239]3:6   [2240]3:10   [2241]3:30   [2242]4
   [2243]4:1-6   [2244]4:3-6   [2245]4:7-16   [2246]4:7-16
   [2247]4:8-10   [2248]4:8-10   [2249]4:8-11   [2250]4:10-12
   [2251]4:11   [2252]4:12   [2253]4:18   [2254]4:18   [2255]4:19
   [2256]4:24   [2257]4:30   [2258]4:30   [2259]5:2   [2260]5:2
   [2261]5:17   [2262]5:18   [2263]5:18   [2264]5:18   [2265]5:22-33
   [2266]5:23-27   [2267]5:25   [2268]5:25-27   [2269]5:25-33
   [2270]5:26   [2271]5:27   [2272]5:28-33   [2273]5:33   [2274]6
   [2275]6:14   [2276]6:17   [2277]6:17   [2278]6:18   [2279]6:21
   [2280]6:22

   Philippians

   [2281]1:1   [2282]1:2   [2283]1:6   [2284]1:9-11   [2285]1:23
   [2286]1:26   [2287]2:4   [2288]2:6   [2289]2:7   [2290]2:7
   [2291]2:9-11   [2292]2:9-11   [2293]2:12   [2294]2:12   [2295]2:13
   [2296]3:5   [2297]3:6   [2298]3:6   [2299]3:6   [2300]3:10
   [2301]3:10   [2302]3:20   [2303]3:20   [2304]4:4   [2305]4:4
   [2306]4:7   [2307]4:18

   Colossians

   [2308]1:1   [2309]1:7   [2310]1:10   [2311]1:15   [2312]1:15
   [2313]1:18   [2314]1:18   [2315]1:18   [2316]1:24   [2317]1:24
   [2318]1:24   [2319]1:24   [2320]2:2   [2321]2:3   [2322]2:9
   [2323]2:10   [2324]2:10   [2325]2:11   [2326]2:11   [2327]2:13-15
   [2328]2:15   [2329]2:16   [2330]2:16-23   [2331]2:19   [2332]2:20-22
   [2333]2:23   [2334]3:1-3   [2335]3:4   [2336]3:4   [2337]3:9
   [2338]3:10   [2339]3:10   [2340]3:10   [2341]3:18-4:1   [2342]4:14
   [2343]100

   1 Thessalonians

   [2344]1:10   [2345]4:6   [2346]4:9   [2347]4:10-12   [2348]4:13
   [2349]4:13-5   [2350]4:13-18   [2351]4:13-18   [2352]4:13-18
   [2353]4:13-18   [2354]4:13-18   [2355]4:13-18   [2356]4:13-18
   [2357]4:13-18   [2358]4:13-18   [2359]4:13-18   [2360]4:13-18
   [2361]4:13-18   [2362]4:14-17   [2363]4:14-17   [2364]4:16
   [2365]4:16   [2366]4:16   [2367]4:16-18   [2368]4:16-18
   [2369]4:16-18   [2370]4:17   [2371]4:17   [2372]4:17   [2373]4:17
   [2374]5:3   [2375]5:23   [2376]5:23   [2377]12

   2 Thessalonians

   [2378]1:5-10   [2379]1:6-10   [2380]1:7-10   [2381]1:7-10   [2382]1:9
   [2383]1:9   [2384]2   [2385]2   [2386]2   [2387]2   [2388]2:1
   [2389]2:1   [2390]2:2   [2391]2:3-8   [2392]2:3-8   [2393]2:4
   [2394]2:4   [2395]2:4   [2396]2:4   [2397]2:4-8   [2398]2:8
   [2399]2:8   [2400]2:8   [2401]2:8   [2402]2:9   [2403]2:9
   [2404]2:11   [2405]2:11   [2406]2:11   [2407]2:12   [2408]2:12
   [2409]2:12   [2410]3:4   [2411]3:8   [2412]3:17

   1 Timothy

   [2413]1:3   [2414]1:7   [2415]1:7   [2416]1:15   [2417]1:20   [2418]2
   [2419]2:8   [2420]2:14   [2421]2:24   [2422]3:2   [2423]3:6
   [2424]4:1-3   [2425]4:2   [2426]4:3   [2427]4:4   [2428]4:5
   [2429]4:8   [2430]4:10   [2431]4:12   [2432]5:23   [2433]6:5
   [2434]6:9

   2 Timothy

   [2435]1:5   [2436]1:7   [2437]1:7   [2438]1:8   [2439]1:12
   [2440]1:16   [2441]2:4   [2442]2:9   [2443]2:17   [2444]2:17
   [2445]2:18   [2446]2:19   [2447]2:20   [2448]2:21   [2449]2:21
   [2450]3   [2451]3   [2452]3:6   [2453]3:8-9   [2454]3:10   [2455]3:16
   [2456]3:16   [2457]3:16   [2458]4:3   [2459]4:4   [2460]4:6
   [2461]4:10   [2462]4:11   [2463]4:21

   Titus

   [2464]1:2   [2465]1:5   [2466]1:8   [2467]1:10   [2468]1:11
   [2469]1:11   [2470]1:16   [2471]3:5

   Philemon

   [2472]1:1   [2473]1:22

   Hebrews

   [2474]1:3   [2475]1:8   [2476]1:9   [2477]1:13   [2478]1:14
   [2479]2:5-9   [2480]2:5-9   [2481]2:10   [2482]2:11   [2483]2:11
   [2484]2:11   [2485]2:12   [2486]2:13   [2487]2:14   [2488]2:14
   [2489]2:15   [2490]2:15   [2491]3:12-19   [2492]3:17-19
   [2493]4:3-11   [2494]4:7   [2495]4:12   [2496]4:12   [2497]4:16
   [2498]6:13   [2499]6:14   [2500]7   [2501]7   [2502]7   [2503]7:6
   [2504]7:7   [2505]7:11-19   [2506]7:18   [2507]7:19   [2508]7:23-25
   [2509]7:23-25   [2510]7:25   [2511]7:25   [2512]7:26   [2513]8:3
   [2514]9:4   [2515]9:4   [2516]9:4   [2517]9:5   [2518]9:7-9
   [2519]9:12   [2520]9:15-17   [2521]9:22   [2522]9:22   [2523]9:22
   [2524]9:24   [2525]9:25   [2526]9:28   [2527]10   [2528]10:1
   [2529]10:3   [2530]10:4   [2531]10:4   [2532]10:4   [2533]10:5
   [2534]10:5-10   [2535]10:7   [2536]10:10   [2537]10:12   [2538]10:13
   [2539]10:13   [2540]10:16-20   [2541]10:19-22   [2542]10:28-31
   [2543]10:32-34   [2544]10:37   [2545]10:38   [2546]11:4   [2547]11:4
   [2548]11:5   [2549]11:5   [2550]11:8-16   [2551]11:11-14
   [2552]11:17-19   [2553]11:22   [2554]11:23   [2555]11:23-27
   [2556]11:30   [2557]11:31   [2558]11:32   [2559]12:5   [2560]12:6
   [2561]12:15-17   [2562]12:22   [2563]12:22   [2564]12:23
   [2565]12:29   [2566]13:2   [2567]13:8   [2568]13:10-13   [2569]13:12
   [2570]13:13-15   [2571]13:20   [2572]13:20

   James

   [2573]1:13   [2574]1:13   [2575]1:17   [2576]1:18   [2577]2:10
   [2578]2:10   [2579]2:21-24   [2580]2:24   [2581]2:24   [2582]2:25
   [2583]3:1   [2584]4:8   [2585]5   [2586]5:17

   1 Peter

   [2587]1:1   [2588]1:3-9   [2589]1:10-12   [2590]1:12   [2591]1:13-16
   [2592]1:18   [2593]1:18-21   [2594]1:19   [2595]1:22   [2596]1:24
   [2597]2:4   [2598]2:4-9   [2599]2:4-9   [2600]2:5   [2601]2:8
   [2602]2:9   [2603]2:13-17   [2604]2:17   [2605]2:18   [2606]2:21
   [2607]3:10-13   [2608]3:18-22   [2609]4:9   [2610]5   [2611]5
   [2612]5:1   [2613]5:4   [2614]5:4   [2615]5:5-6

   2 Peter

   [2616]1   [2617]1   [2618]1:2   [2619]1:16-18   [2620]1:16-18
   [2621]1:16-18   [2622]1:21   [2623]2   [2624]2:4   [2625]2:4
   [2626]2:5   [2627]2:5   [2628]2:6-9   [2629]2:16   [2630]3
   [2631]3:10-13

   1 John

   [2632]1   [2633]1:3   [2634]1:3   [2635]1:3   [2636]1:5   [2637]1:7
   [2638]1:7   [2639]1:8   [2640]1:8   [2641]1:9   [2642]1:9   [2643]1:9
   [2644]1:9   [2645]2:1   [2646]2:1   [2647]2:1   [2648]2:1   [2649]2:1
   [2650]2:1   [2651]2:2   [2652]2:2   [2653]2:2   [2654]2:2   [2655]2:2
   [2656]2:16   [2657]2:16   [2658]2:16   [2659]2:20-27   [2660]3:1-3
   [2661]3:8   [2662]3:8   [2663]3:12   [2664]3:14-18   [2665]3:15
   [2666]3:15-17   [2667]4   [2668]4:1-6   [2669]5:4   [2670]5:4
   [2671]5:9-13   [2672]5:16   [2673]5:19   [2674]9

   2 John

   [2675]1:9-10

   Jude

   [2676]1:6   [2677]1:6   [2678]1:7   [2679]1:9   [2680]1:9
   [2681]1:11   [2682]1:11   [2683]1:11   [2684]1:14   [2685]1:20

   Revelation

   [2686]1   [2687]1   [2688]1   [2689]1:5   [2690]1:5   [2691]1:6
   [2692]1:12   [2693]1:12-14   [2694]1:12-17   [2695]1:13-15
   [2696]1:18   [2697]1:20   [2698]1:20   [2699]2   [2700]2:11
   [2701]2:14   [2702]2:29   [2703]3:5   [2704]3:7   [2705]3:10
   [2706]3:10   [2707]3:18   [2708]3:20   [2709]3:20   [2710]3:20
   [2711]3:21   [2712]4   [2713]5:3-10   [2714]5:8   [2715]5:9
   [2716]7:3   [2717]7:3-8   [2718]7:9-14   [2719]7:14   [2720]7:15
   [2721]7:16   [2722]8   [2723]8   [2724]8:3   [2725]8:4   [2726]10
   [2727]10:1-6   [2728]11   [2729]11   [2730]11   [2731]11:2
   [2732]11:3   [2733]12   [2734]12:6   [2735]12:7   [2736]12:9
   [2737]12:10   [2738]12:12   [2739]12:13   [2740]12:14   [2741]13
   [2742]13   [2743]13   [2744]13:4-7   [2745]13:5   [2746]13:6
   [2747]13:8   [2748]13:11-15   [2749]13:11-17   [2750]13:11-17
   [2751]13:11-17   [2752]14   [2753]14:2   [2754]14:3   [2755]14:6
   [2756]14:7   [2757]15:2   [2758]15:3   [2759]16:13   [2760]17
   [2761]17:15   [2762]18   [2763]18   [2764]18   [2765]18:2   [2766]19
   [2767]19:6   [2768]19:8   [2769]19:11-21   [2770]19:17   [2771]19:18
   [2772]19:20   [2773]20   [2774]20   [2775]20   [2776]20:1-3
   [2777]20:1-10   [2778]20:4-6   [2779]20:4-6   [2780]20:5-6
   [2781]20:6   [2782]20:7   [2783]20:7-10   [2784]20:8   [2785]20:10
   [2786]20:10   [2787]20:11-15   [2788]20:14   [2789]21:2   [2790]21:3
   [2791]21:8   [2792]21:9   [2793]22:1-5   [2794]22:5   [2795]22:12
   [2796]22:17   [2797]22:18   [2798]22:19   [2799]22:19   [2800]22:20
   [2801]100:20

   Wisdom of Solomon

   [2802]15
     __________________________________________________________________

            This document is from the Christian Classics Ethereal
               Library at Calvin College, http://www.ccel.org,
                   generated on demand from ThML source.

References

   1. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=1&scrV=0#ii-p7.1
   2. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=1&scrV=0#ii-p7.2
   3. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=1&scrV=0#ii-p11.1
   4. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=2&scrV=23#iv.x-p86.1
   5. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=2&scrV=24#iv.x-p86.2
   6. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=3&scrV=0#iii.x-p39.1
   7. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=3&scrV=0#iii.xxvi-p28.1
   8. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=3&scrV=0#iv.viii-p77.4
   9. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=3&scrV=6#iv.iii-p54.1
  10. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=3&scrV=15#iii.i-p181.1
  11. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=3&scrV=15#iii.i-p517.1
  12. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=3&scrV=15#iii.iv-p231.1
  13. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=3&scrV=15#iv.iii-p27.1
  14. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=3&scrV=15#iv.i-p27.1
  15. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=3&scrV=21#iii.i-p100.2
  16. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=4&scrV=13#iii.xix-p201.4
  17. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=4&scrV=14#iii.iv-p321.1
  18. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=5&scrV=1#iii.ii-p305.1
  19. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=5&scrV=28#iii.i-p132.1
  20. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=6&scrV=0#iii.i-p148.1
  21. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=6&scrV=0#iv.vii-p75.1
  22. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=6&scrV=0#iv.xxi-p36.2
  23. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=6&scrV=12#iii.xix-p107.1
  24. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=6&scrV=24#iii.xii-p9.2
  25. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=9&scrV=4#iv.v-p153.1
  26. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=9&scrV=6#iii.ii-p404.1
  27. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=9&scrV=6#iii.x-p115.1
  28. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=10&scrV=5#iii.v-p291.3
  29. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=11&scrV=0#iii.ii-p88.1
  30. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=11&scrV=0#iii.xxvii-p28.2
  31. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=11&scrV=0#iii.xxxviii-p38.4
  32. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=11&scrV=5#iii.i-p280.1
  33. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=12&scrV=0#iii.i-p230.1
  34. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=12&scrV=0#iii.x-p39.1
  35. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=12&scrV=6#iii.vi-p271.1
  36. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=12&scrV=7#iii.vi-p271.2
  37. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=13&scrV=15#iii.v-p251.1
  38. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=13&scrV=16#iii.iv-p226.4
  39. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=14&scrV=7#iii.ii-p301.1
  40. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=14&scrV=17#iv.xix-p62.1
  41. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=14&scrV=18#iii.ii-p525.1
  42. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=14&scrV=20#iv.viii-p68.4
  43. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=15&scrV=0#iii.x-p73.1
  44. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=15&scrV=6#iii.i-p238.1
  45. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=15&scrV=6#iv.vi-p39.2
  46. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=15&scrV=7#iii.v-p251.2
  47. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=15&scrV=13#iii.ii-p189.1
  48. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=15&scrV=13#iii.ii-p5.1
  49. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=15&scrV=14#iii.ii-p5.2
  50. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=15&scrV=18#iii.v-p252.5
  51. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=15&scrV=18#iii.v-p259.1
  52. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=16&scrV=16#iii.vii-p22.1
  53. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=17&scrV=1#iii.vii-p22.2
  54. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=18&scrV=0#iii.x-p166.2
  55. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=18&scrV=17#iv.iv-p129.1
  56. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=19&scrV=3#iv.i-p177.4
  57. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=19&scrV=15#iii.xix-p201.5
  58. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=20&scrV=2#iii.xix-p183.2
  59. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=22&scrV=1#iv.vi-p39.3
  60. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=22&scrV=2#iii.xiv-p9.1
  61. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=27&scrV=45#iii.iv-p321.2
  62. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=28&scrV=2#iv.xix-p116.9
  63. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=29&scrV=15#iii.ix-p7.1
  64. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=31&scrV=54#iii.iii-p117.1
  65. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=32&scrV=23#iii.ii-p322.1
  66. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=32&scrV=28#iii.ix-p305.1
  67. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=33&scrV=18#iii.vi-p271.3
  68. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=35&scrV=2#iii.vi-p271.4
  69. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=35&scrV=19#iii.viii-p7.1
  70. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=38&scrV=0#iii.v-p211.1
  71. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=38&scrV=11#iii.viii-p10.1
  72. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=47&scrV=11#iii.ii-p187.1
  73. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=48&scrV=5#iii.xxvi-p287.1
  74. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=48&scrV=7#iii.viii-p7.2
  75. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=48&scrV=7#iii.xix-p306.2
  76. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=49&scrV=0#iii.v-p303.1
  77. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=49&scrV=0#iii.iv-p13.1
  78. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=49&scrV=0#iii.vi-p216.3
  79. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=49&scrV=0#iii.xiii-p18.3
  80. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=49&scrV=8#iii.vii-p38.1
  81. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=49&scrV=10#iii.iv-p237.1
  82. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=3&scrV=0#iii.xxvi-p11.1
  83. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=3&scrV=14#iv.i-p273.2
  84. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=4&scrV=22#iii.iii-p374.1
  85. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=4&scrV=22#iv.i-p41.3
  86. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=5&scrV=0#iv.xxvii-p110.1
  87. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=7&scrV=5#iii.ii-p81.1
  88. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=10&scrV=21#iii.xxvi-p180.1
  89. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=12&scrV=0#iii.iii-p413.1
  90. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=12&scrV=0#iii.xiv-p100.1
  91. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=12&scrV=0#iv.i-p322.7
  92. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=12&scrV=7#iii.xxvi-p74.4
  93. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=12&scrV=13#iii.i-p145.1
  94. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=12&scrV=25#iii.iv-p59.1
  95. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=12&scrV=28#iii.iv-p134.1
  96. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=12&scrV=37#iii.xxvi-p119.1
  97. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=12&scrV=38#iii.xxvi-p119.2
  98. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=13&scrV=0#iii.iv-p81.1
  99. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=13&scrV=2#iii.v-p51.1
 100. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=13&scrV=9#iv.i-p274.3
 101. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=13&scrV=11#iii.v-p51.2
 102. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=13&scrV=12#iv.iii-p35.1
 103. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=13&scrV=13#iv.iii-p35.2
 104. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=14&scrV=19#iii.ii-p208.1
 105. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=15&scrV=0#iv.xxvii-p109.1
 106. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=15&scrV=16#iii.xvii-p37.1
 107. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=16&scrV=0#iii.iv-p116.1
 108. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=16&scrV=8#iii.xii-p20.1
 109. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=16&scrV=10#iii.ii-p207.1
 110. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=16&scrV=31#iii.iv-p109.1
 111. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=16&scrV=33#iii.xi-p91.1
 112. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=17&scrV=0#iii.v-p212.1
 113. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=17&scrV=5#iii.v-p74.1
 114. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=17&scrV=5#iii.iv-p186.1
 115. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=17&scrV=6#iii.v-p74.2
 116. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=17&scrV=8#iii.ix-p164.1
 117. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=17&scrV=14#iii.iv-p239.1
 118. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=18&scrV=12#iii.iii-p117.2
 119. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=19&scrV=1#iii.iv-p73.1
 120. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=19&scrV=5#iii.iv-p226.1
 121. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=19&scrV=5#iv.i-p179.1
 122. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=19&scrV=12#iii.xxvi-p119.4
 123. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=19&scrV=15#iii.ix-p235.3
 124. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=19&scrV=16#iii.v-p302.1
 125. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=20&scrV=5#iii.xii-p88.2
 126. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=20&scrV=5#iii.xxvi-p70.2
 127. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=20&scrV=5#iv.viii-p77.1
 128. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=21&scrV=14#iii.xi-p11.1
 129. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=21&scrV=32#iv.i-p322.6
 130. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=22&scrV=26#iii.xxx-p4.1
 131. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=23&scrV=20#iii.ii-p208.2
 132. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=23&scrV=34#iii.vi-p126.1
 133. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=25&scrV=0#iii.xxvi-p28.2
 134. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=25&scrV=10#iii.i-p84.1
 135. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=25&scrV=15#iii.xi-p90.3
 136. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=25&scrV=17#iv.iii-p214.1
 137. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=25&scrV=18#iv.iii-p214.2
 138. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=25&scrV=21#iv.iii-p214.3
 139. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=25&scrV=22#iii.iv-p51.1
 140. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=25&scrV=22#iii.xxiii-p4.1
 141. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=26&scrV=31#iv.i-p348.1
 142. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=28&scrV=26#iii.ix-p247.1
 143. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=28&scrV=41#iii.xiv-p75.1
 144. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=29&scrV=21#iv.xix-p94.1
 145. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=29&scrV=27#iii.ix-p30.1
 146. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=31&scrV=13#iii.iii-p366.1
 147. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=32&scrV=0#iii.xiv-p41.1
 148. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=32&scrV=6#iii.iii-p117.3
 149. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=32&scrV=25#iii.i-p515.6
 150. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=32&scrV=26#iii.v-p303.2
 151. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=33&scrV=0#iii.xviii-p24.1
 152. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=33&scrV=0#iii.xxvi-p11.1
 153. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=33&scrV=2#iii.iv-p120.4
 154. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=33&scrV=9#iii.ii-p209.1
 155. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=33&scrV=16#iv.v-p20.1
 156. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=33&scrV=20#iii.iv-p120.1
 157. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=34&scrV=0#iii.xi-p26.1
 158. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=34&scrV=0#iii.xviii-p24.1
 159. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=34&scrV=5#iii.iv-p120.5
 160. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=34&scrV=12#iii.vi-p126.2
 161. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=34&scrV=22#iii.iii-p362.1
 162. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=34&scrV=22#iv.v-p20.2
 163. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=34&scrV=33#iv.viii-p18.1
 164. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=34&scrV=35#iv.viii-p24.1
 165. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=37&scrV=7#iii.xi-p90.1
 166. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=37&scrV=8#iii.xi-p90.2
 167. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=38&scrV=8#iii.ix-p32.1
 168. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=40&scrV=34#iii.xi-p93.1
 169. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=2&scrV=13#iv.ii-p89.1
 170. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=3&scrV=7#iii.ix-p7.2
 171. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=4&scrV=35#iv.i-p323.1
 172. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=7&scrV=31#iii.ix-p30.2
 173. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=7&scrV=32#iii.ix-p30.3
 174. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=7&scrV=34#iii.ix-p30.4
 175. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=8&scrV=30#iv.xix-p94.2
 176. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=10&scrV=0#iv.v-p46.2
 177. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=10&scrV=10#iii.xxxvii-p4.1
 178. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=10&scrV=11#iii.xxxvii-p4.2
 179. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=12&scrV=3#iii.iii-p9.6
 180. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=12&scrV=8#iv.iii-p35.3
 181. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=14&scrV=0#iv.iii-p72.2
 182. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=14&scrV=3#iii.iii-p9.2
 183. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=14&scrV=4#iii.iv-p178.1
 184. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=14&scrV=8#iii.iv-p43.1
 185. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=14&scrV=9#iii.iv-p43.2
 186. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=14&scrV=10#iii.iii-p9.3
 187. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=16&scrV=0#iv.i-p348.2
 188. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=16&scrV=21#iii.iii-p63.1
 189. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=16&scrV=27#iv.iv-p162.9
 190. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=17&scrV=3#iii.xi-p28.1
 191. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=17&scrV=4#iii.xi-p28.2
 192. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=17&scrV=7#iii.ii-p359.1
 193. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=17&scrV=11#iii.i-p142.1
 194. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=17&scrV=14#iv.iii-p262.1
 195. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=18&scrV=9#iii.i-p106.1
 196. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=19&scrV=0#iii.v-p102.4
 197. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=19&scrV=9#iii.viii-p13.1
 198. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=19&scrV=10#iii.viii-p13.2
 199. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=19&scrV=15#iii.ii-p453.1
 200. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=19&scrV=16#iii.ii-p414.1
 201. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=19&scrV=31#iii.ix-p298.1
 202. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=20&scrV=24#iii.iv-p226.2
 203. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=20&scrV=27#iii.ix-p298.2
 204. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=23&scrV=0#iii.xv-p12.1
 205. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=23&scrV=3#iii.ii-p285.1
 206. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=23&scrV=3#iii.ii-p381.1
 207. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=23&scrV=12#iii.iii-p83.1
 208. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=23&scrV=13#iii.iii-p83.2
 209. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=23&scrV=18#iii.iii-p83.3
 210. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=23&scrV=33#iii.xi-p163.3
 211. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=23&scrV=34#iii.xi-p163.4
 212. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=24&scrV=5#iii.ii-p524.1
 213. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=24&scrV=5#iii.ii-p524.5
 214. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=24&scrV=6#iii.ii-p524.2
 215. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=24&scrV=6#iii.ii-p524.6
 216. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=24&scrV=7#iii.ii-p524.3
 217. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=24&scrV=9#iii.ix-p235.2
 218. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=24&scrV=16#iv.iv-p162.3
 219. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=25&scrV=0#iii.v-p111.1
 220. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=25&scrV=20#iii.ii-p456.1
 221. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=25&scrV=23#iii.i-p190.1
 222. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=25&scrV=23#iii.xi-p257.1
 223. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=25&scrV=25#iii.viii-p16.1
 224. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=25&scrV=25#iii.viii-p36.1
 225. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=25&scrV=34#iii.iv-p318.3
 226. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=25&scrV=93#iii.ii-p435.1
 227. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=26&scrV=33#iii.xiv-p110.1
 228. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=27&scrV=0#iii.vii-p175.1
 229. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=27&scrV=28#iii.vi-p9.1
 230. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=27&scrV=29#iii.vi-p9.2
 231. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=1&scrV=0#iii.xiii-p18.1
 232. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=1&scrV=3#iii.ii-p675.1
 233. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=2&scrV=0#iii.xiv-p68.3
 234. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=2&scrV=50#iii.ii-p496.1
 235. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=2&scrV=53#iii.ii-p496.2
 236. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=3&scrV=0#iii.ii-p194.2
 237. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=4&scrV=14#iii.x-p34.1
 238. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=4&scrV=15#iii.x-p34.2
 239. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=5&scrV=0#iv.i-p232.1
 240. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=6&scrV=0#iii.vii-p196.1
 241. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=6&scrV=5#iii.ix-p8.2
 242. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=6&scrV=5#iii.ix-p18.1
 243. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=7&scrV=9#iii.x-p34.3
 244. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=8&scrV=0#iii.iii-p63.2
 245. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=9&scrV=6#iii.xiv-p76.1
 246. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=10&scrV=29#iii.iv-p101.1
 247. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=12&scrV=0#iv.iii-p72.1
 248. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=12&scrV=0#iii.xiv-p68.3
 249. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=13&scrV=31#iii.i-p133.1
 250. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=14&scrV=24#iii.vi-p218.1
 251. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=14&scrV=33#iii.xxvii-p144.2
 252. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=15&scrV=1#iii.ii-p524.4
 253. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=15&scrV=5#iv.xi-p34.1
 254. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=16&scrV=40#iii.ii-p207.2
 255. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=17&scrV=10#iii.xi-p91.2
 256. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=18&scrV=0#iii.xiv-p68.1
 257. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=18&scrV=3#iii.x-p34.4
 258. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=18&scrV=16#iii.ii-p194.1
 259. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=18&scrV=16#iv.iii-p35.4
 260. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=18&scrV=21#iii.v-p216.1
 261. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=19&scrV=11#iii.xxxvii-p4.4
 262. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=20&scrV=0#iii.v-p27.1
 263. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=20&scrV=5#iv.xxvii-p23.2
 264. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=20&scrV=23#iv.xxvii-p23.3
 265. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=21&scrV=31#iii.vi-p161.1
 266. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=23&scrV=0#iv.i-p37.2
 267. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=23&scrV=23#iii.i-p452.1
 268. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=24&scrV=17#iii.x-p73.2
 269. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=24&scrV=20#iii.ix-p164.2
 270. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=25&scrV=0#iii.xxvi-p140.1
 271. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=26&scrV=54#iii.vi-p216.2
 272. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=27&scrV=1#iii.vi-p222.1
 273. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=27&scrV=21#iii.vi-p28.1
 274. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=27&scrV=21#iii.v-p131.1
 275. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=27&scrV=21#iii.ix-p247.2
 276. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=28&scrV=0#iv.v-p20.3
 277. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=28&scrV=7#iii.iii-p83.4
 278. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=28&scrV=9#iii.ii-p381.2
 279. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=28&scrV=10#iii.ii-p381.3
 280. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=32&scrV=0#iii.vi-p34.1
 281. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=32&scrV=41#iii.vii-p153.1
 282. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=33&scrV=54#iii.vi-p216.1
 283. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=34&scrV=5#iii.i-p232.1
 284. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=35&scrV=7#iii.i-p515.3
 285. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=35&scrV=8#iii.i-p515.4
 286. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=35&scrV=9#iii.ii-p440.1
 287. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=35&scrV=21#iii.x-p113.1
 288. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=35&scrV=22#iii.xi-p13.1
 289. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=35&scrV=33#iii.i-p144.1
 290. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=36&scrV=78#iii.xi-p257.2
 291. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=1&scrV=2#iii.iv-p299.1
 292. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=1&scrV=9#iii.ii-p312.1
 293. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=1&scrV=13#iii.ii-p312.2
 294. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=1&scrV=19#iii.iv-p134.2
 295. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=1&scrV=23#iii.iv-p146.1
 296. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=1&scrV=36#iii.vi-p218.2
 297. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=1&scrV=45#iii.iv-p299.2
 298. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=2&scrV=1#iii.iv-p198.1
 299. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=2&scrV=16#iii.iv-p183.1
 300. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=2&scrV=36#iii.vi-p161.2
 301. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=3&scrV=3#iii.vi-p161.3
 302. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=3&scrV=14#iii.vii-p153.2
 303. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=4&scrV=12#iii.ii-p364.1
 304. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=4&scrV=15#iii.ii-p364.2
 305. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=4&scrV=15#iii.ii-p466.1
 306. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=5&scrV=12#iii.ii-p354.1
 307. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=5&scrV=13#iii.ii-p354.2
 308. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=5&scrV=15#iii.ii-p386.1
 309. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=5&scrV=15#iii.iii-p366.2
 310. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=5&scrV=16#iii.ii-p401.1
 311. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=5&scrV=32#iii.ii-p354.3
 312. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=5&scrV=33#iii.ii-p354.4
 313. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=6&scrV=1#iii.v-p51.3
 314. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=6&scrV=4#iv.i-p274.5
 315. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=6&scrV=9#iv.i-p274.4
 316. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=6&scrV=10#iii.vi-p106.1
 317. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=7&scrV=2#iii.vi-p95.1
 318. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=7&scrV=2#iii.vi-p126.3
 319. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=7&scrV=3#iii.viii-p8.1
 320. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=7&scrV=6#iii.xxx-p7.1
 321. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=7&scrV=9#iii.ii-p368.1
 322. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=7&scrV=20#iii.vi-p95.2
 323. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=8&scrV=3#iii.iii-p410.1
 324. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=9&scrV=15#iii.ii-p710.1
 325. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=10&scrV=4#iii.ii-p738.1
 326. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=11&scrV=16#iii.xi-p220.1
 327. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=11&scrV=16#iii.xi-p239.1
 328. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=11&scrV=17#iii.xi-p220.2
 329. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=11&scrV=17#iii.xi-p239.2
 330. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=11&scrV=18#iii.v-p51.4
 331. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=11&scrV=25#iii.xvii-p37.2
 332. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=12&scrV=4#iii.iii-p97.1
 333. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=12&scrV=12#iii.ix-p7.3
 334. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=12&scrV=15#iii.iii-p284.1
 335. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=12&scrV=17#iii.iii-p97.2
 336. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=12&scrV=18#iii.iii-p97.3
 337. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=13&scrV=51#iii.xi-p225.1
 338. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=14&scrV=3#iii.xxvi-p51.2
 339. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=14&scrV=21#iii.iii-p314.2
 340. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=14&scrV=22#iii.v-p216.2
 341. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=14&scrV=23#iii.v-p216.3
 342. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=14&scrV=28#iii.v-p216.4
 343. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=14&scrV=29#iii.v-p216.5
 344. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=15&scrV=12#iii.ii-p435.2
 345. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=16&scrV=16#iii.xix-p304.1
 346. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=16&scrV=21#iii.xiv-p93.1
 347. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=17&scrV=16#iii.xi-p129.1
 348. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=18&scrV=0#iii.x-p39.2
 349. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=18&scrV=9#iii.xiv-p93.2
 350. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=18&scrV=9#iii.ii-p360.1
 351. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=18&scrV=10#iii.ix-p298.3
 352. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=18&scrV=11#iii.ix-p298.4
 353. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=18&scrV=18#iii.x-p115.2
 354. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=18&scrV=18#iii.xxiii-p4.2
 355. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=19&scrV=0#iii.iv-p332.1
 356. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=19&scrV=16#iii.ii-p413.1
 357. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=20&scrV=5#iii.xix-p175.1
 358. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=20&scrV=8#iii.vii-p119.1
 359. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=20&scrV=10#iii.xii-p69.1
 360. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=20&scrV=13#iii.iv-p275.1
 361. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=21&scrV=17#iii.xii-p9.1
 362. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=21&scrV=18#iii.ix-p33.1
 363. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=22&scrV=10#iv.viii-p44.1
 364. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=23&scrV=0#iii.xxvi-p51.3
 365. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=23&scrV=3#iii.viii-p8.2
 366. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=23&scrV=5#iii.iv-p233.1
 367. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=23&scrV=22#iii.iii-p467.1
 368. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=24&scrV=16#iii.vi-p104.1
 369. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=24&scrV=19#iii.viii-p13.3
 370. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=25&scrV=5#iii.viii-p10.2
 371. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=25&scrV=5#iv.i-p273.1
 372. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=25&scrV=5#iii.iii-p289.1
 373. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=25&scrV=17#iii.ix-p164.3
 374. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=25&scrV=18#iii.ii-p301.2
 375. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=25&scrV=19#iii.ii-p305.2
 376. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=25&scrV=25#iii.viii-p37.1
 377. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=28&scrV=1#iv.iii-p264.1
 378. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=28&scrV=68#iii.xxvi-p51.4
 379. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=30&scrV=1#iii.xix-p223.1
 380. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=30&scrV=9#iv.i-p179.6
 381. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=31&scrV=15#iii.ii-p204.2
 382. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=32&scrV=11#iii.ii-p323.1
 383. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=32&scrV=12#iii.ii-p323.2
 384. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=32&scrV=17#iii.ii-p359.2
 385. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=32&scrV=21#iii.ii-p365.1
 386. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=33&scrV=0#iii.vi-p216.4
 387. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=33&scrV=8#iii.i-p515.7
 388. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=33&scrV=10#iii.xxxvii-p4.3
 389. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=33&scrV=27#iii.ii-p559.1
 390. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=33&scrV=28#iii.iv-p226.3
 391. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Josh&scrCh=2&scrV=9#iii.ii-p234.1
 392. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Josh&scrCh=2&scrV=15#iii.ix-p216.1
 393. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Josh&scrCh=3&scrV=3#iii.v-p280.1
 394. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Josh&scrCh=7&scrV=0#iv.v-p46.3
 395. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Josh&scrCh=7&scrV=1#iii.iii-p122.1
 396. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Josh&scrCh=7&scrV=5#iii.vi-p174.1
 397. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Josh&scrCh=7&scrV=17#iii.iii-p473.1
 398. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Josh&scrCh=8&scrV=33#iii.v-p231.2
 399. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Josh&scrCh=8&scrV=34#iii.v-p231.3
 400. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Josh&scrCh=9&scrV=3#iii.x-p166.1
 401. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Josh&scrCh=9&scrV=23#iii.i-p161.1
 402. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Josh&scrCh=11&scrV=0#iii.vii-p69.1
 403. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Josh&scrCh=15&scrV=4#iii.i-p232.2
 404. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Josh&scrCh=15&scrV=14#iii.v-p31.1
 405. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Josh&scrCh=15&scrV=60#iii.x-p35.2
 406. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Josh&scrCh=15&scrV=63#iii.ix-p192.1
 407. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Josh&scrCh=19&scrV=1#iii.xiii-p18.2
 408. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Josh&scrCh=19&scrV=9#iii.i-p515.1
 409. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Josh&scrCh=19&scrV=15#iii.viii-p7.4
 410. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Josh&scrCh=20&scrV=0#iii.iv-p332.2
 411. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Josh&scrCh=21&scrV=1#iii.i-p515.5
 412. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Josh&scrCh=24&scrV=0#iii.vii-p47.1
 413. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Josh&scrCh=24&scrV=2#iii.i-p186.1
 414. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Josh&scrCh=24&scrV=3#iii.i-p186.2
 415. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Josh&scrCh=24&scrV=14#iii.i-p186.3
 416. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Josh&scrCh=24&scrV=15#iii.i-p186.4
 417. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Josh&scrCh=24&scrV=19#iv.viii-p77.2
 418. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Judg&scrCh=1&scrV=16#iii.iv-p89.1
 419. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Judg&scrCh=1&scrV=16#iii.iv-p239.3
 420. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Judg&scrCh=1&scrV=21#iii.ix-p192.2
 421. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Judg&scrCh=2&scrV=28#iv.i-p236.1
 422. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Judg&scrCh=3&scrV=4#iii.vii-p23.2
 423. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Judg&scrCh=3&scrV=8#iii.vii-p23.1
 424. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Judg&scrCh=4&scrV=3#iii.vii-p23.3
 425. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Judg&scrCh=4&scrV=4#iii.ix-p53.1
 426. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Judg&scrCh=4&scrV=11#iii.iv-p239.4
 427. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Judg&scrCh=4&scrV=16#iii.iv-p239.5
 428. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Judg&scrCh=4&scrV=17#iii.iv-p239.6
 429. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Judg&scrCh=5&scrV=14#iii.ii-p302.1
 430. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Judg&scrCh=6&scrV=1#iii.iv-p275.2
 431. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Judg&scrCh=6&scrV=1#iii.vii-p23.4
 432. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Judg&scrCh=6&scrV=8#iii.ix-p53.2
 433. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Judg&scrCh=6&scrV=26#iii.xi-p207.1
 434. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Judg&scrCh=9&scrV=7#iii.v-p231.1
 435. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Judg&scrCh=9&scrV=7#iii.ix-p278.1
 436. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Judg&scrCh=9&scrV=23#iii.ix-p186.3
 437. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Judg&scrCh=10&scrV=0#iii.vii-p23.5
 438. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Judg&scrCh=11&scrV=0#iii.ix-p116.1
 439. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Judg&scrCh=12&scrV=15#iii.ii-p302.2
 440. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Judg&scrCh=13&scrV=2#iv.xix-p116.10
 441. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Judg&scrCh=13&scrV=5#iii.ix-p8.3
 442. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Judg&scrCh=13&scrV=19#iii.iii-p83.5
 443. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Judg&scrCh=13&scrV=23#iii.vii-p218.1
 444. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ruth&scrCh=3&scrV=9#iii.xxvi-p119.3
 445. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ruth&scrCh=4&scrV=4#iii.v-p211.2
 446. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ruth&scrCh=4&scrV=10#iii.v-p195.2
 447. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=2&scrV=2#iii.x-p100.1
 448. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=2&scrV=30#iii.xi-p12.1
 449. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=4&scrV=11#iii.vi-p224.1
 450. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=6&scrV=21#iii.x-p35.1
 451. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=7&scrV=2#iii.xxvi-p49.4
 452. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=7&scrV=2#iii.xxvi-p56.1
 453. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=7&scrV=2#iii.xxvii-p145.1
 454. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=7&scrV=15#iii.xii-p8.1
 455. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=8&scrV=7#iii.v-p132.1
 456. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=10&scrV=2#iii.i-p439.1
 457. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=13&scrV=0#iii.xiv-p68.2
 458. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=15&scrV=0#iii.v-p212.2
 459. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=15&scrV=0#iii.xi-p255.1
 460. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=15&scrV=0#iii.xvii-p49.1
 461. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=15&scrV=1#iii.iv-p239.2
 462. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=15&scrV=6#iii.iv-p89.2
 463. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=15&scrV=15#iii.x-p204.1
 464. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=15&scrV=29#iii.iv-p229.1
 465. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=15&scrV=30#iii.ii-p305.3
 466. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=17&scrV=12#iv.iii-p33.2
 467. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=18&scrV=0#iii.xi-p264.1
 468. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=21&scrV=13#iii.xix-p183.1
 469. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=22&scrV=1#iii.xix-p325.1
 470. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=23&scrV=1#iii.xix-p177.1
 471. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=23&scrV=1#iii.xix-p193.1
 472. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=24&scrV=0#iii.xix-p185.1
 473. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=24&scrV=3#iii.xix-p325.2
 474. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=24&scrV=16#iv.iii-p53.1
 475. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=27&scrV=8#iii.vi-p214.1
 476. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=28&scrV=10#iii.xix-p201.6
 477. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=31&scrV=0#iii.xiii-p36.1
 478. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=31&scrV=12#iii.xiv-p36.1
 479. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=1&scrV=1#iii.ii-p305.4
 480. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=3&scrV=4#iii.xi-p6.1
 481. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=3&scrV=28#iii.xi-p13.2
 482. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=3&scrV=29#iii.xi-p13.3
 483. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=5&scrV=0#iii.xiii-p42.1
 484. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=5&scrV=4#iii.xxvii-p144.5
 485. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=5&scrV=5#iii.xxvii-p144.6
 486. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=5&scrV=11#iii.xix-p175.2
 487. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=6&scrV=0#iii.ix-p78.1
 488. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=6&scrV=1#iii.x-p201.1
 489. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=6&scrV=2#iii.x-p201.2
 490. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=6&scrV=6#iii.iv-p47.1
 491. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=7&scrV=0#iii.xi-p7.1
 492. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=7&scrV=0#iii.xii-p45.1
 493. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=7&scrV=0#iii.xiii-p45.1
 494. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=7&scrV=0#iii.xix-p265.5
 495. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=7&scrV=2#iii.xix-p175.3
 496. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=7&scrV=8#iv.vii-p111.4
 497. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=8&scrV=2#iii.xii-p4.1
 498. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=8&scrV=4#iii.v-p132.2
 499. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=8&scrV=12#iii.ii-p305.5
 500. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=8&scrV=17#iv.i-p59.1
 501. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=10&scrV=4#iii.xxvi-p53.1
 502. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=10&scrV=5#iii.xi-p207.2
 503. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=10&scrV=5#iii.xxvi-p53.2
 504. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=11&scrV=0#iii.xi-p135.1
 505. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=11&scrV=0#iii.xix-p179.1
 506. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=12&scrV=0#iii.xi-p255.2
 507. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=12&scrV=0#iii.xix-p179.1
 508. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=14&scrV=14#iii.x-p139.1
 509. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=15&scrV=0#iii.xix-p47.1
 510. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=15&scrV=0#iii.xix-p64.1
 511. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=16&scrV=5#iii.xix-p74.1
 512. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=16&scrV=12#iii.xix-p201.7
 513. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=21&scrV=0#iii.vi-p127.1
 514. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=21&scrV=0#iii.vi-p145.1
 515. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=22&scrV=0#iii.xix-p123.1
 516. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=1&scrV=32#iii.xiii-p54.1
 517. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=2&scrV=27#iii.iii-p156.1
 518. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=3&scrV=1#iii.xxii-p3.1
 519. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=4&scrV=4#iii.iv-p21.1
 520. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=4&scrV=29#iii.xx-p2.1
 521. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=4&scrV=32#iii.xxii-p2.1
 522. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=5&scrV=33#iii.xiv-p34.1
 523. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=6&scrV=1#iii.vii-p24.1
 524. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=6&scrV=1#iii.xxvii-p144.1
 525. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=7&scrV=8#iii.xxii-p3.2
 526. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=8&scrV=9#iii.v-p284.1
 527. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=9&scrV=20#iii.i-p161.2
 528. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=9&scrV=24#iii.xxii-p3.3
 529. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=11&scrV=9#iii.iii-p119.1
 530. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=12&scrV=0#iii.v-p252.1
 531. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=12&scrV=0#iii.vi-p251.1
 532. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=12&scrV=0#iii.xiv-p24.1
 533. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=12&scrV=27#iii.xix-p304.2
 534. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=12&scrV=28#iii.xix-p304.3
 535. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=16&scrV=9#iii.xii-p97.1
 536. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=16&scrV=26#iii.v-p132.3
 537. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=16&scrV=34#iii.vi-p99.1
 538. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=18&scrV=0#iii.vii-p114.1
 539. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=18&scrV=28#iii.v-p102.1
 540. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=19&scrV=0#iii.xviii-p24.2
 541. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=19&scrV=0#iii.xxvi-p11.2
 542. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=19&scrV=15#iii.xii-p76.1
 543. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=19&scrV=16#iii.xii-p91.1
 544. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=19&scrV=18#iv.vi-p90.1
 545. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=19&scrV=19#iii.xii-p12.1
 546. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=21&scrV=0#iii.xii-p94.1
 547. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=21&scrV=27#iii.xvii-p20.1
 548. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=22&scrV=0#iii.xiv-p40.1
 549. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=22&scrV=4#iii.xii-p91.2
 550. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=22&scrV=15#iii.ix-p186.4
 551. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=22&scrV=23#iii.xxvi-p99.1
 552. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=22&scrV=51#iii.xii-p87.1
 553. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=2&scrV=0#iii.xiv-p56.1
 554. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=8&scrV=26#iii.xiv-p58.1
 555. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=9&scrV=21#iii.xi-p258.3
 556. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=9&scrV=30#iii.xi-p258.2
 557. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=10&scrV=2#iii.v-p195.3
 558. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=10&scrV=11#iii.xxviii-p8.1
 559. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=10&scrV=15#iii.xxiv-p119.1
 560. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=14&scrV=0#iii.xiv-p67.1
 561. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=14&scrV=0#iii.xxviii-p4.1
 562. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=14&scrV=25#iii.xxxii-p1.1
 563. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=14&scrV=25#iii.xxxii-p26.1
 564. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=15&scrV=12#iii.xxviii-p8.2
 565. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=15&scrV=29#iii.iv-p239.7
 566. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=17&scrV=1#iii.v-p252.2
 567. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=17&scrV=6#iii.xi-p172.1
 568. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=17&scrV=24#iii.xv-p14.1
 569. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=17&scrV=31#iii.iii-p290.1
 570. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=18&scrV=0#iii.xiv-p31.2
 571. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=18&scrV=0#iii.xiv-p74.1
 572. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=18&scrV=0#iii.xxviii-p8.3
 573. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=18&scrV=1#iii.iv-p202.3
 574. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=18&scrV=22#iii.iv-p225.1
 575. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=19&scrV=21#iii.x-p28.4
 576. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=19&scrV=35#iii.xix-p245.2
 577. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=19&scrV=35#iii.xxviii-p9.1
 578. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=19&scrV=37#iii.i-p138.1
 579. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=20&scrV=0#iii.xxxvi-p8.1
 580. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=20&scrV=12#iii.xiv-p77.1
 581. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=20&scrV=12#iii.xxxv-p2.1
 582. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=22&scrV=0#iii.xxiv-p9.2
 583. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=22&scrV=8#iii.v-p284.3
 584. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=22&scrV=8#iii.xxiv-p9.1
 585. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=23&scrV=13#iii.xi-p133.1
 586. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=23&scrV=15#iii.xi-p166.1
 587. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=23&scrV=15#iii.xi-p167.2
 588. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=23&scrV=16#iii.xi-p166.2
 589. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=23&scrV=32#iii.xiv-p104.1
 590. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=24&scrV=1#iii.v-p252.3
 591. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=24&scrV=2#iii.xiv-p106.3
 592. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=24&scrV=8#iii.xiv-p108.1
 593. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=24&scrV=8#iii.xxvi-p122.1
 594. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=24&scrV=11#iii.xxvi-p3.1
 595. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=25&scrV=11#iii.v-p252.4
 596. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=25&scrV=18#iii.iv-p21.2
 597. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=25&scrV=18#iii.xv-p37.1
 598. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Chr&scrCh=1&scrV=0#iii.xiii-p30.1
 599. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Chr&scrCh=1&scrV=32#iii.i-p350.1
 600. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Chr&scrCh=1&scrV=43#iii.i-p443.1
 601. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Chr&scrCh=2&scrV=9#iii.ii-p304.1
 602. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Chr&scrCh=2&scrV=22#iii.vii-p153.3
 603. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Chr&scrCh=5&scrV=1#iii.i-p511.1
 604. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Chr&scrCh=5&scrV=1#iii.xxvi-p287.2
 605. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Chr&scrCh=5&scrV=2#iii.i-p511.2
 606. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Chr&scrCh=6&scrV=18#iii.xix-p265.2
 607. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Chr&scrCh=6&scrV=33#iii.ix-p6.1
 608. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Chr&scrCh=6&scrV=33#iii.xix-p265.3
 609. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Chr&scrCh=6&scrV=34#iii.ix-p6.2
 610. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Chr&scrCh=6&scrV=60#iii.iv-p318.1
 611. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Chr&scrCh=9&scrV=2#iii.vi-p128.1
 612. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Chr&scrCh=12&scrV=33#iii.i-p519.1
 613. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Chr&scrCh=13&scrV=0#iii.ix-p78.2
 614. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Chr&scrCh=15&scrV=1#iii.x-p36.1
 615. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Chr&scrCh=15&scrV=11#iii.v-p280.2
 616. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Chr&scrCh=15&scrV=12#iii.v-p280.3
 617. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Chr&scrCh=15&scrV=17#iii.xix-p265.4
 618. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Chr&scrCh=15&scrV=27#iii.vii-p128.1
 619. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Chr&scrCh=16&scrV=0#iii.x-p37.1
 620. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Chr&scrCh=16&scrV=0#iii.xiv-p4.1
 621. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Chr&scrCh=16&scrV=0#iii.xix-p269.2
 622. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Chr&scrCh=16&scrV=39#iii.x-p74.1
 623. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Chr&scrCh=21&scrV=0#iii.x-p199.1
 624. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Chr&scrCh=21&scrV=3#iii.x-p197.1
 625. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Chr&scrCh=21&scrV=5#iii.xiv-p31.1
 626. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Chr&scrCh=21&scrV=28#iii.x-p205.1
 627. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Chr&scrCh=21&scrV=29#iii.xiv-p4.2
 628. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Chr&scrCh=22&scrV=3#iii.v-p68.2
 629. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Chr&scrCh=29&scrV=2#iii.v-p68.3
 630. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Chr&scrCh=1&scrV=0#iii.xi-p72.1
 631. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Chr&scrCh=1&scrV=16#iii.v-p132.4
 632. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Chr&scrCh=2&scrV=14#iii.xi-p69.1
 633. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Chr&scrCh=2&scrV=17#iii.xi-p40.1
 634. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Chr&scrCh=2&scrV=18#iii.xi-p40.2
 635. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Chr&scrCh=2&scrV=18#iii.xi-p110.1
 636. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Chr&scrCh=3&scrV=1#iii.i-p316.1
 637. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Chr&scrCh=4&scrV=1#iii.xi-p71.1
 638. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Chr&scrCh=6&scrV=13#iii.xi-p98.1
 639. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Chr&scrCh=8&scrV=2#iii.xi-p107.1
 640. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Chr&scrCh=9&scrV=29#iii.xi-p138.1
 641. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Chr&scrCh=11&scrV=12#iii.xi-p135.2
 642. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Chr&scrCh=11&scrV=12#iii.xi-p163.1
 643. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Chr&scrCh=11&scrV=13#iii.xi-p135.3
 644. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Chr&scrCh=11&scrV=13#iii.xi-p163.2
 645. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Chr&scrCh=12&scrV=16#iii.xi-p187.1
 646. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Chr&scrCh=15&scrV=9#iii.i-p515.2
 647. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Chr&scrCh=18&scrV=0#iii.xi-p261.1
 648. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Chr&scrCh=21&scrV=0#iii.xii-p96.2
 649. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Chr&scrCh=21&scrV=17#iii.xii-p87.2
 650. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Chr&scrCh=22&scrV=8#iii.xii-p96.1
 651. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Chr&scrCh=23&scrV=19#iii.xvi-p38.1
 652. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Chr&scrCh=24&scrV=0#iii.xiv-p63.1
 653. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Chr&scrCh=24&scrV=21#iv.iii-p142.7
 654. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Chr&scrCh=26&scrV=0#iii.xii-p147.1
 655. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Chr&scrCh=28&scrV=20#iii.iii-p122.2
 656. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Chr&scrCh=29&scrV=0#iii.xii-p179.1
 657. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Chr&scrCh=29&scrV=21#iii.iii-p48.1
 658. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Chr&scrCh=33&scrV=11#iii.xii-p210.1
 659. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Chr&scrCh=35&scrV=15#iii.xix-p242.1
 660. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Chr&scrCh=113&scrV=12#iii.iv-p85.1
 661. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ezra&scrCh=2&scrV=41#iii.xix-p242.2
 662. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ezra&scrCh=2&scrV=43#iii.vi-p128.2
 663. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ezra&scrCh=3&scrV=8#iii.xxxvii-p3.1
 664. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ezra&scrCh=4&scrV=5#iii.xxvii-p184.1
 665. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ezra&scrCh=4&scrV=6#iii.xvii-p4.1
 666. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ezra&scrCh=7&scrV=17#iii.iii-p83.6
 667. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Neh&scrCh=2&scrV=0#iii.xxvii-p112.1
 668. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Neh&scrCh=6&scrV=16#iii.xix-p327.1
 669. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Neh&scrCh=9&scrV=12#iii.ii-p205.2
 670. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Neh&scrCh=9&scrV=17#iii.iv-p148.1
 671. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Neh&scrCh=9&scrV=17#iii.iv-p156.1
 672. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Neh&scrCh=12&scrV=27#iii.v-p147.1
 673. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Neh&scrCh=12&scrV=27#iii.xix-p327.2
 674. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Neh&scrCh=13&scrV=1#iii.v-p195.1
 675. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Esth&scrCh=2&scrV=3#iii.xi-p64.1
 676. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Esth&scrCh=2&scrV=9#iii.xi-p64.2
 677. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Esth&scrCh=6&scrV=8#iii.ix-p197.1
 678. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Esth&scrCh=8&scrV=8#iv.x-p8.7
 679. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=1&scrV=0#iii.ii-p137.1
 680. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=1&scrV=0#iii.ix-p186.5
 681. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=1&scrV=5#iii.i-p223.1
 682. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=2&scrV=6#iv.v-p139.1
 683. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=3&scrV=3#iii.xviii-p46.1
 684. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=6&scrV=5#iii.xviii-p40.1
 685. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=10&scrV=9#iii.i-p43.1
 686. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=14&scrV=4#iii.iii-p207.2
 687. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=14&scrV=4#iii.iii-p218.1
 688. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=19&scrV=25#iii.iv-p389.1
 689. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=19&scrV=29#iii.xix-p201.8
 690. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=25&scrV=0#iii.i-p223.3
 691. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=27&scrV=20#iii.xix-p201.11
 692. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=29&scrV=0#iii.i-p223.2
 693. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=32&scrV=8#iii.i-p43.5
 694. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=1&scrV=0#iii.xix-p18.1
 695. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=1&scrV=0#iii.xix-p41.1
 696. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=1&scrV=0#iii.xix-p60.1
 697. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=2&scrV=0#iii.iii-p119.3
 698. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=2&scrV=0#iii.xix-p4.3
 699. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=2&scrV=0#iii.xix-p43.1
 700. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=2&scrV=0#iii.xix-p62.1
 701. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=2&scrV=0#iii.xix-p241.1
 702. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=2&scrV=0#iii.xix-p241.2
 703. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=2&scrV=0#iii.xxvii-p60.1
 704. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=2&scrV=8#iii.ii-p42.1
 705. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=3&scrV=0#iii.x-p120.2
 706. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=3&scrV=0#iii.x-p141.1
 707. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=3&scrV=0#iii.xix-p46.1
 708. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=3&scrV=0#iii.xix-p65.1
 709. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=4&scrV=0#iii.xix-p49.1
 710. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=5&scrV=0#iii.xix-p54.1
 711. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=5&scrV=11#iii.xix-p202.1
 712. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=6&scrV=0#iii.xix-p56.1
 713. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=7&scrV=0#iii.xix-p73.1
 714. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=7&scrV=0#iii.xix-p92.1
 715. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=7&scrV=0#iii.xix-p113.1
 716. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=8&scrV=0#iii.i-p22.4
 717. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=8&scrV=0#iii.xix-p76.1
 718. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=9&scrV=0#iii.xix-p81.1
 719. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=10&scrV=0#iii.xix-p86.1
 720. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=10&scrV=0#iii.xix-p96.1
 721. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=10&scrV=0#iii.xix-p98.1
 722. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=11&scrV=0#iii.xix-p100.1
 723. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=11&scrV=0#iii.xix-p115.1
 724. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=12&scrV=0#iii.xix-p102.1
 725. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=13&scrV=0#iii.xix-p104.1
 726. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=14&scrV=0#iii.xix-p106.1
 727. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=14&scrV=1#iv.vi-p27.1
 728. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=14&scrV=53#iv.vi-p27.2
 729. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=15&scrV=0#iii.xix-p108.1
 730. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=15&scrV=0#iii.xix-p270.2
 731. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=15&scrV=2#iii.ii-p414.3
 732. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=16&scrV=0#iii.xix-p110.1
 733. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=16&scrV=0#iv.v-p24.3
 734. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=16&scrV=10#iii.ii-p160.4
 735. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=17&scrV=0#iii.xix-p112.1
 736. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=17&scrV=4#iv.iii-p54.3
 737. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=17&scrV=4#iv.iii-p63.1
 738. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=18&scrV=0#iii.xix-p122.1
 739. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=18&scrV=0#iii.xix-p149.1
 740. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=19&scrV=0#iii.xix-p124.1
 741. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=19&scrV=0#iii.xix-p150.1
 742. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=19&scrV=12#iii.iv-p169.1
 743. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=19&scrV=12#iii.iii-p118.1
 744. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=19&scrV=13#iii.iv-p169.2
 745. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=20&scrV=0#iii.xix-p127.1
 746. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=20&scrV=0#iii.xix-p152.1
 747. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=20&scrV=5#iii.ii-p306.1
 748. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=20&scrV=7#iii.vi-p167.1
 749. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=20&scrV=7#iii.vi-p159.1
 750. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=22&scrV=0#iii.i-p77.6
 751. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=22&scrV=0#iii.xix-p130.1
 752. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=22&scrV=0#iii.xix-p153.2
 753. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=22&scrV=1#iv.i-p324.4
 754. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=22&scrV=22#iv.i-p364.1
 755. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=23&scrV=0#iii.xix-p134.1
 756. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=24&scrV=0#iii.xix-p145.1
 757. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=24&scrV=0#iii.xix-p156.1
 758. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=24&scrV=0#iii.xix-p159.1
 759. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=25&scrV=0#iii.xix-p162.1
 760. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=25&scrV=4#iv.xv-p34.1
 761. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=26&scrV=0#iii.xix-p168.1
 762. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=26&scrV=0#iii.xix-p190.1
 763. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=27&scrV=0#iii.xix-p170.1
 764. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=28&scrV=3#iv.iv-p160.1
 765. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=29&scrV=0#iii.xix-p172.1
 766. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=29&scrV=0#iii.xix-p191.1
 767. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=30&scrV=0#iii.xix-p174.1
 768. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=31&scrV=0#iii.ix-p248.1
 769. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=31&scrV=0#iii.ix-p260.1
 770. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=31&scrV=0#iii.xix-p176.1
 771. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=31&scrV=0#iii.xix-p192.1
 772. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=31&scrV=11#iii.xix-p201.2
 773. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=32&scrV=0#iii.x-p91.1
 774. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=32&scrV=0#iii.xix-p50.1
 775. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=32&scrV=0#iii.xix-p178.1
 776. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=32&scrV=0#iii.xix-p194.1
 777. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=33&scrV=0#iii.xix-p180.1
 778. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=33&scrV=6#iii.i-p10.1
 779. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=34&scrV=0#iii.xix-p182.1
 780. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=34&scrV=7#iii.xxvii-p30.1
 781. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=34&scrV=20#iii.ii-p160.2
 782. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=35&scrV=0#iii.xix-p184.1
 783. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=37&scrV=0#iii.xix-p186.1
 784. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=37&scrV=0#iii.xxiv-p39.1
 785. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=37&scrV=1#iii.xix-p196.1
 786. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=38&scrV=0#iii.xix-p198.1
 787. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=38&scrV=0#iii.xix-p226.1
 788. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=38&scrV=4#iii.xix-p201.3
 789. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=40&scrV=0#iii.xix-p200.1
 790. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=40&scrV=6#iii.ii-p436.1
 791. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=41&scrV=0#iii.x-p120.1
 792. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=41&scrV=0#iii.xix-p203.1
 793. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=41&scrV=9#iv.i-p322.1
 794. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=42&scrV=0#iii.xix-p19.1
 795. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=42&scrV=0#iii.xix-p205.1
 796. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=42&scrV=0#iii.xix-p213.1
 797. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=42&scrV=0#iii.xix-p230.1
 798. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=42&scrV=7#iii.vi-p187.1
 799. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=44&scrV=0#iii.iv-p278.1
 800. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=44&scrV=0#iii.xix-p214.1
 801. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=44&scrV=1#iii.iv-p201.1
 802. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=45&scrV=0#iii.xix-p216.1
 803. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=45&scrV=0#iii.xxii-p6.1
 804. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=45&scrV=0#iii.xxii-p47.2
 805. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=46&scrV=0#iii.xix-p219.1
 806. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=47&scrV=0#iii.xix-p220.1
 807. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=50&scrV=0#iii.xix-p218.1
 808. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=50&scrV=15#iii.ix-p8.1
 809. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=50&scrV=15#iii.ix-p17.1
 810. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=50&scrV=21#iii.xxxvi-p6.3
 811. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=51&scrV=0#iii.x-p91.1
 812. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=51&scrV=0#iii.x-p106.1
 813. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=51&scrV=0#iii.xix-p179.2
 814. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=51&scrV=0#iii.xix-p222.1
 815. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=51&scrV=0#iii.xix-p232.1
 816. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=51&scrV=5#iv.iv-p44.5
 817. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=52&scrV=0#iii.ix-p260.1
 818. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=52&scrV=0#iii.xix-p221.1
 819. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=52&scrV=1#iii.ix-p244.1
 820. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=53&scrV=0#iii.i-p43.10
 821. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=57&scrV=5#iii.iii-p205.1
 822. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=62&scrV=12#iii.vi-p12.1
 823. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=65&scrV=0#iii.v-p296.1
 824. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=67&scrV=0#iii.xix-p250.1
 825. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=68&scrV=0#iii.xix-p237.1
 826. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=68&scrV=0#iii.xix-p252.1
 827. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=69&scrV=0#iii.xix-p238.1
 828. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=69&scrV=0#iii.xix-p255.1
 829. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=69&scrV=24#iii.xix-p201.12
 830. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=69&scrV=25#iv.i-p322.2
 831. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=69&scrV=25#iv.v-p7.2
 832. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=72&scrV=0#iii.xix-p240.1
 833. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=73&scrV=0#iii.xix-p20.1
 834. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=73&scrV=0#iii.xix-p258.1
 835. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=73&scrV=0#iii.xxiv-p47.1
 836. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=74&scrV=0#iii.xix-p260.1
 837. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=74&scrV=0#iii.xix-p274.1
 838. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=75&scrV=0#iii.xix-p245.1
 839. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=77&scrV=16#iii.ii-p225.1
 840. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=78&scrV=0#iii.xix-p246.1
 841. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=78&scrV=14#iii.ii-p205.1
 842. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=78&scrV=15#iii.v-p74.3
 843. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=78&scrV=16#iii.v-p74.4
 844. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=80&scrV=0#iii.xix-p261.1
 845. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=80&scrV=1#iii.ii-p520.1
 846. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=82&scrV=0#iv.iv-p80.1
 847. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=84&scrV=10#iii.vi-p128.3
 848. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=85&scrV=9#iii.ii-p520.3
 849. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=85&scrV=10#iii.ii-p520.4
 850. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=86&scrV=0#iii.xix-p263.1
 851. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=86&scrV=0#iii.xix-p276.1
 852. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=88&scrV=0#iii.xix-p265.1
 853. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=88&scrV=7#iii.vi-p187.2
 854. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=90&scrV=0#iii.xix-p21.1
 855. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=90&scrV=0#iii.xix-p266.1
 856. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=91&scrV=0#iii.i-p115.1
 857. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=91&scrV=0#iii.xix-p277.1
 858. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=93&scrV=0#iii.xix-p268.1
 859. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=93&scrV=0#iii.xix-p269.1
 860. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=95&scrV=8#iv.xix-p43.1
 861. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=95&scrV=10#iii.iv-p7.1
 862. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=96&scrV=2#iv.xxvii-p97.2
 863. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=99&scrV=6#iii.ii-p209.2
 864. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=99&scrV=7#iii.ii-p209.3
 865. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=101&scrV=0#iii.xix-p270.1
 866. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=102&scrV=0#iii.xix-p270.3
 867. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=103&scrV=0#iii.xix-p271.1
 868. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=103&scrV=7#iii.ix-p100.1
 869. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=103&scrV=12#iii.iii-p271.1
 870. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=104&scrV=2#iii.i-p50.1
 871. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=105&scrV=9#iii.i-p317.1
 872. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=105&scrV=13#iii.i-p295.1
 873. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=105&scrV=39#iii.ii-p204.1
 874. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=106&scrV=33#iii.iv-p185.1
 875. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=106&scrV=37#iii.ii-p359.3
 876. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=107&scrV=0#iii.xix-p22.1
 877. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=107&scrV=0#iii.xix-p280.1
 878. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=109&scrV=0#iii.xix-p298.1
 879. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=109&scrV=8#iv.i-p322.3
 880. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=109&scrV=13#iii.xii-p88.1
 881. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=110&scrV=0#iii.iv-p237.2
 882. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=110&scrV=0#iii.xix-p283.1
 883. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=110&scrV=0#iii.xix-p299.1
 884. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=110&scrV=0#iv.i-p273.3
 885. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=111&scrV=0#iii.xix-p287.1
 886. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=112&scrV=0#iii.xix-p287.1
 887. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=112&scrV=0#iii.xix-p288.1
 888. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=113&scrV=0#iii.xiv-p100.2
 889. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=113&scrV=0#iii.xix-p289.1
 890. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=113&scrV=0#iii.xix-p301.1
 891. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=114&scrV=0#iii.vi-p59.1
 892. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=116&scrV=10#iv.viii-p27.4
 893. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=117&scrV=0#iii.xix-p24.1
 894. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=118&scrV=0#iv.i-p257.1
 895. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=119&scrV=0#iii.xix-p292.1
 896. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=119&scrV=0#iii.xix-p302.1
 897. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=119&scrV=29#iii.ix-p235.1
 898. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=121&scrV=0#iii.xix-p305.1
 899. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=122&scrV=0#iii.xi-p116.1
 900. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=122&scrV=6#iii.xi-p94.1
 901. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=124&scrV=0#iii.xix-p305.2
 902. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=126&scrV=0#iii.xix-p305.2
 903. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=126&scrV=1#iii.x-p28.5
 904. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=129&scrV=0#iii.xix-p305.2
 905. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=132&scrV=0#iii.xix-p306.1
 906. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=132&scrV=0#iii.xix-p312.1
 907. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=133&scrV=0#iii.ii-p656.1
 908. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=134&scrV=0#iii.xix-p305.3
 909. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=134&scrV=0#iii.xix-p313.1
 910. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=135&scrV=0#iii.xix-p315.1
 911. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=135&scrV=4#iv.i-p179.2
 912. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=136&scrV=0#iii.xix-p317.1
 913. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=137&scrV=0#iii.xix-p319.1
 914. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=137&scrV=0#iii.xix-p331.1
 915. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=139&scrV=0#iii.xix-p321.1
 916. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=139&scrV=0#iii.xix-p332.1
 917. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=139&scrV=20#iii.ii-p377.1
 918. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=141&scrV=2#iii.ii-p671.1
 919. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=142&scrV=0#iii.ix-p253.1
 920. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=142&scrV=0#iii.xix-p324.1
 921. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=142&scrV=0#iii.xix-p334.1
 922. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=147&scrV=0#iii.xix-p326.1
 923. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=147&scrV=0#iii.xxx-p7.2
 924. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=148&scrV=0#iii.i-p13.1
 925. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=1&scrV=24#iv.xxvii-p8.16
 926. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=3&scrV=5#iii.i-p335.1
 927. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=3&scrV=5#iii.i-p355.1
 928. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=3&scrV=6#iii.i-p335.2
 929. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=3&scrV=6#iii.i-p355.2
 930. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=5&scrV=31#iii.xi-p131.1
 931. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=10&scrV=1#iii.xviii-p43.1
 932. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=10&scrV=27#iii.xii-p191.1
 933. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=15&scrV=1#iii.vii-p124.1
 934. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=16&scrV=7#iii.i-p400.1
 935. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=16&scrV=33#iv.v-p7.6
 936. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=19&scrV=9#iii.ii-p414.2
 937. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=20&scrV=27#iii.i-p43.6
 938. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=23&scrV=7#iii.xix-p107.2
 939. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Eccl&scrCh=4&scrV=13#iii.xi-p131.2
 940. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Eccl&scrCh=7&scrV=29#iii.i-p70.3
 941. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Eccl&scrCh=12&scrV=7#iii.i-p80.1
 942. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=1&scrV=5#iv.i-p123.1
 943. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=1&scrV=6#iv.i-p123.2
 944. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=1&scrV=9#iii.xxvii-p29.1
 945. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=1&scrV=9#iv.i-p288.2
 946. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=1&scrV=9#iv.vi-p90.2
 947. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=2&scrV=0#iii.xxxiii-p10.1
 948. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=2&scrV=2#iv.v-p152.5
 949. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=2&scrV=2#iii.xxxiii-p1.3
 950. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=2&scrV=11#iv.v-p152.6
 951. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=3&scrV=16#iii.xxii-p47.1
 952. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=4&scrV=5#iii.ii-p205.3
 953. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=5&scrV=1#iv.i-p171.1
 954. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=5&scrV=18#iii.xix-p201.9
 955. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=6&scrV=0#iii.xxii-p6.3
 956. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=6&scrV=0#iii.xxvi-p11.3
 957. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=6&scrV=0#iv.iv-p93.1
 958. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=6&scrV=0#iv.v-p231.4
 959. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=6&scrV=1#iv.iv-p100.1
 960. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=6&scrV=9#iii.v-p256.1
 961. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=6&scrV=9#iv.v-p133.2
 962. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=6&scrV=10#iii.v-p256.2
 963. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=6&scrV=10#iv.v-p133.3
 964. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=7&scrV=11#iii.xii-p193.1
 965. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=7&scrV=14#iii.i-p75.7
 966. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=7&scrV=14#iii.ii-p39.1
 967. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=7&scrV=14#iv.iii-p27.2
 968. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=7&scrV=14#iv.i-p27.2
 969. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=7&scrV=19#iii.v-p98.1
 970. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=7&scrV=20#iii.v-p98.2
 971. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=8&scrV=14#iv.i-p257.2
 972. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=8&scrV=15#iv.i-p257.3
 973. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=8&scrV=18#iii.x-p28.1
 974. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=9&scrV=1#iv.i-p79.4
 975. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=9&scrV=2#iv.i-p79.5
 976. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=9&scrV=6#iii.vii-p196.2
 977. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=9&scrV=6#iii.vii-p216.1
 978. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=9&scrV=6#iv.iii-p27.3
 979. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=9&scrV=6#iv.ii-p25.1
 980. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=9&scrV=7#iv.iii-p27.4
 981. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=10&scrV=22#iii.xxvii-p119.1
 982. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=10&scrV=22#iv.vi-p88.3
 983. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=10&scrV=23#iv.vi-p88.4
 984. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=11&scrV=2#iv.xxvii-p7.1
 985. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=11&scrV=5#iv.xix-p62.4
 986. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=11&scrV=5#iv.xxvii-p8.3
 987. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=11&scrV=6#iv.xix-p62.5
 988. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=11&scrV=10#iv.i-p211.5
 989. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=11&scrV=11#iii.v-p262.1
 990. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=11&scrV=11#iii.xii-p159.1
 991. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=11&scrV=12#iii.v-p262.2
 992. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=11&scrV=61#iv.xxvii-p8.4
 993. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=13&scrV=0#iv.xxvii-p112.1
 994. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=13&scrV=0#iv.xxvii-p119.1
 995. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=13&scrV=0#iv.xxvii-p135.1
 996. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=13&scrV=19#iv.xxvii-p126.1
 997. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=14&scrV=0#iii.xxvi-p174.1
 998. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=14&scrV=1#iii.v-p264.1
 999. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=14&scrV=2#iii.v-p264.2
1000. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=17&scrV=5#iii.xxvii-p55.1
1001. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=17&scrV=8#iii.iv-p225.2
1002. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=22&scrV=20#iv.xxvii-p8.29
1003. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=22&scrV=20#iii.iv-p199.1
1004. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=27&scrV=12#iii.i-p232.3
1005. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=28&scrV=15#iii.xxvii-p120.1
1006. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=28&scrV=21#iii.vi-p140.1
1007. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=31&scrV=3#iii.v-p132.5
1008. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=35&scrV=4#iv.xxvii-p97.3
1009. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=35&scrV=5#iv.i-p122.1
1010. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=35&scrV=6#iv.i-p122.2
1011. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=36&scrV=0#iii.xii-p179.2
1012. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=37&scrV=38#iii.i-p138.2
1013. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=40&scrV=0#iv.iii-p52.1
1014. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=42&scrV=1#iv.ii-p5.1
1015. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=43&scrV=2#iii.xxvii-p30.2
1016. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=43&scrV=10#iv.ii-p5.2
1017. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=43&scrV=25#iv.i-p127.1
1018. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=44&scrV=0#iii.xv-p24.1
1019. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=48&scrV=4#iv.xxvii-p8.17
1020. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=49&scrV=6#iv.ii-p5.3
1021. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=49&scrV=13#iv.i-p179.7
1022. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=50&scrV=0#iii.i-p77.5
1023. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=53&scrV=0#iii.x-p42.1
1024. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=53&scrV=0#iii.xxiii-p184.1
1025. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=53&scrV=0#iii.xxiii-p223.1
1026. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=53&scrV=0#iv.iv-p169.1
1027. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=53&scrV=4#iv.i-p125.1
1028. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=53&scrV=5#iv.iv-p162.1
1029. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=53&scrV=7#iv.iv-p162.7
1030. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=53&scrV=9#iv.ii-p144.1
1031. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=53&scrV=9#iv.ii-p153.1
1032. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=53&scrV=9#iv.iv-p163.2
1033. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=53&scrV=10#iv.i-p324.3
1034. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=53&scrV=11#iii.xix-p201.10
1035. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=54&scrV=1#iv.xxvii-p139.4
1036. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=54&scrV=5#iii.xxii-p6.2
1037. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=57&scrV=15#iv.iii-p184.2
1038. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=58&scrV=3#iii.iii-p389.1
1039. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=59&scrV=20#iii.iv-p237.4
1040. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=60&scrV=17#iii.v-p68.4
1041. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=61&scrV=0#iv.iii-p52.3
1042. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=61&scrV=0#iv.iii-p66.1
1043. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=61&scrV=1#iv.iii-p76.1
1044. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=61&scrV=2#iv.iii-p66.2
1045. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=61&scrV=2#iii.xxiii-p240.1
1046. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=61&scrV=2#iv.iii-p78.1
1047. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=61&scrV=10#iii.ii-p569.1
1048. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=62&scrV=4#iv.i-p179.8
1049. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=62&scrV=5#iii.xxii-p40.1
1050. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=62&scrV=5#iii.xxxvi-p6.1
1051. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=63&scrV=8#iii.ii-p208.3
1052. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=63&scrV=9#iii.ii-p208.4
1053. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=63&scrV=9#iii.ii-p727.2
1054. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=63&scrV=17#iii.v-p256.3
1055. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=64&scrV=6#iii.i-p318.2
1056. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=65&scrV=25#iii.i-p74.1
1057. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=200&scrV=44#iii.xv-p5.2
1058. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=200&scrV=45#iii.xv-p5.3
1059. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=1&scrV=9#iii.xxvi-p17.1
1060. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=2&scrV=2#iii.xxii-p6.4
1061. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=2&scrV=2#iii.xxii-p54.1
1062. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=2&scrV=8#iii.xxxviii-p62.1
1063. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=4&scrV=2#iii.ii-p375.1
1064. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=7&scrV=31#iii.iii-p290.2
1065. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=8&scrV=8#iv.i-p59.2
1066. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=11&scrV=13#iii.iv-p225.3
1067. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=11&scrV=21#iii.xxx-p4.2
1068. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=12&scrV=1#iii.xix-p243.1
1069. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=13&scrV=7#iii.xxv-p1.1
1070. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=15&scrV=16#iii.xxvi-p17.2
1071. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=16&scrV=6#iii.v-p102.2
1072. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=16&scrV=41#iii.v-p102.3
1073. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=17&scrV=9#iv.iv-p44.1
1074. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=17&scrV=13#iii.xxvi-p97.1
1075. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=18&scrV=1#iv.i-p337.2
1076. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=18&scrV=1#iii.i-p43.2
1077. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=19&scrV=5#iii.iii-p290.3
1078. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=20&scrV=1#iii.xi-p264.2
1079. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=21&scrV=0#iii.xii-p240.1
1080. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=22&scrV=0#iii.xii-p240.1
1081. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=22&scrV=13#iii.xiv-p106.1
1082. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=23&scrV=3#iii.v-p262.3
1083. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=25&scrV=12#iii.xii-p245.1
1084. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=25&scrV=12#iii.xiv-p110.2
1085. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=25&scrV=12#iii.xv-p5.1
1086. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=25&scrV=13#iii.xiv-p110.3
1087. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=26&scrV=18#iii.xxxiii-p1.1
1088. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=26&scrV=19#iii.xxxiii-p1.2
1089. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=27&scrV=0#iii.xii-p240.1
1090. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=27&scrV=0#iii.xii-p240.1
1091. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=27&scrV=0#iii.xv-p6.2
1092. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=27&scrV=0#iii.xxvii-p13.1
1093. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=27&scrV=0#iii.xxvii-p23.1
1094. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=30&scrV=7#iv.xxvii-p43.2
1095. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=31&scrV=9#iv.i-p41.4
1096. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=31&scrV=15#iv.i-p41.2
1097. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=31&scrV=22#iv.i-p27.3
1098. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=32&scrV=7#iii.iv-p318.2
1099. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=32&scrV=9#iv.x-p8.2
1100. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=32&scrV=10#iv.x-p8.3
1101. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=32&scrV=11#iv.x-p8.4
1102. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=32&scrV=12#iv.x-p8.5
1103. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=34&scrV=0#iii.xii-p101.1
1104. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=34&scrV=0#iii.xii-p240.1
1105. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=34&scrV=5#iii.xiv-p36.2
1106. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=39&scrV=4#iii.xxvi-p93.1
1107. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=40&scrV=0#iii.xii-p242.1
1108. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=40&scrV=0#iii.xii-p240.1
1109. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=40&scrV=0#iii.xxvi-p53.3
1110. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=40&scrV=0#iii.xxvi-p60.1
1111. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=40&scrV=0#iii.xxvi-p193.1
1112. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=49&scrV=7#iii.xxxi-p1.1
1113. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=52&scrV=6#iii.xxvi-p51.1
1114. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=52&scrV=12#iii.xix-p260.2
1115. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Lam&scrCh=2&scrV=9#iii.xxiii-p4.5
1116. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=1&scrV=1#iii.xxvii-p3.1
1117. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=1&scrV=2#iii.xxvii-p3.2
1118. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=1&scrV=26#iii.xxii-p42.2
1119. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=1&scrV=27#iii.xxii-p42.3
1120. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=2&scrV=9#iii.xxxviii-p37.1
1121. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=2&scrV=10#iii.xxxviii-p37.2
1122. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=12&scrV=13#iii.xxiv-p137.1
1123. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=16&scrV=10#iii.xxii-p40.2
1124. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=17&scrV=19#iii.ii-p716.1
1125. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=18&scrV=20#iii.ii-p367.1
1126. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=18&scrV=20#iii.ii-p390.1
1127. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=19&scrV=1#iii.xiv-p108.2
1128. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=20&scrV=35#iv.vii-p109.3
1129. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=20&scrV=37#iv.xxvii-p144.3
1130. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=22&scrV=7#iii.ii-p401.2
1131. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=22&scrV=27#iii.xxxiii-p1.4
1132. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=28&scrV=22#iii.ii-p81.2
1133. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=32&scrV=4#iii.ii-p228.1
1134. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=33&scrV=31#iv.iii-p159.1
1135. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=36&scrV=26#iii.i-p43.8
1136. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=36&scrV=27#iii.i-p43.9
1137. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=37&scrV=0#iii.xxvii-p209.6
1138. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=37&scrV=0#iii.xxvii-p219.1
1139. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=37&scrV=0#iv.i-p211.4
1140. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=37&scrV=21#iii.v-p262.4
1141. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=39&scrV=10#iii.ii-p176.1
1142. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=1&scrV=1#iii.xiv-p106.2
1143. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=2&scrV=0#iv.iii-p33.1
1144. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=2&scrV=0#iii.xv-p6.3
1145. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=2&scrV=0#iii.xv-p25.1
1146. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=2&scrV=3#iv.i-p257.12
1147. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=2&scrV=4#iv.i-p257.13
1148. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=2&scrV=34#iv.i-p289.4
1149. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=2&scrV=34#iv.xxvii-p140.1
1150. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=2&scrV=34#iv.i-p58.1
1151. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=2&scrV=35#iv.xxvii-p140.2
1152. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=2&scrV=36#iii.iv-p239.8
1153. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=2&scrV=44#iv.i-p58.2
1154. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=2&scrV=48#iv.i-p37.1
1155. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=4&scrV=13#iii.xxvi-p74.1
1156. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=4&scrV=17#iii.xxvi-p74.2
1157. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=4&scrV=20#iv.i-p177.1
1158. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=4&scrV=22#iv.i-p177.2
1159. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=4&scrV=23#iii.xxvi-p74.3
1160. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=5&scrV=3#iii.iv-p239.10
1161. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=5&scrV=7#iii.iv-p239.9
1162. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=7&scrV=0#iii.xiv-p93.3
1163. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=7&scrV=0#iii.xxvii-p116.1
1164. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=7&scrV=0#iv.xxvii-p94.1
1165. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=7&scrV=8#iii.xxvii-p28.3
1166. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=7&scrV=9#iv.xxvii-p8.7
1167. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=7&scrV=9#iv.xxvii-p141.2
1168. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=7&scrV=11#iii.xxvi-p174.3
1169. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=7&scrV=13#iii.xix-p147.1
1170. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=7&scrV=14#iii.xix-p147.2
1171. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=7&scrV=24#iv.xxvii-p141.1
1172. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=7&scrV=25#iii.xxvi-p174.2
1173. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=9&scrV=0#iii.i-p499.1
1174. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=9&scrV=0#iii.vii-p21.1
1175. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=9&scrV=0#iii.vii-p32.1
1176. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=9&scrV=0#iii.xxiii-p115.1
1177. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=9&scrV=0#iii.xxiii-p234.1
1178. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=9&scrV=0#iv.xiv-p17.1
1179. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=9&scrV=24#iv.xxvii-p39.1
1180. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=9&scrV=24#iii.xxvii-p146.1
1181. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=9&scrV=24#iv.i-p287.1
1182. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=9&scrV=24#iv.xxvii-p43.3
1183. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=9&scrV=25#iv.iii-p25.5
1184. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=9&scrV=25#iii.xvi-p17.1
1185. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=9&scrV=25#iv.i-p26.2
1186. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=9&scrV=26#iv.iii-p25.6
1187. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=9&scrV=26#iv.i-p26.3
1188. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=9&scrV=27#iv.i-p254.3
1189. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=9&scrV=27#iv.i-p289.1
1190. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=10&scrV=0#iii.xxvi-p11.4
1191. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=10&scrV=5#iii.xxii-p42.4
1192. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=10&scrV=6#iii.xxii-p42.5
1193. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=10&scrV=6#iv.xxvii-p8.19
1194. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=11&scrV=0#iii.xxiii-p117.1
1195. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=11&scrV=32#iii.vii-p116.2
1196. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=12&scrV=3#iv.xxvii-p8.23
1197. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=1&scrV=2#iv.vi-p88.2
1198. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=1&scrV=10#iii.xii-p159.2
1199. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=1&scrV=10#iv.vi-p88.1
1200. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=1&scrV=11#iii.xii-p159.3
1201. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=2&scrV=1#iv.xxvii-p139.5
1202. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=2&scrV=14#iii.xxvi-p142.1
1203. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=2&scrV=14#iii.v-p263.1
1204. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=2&scrV=14#iii.xxii-p6.5
1205. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=2&scrV=15#iii.vi-p195.1
1206. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=2&scrV=15#iii.xxvi-p142.2
1207. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=2&scrV=19#iii.xxxvi-p6.2
1208. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=2&scrV=23#iv.xxvii-p139.6
1209. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=8&scrV=11#iii.iv-p225.4
1210. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=9&scrV=3#iii.xxvi-p51.5
1211. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=11&scrV=1#iv.i-p41.1
1212. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=13&scrV=10#iii.ix-p85.1
1213. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=13&scrV=11#iii.ix-p85.2
1214. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Joel&scrCh=1&scrV=14#iii.xvii-p20.2
1215. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Joel&scrCh=2&scrV=0#iii.xxiii-p123.1
1216. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Joel&scrCh=2&scrV=0#iii.xxiii-p140.1
1217. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Joel&scrCh=2&scrV=0#iii.xxvii-p207.2
1218. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Joel&scrCh=2&scrV=28#iii.iv-p112.1
1219. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Joel&scrCh=2&scrV=28#iv.v-p24.1
1220. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Joel&scrCh=2&scrV=29#iv.v-p24.2
1221. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Joel&scrCh=3&scrV=0#iv.i-p292.2
1222. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Joel&scrCh=3&scrV=1#iii.v-p264.3
1223. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Joel&scrCh=3&scrV=17#iii.x-p28.2
1224. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Joel&scrCh=3&scrV=18#iii.xxvi-p285.1
1225. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Amos&scrCh=1&scrV=13#iii.x-p100.2
1226. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Amos&scrCh=3&scrV=4#iii.xxix-p2.2
1227. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Amos&scrCh=5&scrV=16#iii.xxix-p2.1
1228. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Amos&scrCh=6&scrV=10#iii.xiv-p36.3
1229. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Amos&scrCh=8&scrV=11#iii.xxiii-p4.3
1230. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Amos&scrCh=8&scrV=11#iii.xxvi-p49.5
1231. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Amos&scrCh=8&scrV=11#iii.xxvi-p56.2
1232. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Amos&scrCh=8&scrV=12#iii.xxiii-p4.4
1233. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Amos&scrCh=8&scrV=12#iii.xxvi-p49.6
1234. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Amos&scrCh=8&scrV=12#iii.xxvi-p56.3
1235. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Amos&scrCh=9&scrV=9#iii.v-p261.1
1236. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Amos&scrCh=9&scrV=11#iii.v-p265.1
1237. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Jonah&scrCh=3&scrV=5#iii.xvii-p20.3
1238. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Mic&scrCh=4&scrV=7#iii.x-p28.3
1239. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Mic&scrCh=4&scrV=11#iii.xxiii-p117.2
1240. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Mic&scrCh=5&scrV=2#iii.viii-p7.3
1241. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Mic&scrCh=5&scrV=2#iv.iii-p33.3
1242. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Mic&scrCh=5&scrV=2#iv.i-p38.1
1243. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Mic&scrCh=5&scrV=4#iii.xxiii-p117.3
1244. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Mic&scrCh=7&scrV=19#iii.iii-p271.2
1245. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Nah&scrCh=2&scrV=2#iii.xxxiv-p6.1
1246. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Hab&scrCh=2&scrV=4#iv.vi-p10.1
1247. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Hab&scrCh=2&scrV=12#iii.xxxviii-p38.2
1248. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Zeph&scrCh=3&scrV=14#iii.xxii-p40.3
1249. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Zeph&scrCh=3&scrV=17#iii.xxii-p40.4
1250. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Zeph&scrCh=3&scrV=19#iii.xxxiii-p1.5
1251. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Zech&scrCh=3&scrV=8#iv.ii-p5.4
1252. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Zech&scrCh=4&scrV=0#iii.ii-p529.1
1253. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Zech&scrCh=4&scrV=6#iv.iv-p112.1
1254. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Zech&scrCh=4&scrV=7#iv.i-p255.1
1255. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Zech&scrCh=5&scrV=0#iv.xxvii-p136.1
1256. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Zech&scrCh=5&scrV=5#iv.xxvii-p127.1
1257. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Zech&scrCh=6&scrV=12#iv.xix-p62.2
1258. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Zech&scrCh=6&scrV=13#iii.xix-p286.1
1259. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Zech&scrCh=6&scrV=13#iv.xix-p62.3
1260. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Zech&scrCh=7&scrV=5#iii.iii-p389.2
1261. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Zech&scrCh=8&scrV=0#iii.xxvii-p207.1
1262. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Zech&scrCh=9&scrV=9#iv.i-p253.1
1263. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Zech&scrCh=11&scrV=12#iv.i-p322.4
1264. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Zech&scrCh=11&scrV=12#iv.i-p337.3
1265. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Zech&scrCh=11&scrV=13#iv.i-p337.4
1266. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Zech&scrCh=11&scrV=15#iii.xxvii-p203.1
1267. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Zech&scrCh=12&scrV=1#iv.xxvii-p140.3
1268. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Zech&scrCh=12&scrV=8#iv.vii-p111.5
1269. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Zech&scrCh=12&scrV=8#iii.iii-p456.1
1270. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Zech&scrCh=12&scrV=10#iii.i-p502.1
1271. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Zech&scrCh=12&scrV=10#iv.v-p79.8
1272. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Zech&scrCh=12&scrV=10#iv.vii-p109.4
1273. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Zech&scrCh=12&scrV=11#iii.xiv-p102.1
1274. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Zech&scrCh=13&scrV=1#iii.xxvii-p110.1
1275. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Zech&scrCh=13&scrV=1#iv.iv-p163.1
1276. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Zech&scrCh=13&scrV=8#iii.xxvii-p209.3
1277. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Zech&scrCh=13&scrV=9#iii.xxvii-p209.4
1278. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Zech&scrCh=14&scrV=0#iii.iii-p394.1
1279. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Zech&scrCh=14&scrV=1#iv.xxvii-p111.1
1280. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Zech&scrCh=14&scrV=1#iv.i-p292.1
1281. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Zech&scrCh=14&scrV=8#iii.xxvi-p285.2
1282. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Zech&scrCh=16&scrV=0#iii.iii-p394.2
1283. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Zech&scrCh=21&scrV=0#iii.iii-p394.3
1284. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Mal&scrCh=1&scrV=7#iii.xxxix-p1.1
1285. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Mal&scrCh=1&scrV=8#iii.iii-p51.1
1286. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Mal&scrCh=1&scrV=8#iii.xxxix-p1.2
1287. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Mal&scrCh=1&scrV=13#iii.iii-p51.2
1288. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Mal&scrCh=1&scrV=14#iii.ii-p156.1
1289. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Mal&scrCh=2&scrV=7#iii.xxxvii-p4.5
1290. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Mal&scrCh=2&scrV=7#iv.xxvii-p8.24
1291. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Mal&scrCh=2&scrV=11#iii.xxxix-p1.3
1292. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Mal&scrCh=2&scrV=14#iii.i-p391.1
1293. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Mal&scrCh=2&scrV=15#iii.i-p109.1
1294. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Mal&scrCh=3&scrV=1#iv.iii-p25.1
1295. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Mal&scrCh=3&scrV=1#iv.i-p212.1
1296. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Mal&scrCh=3&scrV=3#iv.i-p254.2
1297. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Mal&scrCh=3&scrV=5#iii.ii-p377.2
1298. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Mal&scrCh=3&scrV=6#iii.iv-p229.2
1299. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Mal&scrCh=3&scrV=8#iii.iii-p124.1
1300. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Mal&scrCh=3&scrV=8#iii.xxxix-p1.4
1301. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Mal&scrCh=3&scrV=10#iii.iii-p124.2
1302. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Mal&scrCh=4&scrV=2#iv.iii-p25.2
1303. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Mal&scrCh=4&scrV=2#iv.i-p127.2
1304. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Mal&scrCh=4&scrV=5#iv.iii-p25.3
1305. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Mal&scrCh=4&scrV=5#iii.xxiii-p229.1
1306. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Mal&scrCh=4&scrV=6#iv.iii-p25.4
1307. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=1&scrV=1#iv.iii-p21.1
1308. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=1&scrV=3#iii.i-p509.1
1309. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=1&scrV=23#iii.xxiii-p63.1
1310. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=1&scrV=23#iii.xxiii-p74.1
1311. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=2&scrV=0#iii.xiv-p93.4
1312. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=2&scrV=0#iii.xxxiii-p12.1
1313. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=2&scrV=2#iii.iv-p237.3
1314. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=2&scrV=5#iii.xxxiii-p1.6
1315. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=3&scrV=0#iv.iii-p52.2
1316. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=3&scrV=1#iv.ii-p26.1
1317. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=3&scrV=2#iv.v-p20.4
1318. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=3&scrV=7#iii.i-p75.1
1319. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=3&scrV=13#iv.ii-p27.1
1320. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=4&scrV=0#iv.iii-p68.3
1321. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=4&scrV=1#iv.ii-p28.1
1322. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=4&scrV=6#iii.xix-p267.1
1323. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=4&scrV=12#iv.ii-p29.1
1324. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=4&scrV=17#iv.vii-p111.7
1325. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=3#iii.xxxviii-p62.4
1326. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=11#iii.xxxviii-p62.5
1327. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=13#iii.iii-p90.1
1328. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=13#iv.iii-p188.1
1329. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=14#iv.xxvii-p8.2
1330. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=16#iii.i-p305.1
1331. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=20#iii.ii-p361.1
1332. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=21#iii.ii-p404.2
1333. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=27#iii.ii-p407.1
1334. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=32#iv.vii-p39.1
1335. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=33#iii.ii-p376.1
1336. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=38#iii.ii-p404.3
1337. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=33#iv.xii-p79.1
1338. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=8&scrV=0#iv.ii-p30.1
1339. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=8&scrV=0#iv.iii-p68.2
1340. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=8&scrV=1#iii.iii-p244.1
1341. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=8&scrV=4#iii.iii-p9.1
1342. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=9&scrV=1#iv.iii-p85.2
1343. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=9&scrV=15#iii.xxii-p6.6
1344. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=9&scrV=21#iv.ii-p86.1
1345. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=9&scrV=36#iii.xxxviii-p61.1
1346. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=10&scrV=0#iii.xii-p5.1
1347. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=10&scrV=28#iii.iii-p85.1
1348. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=10&scrV=32#iii.iii-p62.2
1349. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=10&scrV=35#iii.xxxiii-p1.8
1350. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=10&scrV=36#iii.xxxiii-p1.9
1351. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=11&scrV=0#iv.iii-p111.1
1352. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=11&scrV=10#iii.xxxix-p7.1
1353. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=11&scrV=14#iii.xxxix-p9.1
1354. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=11&scrV=20#iv.vii-p111.8
1355. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=11&scrV=25#iii.xix-p78.1
1356. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=11&scrV=25#iv.iii-p135.1
1357. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=12&scrV=1#iii.ii-p285.3
1358. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=12&scrV=3#iii.ix-p236.1
1359. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=12&scrV=14#iii.xxiii-p191.1
1360. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=12&scrV=27#iv.iii-p68.4
1361. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=12&scrV=37#iii.ii-p299.1
1362. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=12&scrV=38#iii.xxxii-p7.1
1363. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=12&scrV=38#iii.xxxii-p29.1
1364. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=12&scrV=42#iii.xi-p126.1
1365. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=13&scrV=0#iv.ii-p58.1
1366. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=13&scrV=0#iv.ii-p65.1
1367. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=13&scrV=0#iv.ii-p116.2
1368. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=13&scrV=0#iv.iii-p176.1
1369. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=13&scrV=0#iv.xxvii-p20.1
1370. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=13&scrV=0#iv.xxvii-p28.1
1371. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=13&scrV=8#iii.v-p68.1
1372. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=13&scrV=38#iii.i-p75.2
1373. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=13&scrV=38#iv.i-p175.1
1374. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=13&scrV=39#iii.iii-p381.1
1375. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=13&scrV=53#iv.ii-p73.1
1376. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=15&scrV=13#iv.ii-p73.2
1377. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=15&scrV=18#iii.xx-p74.1
1378. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=15&scrV=21#iv.ii-p76.1
1379. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=16&scrV=0#iv.iv-p92.1
1380. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=16&scrV=0#iv.v-p96.2
1381. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=16&scrV=11#iv.i-p177.5
1382. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=16&scrV=12#iv.i-p177.6
1383. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=16&scrV=17#iii.v-p256.4
1384. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=16&scrV=19#iv.xxvii-p8.30
1385. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=16&scrV=21#iii.xxxviii-p62.2
1386. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=16&scrV=27#iv.xxiv-p8.6
1387. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=17&scrV=0#iv.xxvi-p5.1
1388. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=17&scrV=1#iv.xxvii-p8.8
1389. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=17&scrV=2#iv.xxvii-p8.9
1390. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=18&scrV=15#iv.i-p106.1
1391. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=19&scrV=0#iv.ii-p97.1
1392. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=19&scrV=1#iii.ii-p437.1
1393. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=19&scrV=3#iii.i-p391.2
1394. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=19&scrV=3#iii.v-p201.1
1395. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=19&scrV=3#iii.ix-p274.1
1396. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=19&scrV=8#iii.iii-p297.1
1397. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=19&scrV=8#iii.iii-p305.1
1398. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=19&scrV=17#iii.vii-p197.1
1399. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=19&scrV=17#iii.vii-p217.1
1400. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=19&scrV=28#iii.i-p348.2
1401. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=19&scrV=28#iv.xxvii-p141.6
1402. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=20&scrV=20#iv.ii-p101.2
1403. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=20&scrV=23#iv.v-p116.1
1404. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=20&scrV=28#iii.i-p101.2
1405. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=21&scrV=0#iv.iii-p229.1
1406. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=21&scrV=0#iv.iii-p236.1
1407. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=21&scrV=5#iii.xxxviii-p58.1
1408. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=21&scrV=12#iv.iv-p42.1
1409. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=21&scrV=13#iv.iv-p42.2
1410. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=21&scrV=15#iii.xix-p78.2
1411. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=21&scrV=16#iii.xix-p78.3
1412. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=21&scrV=42#iv.vii-p111.9
1413. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=21&scrV=43#iv.vii-p111.10
1414. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=22&scrV=1#iii.i-p344.1
1415. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=22&scrV=2#iii.i-p344.2
1416. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=22&scrV=15#iv.ii-p113.1
1417. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=22&scrV=23#iv.ii-p113.2
1418. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=22&scrV=25#iii.v-p211.3
1419. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=22&scrV=34#iv.ii-p113.3
1420. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=22&scrV=34#iv.iii-p127.1
1421. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=22&scrV=37#iii.ii-p351.1
1422. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=22&scrV=37#iii.ii-p388.1
1423. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=22&scrV=42#iii.xix-p284.1
1424. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=23&scrV=0#iii.xxxviii-p62.3
1425. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=23&scrV=0#iv.iii-p142.5
1426. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=23&scrV=15#iv.i-p175.2
1427. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=23&scrV=29#iii.xiv-p63.2
1428. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=23&scrV=33#iii.i-p75.3
1429. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=23&scrV=36#iii.xxv-p1.2
1430. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=24&scrV=0#iv.ii-p116.3
1431. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=24&scrV=0#iii.xiv-p93.4
1432. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=24&scrV=0#iii.xxvii-p209.1
1433. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=24&scrV=0#iii.xxvii-p218.1
1434. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=24&scrV=0#iv.iii-p236.4
1435. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=24&scrV=0#iv.xiv-p17.2
1436. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=24&scrV=0#iv.xxvii-p39.2
1437. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=24&scrV=3#iii.xxvii-p119.2
1438. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=24&scrV=14#iv.iii-p263.2
1439. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=24&scrV=15#iv.i-p254.4
1440. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=24&scrV=15#iv.xxvii-p43.4
1441. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=24&scrV=15#iv.xxvii-p141.3
1442. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=24&scrV=22#iii.xxvii-p209.5
1443. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=24&scrV=27#iv.vii-p111.11
1444. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=24&scrV=29#iv.iv-p110.2
1445. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=24&scrV=29#iv.xxvii-p99.2
1446. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=24&scrV=30#iv.iv-p110.3
1447. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=25&scrV=0#iv.ii-p116.1
1448. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=25&scrV=0#iv.xxvii-p99.1
1449. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=25&scrV=14#iv.iii-p228.1
1450. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=25&scrV=31#iii.xix-p147.4
1451. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=25&scrV=31#iv.xxvii-p97.1
1452. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=25&scrV=31#iii.v-p264.4
1453. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=25&scrV=31#iii.xxvii-p60.2
1454. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=25&scrV=32#iv.xxvii-p144.2
1455. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=25&scrV=35#iv.xix-p116.11
1456. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=25&scrV=40#iv.xii-p30.3
1457. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=25&scrV=41#iii.vi-p13.1
1458. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=25&scrV=45#iv.xii-p30.4
1459. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=25&scrV=46#iv.xii-p28.3
1460. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=26&scrV=0#iv.iii-p245.1
1461. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=26&scrV=46#iii.ii-p157.2
1462. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=26&scrV=58#iv.i-p325.4
1463. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=27&scrV=5#iv.v-p7.5
1464. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=27&scrV=29#iv.iv-p162.2
1465. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=27&scrV=46#iii.xix-p131.1
1466. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=27&scrV=56#iv.i-p25.2
1467. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=27&scrV=57#iii.i-p493.2
1468. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=28&scrV=0#iv.ii-p145.1
1469. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=28&scrV=0#iv.iii-p260.1
1470. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=28&scrV=2#iv.i-p361.4
1471. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=28&scrV=8#iv.i-p361.9
1472. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=28&scrV=8#iv.i-p362.2
1473. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=28&scrV=9#iv.iv-p176.1
1474. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=28&scrV=18#iv.xxvii-p8.34
1475. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=1&scrV=0#iv.iii-p68.1
1476. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=1&scrV=1#iv.iii-p21.2
1477. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=1&scrV=2#iii.xxxix-p7.2
1478. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=2&scrV=0#iii.ii-p385.1
1479. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=2&scrV=0#iv.iii-p87.1
1480. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=2&scrV=1#iv.iii-p85.1
1481. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=2&scrV=22#iv.iv-p44.16
1482. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=2&scrV=23#iii.ii-p285.4
1483. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=2&scrV=25#iii.ix-p236.2
1484. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=2&scrV=27#iii.i-p38.1
1485. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=3&scrV=21#iv.i-p158.1
1486. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=3&scrV=29#iii.v-p144.1
1487. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=5&scrV=0#iv.iii-p236.3
1488. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=7&scrV=1#iv.i-p197.1
1489. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=7&scrV=1#iv.iii-p150.1
1490. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=7&scrV=3#iv.iii-p142.6
1491. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=7&scrV=31#iv.iii-p117.1
1492. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=8&scrV=15#iv.i-p177.7
1493. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=9&scrV=11#iii.xxxix-p9.2
1494. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=9&scrV=50#iii.iii-p90.2
1495. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=10&scrV=0#iv.i-p252.1
1496. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=10&scrV=35#iv.ii-p101.1
1497. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=10&scrV=45#iv.ii-p5.5
1498. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=12&scrV=0#iv.iii-p236.2
1499. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=12&scrV=28#iv.iii-p127.2
1500. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=14&scrV=0#iv.i-p325.1
1501. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=14&scrV=0#iv.iii-p245.2
1502. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=15&scrV=15#iv.i-p361.8
1503. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=15&scrV=37#iv.i-p347.1
1504. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=15&scrV=40#iv.i-p25.3
1505. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=15&scrV=42#iv.iv-p162.4
1506. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=16&scrV=16#iv.xii-p28.5
1507. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=16&scrV=18#iv.v-p231.1
1508. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=1&scrV=0#iv.i-p57.1
1509. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=1&scrV=17#iii.xxxix-p9.3
1510. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=1&scrV=17#iv.i-p212.2
1511. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=1&scrV=28#iv.i-p27.4
1512. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=1&scrV=31#iv.i-p26.1
1513. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=1&scrV=31#iv.vii-p111.6
1514. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=1&scrV=31#iii.i-p75.8
1515. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=1&scrV=32#iv.v-p152.3
1516. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=1&scrV=33#iv.v-p152.4
1517. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=1&scrV=46#iii.ix-p11.1
1518. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=1&scrV=73#iii.i-p317.2
1519. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=1&scrV=76#iii.xxxix-p7.3
1520. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=2&scrV=0#iv.i-p40.2
1521. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=2&scrV=24#iii.iii-p203.1
1522. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=2&scrV=30#iv.i-p40.1
1523. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=2&scrV=36#iii.ix-p32.2
1524. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=2&scrV=37#iii.ix-p32.3
1525. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=2&scrV=38#iv.vi-p90.3
1526. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=3&scrV=1#iii.xxiii-p189.1
1527. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=3&scrV=1#iv.i-p79.2
1528. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=3&scrV=2#iv.iv-p160.2
1529. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=4&scrV=1#iii.i-p70.2
1530. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=4&scrV=14#iv.i-p79.3
1531. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=4&scrV=16#iii.ii-p629.1
1532. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=4&scrV=16#iii.xxiii-p232.1
1533. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=4&scrV=16#iii.xxiii-p239.1
1534. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=4&scrV=21#iii.ii-p629.2
1535. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=4&scrV=25#iii.xi-p222.1
1536. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=4&scrV=25#iii.xi-p241.1
1537. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=4&scrV=26#iii.xi-p222.2
1538. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=4&scrV=26#iii.xi-p241.2
1539. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=6&scrV=3#iii.ix-p236.3
1540. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=8&scrV=2#iv.i-p25.1
1541. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=9&scrV=46#iv.i-p228.1
1542. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=10&scrV=0#iii.xiv-p71.1
1543. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=10&scrV=20#iii.xxvi-p97.3
1544. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=10&scrV=39#iv.i-p25.5
1545. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=11&scrV=9#iii.xx-p57.1
1546. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=11&scrV=13#iv.v-p20.5
1547. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=11&scrV=31#iii.xi-p126.2
1548. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=11&scrV=52#iv.xxvii-p8.31
1549. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=13&scrV=16#iv.vii-p22.1
1550. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=13&scrV=25#iv.xxvii-p8.18
1551. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=14&scrV=13#iv.xxvii-p141.9
1552. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=14&scrV=14#iv.xxvii-p141.10
1553. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=15&scrV=10#iii.i-p374.3
1554. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=16&scrV=23#iv.x-p28.4
1555. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=16&scrV=31#iii.ii-p9.1
1556. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=16&scrV=31#iii.ii-p328.1
1557. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=16&scrV=31#iii.ii-p341.1
1558. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=17&scrV=3#iv.i-p230.1
1559. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=17&scrV=4#iv.i-p230.2
1560. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=17&scrV=31#iii.i-p285.1
1561. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=18&scrV=8#iii.i-p131.1
1562. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=18&scrV=35#iv.i-p252.2
1563. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=19&scrV=0#iii.xxvii-p60.6
1564. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=19&scrV=1527#iv.xxiv-p8.1
1565. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=20&scrV=2#iii.xxiv-p58.1
1566. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=21&scrV=0#iv.xxvii-p97.4
1567. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=21&scrV=20#iv.i-p285.1
1568. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=21&scrV=24#iii.iii-p457.1
1569. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=21&scrV=24#iv.iii-p237.3
1570. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=22&scrV=0#iv.i-p325.2
1571. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=22&scrV=3#iv.i-p322.5
1572. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=23&scrV=46#iv.i-p347.2
1573. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=23&scrV=55#iv.i-p361.1
1574. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=24&scrV=0#iv.vii-p109.1
1575. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=24&scrV=4#iv.i-p361.6
1576. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=24&scrV=5#iv.i-p361.7
1577. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=24&scrV=13#iv.i-p362.5
1578. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=24&scrV=27#iv.v-p7.3
1579. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=24&scrV=34#iv.i-p362.3
1580. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=24&scrV=36#iv.i-p362.6
1581. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=24&scrV=41#iii.i-p268.1
1582. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=24&scrV=44#iii.ii-p9.2
1583. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=24&scrV=46#iv.v-p7.4
1584. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=0#iv.i-p81.1
1585. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=0#iv.iv-p26.5
1586. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=1#iv.xi-p29.2
1587. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=1#iv.xix-p62.6
1588. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=1#iii.ii-p209.4
1589. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=12#iv.iv-p44.7
1590. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=13#iv.iv-p44.8
1591. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=14#iv.xxvii-p158.1
1592. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=15#iv.i-p79.1
1593. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=17#iii.vi-p172.1
1594. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=18#iii.iv-p120.2
1595. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=18#iii.xxvi-p70.1
1596. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=23#iii.xxiii-p189.2
1597. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=33#iii.ii-p655.1
1598. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=33#iv.iv-p178.1
1599. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=33#iv.v-p20.6
1600. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=34#iii.ii-p655.2
1601. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=45#iii.v-p140.1
1602. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=46#iv.i-p42.1
1603. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=51#iii.i-p374.1
1604. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=51#iii.i-p454.1
1605. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=51#iii.i-p460.1
1606. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=2&scrV=13#iv.i-p254.1
1607. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=0#iv.i-p228.2
1608. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=0#iv.iii-p246.1
1609. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=0#iv.iv-p26.5
1610. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=2#iv.iii-p68.5
1611. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=2#iv.iii-p81.1
1612. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=5#iii.ii-p679.1
1613. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=14#iii.iv-p202.1
1614. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=14#iv.iv-p44.12
1615. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=15#iii.iv-p202.2
1616. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=15#iii.iv-p208.1
1617. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=15#iv.iv-p44.13
1618. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=16#iii.iv-p208.2
1619. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=16#iv.iv-p44.14
1620. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=16#iv.iv-p51.1
1621. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=16#iv.v-p99.1
1622. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=29#iii.xxii-p6.7
1623. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=29#iii.xxii-p29.1
1624. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=34#iii.ii-p656.2
1625. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=4&scrV=0#iii.xii-p158.1
1626. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=4&scrV=9#iii.xv-p15.1
1627. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=4&scrV=19#iv.v-p75.1
1628. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=4&scrV=42#iv.v-p73.1
1629. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=16#iii.ii-p385.2
1630. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=17#iii.ii-p385.3
1631. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=21#iii.xxvi-p203.1
1632. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=22#iii.xxvii-p60.5
1633. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=28#iv.iii-p186.1
1634. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=43#iii.xxxviii-p62.7
1635. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=31#iii.ii-p526.2
1636. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=37#iii.iv-p231.2
1637. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=38#iii.iii-p84.2
1638. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=51#iii.iii-p100.1
1639. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=7&scrV=5#iv.xx-p4.1
1640. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=7&scrV=22#iii.iii-p9.4
1641. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=7&scrV=23#iii.iii-p9.5
1642. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=7&scrV=37#iv.v-p20.7
1643. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=7&scrV=39#iii.ii-p655.3
1644. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=7&scrV=39#iii.iv-p112.2
1645. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=7&scrV=42#iii.xxxiii-p1.7
1646. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=12#iii.ii-p529.4
1647. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=21#iv.xxvii-p145.2
1648. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=24#iv.xxvii-p145.3
1649. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=38#iv.i-p175.3
1650. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=43#iii.v-p256.5
1651. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=44#iii.i-p66.2
1652. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=44#iii.i-p75.4
1653. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=56#iii.i-p229.1
1654. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=58#iii.ii-p41.1
1655. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=58#iii.ii-p54.1
1656. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=9&scrV=3#iii.xviii-p25.1
1657. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=9&scrV=41#iv.iv-p130.1
1658. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=10&scrV=0#iii.xxxviii-p61.2
1659. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=10&scrV=11#iii.xix-p146.1
1660. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=10&scrV=17#iv.i-p324.1
1661. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=10&scrV=18#iii.i-p316.2
1662. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=10&scrV=18#iv.i-p324.2
1663. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=10&scrV=18#iv.i-p347.3
1664. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=11&scrV=51#iv.i-p179.5
1665. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=12&scrV=1#iv.i-p321.1
1666. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=12&scrV=5#iv.i-p321.2
1667. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=12&scrV=14#iv.xxvii-p23.5
1668. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=12&scrV=31#iv.xxvii-p23.4
1669. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=12&scrV=31#iii.vi-p187.3
1670. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=13&scrV=1#iii.ii-p680.3
1671. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=13&scrV=10#iii.ii-p680.1
1672. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=0#iv.v-p20.8
1673. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=1#iii.i-p348.1
1674. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=6#iii.i-p101.3
1675. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=6#iii.iii-p163.1
1676. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=16#iii.i-p43.11
1677. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=16#iii.ix-p112.1
1678. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=16#iii.ix-p186.1
1679. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=17#iii.i-p43.12
1680. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=21#iii.iv-p51.2
1681. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=15&scrV=6#iv.xxiii-p20.1
1682. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=15&scrV=17#iii.i-p493.1
1683. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=15&scrV=26#iii.i-p346.1
1684. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=16&scrV=13#iv.i-p85.1
1685. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=16&scrV=13#iii.i-p346.2
1686. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=17&scrV=0#iv.xi-p29.1
1687. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=17&scrV=15#iv.viii-p44.6
1688. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=17&scrV=19#iii.iii-p67.1
1689. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=18&scrV=0#iv.i-p325.3
1690. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=18&scrV=9#iv.iv-p148.2
1691. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=18&scrV=31#iv.v-p61.1
1692. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=19&scrV=19#iii.ii-p157.1
1693. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=19&scrV=25#iv.i-p25.4
1694. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=19&scrV=25#iv.iii-p260.2
1695. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=19&scrV=30#iii.xix-p131.2
1696. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=19&scrV=30#iii.xix-p153.1
1697. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=19&scrV=30#iv.i-p347.4
1698. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=19&scrV=33#iii.ii-p160.1
1699. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=20&scrV=1#iv.i-p361.2
1700. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=20&scrV=2#iv.i-p361.3
1701. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=20&scrV=11#iv.i-p361.5
1702. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=20&scrV=14#iv.i-p362.1
1703. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=20&scrV=17#iii.xix-p133.1
1704. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=20&scrV=19#iv.v-p7.1
1705. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=20&scrV=19#iv.i-p362.7
1706. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=20&scrV=22#iv.v-p6.1
1707. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=20&scrV=22#iv.xxvii-p8.35
1708. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=20&scrV=23#iv.xxvii-p8.36
1709. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=20&scrV=31#iv.iii-p21.3
1710. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=21&scrV=7#iv.iii-p261.3
1711. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=1&scrV=0#iv.iii-p21.4
1712. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=1&scrV=0#iv.ix-p21.1
1713. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=1&scrV=5#iv.v-p20.9
1714. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=1&scrV=9#iii.xii-p9.4
1715. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=1&scrV=11#iii.x-p174.1
1716. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=1&scrV=13#iv.xx-p4.2
1717. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=1&scrV=18#iv.i-p337.1
1718. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=1&scrV=18#iv.i-p353.1
1719. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=1&scrV=20#iii.xix-p239.1
1720. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=1&scrV=22#iv.i-p146.1
1721. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=2&scrV=0#iii.ii-p655.4
1722. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=2&scrV=0#iv.iii-p21.4
1723. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=2&scrV=0#iii.xix-p202.2
1724. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=2&scrV=0#iv.i-p62.1
1725. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=2&scrV=0#iv.iv-p178.4
1726. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=2&scrV=0#iv.vi-p4.1
1727. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=2&scrV=1#iv.iii-p40.1
1728. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=2&scrV=1#iii.iii-p380.1
1729. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=2&scrV=1#iii.ii-p318.1
1730. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=2&scrV=1#iv.iv-p149.1
1731. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=2&scrV=2#iv.iii-p40.2
1732. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=2&scrV=4#iii.xxvi-p49.1
1733. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=2&scrV=25#iii.xix-p111.1
1734. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=2&scrV=32#iv.xxiii-p20.2
1735. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=2&scrV=33#iv.iv-p178.2
1736. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=2&scrV=33#iv.xxiii-p20.3
1737. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=2&scrV=34#iii.xix-p284.2
1738. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=2&scrV=38#iv.v-p80.2
1739. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=2&scrV=38#iv.i-p209.8
1740. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=2&scrV=41#iv.i-p180.2
1741. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=3&scrV=19#iii.iii-p433.1
1742. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=3&scrV=19#iv.i-p258.2
1743. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=3&scrV=22#iii.v-p140.2
1744. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=3&scrV=23#iii.v-p140.3
1745. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=4&scrV=8#iv.v-p20.14
1746. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=4&scrV=12#iii.i-p101.4
1747. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=4&scrV=12#iii.iii-p163.2
1748. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=4&scrV=25#iii.xix-p4.1
1749. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=4&scrV=25#iii.xix-p44.1
1750. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=4&scrV=27#iii.ii-p165.3
1751. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=4&scrV=27#iii.ii-p629.3
1752. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=4&scrV=31#iv.v-p20.15
1753. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=5&scrV=0#iii.vii-p114.2
1754. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=5&scrV=1#iii.iii-p162.1
1755. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=5&scrV=3#iii.iii-p162.2
1756. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=5&scrV=4#iii.xii-p20.2
1757. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=6&scrV=3#iv.v-p78.1
1758. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=6&scrV=5#iv.v-p20.16
1759. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=7&scrV=0#iv.i-p258.1
1760. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=7&scrV=0#iv.iv-p131.1
1761. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=7&scrV=2#iii.i-p188.1
1762. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=7&scrV=2#iii.i-p185.1
1763. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=7&scrV=16#iii.ii-p199.1
1764. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=7&scrV=20#iii.ii-p21.1
1765. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=7&scrV=38#iv.i-p209.2
1766. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=7&scrV=55#iv.v-p20.17
1767. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=7&scrV=58#iii.v-p130.1
1768. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=8&scrV=16#iv.v-p80.3
1769. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=8&scrV=32#iv.iv-p162.8
1770. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=9&scrV=0#iii.xviii-p24.3
1771. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=9&scrV=0#iii.xxvi-p11.5
1772. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=9&scrV=0#iv.vii-p57.1
1773. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=9&scrV=0#iv.vii-p109.2
1774. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=9&scrV=0#iv.viii-p33.2
1775. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=9&scrV=0#iv.ix-p21.2
1776. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=9&scrV=4#iii.iv-p270.1
1777. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=9&scrV=4#iv.xii-p30.1
1778. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=9&scrV=5#iii.iv-p270.2
1779. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=9&scrV=5#iv.xii-p30.2
1780. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=9&scrV=20#iv.v-p78.2
1781. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=10&scrV=0#iv.i-p258.3
1782. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=10&scrV=0#iv.v-p76.1
1783. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=10&scrV=0#iv.xvii-p11.3
1784. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=10&scrV=9#iii.iii-p188.1
1785. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=10&scrV=34#iv.i-p209.9
1786. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=10&scrV=38#iii.ii-p629.4
1787. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=10&scrV=38#iii.iii-p85.2
1788. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=10&scrV=46#iv.v-p22.1
1789. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=12&scrV=12#iv.i-p25.6
1790. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=12&scrV=15#iv.i-p228.3
1791. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=13&scrV=0#iv.xvi-p37.1
1792. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=13&scrV=10#iii.i-p75.5
1793. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=13&scrV=20#iii.vii-p19.1
1794. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=13&scrV=20#iii.xxvii-p144.3
1795. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=13&scrV=21#iii.xxvii-p144.4
1796. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=13&scrV=28#iv.iii-p186.6
1797. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=13&scrV=33#iii.xix-p44.2
1798. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=13&scrV=46#iv.iii-p186.5
1799. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=14&scrV=11#iii.xxvii-p28.1
1800. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=15&scrV=0#iv.ix-p8.1
1801. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=15&scrV=0#iv.ix-p21.3
1802. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=15&scrV=0#iv.xvii-p5.1
1803. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=15&scrV=0#iv.xx-p31.1
1804. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=15&scrV=1#iii.i-p142.2
1805. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=15&scrV=7#iv.i-p209.4
1806. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=15&scrV=14#iii.v-p261.2
1807. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=15&scrV=14#iii.xxvi-p144.1
1808. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=15&scrV=14#iv.vii-p111.12
1809. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=15&scrV=16#iii.xxvi-p202.1
1810. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=15&scrV=17#iii.xxvi-p202.2
1811. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=15&scrV=20#iv.xix-p118.1
1812. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=15&scrV=21#iii.ii-p285.2
1813. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=15&scrV=38#iv.v-p134.1
1814. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=16&scrV=0#iv.xi-p3.1
1815. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=16&scrV=0#iv.xiii-p7.1
1816. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=16&scrV=0#iv.xiii-p9.1
1817. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=16&scrV=6#iv.ix-p2.1
1818. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=16&scrV=18#iv.ix-p2.2
1819. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=17&scrV=0#iv.xiii-p3.1
1820. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=17&scrV=0#iv.xiii-p20.1
1821. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=17&scrV=0#iv.xiii-p22.1
1822. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=17&scrV=0#iv.xiii-p35.1
1823. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=17&scrV=0#iv.xiv-p3.1
1824. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=17&scrV=26#iii.v-p291.1
1825. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=17&scrV=27#iii.v-p291.2
1826. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=19&scrV=0#iii.vii-p114.3
1827. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=19&scrV=0#iv.xvi-p37.2
1828. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=19&scrV=0#iv.xviii-p1.2
1829. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=19&scrV=0#iv.xxv-p8.1
1830. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=19&scrV=6#iv.v-p22.2
1831. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=19&scrV=22#iv.xv-p7.1
1832. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=19&scrV=23#iv.viii-p1.1
1833. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=19&scrV=39#iv.i-p209.3
1834. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=20&scrV=0#iv.xviii-p1.2
1835. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=20&scrV=24#iv.iii-p263.1
1836. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=21&scrV=20#iv.v-p101.1
1837. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=22&scrV=3#iv.v-p79.1
1838. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=22&scrV=4#iv.v-p72.2
1839. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=22&scrV=6#iv.xxvii-p8.10
1840. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=22&scrV=19#iv.v-p72.3
1841. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=22&scrV=20#iv.v-p72.4
1842. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=22&scrV=28#iv.v-p79.2
1843. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=23&scrV=6#iv.v-p79.3
1844. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=24&scrV=10#iv.v-p72.5
1845. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=24&scrV=11#iv.v-p72.6
1846. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=24&scrV=14#iv.iii-p186.2
1847. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=28&scrV=0#iv.x-p3.1
1848. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=28&scrV=0#iv.xi-p2.1
1849. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=28&scrV=0#iv.xvi-p4.1
1850. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=28&scrV=0#iv.xvii-p3.1
1851. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=28&scrV=26#iii.v-p256.6
1852. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=28&scrV=27#iii.v-p256.7
1853. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=1&scrV=10#iv.viii-p76.1
1854. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=1&scrV=11#iv.v-p231.2
1855. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=1&scrV=16#iv.v-p133.1
1856. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=1&scrV=16#iv.v-p231.3
1857. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=1&scrV=17#iii.xxxv-p6.1
1858. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=1&scrV=17#iv.xi-p46.1
1859. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=1&scrV=22#iii.v-p76.1
1860. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=1&scrV=28#iii.i-p169.1
1861. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=2&scrV=25#iii.v-p79.1
1862. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=2&scrV=29#iii.v-p79.2
1863. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=3&scrV=18#iv.i-p235.1
1864. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=3&scrV=19#iv.iii-p190.1
1865. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=3&scrV=19#iii.ii-p467.1
1866. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=3&scrV=21#iii.i-p101.5
1867. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=3&scrV=22#iii.i-p70.4
1868. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=3&scrV=22#iii.xxxviii-p24.1
1869. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=3&scrV=24#iii.ii-p165.1
1870. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=3&scrV=25#iii.i-p101.6
1871. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=3&scrV=25#iii.ii-p521.1
1872. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=3&scrV=25#iii.xxvi-p248.1
1873. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=3&scrV=25#iv.xii-p28.1
1874. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=3&scrV=26#iii.iv-p254.1
1875. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=4&scrV=0#iii.xix-p50.2
1876. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=4&scrV=4#iii.iv-p231.3
1877. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=4&scrV=17#iii.xxvi-p203.2
1878. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=4&scrV=20#iii.i-p357.1
1879. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=4&scrV=23#iii.i-p228.1
1880. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=4&scrV=23#iii.i-p239.1
1881. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=4&scrV=25#iv.iv-p162.5
1882. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=5&scrV=0#iii.ii-p645.1
1883. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=5&scrV=1#iii.iii-p99.1
1884. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=5&scrV=1#iii.xxxv-p6.2
1885. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=5&scrV=12#iii.ii-p252.1
1886. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=5&scrV=12#iv.i-p67.1
1887. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=5&scrV=19#iii.iii-p67.2
1888. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=6&scrV=0#iv.viii-p33.1
1889. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=6&scrV=1#iii.vi-p185.1
1890. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=6&scrV=4#iv.xii-p56.3
1891. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=6&scrV=4#iv.xii-p56.4
1892. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=6&scrV=9#iv.xix-p62.7
1893. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=7&scrV=0#iii.vii-p169.1
1894. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=7&scrV=7#iii.ii-p361.2
1895. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=7&scrV=7#iii.ii-p420.1
1896. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=7&scrV=11#iii.xi-p258.1
1897. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=7&scrV=18#iii.ii-p589.1
1898. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=0#iv.xxvi-p12.1
1899. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=1#iv.viii-p31.2
1900. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=3#iii.iii-p116.1
1901. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=3#iii.vi-p172.2
1902. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=4#iii.vi-p172.3
1903. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=7#iii.ii-p589.2
1904. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=7#iv.iv-p44.3
1905. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=8#iv.iv-p44.4
1906. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=9#iv.i-p290.2
1907. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=9#iv.v-p189.1
1908. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=9#iv.iii-p142.1
1909. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=10#iv.xii-p56.1
1910. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=18#iv.x-p30.5
1911. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=18#iii.iii-p249.1
1912. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=19#iii.iii-p433.3
1913. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=20#iii.iii-p367.1
1914. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=20#iii.xxi-p4.1
1915. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=26#iii.vi-p137.2
1916. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=26#iii.vi-p147.1
1917. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=26#iv.iv-p112.2
1918. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=28#iii.xv-p6.1
1919. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=30#iv.iv-p162.6
1920. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=33#iii.ii-p654.5
1921. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=34#iii.ii-p654.6
1922. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=34#iii.ii-p673.1
1923. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=36#iv.viii-p27.3
1924. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=37#iii.vi-p173.1
1925. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=9&scrV=1#iii.ii-p714.1
1926. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=9&scrV=1#iii.xxv-p1.3
1927. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=9&scrV=14#iii.ii-p99.1
1928. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=9&scrV=20#iii.i-p43.3
1929. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=9&scrV=21#iii.i-p43.4
1930. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=9&scrV=24#iv.x-p46.1
1931. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=9&scrV=32#iv.i-p257.4
1932. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=9&scrV=33#iv.i-p257.5
1933. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=10&scrV=4#iii.vi-p172.4
1934. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=10&scrV=4#iv.ix-p42.1
1935. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=10&scrV=5#iii.vi-p172.5
1936. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=10&scrV=9#iii.i-p257.1
1937. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=10&scrV=9#iii.iii-p62.3
1938. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=10&scrV=10#iii.i-p257.2
1939. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=10&scrV=10#iii.iii-p62.4
1940. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=10&scrV=19#iv.x-p46.2
1941. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=11&scrV=0#iii.iii-p463.1
1942. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=11&scrV=0#iii.xxiii-p207.1
1943. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=11&scrV=0#iii.xxiii-p221.1
1944. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=11&scrV=0#iv.v-p231.5
1945. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=11&scrV=0#iv.v-p236.1
1946. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=11&scrV=1#iii.xxv-p16.1
1947. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=11&scrV=5#iii.xxvii-p29.2
1948. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=11&scrV=5#iv.i-p288.3
1949. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=11&scrV=25#iii.xxiv-p98.1
1950. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=11&scrV=25#iv.i-p179.3
1951. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=11&scrV=25#iv.vii-p109.5
1952. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=11&scrV=25#iii.iv-p237.5
1953. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=11&scrV=26#iii.v-p263.2
1954. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=11&scrV=26#iii.xxvii-p110.2
1955. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=11&scrV=27#iii.v-p263.3
1956. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=11&scrV=29#iii.i-p253.1
1957. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=11&scrV=29#iii.iv-p229.3
1958. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=11&scrV=29#iii.iv-p164.3
1959. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=11&scrV=29#iii.ix-p186.2
1960. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=12&scrV=1#iii.iii-p67.4
1961. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=12&scrV=1#iii.iii-p147.1
1962. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=12&scrV=3#iv.xxi-p47.2
1963. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=12&scrV=10#iv.xix-p116.1
1964. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=12&scrV=13#iv.xix-p116.5
1965. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=12&scrV=20#iii.ix-p254.1
1966. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=12&scrV=21#iii.ix-p254.2
1967. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=13&scrV=1#iii.ii-p448.1
1968. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=13&scrV=1#iv.i-p274.1
1969. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=14&scrV=0#iv.i-p106.4
1970. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=14&scrV=0#iv.vii-p25.1
1971. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=14&scrV=0#iv.vii-p39.4
1972. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=14&scrV=2#iv.xii-p58.1
1973. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=14&scrV=20#iv.xvii-p11.2
1974. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=15&scrV=2#iii.iii-p147.2
1975. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=15&scrV=8#iv.viii-p1.2
1976. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=15&scrV=9#iii.x-p185.1
1977. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=15&scrV=20#iv.vi-p7.1
1978. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=15&scrV=21#iv.vi-p7.2
1979. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=15&scrV=28#iv.viii-p76.2
1980. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=16&scrV=1#iv.vi-p5.1
1981. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=16&scrV=1#iv.xi-p56.1
1982. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=16&scrV=6#iv.i-p25.7
1983. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=16&scrV=25#iv.x-p4.1
1984. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=16&scrV=26#iv.x-p4.2
1985. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=3#iii.iii-p99.3
1986. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=7#iv.i-p290.1
1987. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=12#iv.viii-p77.3
1988. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=18#iii.vii-p122.1
1989. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=23#iv.i-p257.6
1990. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=24#iv.iv-p26.1
1991. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=26#iii.xxxviii-p62.6
1992. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=27#iii.x-p133.1
1993. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=27#iii.x-p143.1
1994. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=27#iii.xix-p78.4
1995. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=28#iii.x-p133.2
1996. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=28#iii.x-p143.2
1997. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=30#iv.vi-p9.1
1998. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=0#iii.xx-p62.1
1999. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=9#iii.ix-p91.1
2000. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=9#iii.v-p256.8
2001. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=11#iii.i-p43.7
2002. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=14#iii.iii-p314.3
2003. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=14#iv.iv-p44.2
2004. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=11#iv.i-p257.8
2005. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=11#iv.viii-p31.3
2006. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=11#iv.xxiv-p8.2
2007. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=11#iv.xxiv-p8.4
2008. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=4#iii.iii-p118.2
2009. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=9#iii.xviii-p25.2
2010. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=16#iv.xv-p7.3
2011. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=17#iv.xv-p7.2
2012. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=0#iv.iii-p261.2
2013. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=1#iii.x-p95.1
2014. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=1#iii.ix-p186.6
2015. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=1#iii.ix-p200.1
2016. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=6#iv.i-p177.8
2017. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=7#iii.iii-p320.1
2018. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=7#iii.iii-p329.1
2019. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=7#iii.iii-p375.1
2020. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=7#iii.ii-p159.1
2021. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=8#iii.iii-p375.2
2022. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=12#iv.i-p106.2
2023. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=13#iv.i-p106.3
2024. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=6&scrV=2#iii.i-p348.3
2025. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=6&scrV=2#iv.xxvii-p141.7
2026. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=6&scrV=11#iii.i-p345.1
2027. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=6&scrV=11#iii.ii-p680.2
2028. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=6&scrV=12#iv.xi-p47.1
2029. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=6&scrV=19#iii.i-p43.13
2030. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=6&scrV=19#iv.iii-p142.2
2031. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=6&scrV=19#iv.v-p20.11
2032. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=6&scrV=20#iii.iii-p190.1
2033. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=6&scrV=20#iii.iii-p199.1
2034. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=7&scrV=0#iii.xxiv-p66.1
2035. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=7&scrV=17#iv.xviii-p8.1
2036. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=7&scrV=32#iii.xxiv-p56.1
2037. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=7&scrV=33#iii.xxiv-p56.2
2038. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=9&scrV=1#iv.i-p146.2
2039. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=9&scrV=1#iv.v-p79.9
2040. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=9&scrV=20#iv.v-p167.1
2041. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=9&scrV=20#iv.v-p179.1
2042. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=9&scrV=27#iii.xi-p167.1
2043. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=9&scrV=27#iii.xi-p181.1
2044. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=10&scrV=0#iii.iv-p8.1
2045. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=10&scrV=1#iii.iv-p134.3
2046. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=10&scrV=1#iii.iv-p164.1
2047. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=10&scrV=4#iii.v-p86.1
2048. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=10&scrV=4#iii.v-p74.5
2049. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=10&scrV=4#iii.iv-p186.2
2050. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=10&scrV=6#iii.iii-p117.4
2051. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=10&scrV=11#iii.ii-p245.1
2052. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=10&scrV=17#iii.ii-p160.3
2053. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=10&scrV=19#iii.ii-p359.4
2054. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=10&scrV=20#iii.ii-p359.5
2055. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=10&scrV=23#iii.iii-p314.4
2056. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=10&scrV=31#iii.iii-p314.1
2057. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=10&scrV=32#iv.xvi-p26.1
2058. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=10&scrV=32#iv.xvi-p32.1
2059. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=11&scrV=0#iv.vii-p97.1
2060. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=11&scrV=5#iv.xv-p35.1
2061. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=11&scrV=23#iv.iii-p22.1
2062. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=11&scrV=28#iii.x-p95.2
2063. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=11&scrV=30#iv.v-p46.4
2064. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=0#iv.i-p290.3
2065. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=0#iv.xxi-p47.1
2066. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=3#iii.i-p345.2
2067. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=3#iv.iv-p178.3
2068. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=4#iv.xxvii-p8.37
2069. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=8#iv.xxvii-p8.38
2070. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=12#iv.x-p32.1
2071. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=12#iv.xii-p30.5
2072. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=12#iv.x-p4.4
2073. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=12#iv.x-p16.1
2074. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=13#iii.i-p345.3
2075. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=13#iv.i-p62.2
2076. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=13#iv.iv-p149.2
2077. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=13#iv.v-p20.10
2078. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=13#iv.v-p29.1
2079. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=13#iv.vi-p57.1
2080. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=13#iv.xii-p56.2
2081. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=13&scrV=0#iv.xxii-p11.1
2082. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=14&scrV=0#iv.v-p22.3
2083. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=14&scrV=0#iv.v-p194.1
2084. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=14&scrV=0#iv.xiii-p54.1
2085. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=14&scrV=34#iv.xv-p36.1
2086. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=14&scrV=35#iv.xv-p36.2
2087. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=14&scrV=37#iv.iv-p131.2
2088. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=0#iv.iii-p261.1
2089. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=0#iv.xxvii-p141.11
2090. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=5#iv.i-p362.4
2091. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=7#iv.xx-p4.3
2092. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=20#iii.iii-p375.3
2093. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=20#iv.i-p67.2
2094. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=22#iii.xix-p79.1
2095. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=22#iii.xix-p94.1
2096. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=23#iv.iii-p186.3
2097. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=23#iv.xi-p46.2
2098. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=23#iv.xxvii-p157.1
2099. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=23#iv.xxvii-p163.1
2100. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=25#iii.xix-p284.3
2101. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=27#iv.i-p251.4
2102. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=28#iv.i-p251.5
2103. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=31#iv.viii-p27.2
2104. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=45#iii.xxvi-p14.1
2105. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=45#iv.i-p67.3
2106. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=50#iv.i-p211.2
2107. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=58#iv.iii-p161.1
2108. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=16&scrV=1#iii.iii-p478.1
2109. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=16&scrV=1#iii.iii-p496.1
2110. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=16&scrV=1#iv.viii-p68.1
2111. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=16&scrV=1#iii.iii-p488.1
2112. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=16&scrV=2#iii.iii-p478.2
2113. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=16&scrV=2#iii.iii-p496.2
2114. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=16&scrV=2#iv.viii-p68.2
2115. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=16&scrV=2#iv.viii-p68.3
2116. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=16&scrV=10#iv.xv-p8.1
2117. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=5#iv.xii-p30.6
2118. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=9#iii.xxvi-p203.3
2119. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=10#iii.vi-p173.2
2120. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=14#iii.vi-p173.3
2121. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=6#iv.vi-p60.1
2122. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=7#iii.ii-p739.1
2123. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=18#iii.iii-p148.1
2124. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=6#iii.ii-p529.5
2125. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=7#iii.xi-p233.2
2126. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=8#iv.iv-p110.5
2127. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=9#iii.vii-p212.1
2128. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=9#iii.vii-p225.1
2129. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=10#iv.xxvii-p144.1
2130. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=14#iii.iii-p482.1
2131. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=14#iii.ii-p653.1
2132. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=15#iii.iii-p482.2
2133. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=15#iv.iv-p176.2
2134. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=17#iii.iii-p215.1
2135. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=17#iii.iii-p221.1
2136. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=17#iv.iv-p44.9
2137. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=18#iv.xii-p28.2
2138. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=21#iii.i-p70.5
2139. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=21#iii.iii-p116.2
2140. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=21#iii.xxvii-p39.1
2141. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=21#iii.xxvii-p50.1
2142. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=6&scrV=11#iii.xxvi-p49.2
2143. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=6&scrV=11#iv.v-p98.1
2144. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=6&scrV=12#iii.xxvi-p49.3
2145. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=6&scrV=14#iii.i-p209.2
2146. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=6&scrV=14#iv.vii-p39.3
2147. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=6&scrV=14#iii.ii-p724.1
2148. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=6&scrV=14#iv.viii-p44.7
2149. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=6&scrV=17#iii.iii-p315.1
2150. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=6&scrV=17#iv.viii-p44.9
2151. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=6&scrV=18#iii.iii-p315.2
2152. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=6&scrV=18#iv.viii-p44.10
2153. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=7&scrV=1#iii.iii-p311.1
2154. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=7&scrV=1#iii.iii-p316.1
2155. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=7&scrV=1#iii.iii-p327.1
2156. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=7&scrV=9#iii.iii-p500.1
2157. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=8&scrV=6#iv.xvii-p5.3
2158. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=8&scrV=7#iii.iii-p478.3
2159. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=8&scrV=12#iv.xvii-p5.4
2160. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=10&scrV=14#iv.vi-p7.3
2161. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=11&scrV=2#iv.x-p86.3
2162. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=11&scrV=2#iv.xxvii-p139.7
2163. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=11&scrV=3#iii.i-p66.3
2164. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=11&scrV=3#iv.x-p86.4
2165. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=11&scrV=3#iv.xxvii-p139.8
2166. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=11&scrV=5#iii.iv-p119.1
2167. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=11&scrV=24#iii.v-p221.1
2168. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=11&scrV=24#iii.v-p210.1
2169. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=7#iv.vii-p22.2
2170. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=11#iii.iv-p119.2
2171. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=12#iii.iv-p119.3
2172. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=1&scrV=1#iv.v-p80.1
2173. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=1&scrV=8#iii.v-p98.4
2174. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=1&scrV=12#iv.v-p78.3
2175. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=1&scrV=13#iv.v-p79.4
2176. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=1&scrV=14#iv.v-p79.5
2177. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=1&scrV=17#iv.v-p81.1
2178. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=2&scrV=0#iv.v-p151.1
2179. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=2&scrV=2#iv.v-p100.1
2180. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=2&scrV=6#iv.ix-p3.1
2181. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=2&scrV=8#iv.v-p151.2
2182. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=2&scrV=11#iv.i-p209.5
2183. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=3&scrV=8#iv.vi-p6.1
2184. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=3&scrV=14#iii.iii-p116.3
2185. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=3&scrV=18#iv.vii-p73.1
2186. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=3&scrV=23#iii.vi-p172.8
2187. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=3&scrV=24#iii.ii-p421.3
2188. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=3&scrV=24#iii.xxxv-p6.3
2189. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=3&scrV=24#iv.iv-p44.15
2190. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=3&scrV=28#iv.x-p89.1
2191. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=3&scrV=28#iv.x-p98.1
2192. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=3&scrV=29#iii.i-p255.1
2193. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=4&scrV=1#iii.iii-p188.2
2194. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=4&scrV=1#iii.iii-p479.1
2195. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=4&scrV=1#iii.iii-p497.1
2196. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=4&scrV=4#iii.i-p75.9
2197. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=4&scrV=4#iii.i-p512.1
2198. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=4&scrV=5#iii.i-p75.10
2199. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=4&scrV=5#iii.i-p512.2
2200. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=4&scrV=9#iii.iii-p483.1
2201. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=4&scrV=15#iv.viii-p78.1
2202. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=4&scrV=21#iii.i-p310.1
2203. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=5&scrV=16#iv.x-p62.1
2204. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=5&scrV=21#iv.xxiii-p35.1
2205. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=6&scrV=1#iv.viii-p44.8
2206. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=6&scrV=2#iii.iii-p147.3
2207. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=11&scrV=1#iv.xvii-p5.2
2208. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=4#iv.xii-p28.6
2209. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=4#iii.ix-p124.1
2210. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=7#iii.ii-p165.2
2211. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=7#iv.xii-p2.4
2212. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=11#iii.vi-p175.1
2213. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=11#iii.ix-p124.2
2214. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=12#iii.ix-p124.3
2215. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=13#iv.v-p80.4
2216. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=14#iii.vi-p175.2
2217. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=15#iv.xii-p2.3
2218. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=15#iii.v-p256.9
2219. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=20#iii.xix-p284.5
2220. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=23#iv.v-p20.12
2221. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=2&scrV=1#iv.iii-p190.2
2222. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=2&scrV=1#iii.iv-p231.4
2223. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=2&scrV=3#iv.iv-p44.6
2224. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=2&scrV=5#iii.ii-p653.2
2225. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=2&scrV=5#iii.vi-p185.2
2226. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=2&scrV=6#iii.ii-p653.3
2227. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=2&scrV=6#iii.vi-p185.3
2228. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=2&scrV=6#iv.xii-p3.2
2229. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=2&scrV=10#iv.iv-p44.10
2230. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=2&scrV=11#iv.v-p96.1
2231. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=2&scrV=11#iv.v-p105.1
2232. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=2&scrV=12#iii.i-p105.1
2233. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=2&scrV=20#iv.i-p257.9
2234. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=2&scrV=21#iv.i-p180.3
2235. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=3&scrV=0#iii.xi-p30.1
2236. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=3&scrV=2#iv.iv-p26.2
2237. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=3&scrV=4#iv.xii-p30.7
2238. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=3&scrV=6#iv.v-p98.2
2239. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=3&scrV=6#iv.v-p152.1
2240. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=3&scrV=10#iii.xviii-p25.3
2241. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=3&scrV=30#iii.xi-p45.1
2242. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=0#iii.xix-p254.1
2243. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=1#iv.iv-p149.3
2244. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=3#iv.v-p20.13
2245. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=7#iii.xix-p237.2
2246. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=7#iv.xxi-p47.3
2247. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=8#iv.i-p349.1
2248. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=8#iv.i-p357.1
2249. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=8#iii.vi-p175.3
2250. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=10#iv.i-p147.1
2251. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=11#iv.xv-p37.1
2252. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=12#iii.xxvii-p181.1
2253. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=18#iii.v-p256.10
2254. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=18#iv.x-p28.1
2255. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=19#iv.x-p28.2
2256. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=24#iv.iv-p44.11
2257. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=30#iv.x-p8.8
2258. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=30#iv.xi-p31.1
2259. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=5&scrV=2#iii.iii-p62.1
2260. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=5&scrV=2#iii.iii-p84.1
2261. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=5&scrV=17#iii.iii-p314.5
2262. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=5&scrV=18#iii.vii-p116.1
2263. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=5&scrV=18#iv.iii-p142.4
2264. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=5&scrV=18#iv.v-p20.18
2265. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=5&scrV=22#iii.i-p49.1
2266. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=5&scrV=23#iii.xxii-p6.8
2267. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=5&scrV=25#iii.ii-p679.2
2268. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=5&scrV=25#iii.xxii-p40.5
2269. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=5&scrV=25#iv.i-p180.1
2270. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=5&scrV=26#iii.ii-p679.3
2271. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=5&scrV=27#iii.xxii-p64.1
2272. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=5&scrV=28#iii.xxii-p50.1
2273. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=5&scrV=33#iii.xx-p77.1
2274. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=6&scrV=0#iv.xxvi-p5.3
2275. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=6&scrV=14#iv.xxvii-p8.5
2276. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=6&scrV=17#iii.ix-p125.1
2277. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=6&scrV=17#iv.xxvii-p8.27
2278. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=6&scrV=18#iii.ix-p125.2
2279. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=6&scrV=21#iv.xii-p2.1
2280. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=6&scrV=22#iv.xii-p2.2
2281. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=1&scrV=1#iv.xv-p7.6
2282. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=1&scrV=2#iv.xvii-p3.4
2283. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=1&scrV=6#iii.iv-p164.4
2284. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=1&scrV=9#iii.iii-p313.1
2285. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=1&scrV=23#iv.iv-p110.6
2286. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=1&scrV=26#iv.xvii-p3.3
2287. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=4#iii.vii-p124.2
2288. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=6#iv.xii-p24.1
2289. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=7#iv.ii-p5.6
2290. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=7#iv.iv-p113.1
2291. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=9#iii.xix-p284.6
2292. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=9#iv.i-p251.6
2293. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=12#iii.x-p31.1
2294. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=12#iii.xx-p55.1
2295. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=13#iii.x-p31.2
2296. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=3&scrV=5#iv.v-p79.6
2297. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=3&scrV=6#iii.ii-p421.1
2298. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=3&scrV=6#iv.v-p79.7
2299. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=3&scrV=6#iv.vi-p72.1
2300. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=3&scrV=10#iv.i-p251.2
2301. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=3&scrV=10#iv.x-p30.3
2302. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=3&scrV=20#iv.xii-p79.2
2303. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=3&scrV=20#iv.xix-p122.1
2304. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=4&scrV=4#iii.iii-p396.1
2305. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=4&scrV=4#iii.iii-p360.1
2306. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=4&scrV=7#iii.iii-p99.2
2307. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=4&scrV=18#iv.xxvii-p19.1
2308. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=1&scrV=1#iv.xv-p7.4
2309. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=1&scrV=7#iv.xviii-p1.1
2310. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=1&scrV=10#iii.iv-p234.1
2311. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=1&scrV=15#iii.iv-p120.3
2312. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=1&scrV=15#iv.xix-p24.1
2313. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=1&scrV=18#iii.iii-p380.2
2314. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=1&scrV=18#iv.x-p4.5
2315. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=1&scrV=18#iv.xii-p3.1
2316. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=1&scrV=24#iv.i-p251.1
2317. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=1&scrV=24#iv.viii-p27.1
2318. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=1&scrV=24#iv.x-p4.6
2319. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=1&scrV=24#iv.x-p30.2
2320. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=2&scrV=2#iv.iv-p26.3
2321. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=2&scrV=3#iv.iv-p26.4
2322. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=2&scrV=9#iv.iv-p26.6
2323. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=2&scrV=10#iii.iii-p209.1
2324. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=2&scrV=10#iv.x-p4.7
2325. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=2&scrV=11#iii.v-p79.3
2326. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=2&scrV=11#iii.iii-p209.2
2327. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=2&scrV=13#iv.xxi-p36.1
2328. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=2&scrV=15#iii.i-p496.1
2329. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=2&scrV=16#iv.xii-p6.1
2330. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=2&scrV=16#iii.iii-p483.2
2331. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=2&scrV=19#iv.i-p180.4
2332. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=2&scrV=20#iii.iii-p188.3
2333. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=2&scrV=23#iv.xii-p6.2
2334. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=3&scrV=1#iii.vi-p185.4
2335. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=3&scrV=4#iii.i-p348.4
2336. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=3&scrV=4#iv.x-p30.1
2337. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=3&scrV=9#iii.ii-p414.4
2338. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=3&scrV=10#iii.i-p22.2
2339. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=3&scrV=10#iii.i-p32.1
2340. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=3&scrV=10#iv.iv-p148.1
2341. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=3&scrV=18#iv.x-p85.1
2342. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=4&scrV=14#iv.v-p4.1
2343. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=100&scrV=0#iii.i-p22.3
2344. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=1&scrV=10#iv.xiv-p3.2
2345. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=4&scrV=6#iv.xix-p118.2
2346. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=4&scrV=9#iv.xix-p116.2
2347. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=4&scrV=10#iv.xiv-p36.1
2348. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=4&scrV=13#iii.v-p102.5
2349. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=4&scrV=13#iv.xiv-p3.3
2350. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=4&scrV=13#iii.iii-p393.1
2351. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=4&scrV=13#iii.i-p284.1
2352. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=4&scrV=13#iii.x-p97.1
2353. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=4&scrV=13#iii.x-p104.1
2354. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=4&scrV=13#iv.i-p83.1
2355. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=4&scrV=13#iv.i-p182.1
2356. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=4&scrV=13#iv.i-p288.1
2357. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=4&scrV=13#iv.vi-p92.1
2358. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=4&scrV=13#iv.vii-p111.2
2359. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=4&scrV=13#iv.vii-p114.1
2360. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=4&scrV=13#iv.x-p4.3
2361. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=4&scrV=13#iv.xiv-p3.7
2362. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=4&scrV=14#iv.i-p211.3
2363. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=4&scrV=14#iv.iv-p110.1
2364. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=4&scrV=16#iii.i-p114.2
2365. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=4&scrV=16#iv.iii-p212.1
2366. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=4&scrV=16#iv.xi-p46.3
2367. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=4&scrV=16#iv.v-p152.2
2368. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=4&scrV=16#iv.xxvii-p35.1
2369. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=4&scrV=16#iv.xxvii-p35.3
2370. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=4&scrV=17#iii.i-p114.3
2371. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=4&scrV=17#iii.xii-p9.5
2372. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=4&scrV=17#iv.v-p78.4
2373. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=4&scrV=17#iv.xi-p47.2
2374. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=5&scrV=3#iv.vii-p22.4
2375. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=5&scrV=23#iii.i-p22.1
2376. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=5&scrV=23#iii.i-p42.1
2377. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=12&scrV=0#iv.xiv-p3.4
2378. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Thess&scrCh=1&scrV=5#iii.xxiii-p127.1
2379. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Thess&scrCh=1&scrV=6#iii.ii-p334.1
2380. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Thess&scrCh=1&scrV=7#iii.i-p105.2
2381. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Thess&scrCh=1&scrV=7#iii.i-p141.1
2382. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Thess&scrCh=1&scrV=9#iv.vii-p22.5
2383. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Thess&scrCh=1&scrV=9#iv.x-p28.3
2384. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Thess&scrCh=2&scrV=0#iii.i-p131.2
2385. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Thess&scrCh=2&scrV=0#iii.xxiii-p115.2
2386. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Thess&scrCh=2&scrV=0#iii.xxiii-p136.1
2387. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Thess&scrCh=2&scrV=0#iv.xxvii-p20.2
2388. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Thess&scrCh=2&scrV=1#iii.xxvii-p203.2
2389. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Thess&scrCh=2&scrV=1#iv.xiv-p3.5
2390. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Thess&scrCh=2&scrV=2#iv.xiv-p3.6
2391. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Thess&scrCh=2&scrV=3#iv.i-p289.2
2392. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Thess&scrCh=2&scrV=3#iv.v-p118.1
2393. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Thess&scrCh=2&scrV=4#iii.i-p68.2
2394. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Thess&scrCh=2&scrV=4#iii.xxvi-p174.4
2395. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Thess&scrCh=2&scrV=4#iv.iii-p237.2
2396. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Thess&scrCh=2&scrV=4#iv.xxvii-p43.5
2397. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Thess&scrCh=2&scrV=4#iv.xxvii-p141.4
2398. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Thess&scrCh=2&scrV=8#iii.xxiii-p85.1
2399. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Thess&scrCh=2&scrV=8#iii.xxiii-p90.1
2400. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Thess&scrCh=2&scrV=8#iii.xxvii-p84.1
2401. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Thess&scrCh=2&scrV=8#iii.xxvii-p207.3
2402. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Thess&scrCh=2&scrV=9#iii.ii-p93.1
2403. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Thess&scrCh=2&scrV=9#iv.v-p74.1
2404. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Thess&scrCh=2&scrV=11#iii.v-p256.11
2405. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Thess&scrCh=2&scrV=11#iii.xxvi-p99.2
2406. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Thess&scrCh=2&scrV=11#iii.xxvi-p111.1
2407. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Thess&scrCh=2&scrV=12#iii.v-p256.12
2408. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Thess&scrCh=2&scrV=12#iii.xxvi-p99.3
2409. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Thess&scrCh=2&scrV=12#iii.xxvi-p111.2
2410. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Thess&scrCh=3&scrV=4#iv.i-p254.5
2411. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Thess&scrCh=3&scrV=8#iv.i-p254.6
2412. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Thess&scrCh=3&scrV=17#iv.ix-p64.1
2413. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=1&scrV=3#iv.xv-p5.1
2414. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=1&scrV=7#iv.xv-p2.1
2415. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=1&scrV=7#iv.xv-p2.3
2416. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=1&scrV=15#iii.ii-p421.2
2417. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=1&scrV=20#iv.vii-p22.3
2418. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=2&scrV=0#iv.v-p194.2
2419. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=2&scrV=8#iii.ii-p671.2
2420. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=2&scrV=14#iii.i-p66.5
2421. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=2&scrV=24#iii.iii-p207.1
2422. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=3&scrV=2#iv.xix-p116.7
2423. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=3&scrV=6#iii.i-p68.1
2424. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=4&scrV=1#iv.i-p177.9
2425. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=4&scrV=2#iv.xii-p58.2
2426. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=4&scrV=3#iv.xii-p58.3
2427. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=4&scrV=4#iv.xvii-p11.1
2428. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=4&scrV=5#iv.vii-p39.2
2429. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=4&scrV=8#iii.i-p474.1
2430. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=4&scrV=10#iv.vii-p111.1
2431. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=4&scrV=12#iv.xv-p8.2
2432. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=5&scrV=23#iv.xv-p8.3
2433. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=6&scrV=5#iv.xv-p2.4
2434. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=6&scrV=9#iv.vii-p22.6
2435. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=1&scrV=5#iv.xv-p8.4
2436. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=1&scrV=7#iv.xv-p8.5
2437. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=1&scrV=7#iv.xxvii-p8.13
2438. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=1&scrV=8#iv.xxvii-p8.14
2439. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=1&scrV=12#iv.x-p8.1
2440. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=1&scrV=16#iv.xv-p5.3
2441. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=2&scrV=4#iii.iii-p314.6
2442. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=2&scrV=9#iv.xv-p5.2
2443. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=2&scrV=17#iv.i-p177.10
2444. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=2&scrV=17#iv.xv-p2.6
2445. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=2&scrV=18#iv.i-p177.11
2446. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=2&scrV=19#iv.x-p8.6
2447. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=2&scrV=20#iv.viii-p44.3
2448. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=2&scrV=21#iv.viii-p44.4
2449. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=2&scrV=21#iv.viii-p44.12
2450. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=3&scrV=0#iii.i-p131.3
2451. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=3&scrV=0#iv.i-p287.2
2452. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=3&scrV=6#iv.xv-p2.7
2453. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=3&scrV=8#iii.ii-p107.1
2454. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=3&scrV=10#iv.xv-p8.6
2455. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=3&scrV=16#iii.xxii-p65.1
2456. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=3&scrV=16#iv.xvi-p33.1
2457. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=3&scrV=16#iv.xxii-p16.1
2458. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=4&scrV=3#iv.i-p177.12
2459. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=4&scrV=4#iv.i-p177.13
2460. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=4&scrV=6#iv.xv-p5.5
2461. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=4&scrV=10#iv.xvii-p5.5
2462. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=4&scrV=11#iv.v-p134.2
2463. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=4&scrV=21#iv.xv-p5.4
2464. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Titus&scrCh=1&scrV=2#iii.iv-p229.4
2465. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Titus&scrCh=1&scrV=5#iv.xv-p39.1
2466. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Titus&scrCh=1&scrV=8#iv.xix-p116.6
2467. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Titus&scrCh=1&scrV=10#iv.xv-p2.2
2468. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Titus&scrCh=1&scrV=11#iv.xv-p2.5
2469. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Titus&scrCh=1&scrV=11#iv.xv-p63.1
2470. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Titus&scrCh=1&scrV=16#iv.xv-p2.8
2471. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Titus&scrCh=3&scrV=5#iii.ii-p679.4
2472. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Phlm&scrCh=1&scrV=1#iv.xv-p7.5
2473. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Phlm&scrCh=1&scrV=22#iv.xvii-p3.2
2474. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=1&scrV=3#iv.xii-p24.2
2475. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=1&scrV=8#iii.x-p41.1
2476. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=1&scrV=9#iii.ii-p656.3
2477. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=1&scrV=13#iii.xix-p284.4
2478. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=1&scrV=14#iii.i-p374.2
2479. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=2&scrV=5#iii.xix-p77.1
2480. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=2&scrV=5#iii.xix-p94.2
2481. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=2&scrV=10#iii.vi-p171.1
2482. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=2&scrV=11#iii.vi-p171.2
2483. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=2&scrV=11#iv.i-p364.2
2484. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=2&scrV=11#iv.x-p30.4
2485. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=2&scrV=12#iv.i-p364.3
2486. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=2&scrV=13#iii.x-p185.2
2487. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=2&scrV=14#iii.i-p77.1
2488. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=2&scrV=14#iii.iii-p272.1
2489. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=2&scrV=15#iii.i-p77.2
2490. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=2&scrV=15#iii.iii-p272.2
2491. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=3&scrV=12#iii.iv-p134.4
2492. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=3&scrV=17#iii.iv-p164.2
2493. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=4&scrV=3#iii.iv-p134.5
2494. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=4&scrV=7#iii.xix-p4.2
2495. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=4&scrV=12#iii.i-p42.2
2496. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=4&scrV=12#iv.xxvii-p8.28
2497. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=4&scrV=16#iii.ii-p520.2
2498. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=6&scrV=13#iii.i-p317.3
2499. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=6&scrV=14#iii.i-p317.4
2500. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=7&scrV=0#iii.i-p223.4
2501. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=7&scrV=0#iii.i-p223.5
2502. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=7&scrV=0#iii.xxxviii-p42.1
2503. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=7&scrV=6#iii.i-p222.1
2504. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=7&scrV=7#iv.iii-p35.5
2505. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=7&scrV=11#iii.ii-p630.1
2506. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=7&scrV=18#iii.vi-p172.6
2507. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=7&scrV=19#iii.vi-p172.7
2508. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=7&scrV=23#iii.iv-p199.2
2509. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=7&scrV=23#iv.xix-p62.8
2510. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=7&scrV=25#iii.ii-p654.1
2511. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=7&scrV=25#iii.vi-p184.1
2512. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=7&scrV=26#iii.ii-p651.1
2513. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=8&scrV=3#iii.ii-p653.5
2514. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=9&scrV=4#iii.ii-p282.1
2515. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=9&scrV=4#iii.v-p284.2
2516. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=9&scrV=4#iii.xi-p114.1
2517. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=9&scrV=5#iv.iii-p214.4
2518. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=9&scrV=7#iii.iii-p267.1
2519. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=9&scrV=12#iii.ii-p653.6
2520. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=9&scrV=15#iii.vi-p248.1
2521. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=9&scrV=22#iii.i-p101.1
2522. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=9&scrV=22#iii.iii-p17.1
2523. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=9&scrV=22#iv.i-p323.2
2524. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=9&scrV=24#iii.ii-p654.2
2525. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=9&scrV=25#iii.ii-p673.2
2526. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=9&scrV=28#iii.iii-p433.2
2527. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=10&scrV=0#iii.iv-p362.1
2528. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=10&scrV=1#iv.xii-p58.4
2529. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=10&scrV=3#iv.xiv-p35.1
2530. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=10&scrV=4#iii.iii-p13.1
2531. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=10&scrV=4#iii.iii-p47.1
2532. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=10&scrV=4#iii.xxvi-p248.2
2533. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=10&scrV=5#iii.xix-p201.1
2534. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=10&scrV=5#iii.iii-p67.3
2535. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=10&scrV=7#iv.xiv-p35.2
2536. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=10&scrV=10#iii.ii-p653.7
2537. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=10&scrV=12#iii.xix-p284.7
2538. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=10&scrV=13#iii.xix-p284.8
2539. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=10&scrV=13#iv.xxvii-p35.2
2540. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=10&scrV=16#iii.ii-p467.2
2541. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=10&scrV=19#iii.ii-p653.4
2542. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=10&scrV=28#iii.v-p141.1
2543. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=10&scrV=32#iv.v-p72.1
2544. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=10&scrV=37#iii.xxxv-p5.1
2545. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=10&scrV=38#iii.xxxv-p5.2
2546. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=11&scrV=4#iii.i-p100.1
2547. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=11&scrV=4#iii.i-p117.1
2548. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=11&scrV=5#iii.i-p114.1
2549. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=11&scrV=5#iii.xii-p9.3
2550. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=11&scrV=8#iii.i-p230.2
2551. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=11&scrV=11#iii.i-p101.7
2552. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=11&scrV=17#iii.i-p314.1
2553. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=11&scrV=22#iii.i-p525.1
2554. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=11&scrV=23#iii.ii-p14.1
2555. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=11&scrV=23#iii.ii-p21.2
2556. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=11&scrV=30#iii.vi-p97.1
2557. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=11&scrV=31#iii.vi-p37.1
2558. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=11&scrV=32#iii.vii-p212.2
2559. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=12&scrV=5#iii.xx-p60.1
2560. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=12&scrV=6#iii.xx-p60.2
2561. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=12&scrV=15#iii.i-p371.1
2562. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=12&scrV=22#iii.x-p28.6
2563. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=12&scrV=22#iv.xxvii-p139.2
2564. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=12&scrV=23#iv.xxvii-p139.3
2565. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=12&scrV=29#iv.xxvii-p8.15
2566. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=13&scrV=2#iii.i-p282.1
2567. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=13&scrV=8#iii.iv-p229.5
2568. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=13&scrV=10#iii.iii-p120.1
2569. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=13&scrV=12#iv.iv-p162.10
2570. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=13&scrV=13#iv.viii-p44.11
2571. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=13&scrV=20#iii.xix-p146.2
2572. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=13&scrV=20#iv.iv-p70.1
2573. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=13#iii.x-p197.2
2574. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=13#iii.x-p212.1
2575. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=17#iii.iv-p229.6
2576. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=18#iii.iii-p380.3
2577. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=2&scrV=10#iii.vi-p102.1
2578. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=2&scrV=10#iii.vi-p115.1
2579. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=2&scrV=21#iii.i-p318.1
2580. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=2&scrV=24#iv.vi-p39.1
2581. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=2&scrV=24#iv.vi-p51.1
2582. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=2&scrV=25#iii.vi-p37.2
2583. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=3&scrV=1#iii.iii-p119.2
2584. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=4&scrV=8#iv.xv-p34.2
2585. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=5&scrV=0#iii.xxxviii-p38.3
2586. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=5&scrV=17#iii.xi-p233.1
2587. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=1#iv.i-p209.6
2588. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=3#iii.iv-p231.5
2589. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=10#iii.v-p256.13
2590. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=12#iii.xviii-p25.4
2591. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=13#iii.iii-p101.3
2592. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=18#iv.i-p179.4
2593. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=18#iii.i-p101.8
2594. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=19#iii.ii-p156.2
2595. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=22#iv.xix-p116.3
2596. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=24#iii.iii-p63.3
2597. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=4#iv.i-p257.10
2598. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=4#iv.i-p209.1
2599. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=4#iv.i-p217.1
2600. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=5#iv.i-p257.11
2601. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=8#iv.i-p257.7
2602. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=9#iv.x-p30.6
2603. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=13#iv.i-p274.2
2604. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=17#iii.ix-p114.1
2605. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=18#iv.x-p85.2
2606. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=21#iv.i-p251.3
2607. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=10#iii.iii-p249.2
2608. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=18#iii.i-p496.2
2609. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=4&scrV=9#iv.xix-p116.8
2610. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=5&scrV=0#iv.iii-p184.1
2611. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=5&scrV=0#iv.iii-p184.1
2612. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=5&scrV=1#iv.i-p209.7
2613. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=5&scrV=4#iii.xix-p146.3
2614. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=5&scrV=4#iv.iv-p70.2
2615. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=5&scrV=5#iv.iii-p195.1
2616. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=0#iii.iv-p53.1
2617. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=0#iv.xxiv-p8.5
2618. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=2#iii.ii-p727.1
2619. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=16#iii.ii-p328.2
2620. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=16#iv.i-p211.1
2621. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=16#iv.xxvii-p8.11
2622. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=21#iv.xxiv-p8.3
2623. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=0#iv.i-p208.1
2624. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=4#iv.i-p132.1
2625. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=4#iv.xxi-p36.3
2626. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=5#iii.iv-p253.1
2627. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=5#iv.xxi-p36.4
2628. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=6#iii.i-p282.2
2629. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=16#iii.iv-p220.1
2630. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=0#iii.i-p131.4
2631. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=10#iii.i-p141.2
2632. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=1&scrV=0#iv.iv-p93.2
2633. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=1&scrV=3#iii.ii-p526.1
2634. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=1&scrV=3#iii.iii-p101.1
2635. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=1&scrV=3#iii.iii-p110.1
2636. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=1&scrV=5#iii.ii-p529.3
2637. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=1&scrV=7#iii.i-p101.9
2638. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=1&scrV=7#iii.ii-p634.1
2639. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=1&scrV=8#iii.ii-p605.1
2640. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=1&scrV=8#iv.v-p46.1
2641. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=1&scrV=9#iii.i-p209.1
2642. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=1&scrV=9#iii.iv-p186.3
2643. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=1&scrV=9#iii.iii-p101.2
2644. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=1&scrV=9#iv.iv-p105.1
2645. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=2&scrV=1#iii.ii-p521.2
2646. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=2&scrV=1#iii.ii-p604.1
2647. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=2&scrV=1#iii.ii-p654.3
2648. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=2&scrV=1#iii.ii-p663.1
2649. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=2&scrV=1#iii.ii-p680.4
2650. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=2&scrV=1#iii.vi-p174.2
2651. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=2&scrV=2#iii.ii-p521.3
2652. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=2&scrV=2#iii.ii-p604.2
2653. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=2&scrV=2#iii.ii-p654.4
2654. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=2&scrV=2#iii.ii-p663.2
2655. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=2&scrV=2#iv.i-p324.5
2656. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=2&scrV=16#iii.i-p70.1
2657. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=2&scrV=16#iv.iii-p54.2
2658. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=2&scrV=16#iv.i-p66.1
2659. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=2&scrV=20#iv.iii-p142.3
2660. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=3&scrV=1#iv.xii-p79.3
2661. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=3&scrV=8#iii.i-p66.4
2662. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=3&scrV=8#iii.i-p75.6
2663. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=3&scrV=12#iii.i-p102.1
2664. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=3&scrV=14#iv.xix-p116.4
2665. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=3&scrV=15#iv.i-p103.1
2666. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=3&scrV=15#iii.ii-p404.4
2667. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=4&scrV=0#iv.xxvii-p141.5
2668. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=4&scrV=1#iii.v-p98.3
2669. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=5&scrV=4#iii.vi-p269.1
2670. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=5&scrV=4#iii.vi-p285.1
2671. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=5&scrV=9#iii.iv-p231.6
2672. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=5&scrV=16#iv.v-p46.5
2673. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=5&scrV=19#iii.iii-p272.3
2674. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=9&scrV=0#iv.iv-p93.2
2675. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=2John&scrCh=1&scrV=9#iv.viii-p44.5
2676. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Jude&scrCh=1&scrV=6#iii.i-p132.2
2677. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Jude&scrCh=1&scrV=6#iv.xxi-p36.5
2678. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Jude&scrCh=1&scrV=7#iv.xxi-p36.5
2679. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Jude&scrCh=1&scrV=9#iii.v-p314.1
2680. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Jude&scrCh=1&scrV=9#iii.xxvii-p181.2
2681. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Jude&scrCh=1&scrV=11#iii.iv-p220.2
2682. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Jude&scrCh=1&scrV=11#iii.iv-p253.2
2683. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Jude&scrCh=1&scrV=11#iv.xxvii-p23.1
2684. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Jude&scrCh=1&scrV=14#iii.i-p114.4
2685. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Jude&scrCh=1&scrV=20#iii.vi-p137.1
2686. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=1&scrV=0#iii.ii-p529.2
2687. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=1&scrV=0#iii.xxvi-p11.6
2688. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=1&scrV=0#iv.xxiii-p3.1
2689. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=1&scrV=5#iii.i-p101.10
2690. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=1&scrV=5#iv.x-p30.7
2691. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=1&scrV=6#iii.i-p101.11
2692. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=1&scrV=12#iv.xxvii-p8.26
2693. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=1&scrV=12#iii.xxvii-p60.4
2694. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=1&scrV=12#iii.xxvii-p179.1
2695. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=1&scrV=13#iii.xxii-p42.6
2696. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=1&scrV=18#iv.i-p209.10
2697. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=1&scrV=20#iv.xxvii-p8.1
2698. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=1&scrV=20#iv.xxvii-p8.25
2699. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=2&scrV=0#iii.iii-p119.4
2700. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=2&scrV=11#iv.x-p28.5
2701. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=2&scrV=14#iii.iv-p253.3
2702. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=2&scrV=29#iii.v-p256.14
2703. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=3&scrV=5#iii.xxvi-p97.2
2704. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=3&scrV=7#iv.xxvii-p8.32
2705. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=3&scrV=10#iii.i-p284.2
2706. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=3&scrV=10#iv.xxvii-p43.1
2707. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=3&scrV=18#iii.v-p256.15
2708. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=3&scrV=20#iv.ii-p86.2
2709. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=3&scrV=20#iii.xxii-p42.1
2710. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=3&scrV=20#iv.xxvii-p8.33
2711. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=3&scrV=21#iv.xxvii-p141.8
2712. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=4&scrV=0#iii.xxvi-p34.1
2713. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=5&scrV=3#iii.xix-p147.3
2714. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=5&scrV=8#iii.ii-p671.3
2715. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=5&scrV=9#iii.xxvi-p44.1
2716. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=7&scrV=3#iii.xxvi-p74.5
2717. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=7&scrV=3#iv.vi-p90.4
2718. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=7&scrV=9#iv.xxvii-p97.5
2719. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=7&scrV=14#iii.xxvii-p29.3
2720. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=7&scrV=15#iii.ii-p205.4
2721. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=7&scrV=16#iii.ii-p205.5
2722. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=8&scrV=0#iii.ii-p673.3
2723. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=8&scrV=0#iii.xiii-p23.1
2724. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=8&scrV=3#iii.ii-p671.4
2725. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=8&scrV=4#iii.ii-p671.5
2726. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=10&scrV=0#iii.xxvi-p17.3
2727. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=10&scrV=1#iii.xxvii-p212.1
2728. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=11&scrV=0#iii.xxvii-p212.2
2729. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=11&scrV=0#iii.xxxix-p9.4
2730. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=11&scrV=0#iv.xxvi-p5.2
2731. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=11&scrV=2#iii.xxvii-p63.2
2732. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=11&scrV=3#iii.xxvii-p63.3
2733. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=12&scrV=0#iii.xxvii-p209.2
2734. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=12&scrV=6#iii.xxvii-p63.4
2735. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=12&scrV=7#iii.xxvii-p181.3
2736. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=12&scrV=9#iii.i-p66.1
2737. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=12&scrV=10#iii.iii-p272.4
2738. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=12&scrV=12#iv.xxvii-p43.6
2739. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=12&scrV=13#iv.xxvii-p43.7
2740. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=12&scrV=14#iii.ii-p323.3
2741. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=13&scrV=0#iii.xiv-p93.5
2742. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=13&scrV=0#iii.xxvii-p63.1
2743. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=13&scrV=0#iii.xxvii-p217.1
2744. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=13&scrV=4#iv.i-p289.3
2745. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=13&scrV=5#iii.xxvii-p121.1
2746. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=13&scrV=6#iii.xxvi-p174.5
2747. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=13&scrV=8#iv.viii-p44.2
2748. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=13&scrV=11#iii.xxvii-p28.4
2749. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=13&scrV=11#iii.xxvii-p121.2
2750. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=13&scrV=11#iii.xxvii-p203.3
2751. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=13&scrV=11#iii.xxvii-p205.1
2752. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=14&scrV=0#iii.i-p141.3
2753. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=14&scrV=2#iv.xxvii-p8.20
2754. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=14&scrV=3#iv.xxvii-p8.21
2755. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=14&scrV=6#iv.i-p288.4
2756. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=14&scrV=7#iv.i-p288.5
2757. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=15&scrV=2#iii.ii-p231.1
2758. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=15&scrV=3#iii.ii-p231.2
2759. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=16&scrV=13#iv.xxvii-p95.1
2760. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=17&scrV=0#iii.xxxviii-p38.6
2761. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=17&scrV=15#iii.xxvii-p55.2
2762. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=18&scrV=0#iii.xxxviii-p38.1
2763. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=18&scrV=0#iii.xxxviii-p38.5
2764. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=18&scrV=0#iv.xxvii-p126.2
2765. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=18&scrV=2#iv.i-p177.3
2766. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=19&scrV=0#iii.xxvii-p60.3
2767. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=19&scrV=6#iv.xxvii-p8.22
2768. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=19&scrV=8#iv.xxvii-p8.6
2769. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=19&scrV=11#iv.iii-p237.1
2770. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=19&scrV=17#iii.ii-p228.2
2771. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=19&scrV=18#iii.ii-p228.3
2772. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=19&scrV=20#iv.xxvii-p145.4
2773. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=20&scrV=0#iv.i-p126.1
2774. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=20&scrV=0#iv.viii-p31.1
2775. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=20&scrV=0#iv.xxvii-p145.1
2776. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=20&scrV=1#iii.i-p77.3
2777. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=20&scrV=1#iv.vii-p111.13
2778. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=20&scrV=4#iii.i-p348.5
2779. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=20&scrV=4#iv.xi-p46.4
2780. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=20&scrV=5#iv.iii-p186.4
2781. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=20&scrV=6#iv.x-p28.6
2782. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=20&scrV=7#iii.xxvi-p219.1
2783. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=20&scrV=7#iii.i-p77.4
2784. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=20&scrV=8#iii.xxvi-p219.2
2785. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=20&scrV=10#iv.xii-p28.4
2786. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=20&scrV=10#iv.xxvii-p145.5
2787. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=20&scrV=11#iv.i-p291.1
2788. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=20&scrV=14#iv.x-p28.7
2789. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=21&scrV=2#iv.x-p32.2
2790. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=21&scrV=3#iv.x-p32.3
2791. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=21&scrV=8#iv.x-p28.8
2792. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=21&scrV=9#iv.xxvii-p139.1
2793. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=22&scrV=1#iii.i-p80.2
2794. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=22&scrV=5#iv.xxvii-p8.12
2795. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=22&scrV=12#iv.xxiv-p8.7
2796. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=22&scrV=17#iii.ix-p112.2
2797. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=22&scrV=18#iv.xxvi-p2.1
2798. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=22&scrV=19#iv.iv-p131.3
2799. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=22&scrV=19#iv.xxvi-p2.2
2800. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=22&scrV=20#iv.iv-p110.4
2801. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=100&scrV=20#iv.vii-p111.3
2802. file:///ccel/g/gray_jm/cwc/cache/cwc.html3?scrBook=Wis&scrCh=15&scrV=0#iv.x-p67.1
