     __________________________________________________________________

           Title: The Expositor's Bible: The Book of Proverbs
      Creator(s): Horton, Robert Forman (1855-1934)
                  Nicoll, William Robertson, Sir (1851-1923) (Editor)
     Print Basis: London: Hodder and Stoughton, 1890.
   CCEL Subjects: All;
     __________________________________________________________________

   THE EXPOSITOR'S BIBLE.

   EDITED BY THE REV.

   W ROBERTSON NICOLL, M.A., LL.D.,

   Editor of "The Expositor."

    THE BOOK OF PROVERBS.

   BY

    R. F. HORTON, M.A.

   London:

   HODDER AND STOUGHTON,

   27, PATERNOSTER ROW.

   MDCCCXC

   THE

   BOOK OF PROVERBS.

   BY

   R. F. HORTON, M.A.,

   Hampstead;

   LATE FELLOW OF NEW COLLEGE, OXFORD.

   London:

   HODDER AND STOUGHTON,

   27, PATERNOSTER ROW.

   MDCCCXCI.
     __________________________________________________________________


   "Shrewd remarks

   Of moral prudence, clothed in images

   Lively and beautiful."

   Wordsworth.

INTRODUCTION.

   In attempting to make the book of Proverbs a subject of Expository
   Lectures and practical sermons it has been necessary to treat the book
   as a uniform composition, following, chapter by chapter, the order
   which the compiler has adopted, and bringing the scattered sentences
   together under subjects which are suggested by certain more striking
   points in the successive chapters. By this method the great bulk of the
   matter contained in the book is brought under review, either in the way
   of exposition or in the way of quotation and allusion, though even in
   this method many smaller sayings slip through the expositor's meshes.
   But the grave defect of the method which is thus employed is that it
   completely obliterates those interesting marks, discernible on the very
   surface of the book, of the origin and the compilation of the separate
   parts. This defect the reader can best supply by turning to Professor
   Cheyne's scholarly work "Job and Solomon; or, The Wisdom of the Old
   Testament;" but for those who have not time or opportunity to refer to
   any book besides the one which is in their hands, a brief Introduction
   to the following Lectures may not be unwelcome.

   The Jewish tradition ascribed the Proverbs, or Sayings of the Wise, to
   Solomon, just as it ascribed the Psalms, or inspired lyrics of the
   poets, to King David, and we may add, just as it ascribed all the
   gradual accretions and developments of the Law to Moses. But even a
   very uncritical reader will observe that the book of Proverbs as we
   have it is not the work of a single hand; and a critical inquiry into
   the language and style of the several parts, and also into the social
   and political conditions which are implied by them, has led scholars to
   the conclusion that, at the most, a certain number of Solomon's wise
   sayings are included in the collection, but that he did not in any
   sense compose the book. In fact, the statement in 1 Kings iv. 32, "He
   spake three thousand proverbs," implies that his utterances were
   recorded by others, and not written down by himself, and the heading to
   chap. xxv. of our book suggests that, the "men of Hezekiah" collected
   the reputed sayings of Solomon from several sources, one of those
   sources being the collection contained in the previous chapters. [1]

   The opening words, then, of the book--"The Proverbs of Solomon the son
   of David, King of Israel"--are not to be taken as an assertion that all
   which follows flowed from Solomon's pen, but rather as a general
   description and key-note of the subject of the treatise. It is as if
   the compiler wished to say, 'This is a compendium of those wise sayings
   current among us, the model and type of which may be found in the
   proverbs attributed to the wisest of men, King Solomon.' That this is
   the way in which we must understand the title becomes plain when we
   find contained in the book a passage described as "the sayings of the
   wise" (xxiv. 23-34), a chapter distinctly entitled "The Words of Agur,"
   and another paragraph headed "The Words of King Lemuel."

   Leaving aside the traditional view of the authorship, which the book
   itself shows to be misleading, the contents may be briefly delineated
   and characterized.

   The main body of Proverbs is the collection which begins at chap. x.,
   "The Proverbs of Solomon," and ends at xxii. 16. This collection has
   certain distinct features which mark it off from all that precedes and
   from all that follows. It is, strictly speaking, a collection of
   proverbs, that is of brief, pointed sayings,--sometimes containing a
   similitude, but more generally consisting of a single antithetical
   moral sentiment,--such as spring into existence and pass current in
   every society of men. All these proverbs are identical in form: each is
   expressed in a distich; the apparent exception in xix. 7 is to be
   explained by the obvious fact that the third clause is the mutilated
   fragment of another proverb, which in the LXX. appears complete: ho
   polla kakopoion telesiourgei kakian, hos de erethizei logous ou
   sothesetai. As the form is the same in all, so the general drift of
   their teaching is quite uniform; the morality inculcated is of no very
   lofty type; the motives for right conduct are mainly prudential; there
   is no sense of mystery or wonder, no tendency to speculation or doubt;
   "Be good, and you will prosper; be wicked, and you will suffer," is the
   sum of the whole. A few scattered precepts occur which seem to touch a
   higher level and to breathe a more spiritual air; and it is possible,
   as has been suggested, that these were added by the author of chaps.
   i.-ix., when he revised and published the compilation. Such a sentiment
   as xiv. 34 well accords with the utterance of Wisdom in viii. 15, 16.
   And the series of proverbs which are grouped on the principle of their
   all containing the name of Jahveh, xv. 33-xvi. 7 (cf. xvi. 20, 33)
   seems to be closely linked with the opening chapters of the book.
   Assuming the proverbs of this collection to spring from the same
   period, and to reflect the social conditions which then prevailed, we
   should say that it points to a time of comparative simplicity and
   purity, when the main industry was that of tilling the soil, when the
   sayings of wise people were valued by an unsophisticated community,
   when the family life was pure, the wife honoured (xii. 4; xviii. 22;
   xix. 14), and parental authority maintained, and when the king was
   still worthy of respect, the immediate and obedient instrument of the
   Divine government (xxi. 1). The whole collection seems to date from the
   earlier and happier times of the monarchy.

   To this collection is added an appendix (xxii. 17-xxiv. 22), which
   opens with an exhortation addressed by the teacher to his pupil. The
   literary form of this appendix falls far behind the style of the main
   collection. The terse and compact distich occurs rarely; most of the
   sayings are more cumbrous and elaborate, and in one case there is a
   brief didactic poem carried through several verses (xxiii. 29-35). As
   the style of composition shows a decline, so the general conditions
   which form the background of the sayings are less happy. They seem to
   indicate a time of growing luxury; gluttony and drunkenness are the
   subjects of strong invective. It appears that the poor are oppressed by
   the rich (xxii. 22), and justice is not rightly administered, so that
   the innocent are carried away into confinement (xxiv. 11, 12). There is
   political unrest, too, and the young have to be cautioned against the
   revolutionary or anarchical spirit (xxiv. 21). We are evidently brought
   down to a later period in Israel's melancholy history.

   Another brief appendix follows (xxiv. 23-34), in which the distich form
   almost entirely disappears; it is remarkable as containing a little
   picture (30-34), which, like the much longer passage in vii. 6-27, is
   presented as the personal observation of the writer.

   We now pass on to an entirely new collection, ch. xxv.-xxix., which was
   made, we are told, in the literary circle at the court of Hezekiah, two
   hundred and fifty years or thereabouts after the time of Solomon. In
   this collection there is no uniformity of structure such as
   distinguished the proverbs of the first collection. Some distichs
   occur, but as often as not the proverb is drawn out into three, four,
   and in one case (xxv. 6, 7) five clauses; xxvii. 23-27 forms a brief
   connected exhortation, which is a considerable departure from the
   simple structure of the mashal, or proverb. The social condition
   reflected in these chapters is not very attractive; it is clear that
   the people have had experience of a bad ruler (xxix. 2); we seem to
   have hints of the many troubled experiences through which the monarchy
   of Israel passed--the divided rule, the injustice, the incapacity, the
   oppression (xxviii. 2, 3, 12, 15, 16, 28). There is one proverb which
   particularly recalls the age of Hezekiah, when the doom of the exile
   was already being proclaimed by the prophets: "As a bird that wandereth
   from her nest, so is a man that wandereth from his place" (xxvii. 8).
   And it is perhaps characteristic of that troubled time, when the
   spiritual life was to be deepened by the experience of material
   suffering and national disaster, that this collection contains a
   proverb which might be almost the key-note of the New Testament
   morality (xxv. 21, 22).

   The book closes with three quite distinct passages, which can only be
   regarded as appendices. According to one interpretation of the very
   difficult words which stand at the head of chaps. xxx. and xxxi., these
   paragraphs would come from a foreign source; it has been thought that
   the word translated "oracle" might be the name of the country mentioned
   in Gen. xxv. 14, Massa. But whether Jakeh and King Lemuel were natives
   of this shadowy land or not, it is certain that the whole tone and
   drift of these two sections are alien to the general spirit of the
   book. There is something enigmatical in their style and artificial in
   their form, which would suggest a very late period in Israel's literary
   history. And the closing passage, which describes the virtuous woman,
   is distinguished by being an alphabetical acrostic, the verses
   beginning with the successive letters of the Hebrew alphabet, a kind of
   composition which points to the dawn of Rabbinical methods in
   literature. It is impossible to say when or how these curious and
   interesting additions were made to our book, but scholars have
   generally recognized them as the product of the exile, if not the
   post-exile, period.

   Now, the two collections which have been described, with their several
   appendices, were at some favourable point in religious history,
   possibly in those happy days of Josiah when the Deuteronomic Law was
   newly promulgated to the joyful nation, brought together, and, as we
   should say now, edited, with an original introduction by an author who,
   unknown to us by name, is among the greatest and noblest of Biblical
   writers. The first nine chapters of the book, which form the
   introduction to the whole, strike a far higher note, appeal to nobler
   conceptions, and are couched in a much loftier style than the book
   itself. The writer bases his moral teaching on Divine authority rather
   than on the utilitarian basis which prevails in most of the proverbs.
   Writing in a time when the temptations to a lawless and sensual life
   were strong, appealing to the wealthier and more cultured youth of the
   nation, he proceeds in sweet and earnest discourse to woo his readers
   from the paths of vice into the Temple of Wisdom and Virtue. His method
   of contrasting the "two ways," and exhorting men to shun the one and
   choose the other, constantly reminds us of the similar appeals in the
   Book of Deuteronomy; but the touch is more graphic and more vivid; the
   gifts of the poet are employed in depicting the seven-pillared House of
   Wisdom and the deadly ways of Folly; and in the wonderful passage which
   introduces Wisdom appealing to the sons of men, on the ground of the
   part which she plays in the Creation and by the throne of God, we
   recognize the voice of a prophet--a prophet, too, who holds one of the
   highest places in the line of those who foretold the coming of our
   Lord.

   Impossible as it has been in the Lectures to bring out the history and
   structure of the book, it will greatly help the reader to bear in mind
   what has just been said; he will thus be prepared for the striking
   contrast between the glowing beauty of the introduction and the
   somewhat frigid precepts which occur so frequently among the Proverbs
   themselves; he will be able to appreciate more fully the point which is
   from time to time brought into relief, that much of the teaching
   contained in the book is crude and imperfect, of value for us only when
   it has been brought to the standard of our Lord's spirit, corrected by
   His love and wisdom, or infused with His Divine life. And especially as
   the reader approaches those strange chapters "The Sayings of Agur" and
   "The Sayings of King Lemuel" he will be glad to remind himself of the
   somewhat loose relation in which they stand to the main body of the
   work.

   In few parts of the Scripture is there more need than in this of the
   ever-present Spirit to interpret and apply the written word, to
   discriminate and assort, to arrange and to combine, the varied
   utterances of the ages. Nowhere is it more necessary to distinguish
   between the inspired speech, which comes to the mind of prophet or poet
   as a direct oracle of God, and the speech which is the product of human
   wisdom, human observation, and human common sense, and is only in that
   secondary sense inspired. In the book of Proverbs there is much which
   is recorded for us by the wisdom of God, not because it is the
   expression of God's wisdom, but distinctly because it is the expression
   of man's wisdom; and among the lessons of the book is the sense of
   limitation and incompleteness which human wisdom leaves upon the mind.

   But under the direction of the Holy Spirit, the reader may not only
   learn from the Proverbs much practical counsel for the common duties of
   life; he may have, from time to time, rare and wonderful glimpses into
   the heights and depths of God.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [1] Cf. xxv. 24 (xxi. 9), xxvi. 22 (xviii. 8), xxvii. 12 (xxii. 3),
   xxvii. 13 (xx. 16), xxvi. 13 (xxii. 13), xxvi. 15 (xix. 24), xxviii. 6
   (xix. 1), xxviii. 19 (xii. 11), xxix. 13 (xxii. 2); to which add xxvii.
   15 (xix. 13), xxvii. 21 (xvii. 3), xxix. 22 (xv. 18).
     __________________________________________________________________

I.

  THE BEGINNING OF WISDOM.

     "The fear of the Lord is the beginning of knowledge."--Prov. i. 7.


   "The fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom:

   And the knowledge of the Holy One is understanding."--Prov. ix. 10.

     (Cf. Eccles. i. 14, "To fear the Lord is the beginning of wisdom:
     and it was created with the faithful in the womb;" also Ps. cxi.
     10.)

   The book of Proverbs belongs to a group of works in the Hebrew
   literature the subject of which is Wisdom. It is probably the earliest
   of them all, and may be regarded as the stem, of which they are the
   branches. Without attempting to determine the relative ages of these
   compositions, the ordinary reader can see the points of contact between
   Proverbs and Ecclesiastes, and a little careful study reveals that the
   book of Job, though fuller and richer in every respect, belongs to the
   same order. Outside the canon of Holy Scripture we possess two works
   which avowedly owe their suggestion and inspiration to our book, viz.
   "The Wisdom of Jesus the Son of Sirach," commonly called
   Ecclesiasticus, a genuinely Hebrew product, and "The Wisdom of
   Solomon," commonly called the Book of Wisdom, of much later origin, and
   exhibiting that fusion of Hebrew religious conceptions with Greek
   speculation which prevailed in the Jewish schools of Alexandria.

   Now, the question at once occurs, What are we to understand by the
   Wisdom which gives a subject and a title to this extensive field of
   literature? and in what relation does it stand to the Law and the
   Prophets, which form the great bulk of the Old Testament Scriptures?

   Broadly speaking, the Wisdom of the Hebrews covers the whole domain of
   what we should call Science and Philosophy. It is the consistent effort
   of the human mind to know, to understand, and to explain all that
   exists. It is, to use the modern phrase, the search for truth. The
   "wise men" were not, like Moses and the Prophets, inspired legislators
   and heralds of God's immediate messages to mankind; but rather, like
   the wise men among the earlier Greeks, Thales, Solon, Anaximenes, or
   like the Sophists among the later Greeks, Socrates and his successors,
   they brought all their faculties to bear in observing the facts of the
   world and of life, and in seeking to interpret them, and then in the
   public streets or in appointed schools endeavoured to communicate their
   knowledge to the young. Nothing was too high for their inquiry: "That
   which is is far off, and exceeding deep; who can find it out?" [2] yet
   they tried to discover and to explain that which is. Nothing was too
   lowly for their attention; wisdom "reaches from one end to another
   mightily, and sweetly orders all things." [3] Their purpose finds
   expression in the words of Ecclesiastes, "I turned about, and my heart
   was set to know and to search out, and to seek wisdom and the reason of
   things." [4]

   But by Wisdom is meant not merely the search, but also the discovery;
   not merely a desire to know, but also a certain body of conceptions
   ascertained and sufficiently formulated. To the Hebrew mind it would
   have seemed meaningless to assert that Agnosticism was wisdom. It was
   saved from this paradoxical conclusion by its firmly rooted faith in
   God. Mystery might hang over the details, but one thing was plain: the
   whole universe was an intelligent plan of God; the mind might be
   baffled in understanding His ways, but that all existence is of His
   choosing and His ordering was taken as the axiom with which all thought
   must start. Thus there is a unity in the Hebrew Wisdom; the unity is
   found in the thought of the Creator; all the facts of the physical
   world, all the problems of human life, are referred to His mind;
   objective Wisdom is God's Being, which includes in its circle
   everything; and subjective wisdom, wisdom in the human mind, consists
   in becoming acquainted with His Being and all that is contained in it,
   and meanwhile in constantly admitting that He is, and yielding to Him
   the rightful place in our thought.

   But while Wisdom embraces in her wide survey all things in heaven and
   in earth, there is one part of the vast field which makes a special
   demand upon human interest. The proper study of mankind is man. Very
   naturally the earliest subject to occupy human thought was human life,
   human conduct, human society. Or, to say the same thing in the language
   of this book, while Wisdom was occupied with the whole creation, she
   specially rejoiced in the habitable earth, and her delight was with the
   sons of men.

   Theoretically embracing all subjects of human knowledge and reflection,
   the Wisdom of the Hebrew literature practically touches but little on
   what we should now call Science, and even where attention was turned to
   the facts and laws of the material world, it was mainly in order to
   borrow similitudes or illustrations for moral and religious purposes.
   King Solomon "spake of trees, from the cedar that is in Lebanon even
   unto the hyssop that springeth out of the wall: he spake also of
   beasts, and of fowl, and of creeping things, and of fishes." [5] But
   the Proverbs which have actually come down to us under his name refer
   almost exclusively to principles of conduct or observation of life, and
   seldom remind us of the earth, the sea, and the sky, except as the
   dwelling-place of men, the house covered with paintings for his delight
   or filled with imagery for his instruction.

   But there is a further distinction to be drawn, and in attempting to
   make it plain we may determine the place of the Proverbs in the general
   scheme of the inspired writings. Human life is a sufficiently large
   theme; it includes not only social and political questions, but the
   searchings and speculations of philosophy, the truths and revelations
   of religion. From one point of view, therefore, wisdom may be said to
   embrace the Law and the Prophets, and in a beautiful passage of
   Ecclesiasticus [6] the whole covenant of Jehovah with Israel is treated
   as an emanation of wisdom from the mouth of the Most High. Wisdom was
   the inspiration of those who shaped the law and built the Holy House,
   of those who ministered in the courts of the Temple, and of those who
   were moved by the Holy One to chide the faults of the people, to call
   them to repentance, to denounce the doom of their sin, and proclaim the
   glad promise of deliverance. Again, from this large point of view
   Wisdom could be regarded as the Divine Philosophy, the system of
   thought and the body of beliefs which would furnish the explanation of
   life, and would root all the decisions of ethics in eternal principles
   of truth. And this function of Wisdom is presented with singular beauty
   and power in the eighth chapter of our book, where, as we shall see,
   the mouth of Wisdom shows that her concern with men is derived from her
   relation with the Creator and from her comprehension of His great
   architectural design in the construction of the world.

   Now, the wisdom which finds expression in the bulk of the Proverbs must
   be clearly distinguished from wisdom in this exalted sense. It is not
   the wisdom of the Law and the Prophets; it moves in a much lower plane.
   It is not the wisdom of chap. viii., a philosophy which harmonizes
   human life with the laws of nature by constantly connecting both with
   God.

   The wisdom of the Proverbs differs from the wisdom of the Prophets in
   this, that it is derived not directly, but mediately from God. No
   special mind is directed to shape these sayings; they grow up in the
   common mind of the people, and they derive their inspiration from those
   general qualities which made the whole nation in the midst of which
   they had their birth an inspired nation, and gave to all the literature
   of the nation a peculiar and inimitable tone. The wisdom of the
   Proverbs differs, too, from the wisdom of these introductory chapters
   in much the same way; it is a difference which might be expressed by a
   familiar use of words; it is a distinction between Philosophy and
   Proverbial Philosophy, a distinction, let us say, between Divine
   Philosophy and Proverbial Philosophy.

   The Proverbs are often shrewd, often edifying, sometimes almost
   evangelical in their sharp ethical insight; but we shall constantly be
   reminded that they do not come with the overbearing authority of the
   prophetic "Thus saith the Lord." And still more shall we be reminded
   how far they lag behind the standard of life and the principles of
   conduct which are presented to us in Christ Jesus.

   What has just been said seems to be a necessary preliminary to the
   study of the Proverbs, and it is only by bearing it in mind that we
   shall be able to appreciate the difference in tone between the nine
   introductory chapters and the main body of the book; nor should we
   venture, perhaps, apart from the consideration which has been urged to
   exercise our critical sense in the study of particular sayings, and to
   insist at all points on bringing the teaching of the wise men of old to
   the standard and test of Him who is Himself made unto us Wisdom.

   But now to turn to our text. We must think of wisdom in the largest
   possible sense, as including not only ethics, but philosophy, and not
   only philosophy, but religion; yes, and as embracing in her vast survey
   the whole field of natural science, when it is said that the fear of
   the Lord is the beginning of wisdom; we must think of knowledge in its
   fullest and most liberal extent when we read that the fear of the Lord
   is the beginning of knowledge.

   In this pregnant truth we may distinguish three ideas: first, fear, or,
   as we should probably say, reverence, is the pre-requisite of all
   scientific, philosophical, or religious truth; second, no real
   knowledge or wisdom can be attained which does not start with the
   recognition of God; and then, thirdly, the expression is not only "the
   fear of God," which might refer only to the Being that is presupposed
   in any intelligent explanation of phenomena, but the "fear of the
   Lord," i.e. of Jahveh, the self-existent One, who has revealed Himself
   in a special way to men as "I am what I am;" and it is therefore hinted
   that no satisfactory philosophy of human life and history can be
   constructed which does not build upon the fact of revelation.

   We may proceed to dwell upon these three thoughts in order.

   1. Most religious people are willing to admit that "the fear of the
   Lord is a fountain of life, to depart from the snares of death." [7]
   But what is not always observed is that the same attitude is necessary
   in the intellectual sphere. And yet the truth may be illustrated in a
   quarter which to some of us may be surprising. It is a notable fact
   that Modern Science had its origin in two deeply religious minds. Bacon
   and Descartes were both stirred to their investigation of physical
   facts by their belief in the Divine Being who was behind them. To
   mention only our great English thinker, Bacon's Novum Organum is the
   most reverent of works, and no one ever realized more keenly than he
   that, as Coleridge used to say, "there is no chance of truth at the
   goal where there is not a childlike humility at the starting-point."

   It is sometimes said that this note of reverence is wanting in the
   great scientific investigators of our day. So far as this is true, it
   is probable that their conclusions will be vitiated, and we are often
   impressed by the feeling that the unmannerly self-assertion and
   overweening self-confidence of many scientific writers augur ill for
   the truth of their assertions. But, on the other hand, it must be
   remembered that the greatest men of science in our own, as in all other
   ages, are distinguished by a singular simplicity, and by a reverence
   which communicates itself to their readers. What could be more reverent
   than Darwin's way of studying the coral-insect or the earth-worm? He
   bestowed on these humble creatures of the ocean and of the earth the
   most patient and loving observation. And his success in understanding
   and explaining them was in proportion to the respect which he showed to
   them. The coral-diver has no reverence for the insect; he is bent only
   on gain, and he consequently can tell us nothing of the coral reef and
   its growth. The gardener has no reverence for the worm; he cuts it
   ruthlessly with his spade, and flings it carelessly aside; accordingly
   he is not able to tell us of its lowly ministries and of the part it
   plays in the fertilization of the soil. It was Darwin's reverence which
   proved to be the beginning of knowledge in these departments of
   investigation; and if it was only the reverence of the naturalist, the
   truth is illustrated all the better, for his knowledge of the unseen
   and the eternal dwindled away, just as his perception of beauty in
   literature and art declined, in proportion as he suffered his spirit of
   reverence towards these things to die.

   The gates of Knowledge and Wisdom are closed, and they are opened only
   to the knock of Reverence. Without reverence, it is true, men may gain
   what is called worldly knowledge and worldly wisdom; but these are far
   removed from truth, and experience often shows us how profoundly
   ignorant and how incurably blind pushing and successful people are,
   whose knowledge is all turned to delusion, and whose wisdom shifts
   round into folly, precisely because the great pre-requisite was
   wanting. The seeker after real knowledge will have little about him
   which suggests worldly success. He is modest, self-forgetful, possibly
   shy; he is absorbed in a disinterested pursuit, for he has seen afar
   the high, white star of Truth; at it he gazes, to it he aspires. Things
   which only affect him personally make but little impression on him;
   things which affect the truth move, agitate, excite him. A bright
   spirit is on ahead, beckoning to him. The colour mounts to his cheek,
   the nerves thrill, and his soul is filled with rapture, when the form
   seems to grow clearer and a step is gained in the pursuit. When a
   discovery is made he almost forgets that he is the discoverer; he will
   even allow the credit of it to pass over to another, for he would
   rather rejoice in the truth itself than allow his joy to be tinged with
   a personal consideration.

   Yes, this modest, self-forgetful, reverent mien is the first condition
   of winning Truth, who must be approached on bended knee, and recognized
   with a humble and a prostrate heart. There is no gainsaying the fact
   that this fear, this reverence, is the beginning of wisdom.

   2. We pass now to an assertion bolder than the last, that there can be
   no true knowledge or wisdom which does not start from the recognition
   of God. This is one of those contentions, not uncommon in the Sacred
   Writings, which appear at first sight to be arbitrary dogmas, but prove
   on closer inquiry to be the authoritative statements of reasoned truth.
   We are face to face, in our day, with an avowedly atheistic philosophy.
   According to the Scriptures, an atheistic philosophy is not a
   philosophy at all, but only a folly: "The fool hath said in his heart,
   There is no God." We have thinkers among us who deem it their great
   mission to get rid of the very idea of God, as one which stands in the
   way of spiritual, social, and political progress. According to the
   Scriptures, to remove the idea of God is to destroy the key of
   knowledge and to make any consistent scheme of thought impossible. Here
   certainly is a clear and sharp issue.

   Now, if this universe of which we form a part is a thought of the
   Divine mind, a work of the Divine hand, a scene of Divine operations,
   in which God is realizing, by slow degrees, a vast spiritual purpose,
   it is self-evident that no attempt to understand the universe can be
   successful which leaves this, its fundamental idea, out of account; as
   well might one attempt to understand a picture while refusing to
   recognize that the artist had any purpose to express in painting it, or
   indeed that there was any artist at all. So much every one will admit.

   But if the universe is not the work of a Divine mind, or the effect of
   a Divine will; if it is merely the working of a blind, irrational
   Force, which realizes no end, because it has no end to realize; if we,
   the feeble outcome of a long, unthinking evolution, are the first
   creatures that ever thought, and the only creatures who now think, in
   all the universe of Being; it follows that of a universe so irrational
   there can be no true knowledge for rational beings, and of a scheme of
   things so unwise there can be no philosophy or wisdom. No person who
   reflects can fail to recognize this, and this is the truth which is
   asserted in the text. It is not necessary to maintain that without
   admitting God we cannot have knowledge of a certain number of empirical
   facts; but that does not constitute a philosophy or a wisdom. It is
   necessary to maintain that without admitting God we cannot have any
   explanation of our knowledge, or any verification of it; without
   admitting God our knowledge can never come to any roundness or
   completeness such as might justify our calling it by the name of
   Wisdom.

   Or to put the matter in a slightly different way: a thinking mind can
   only conceive the universe as the product of thought; if the universe
   is not the product of thought it can never be intelligible to a
   thinking mind, and can therefore never be in a true sense the object of
   knowledge; to deny that the universe is the product of thought is to
   deny the possibility of wisdom.

   We find, then, that it is not a dogma, but a truth of reason, that
   knowledge must start with the recognition of God.

   3. But now we come to an assertion which is the boldest of all, and for
   the present we shall have to be content to leave behind many who have
   readily followed us so far. That we are bound to recognize "the Lord,"
   that is the God of Revelation, and bow down in reverence before Him, as
   the first condition of true wisdom, is just the truth which multitudes
   of men who claim to be Theists are now strenuously denying. Must we be
   content to leave the assertion merely as a dogma enunciated on the
   authority of Scripture?

   Surely they, at any rate, who have made the beginning of wisdom in the
   fear of the Lord should be able to show that the possession which they
   have gained is actually wisdom, and does not rest upon an irrational
   dogma, incapable of proof.

   We have already recognized at the outset that the Wisdom of this book
   is not merely an intellectual account of the reason of things, but also
   more specifically an explanation of the moral and spiritual life. It
   may be granted that so far as the Intellect alone claims satisfaction
   it is enough to posit the bare idea of God as the condition of all
   rational existence. But when men come to recognize themselves as
   Spiritual Beings, with conceptions of right and wrong, with strong
   affections, with soaring aspirations, with ideas which lay hold of
   Eternity, they find themselves quite incapable of being satisfied with
   the bare idea of God; the soul within them pants and thirsts for a
   living God. An intellectual love of God might satisfy purely
   intellectual creatures; but to meet the needs of man as he is, God must
   be a God that manifests His own personality, and does not leave Himself
   without a witness to His rational creature. A wisdom, then, that is to
   truly appraise and rightly guide the life of man must start with the
   recognition of a God whose peculiar designation is the Self-existent
   One, and who makes Himself known to man by that name; that is, it must
   start with the "fear of the Lord." [8]

   How cogent this necessity is appears directly the alternative is
   stated. If Reason assures us of a God that made us, a First Cause of
   our existence and of our being what we are; if Reason also compels us
   to refer to Him our moral nature, our desire of holiness, and our
   capacity of love, what could be a greater tax on faith, and even a
   greater strain on the reason, than to declare that, notwithstanding,
   God has not revealed Himself as the Lord of our life and the God of our
   salvation, as the authority of righteousness or the object of our love?
   When the question is stated in this way it appears that apart from a
   veritable and trustworthy revelation there can be no wisdom which is
   capable of really dealing with human life, as the life of spiritual and
   moral creatures; for a God who does not reveal Himself would be devoid
   of the highest qualities of the human spirit, and the belief in a God
   who is inferior to man, a Creator who is less than the creature, could
   furnish no foundation for an intelligible system of thought.

   Our text now stands before us, not as the unsupported deliverance of
   dogma, but as a condensed utterance of the human reason. We see that
   starting from the conception of Wisdom as the sum of that which is, and
   the sufficient explanation of all things, as including therefore not
   only the laws of nature, but also the laws of human life, both
   spiritual and moral, we can make no step towards the acquisition of
   wisdom without a sincere and absolute reverence, a recognition of God
   as the Author of the universe which we seek to understand, and as the
   Personal Being, the Self-existent One, who reveals Himself under that
   significant name "I am," and declares His will to our waiting hearts.
   "To whom hath the root of Wisdom been revealed? or who hath known her
   wise counsels? There is one wise, and greatly to be feared, the Lord
   sitting upon His throne." [9]

   In this way is struck the key-note of the Jewish "Wisdom." It is
   profoundly true; it is stimulating and helpful. But it may not be out
   of place to remind ourselves even thus early that the idea on which we
   have been dwelling comes short of the higher truth which has been given
   us in Christ. It hardly entered into the mind of a Hebrew thinker to
   conceive that "fear of the Lord" might pass into full, whole-hearted,
   and perfect love. And yet it may be shown that this was the change
   effected when Christ was of God "made unto us Wisdom;" it is not that
   the "fear," or reverence, becomes less, but it is that the fear is
   swallowed up in the larger and more gracious sentiment. For us who have
   received Christ as our Wisdom, it has become almost a truism that we
   must love in order to know. We recognize that the causes of things
   remain hidden from us until our hearts have been kindled into an ardent
   love towards the First Cause, God Himself: we find that even our
   processes of reasoning are faulty until they are touched with the
   Divine tenderness, and rendered sympathetic by the infusion of a
   loftier passion. And it is quite in accordance with this fuller truth
   that both science and philosophy have made genuine progress only in
   Christian lands and under Christian influences. Where the touch of
   Christ's hand has been most decisively felt, in Germany, in England, in
   America, and where consequently Wisdom has attained a nobler, a richer,
   a more tender significance, there, under fostering powers, which are
   not the less real because they are not always acknowledged, the great
   discoveries have been made, the great systems of thought have been
   framed, and the great counsels of conduct have gradually assumed
   substance and authority. And from a wide observation of facts we are
   able to say, "The fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom and
   knowledge;" yes, but the Wisdom of God has led us on from fear to love,
   and in the Love of the Lord is found the fulfilment of that which
   trembled into birth through fear.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [2] Eccl. vii. 24.

   [3] Wisdom viii. 1.

   [4] Eccl. vii. 25.

   [5] 1 Kings iv. 33.

   [6] In this passage Wisdom is represented saying--
   "I from the mouth of the Highest came forth, and as vapour I veiled the
   earth;
   I in the heights pitched my tent, my throne in a pillar of cloud;
   I alone circled the ring of heaven, and walked in the depths of
   abysses;
   In the waves of the sea, and in all the earth, and in every people and
   race I obtained a possession;
   With all these I sought a rest (saying), In whose inheritance shall I
   settle?
   Then came to me the command of the Creator of all; my Creator pitched
   my tent; and He said,
   In Jacob pitch thy tent, in Israel find thine inheritance.
   Before the world was, in the beginning He created me, and while the
   world lasts I shall not fail:
   In the holy tent before Him I offered service, and thus in Sion I was
   planted;
   In the beloved city He likewise made me rest, and in Israel is my
   power;
   And I took root in a people that is glorified, in a portion of the Lord
   His inheritance."--Eccles. xxiv. 3.

   [7] Prov. xiv. 27.

   [8] It may be well to remind the reader who is too familiar with the
   name "the Lord" to consider its significance; that "the Lord" is the
   English translation of that peculiar name, Jahveh, by which God
   revealed Himself to Moses, and the term Jahveh seems to convey one of
   two ideas, existence or the cause of existence, according to the
   vowel-pointing of the consonants yhvh.

   [9] Eccles. i. 6, 8.
     __________________________________________________________________

II.

  WISDOM AS THE GUIDE OF CONDUCT.


   "To deliver thee from the way of the evil man....

   To deliver thee from the strange woman."--Prov. ii. 12a-16a.

   Wisdom is concerned, as we have seen, with the whole universe of fact,
   with the whole range of thought; she surveys and orders all processes
   of nature. We might say of her,


   "She doth preserve the stars from wrong,

   And the most ancient heavens by her are fresh and strong."

   But while she is occupied in these high things, she is no less
   attentive to the affairs of human life, and her delight is to order
   human conduct, not despising even the smallest detail of that which is
   done by men under the sun. Side by side with physical laws, indeed
   often intertwined with them, appear the moral laws which issue from the
   lively oracles of Wisdom. There is not one authority for natural
   phenomena, and another for mental and moral phenomena. As we should say
   now, Truth is one: Science is one: Law is one. The laws of the physical
   order, the laws of the speculative reason, the laws of practical life,
   form a single system, come from the sole mind of God, and are the
   impartial interests of Wisdom.

   As the great authority on Conduct, Wisdom is pictured standing in the
   places where men congregate, where the busy hum of human voices and the
   rush of hurried feet make it necessary for her to lift up her voice in
   order to gain attention. With words of winsome wooing--"for wisdom
   shall enter into thy heart, and knowledge shall be pleasant unto thy
   soul" [10] --or with loud threats and stern declarations of truth--"the
   backsliding of the simple shall slay them, and the prosperity of fools
   shall destroy them" [11] --she tries to win us, while we are yet young,
   to her paths of pleasantness and her ways of peace. Her object is to
   deliver youth, (1) from the evil man, and (2) from the evil woman, or
   in the most comprehensive way "to deliver us from evil."

   First of all, we may spend a few moments in noting the particular
   temptations to which men were exposed in the days when these chapters
   were written. [12] There was a temptation to join a troop of banditti,
   and to obtain a living by acts of highway robbery which would
   frequently result in murder; and there was the temptation to the sin
   which we call specifically Impurity, a temptation which arose not so
   much from the existence of a special class of fallen women, as from the
   shocking looseness and voluptuousness of married women in well-to-do
   circumstances.

   Society under the kings never seems to have reached anything
   approaching to an ordered security. We cannot point to any period when
   the mountain roads, even in the neighbourhood of the capital, were not
   haunted by thieves, who lurked in the rocks or the copses, and fell
   upon passing travellers, to strip and to rob, and if need be to kill
   them. When such things are done, when such things are even recounted in
   sensational literature, there are multitudes of young men who are
   stirred to a debased ambition; a spurious glory encircles the brow of
   the adventurer who sets the laws of society at defiance; and without
   any personal entreaty the foolish youth is disposed to leave the quiet
   ways of industry for the stimulating excitement and the false glamour
   of the bandit life. The reckless plottings of the robbers are described
   in chap. i. 11-14. The character of the men themselves is given in iv.
   16, 17: "They sleep not, except they have done mischief; and their
   sleep is taken away, unless they cause some to fall. For they eat the
   bread of wickedness, and drink the wine of violence." The proverb in
   xxiv. 15 is addressed to such an one: "Lay not wait, O wicked man,
   against the habitation of the righteous; spoil not his resting-place."

   The rebukes of the prophets--Isaiah, Micah, Jeremiah--may have a wider
   application, but they seem at any rate to include this highwayman's
   life. "Your hands are full of blood" is the charge of Isaiah; [13] and
   again, "Their feet run to evil, and they make haste to shed innocent
   blood; their thoughts are thoughts of iniquity." [14] "They build up
   Zion with blood," says Micah indignantly. [15] Jeremiah cries with
   still more vehemence to his generation, "Also in thy skirts is found
   the blood of the souls of the innocent poor;" [16] and again, "But
   thine eyes and thine heart are not but for thy covetousness, and for to
   shed innocent blood, and for oppression, and for violence, to do it."
   [17]

   We are to conceive, then, the young and active men of the day
   constantly tempted to take these unhallowed paths which seemed to
   promise wealth; the sinners were always ready to whisper in the ears of
   those whose life was tedious and unattractive, [18] "Cast in thy lot
   among us; we will all have one purse." The moral sense of the community
   was not sufficiently developed to heartily condemn this life of
   iniquity; as in the eighteenth century among ourselves, so in Israel
   when this book was written, there existed in the minds of the people at
   large a lurking admiration for the bold and dashing "gentlemen of the
   way."

   The other special temptation of that day is described in our book with
   remarkable realism, and there is no false shame in exposing the paths
   of death into which it leads. In v. 3-20 the subject is treated in the
   plainest way: "Her latter end is bitter as wormwood, sharp as a
   two-edged sword. Her feet go down to death; her steps take hold on
   Sheol." It is taken up again in vi. 24-35: "Can a man take fire in his
   bosom, and his clothes not be burned? or can one walk upon hot coals,
   and his feet not be scorched?" The guilty man who has been betrayed by
   the glitter and beauty, by the honeyed words and the soft entreaties,
   "shall get wounds and dishonour, and his reproach shall not be wiped
   away."

   In chap. vii. 5-27 a most vivid picture is drawn of the foolish youth
   seduced into evil; there he is seen going as an ox to the slaughter, as
   one in fetters, "till an arrow strike through his liver; as a bird
   hasteth to the snare, and knoweth not that it is for his life." And the
   Introduction closes with a delineation of Folly, which is obviously
   meant as a counterpart to the delineation of Wisdom in chap. i. 20,
   etc. [19] The miserable woman sits at the door of her house, on a seat
   in the high places of the city; with seductive words she wins the
   foolish passers-by to enter her doors: "the dead are there; her guests
   are in the depths of Sheol."

   It is a temptation which in many varying forms has always beset human
   life. No small part of the danger is that this evil, above all others,
   grows in silence, and yet seems to be aggravated by publicity. The
   preacher cannot speak plainly about it, and even writers shrink from
   touching the subject. We can, however, be thankful that the book, which
   is God's book rather than man's, knows nothing of our false modesty and
   conventional delicacy: it speaks out not only boldly, but minutely; it
   is so explicit that no man who with a prayerful heart will meditate
   upon its teachings need fall into the pitfall--that pitfall which seems
   to grow even more subtle and more seductive as civilization advances,
   and as the great cities absorb a larger proportion of the population;
   or if he fall he can only admit with shame and remorse, "I have hated
   instruction, and my heart despised reproof. Neither have I obeyed the
   voice of my teachers, nor inclined mine ear to them that instructed me.
   I was well-nigh in all evil in the midst of the congregation and
   assembly." [20]

   In the second place, we must try to look at these temptations in the
   light of our own day, in order that we may listen to the voice of
   wisdom, not in the antiquarian, but rather in the practical spirit. The
   second temptation exists amongst us almost unchanged, except that the
   vast accumulation and concentration of vice in great cities has
   provided that mournful band of women whom a great moralist has
   designated the Vestal Virgins of Humanity, consecrated to shame and
   ruin in order to preserve unsullied the sacred flame of the domestic
   altar. The result of this terrible development in evil is that the
   deadly sin has become safer for the sinner, and in certain circles of
   society has become recognized as at any rate a venial fault, if not an
   innocent necessity. It is well to read these chapters again with our
   eye on the modern evil, and to let the voice of Wisdom instruct us that
   the life is not the less blighted because the body remains unpunished,
   and vice is not the less vicious because, instead of ruining others for
   its gratification, it feeds only on those who are already ruined. If
   the Wisdom of the Old Testament is obscure on this point, the Wisdom of
   the New Testament gives no uncertain sound. Interpreting the doctrine
   of our book, as Christians are bound to do, by the light of Christ, we
   can be left in no doubt that to all forms of impurity applies the one
   principle which is here applied to a specific form: "He doeth it that
   would destroy his own soul." "His own iniquities shall take the wicked,
   and he shall be holden with the cords of his sin." [21]

   But with regard to the first of the two temptations, it may be urged
   that in our settled and ordered society it is no longer felt. We are
   not tempted to become highwaymen, nor even to embark on the career of a
   professional thief. We are disposed to skim lightly over the warning,
   under the impression that it does not in any way apply to us. But stop
   a moment! Wisdom spoke in the first instance direct to the vice of her
   day, but she gave to her precepts a more general colouring, which makes
   it applicable to all time, when she said, "So are the ways of every one
   that is greedy of gain; it taketh away the life of the owners thereof."
   [22] The specific form of greediness described in this first chapter
   may have become obsolete among decent and respectable people; but that
   greed of gain which showed itself then in a particular form is alive
   to-day. Dressed in a different garb, it presents temptations of a
   slightly different order; but the spirit is the same, the issue, the
   fatal issue, is the same. It is a melancholy fact that in the most
   progressive and civilized communities the greed of gain, instead of
   dying out, becomes aggravated, acquires a dominant influence, and sways
   men as the master passion. The United States, a country so bountiful to
   her children that a settled peace might be supposed to pervade the life
   of men who can never be in fear of losing the necessaries, or even the
   comforts, of life, are inflamed with a fierce and fiery passion.
   Society is one perpetual turmoil; life is lived at the highest
   conceivable pressure, because each individual is seeking to gain more
   and ever more. In our own country, though society is less fluid, and
   ancient custom checks the action of disturbing forces, the passion for
   gain becomes every year a more exacting tyranny over the lives of the
   people. We are engaged in a pitiless warfare, which we dignify by the
   name of competition; the race is to the swift, and the battle to the
   strong. It becomes almost a recognized principle that man is at liberty
   to prey upon his fellow man. The Eternal Law of Wisdom declares that we
   should treat others as we treat ourselves, and count the interests of
   others dear as our own; it teaches us that we should show a tender
   consideration for the weak, and be always ready, at whatever cost, to
   succour the helpless. But competition says, "No; you must try rather to
   beat the weak out of the field; you must leave no device untried to
   reduce the strength of the strong, and to divert into your own hands
   the grist which was going to your neighbour's mill." This conflict
   between man and man is untempered by pity, because it is supposed to be
   unavoidable as death itself. In a community so constituted, where
   business has fallen into such ways, while the strong may hold their own
   with a clean hand, the weaker are tempted to make up by cunning what
   they lack in strength, and the weakest are ground as the nether
   millstone. The pitilessness of the whole system is appalling, the more
   so because it is accepted as necessary.

   The Bandit life has here emerged in a new form. "Come, let us lay wait
   for blood," says the Sweater or the Fogger, "let us lurk privily for
   the innocent without cause; let us swallow them up alive as Sheol, and
   whole as those that go down into the pit." [23] The Bandit is an
   outcast from society, and his hand is turned against the rich. The
   Sweater is an outcast from society, and his hand is turned against the
   poor. By "laying wait" he is able to demand, from weak men, women, and
   children, the long hours of the day for unceasing toil, and the bitter
   hours of the night for hunger and cold, until the gaunt creatures, worn
   with weariness and despair, find a solace in debauchery or an
   unhallowed rest in death.

   Now, though the temptation to become a sweater may not affect many or
   any of us, I should like to ask, Are there not certain trades or
   occupations, into which some of us are tempted to enter, perfectly
   honeycombed with questionable practices? Under the pretext that it is
   all "business," are not things done which can only be described as
   preying upon the innocence or the stupidity of our neighbours?
   Sometimes the promise is, "We shall find all precious substance, we
   shall fill our houses with spoil." [24] Sometimes the simple object is
   to escape starvation. But there is the miserable temptation to
   sacrifice probity and honour, to stifle compassion and thought, in
   order to bring into our own coffers the coveted wealth. And is there
   not, I ask, a similar temptation lurking in a thousand haunts more or
   less respectable--a temptation which may be described as the spirit of
   gambling? The essence of all gambling, whether it be called speculative
   business or gaming, in stock and share markets or in betting clubs and
   turf rings, is simply the attempt to trade on the supposed ignorance or
   misfortune of others, and to use superior knowledge or fortune for the
   purpose, not of helping, but of robbing them. It may be said that we do
   it in self-defence, and that others would do the same by us; yes, just
   as the bandit says to the young man, "We do not want to injure the
   traveller yonder; we want his purse. He will try to shoot you; you only
   shoot him in self-defence." It is the subtlety of all gambling that
   constitutes its great danger. It seems to turn on the principle that we
   may do what we like with our own; it forgets that its object is to get
   hold of what belongs to others, not by honest work or service rendered,
   but simply by cunning and deception.

   It is, then, only too easy to recognize, in many varied shapes of
   so-called business and of so-called pleasure, "the ways of those who
   are greedy of gain." Wisdom has need to cry aloud in our streets, in
   the chief place of concourse, in the city, in exchanges and marts. Her
   warning to the young man must be explicit and solemn: "My son, if
   sinners entice thee, consent thou not." The bandit life still has its
   attractions, though its methods are changed; it plays upon the idle
   imagination: it promises freedom from laborious and distasteful toil;
   but it says nothing of the ways of death into which it leads.

   Now, in the third place, we come to the protest of Divine Wisdom
   against these evil ways in which men are tempted to walk. They are, she
   says, folly of the most egregious kind. There may be an apparent
   success or a momentary gratification; "precious substance may be
   amassed, and houses may be filled with spoil;" but the people who are
   betrayed into these wicked courses "shall be cut off from the land."
   [25] They "lay wait for their own blood;" greed "taketh away the life
   of the owner thereof;" [26] and as for the strange woman, that
   flattereth with her words, "none that go unto her return again." [27]

   It needs but a clear vision or a little wise reflection to see the
   destructive tendency of Evil. It is the commonest fact of experience
   that where "vice goes before, vengeance follows after." Why do men not
   perceive it? There is a kind of fatuity which blinds the eyes. The
   empty-headed bird sees the net spread out before its eyes; [28] many of
   its fellows have already been caught; the warning seems obvious enough,
   but it is all "in vain;" eager to get the bait--the dainty morsel lying
   there, easily obtainable--the foolish creature approaches, looks,
   argues that it is swifter and stronger than its predecessors, who were
   but weaklings! it will wheel down, take the food, and be gone long
   before the flaps of the net can spring together. In the same way the
   empty-headed youth, warned by the experience of elders and the tender
   entreaties of father and mother, assured that these ways of unjust gain
   are ways of ruin, is yet rash enough to enter the snare in order to
   secure the coveted morsel. And what is the issue? Setting at nought all
   the counsel of Wisdom, he would none of her reproof. [29] A momentary
   success led to wilder infatuation, and convinced him that he was right,
   and Wisdom was wrong; but his prosperity destroyed him. Soon in the
   shame of exposure and the misery of remorse he discovers his mistake.
   Or, worse still, no exposure comes; success continues to his dying day,
   and he leaves his substance to his heirs; "he eats of the fruits of his
   own way, and is filled with his own devices," [30] but none the less he
   walks in the ways of darkness--in paths that are crooked and
   perverse--and he is consumed with inward misery. The soul within is
   hard, and dry, and dead; it is insensible to all feelings except
   feelings of torture. It is a life so dark and wretched, that when a
   sudden light is thrown upon its hidden secrets men are filled with
   astonishment and dismay, that such things could exist underneath that
   quiet surface.

   Finally, note these two characteristics of the Divine Wisdom: (1) she
   is found in her fulness only by diligent seekers; and (2) rejected, she
   turns into the most scornful and implacable foe.

   She is to be sought as silver or hidden treasure is sought. The search
   must be inspired by that eagerness of desire and passion of resolve
   with which avarice seeks for money. No faculty must be left unemployed:
   the ear is to be inclined to catch the first low sounds of wisdom; the
   heart is to be applied to understand what is heard; the very voice is
   to be lifted up in earnest inquiry. It is a well-known fact that the
   fear of the Lord and the knowledge of God are not fruits which grow on
   every wayside bush, to be plucked by every idle passer-by, to be
   dropped carelessly and trodden underfoot. Without seriousness and
   devotion, without protracted and unflagging toil, the things of God are
   not to be attained. You must be up betimes; you must be on your knees
   early; you must lay open the book of Wisdom, pore over its pages, and
   diligently turn its leaves, meditating on its sayings day and night.
   The kingdom of God and His righteousness must be sought, yes, and
   sought first, sought exclusively, as the one important object of
   desire. That easy indifference, that lazy optimism--"it will all come
   right in the end"--that habit of delay in deciding, that inclination to
   postpone the eternal realities to vanishing shadows, will be your ruin.
   The time may come when you will call, and there will be no answer, when
   you will seek diligently, but shall not find. Then in the day of your
   calamity, when your fear cometh, what a smile of scorn will seem to be
   on Wisdom's placid brow, and around her eloquent lips! what derision
   will seem to ring in the well-remembered counsels which you rejected.
   [31] O tide in the affairs of men! O tide in the affairs of God! We are
   called to stand by death-beds, to look into anguished eyes which know
   that it is too late. The bandit of commercial life passes into that
   penal servitude which only death will end; what agony breaks out and
   hisses in his remorse! The wretched victim of lust passes from the
   house of his sin down the path which inclines unto death; how terrible
   is that visage which just retains smirched traces that purity once was
   there! The voice rings down the doleful road, "If I had only been wise,
   if I had given ear, wisdom might have entered even into my heart,
   knowledge might have been pleasant even to my soul!"

   And wisdom still cries to us, "Turn you at my reproof: behold, I will
   pour out my spirit unto you, I will make known my words unto you."
     __________________________________________________________________

   [10] Prov. ii. 10.

   [11] Prov. i. 32.

   [12] We may remind ourselves that, according to the most probable
   conjecture, this introduction to Solomon's Proverbs (chaps, i.-ix.)
   dates from the reign of Josiah (640-609 b.c.).

   [13] Isa. i. 15.

   [14] Isa. lix. 7.

   [15] Micah iii. 10.

   [16] Jer. ii. 34.

   [17] Jer. xxii. 17.

   [18] Prov. i. 14. Compare the proverb, xvi. 29, "A man of violence
   enticeth his neighbour, and leadeth him in a way that is not good."

   [19] Prov. ix. 13-18.

   [20] Prov. v. 12-14.

   [21] Prov. vi. 32 and v. 22.

   [22] Prov. i. 19.

   [23] A dog-chain sold in London at one shilling and threepence was
   found to have cost, for materials twopence, for labour three-farthings.
   (Evidence before Lord Dunraven's Commission on the Sweating System).

   [24] See Prov. i. 13.

   [25] Prov. ii. 22.

   [26] Prov. i. 19.

   [27] Prov. ii. 19.

   [28] Prov. i. 17.

   [29] Prov. i. 25.

   [30] Prov. i. 31, 32.

   [31] Prov. i. 24-31.
     __________________________________________________________________

III.

  THE EARTHLY REWARDS OF WISDOM.

   Prov. iii. 1-10.

   The general teaching of these nine introductory chapters is that the
   "ways of Wisdom are pleasantness, and all her paths are peace." We are
   taught to look for the fruit of righteousness in long life and
   prosperity, for the penalty of sin in premature destruction. "The
   upright shall dwell in the land, and the perfect shall remain in it.
   But the wicked shall be cut off from the land, and they that deal
   treacherously shall be rooted out of it." [32] The foolish "shall eat
   of the fruit of their own way, and be filled with their own devices.
   For the backsliding of the simple shall slay them, and the prosperity
   of fools shall destroy them. But whoso hearkeneth unto Wisdom shall
   dwell securely, and shall be quiet without fear of evil." [33] "By
   Wisdom thy days shall be multiplied, and the years of thy life shall be
   increased. If thou art wise, thou art wise for thyself; and if thou
   scornest, thou alone shall bear it." The ways of Folly have this legend
   written over the entrance-gate: "The dead are there; her guests are in
   the depths of Sheol." [34]

   This teaching is summarized in the passage before us. "My son, forget
   not my law; but let thine heart keep my commandments: for length of
   days, and years of life, and peace, shall they add to thee. Let not
   mercy and truth," those primary requirements of wisdom, "forsake thee:
   bind them about thy neck; write them upon the table of thy heart;" i.e.
   let them be an ornament which strikes the eye of the beholder, but also
   an inward law which regulates the secret thought. "So shalt thou find
   favour and good understanding in the sight of God and man;" that is to
   say, the charm of thy character will conciliate the love of thy fellow
   creatures and of thy God, while they recognize, and He approves, the
   spiritual state from which these graces grow. "Trust in the Lord with
   all thine heart, and lean not upon thine own understanding: [35] in all
   thy ways acknowledge Him, and He shall direct thy paths. Be not wise in
   thine own eyes; fear the Lord, and depart from evil: it shall be health
   to thy navel, and marrow to thy bones. Honour the Lord with thy
   substance, and with the first-fruits of all thy increase: so shall thy
   barns be filled with plenty, and thy vats shall overflow with new
   wine." [36]

   The rewards of wisdom, then, are health and long life, the good-will of
   God and man, prosperity, and abundant earthly possessions. As our Lord
   would put it, they who leave house, or wife, or brethren, or parents,
   or children, for the kingdom of God's sake, shall receive manifold more
   in this time, even of the things which they surrender, in addition to
   the everlasting life in the time to come. [37]

   This is a side of truth which we frequently allow to drop out of sight,
   in order to emphasize another side which is considered more important.
   We are accustomed to dwell on the promised joys of the future world as
   if godliness had no promise of the life which now is, and in so doing
   we take all life and colour from those expected blessings. The true
   view seems to be, The way of wisdom, the path of the upright, is so
   full of joy, so crowned with peace; the life of the children of the
   kingdom is so wisely and bountifully provided for; the inevitable pains
   and troubles which fall to their share are so transformed; that from
   this present good we can infer a future better, gathering hints and
   promises of what we shall be from the realized felicity of what we are.

   If we try to estimate the temporal blessings of wisdom we do not
   thereby deny the larger and more lasting blessings which are to come;
   while if we ignore these present joyful results we deprive ourselves of
   the surest evidence for the things which, though hoped for, are not yet
   seen.

   We may, then, with much advantage try to estimate some of the immediate
   and apprehensible benefits of the life which is lived according to the
   dictates of heavenly wisdom.

   (1) First of all, the right life is a wholesome life--yes, physically
   healthy. Obedience to the eternal moral laws brings "health to the
   navel," and that peculiar brightness which is like the freshness of
   dew. [38] The body is a sacred trust, a temple of the Holy Ghost; to
   use it ill is to violate the trust and to defile the temple. The
   temperance of habit and orderliness of life which Wisdom requires of
   her children are the first conditions of vitality. They who seek health
   as the first consideration become valetudinarians and find neither
   health nor happiness; but they who diligently follow the law of God and
   the impulse of His Spirit find that health has come to them, as it
   were, by a side wind. The peace of mind, the cheerfulness of temper,
   the transfer of all anxiety from the human spirit to the strong Spirit
   of God, are very favourable to longevity. Insurance societies have made
   this discovery, and actuaries will tell you that in a very literal way
   the children of God possess the earth, while the wicked are cut off.

   Yet no one thinks of measuring life only by days and years. To live
   long with the constant feeling that life is not worth living, or to
   live long with the constant apprehension of death, must be counted as a
   small and empty life. Now, it is the chief blessedness in the lot of
   the children of light that each day is a full, rich day, unmarred by
   recollections, unshadowed by apprehensions. Each day is distinctly
   worth living; it has its own exquisite lessons of cloud or sunshine,
   its own beautiful revelations of love, and pity, and hope. Time does
   not hang heavily on the hands, nor yet is its hurried flight a cause of
   vain regret; for it has accomplished that for which it was sent, and by
   staying longer could not accomplish more. And if, after all, God has
   appointed but a few years for His child's earthly life, that is not to
   be regretted; the only ground for sorrow would be to live longer than
   His wise love had decreed. "If God thy death desires," as St. Genest
   says to Adrien in Rotrou's tragedy, "life has been long enow." [39]

   The life in God is undoubtedly a healthy life, nor is it the less
   healthy because the outward man has to decay, and mortality has to be
   swallowed up of life. From the standpoint of the Proverbs this wider
   application of the truth was not as yet visible. The problem which
   emerges in the book of Job was not yet solved. But already, as I think
   we shall see, it was understood that the actual and tangible rewards of
   righteousness were of incomparable price, and made the prosperity of
   the wicked look poor and delusive.

   (2) But there is a second result of the right life which ordinary
   observation and common sense may estimate. Wisdom is very
   uncompromising in her requirement of fair dealing between man and man.
   She cannot away with those commercial practices which can only be
   described as devising "evil against thy neighbour," who "dwelleth
   securely by thee." [40] Her main economic principle is this, that all
   legitimate trade is the mutual advantage of buyer and seller; where the
   seller is seeking to dupe the buyer, and the buyer is seeking to rob
   the seller, trade ceases, and the transaction is the mere inworking of
   the devil. Wisdom is quite aware that by these ways of the devil wealth
   may be accumulated; she is not blind to the fact that the overreaching
   spirit of greed has its rich and splendid reward; but she maintains
   none the less that "the curse of the Lord is in the house of the
   wicked; but He blesseth the habitation of the righteous." [41]

   It is a very impressive experience to enter the house of a great
   magnate whose wealth has been obtained by questionable means. The rooms
   are beautiful; works by the great masters shed their radiance of
   eternal truth from the walls; the library gleams with the well-bound
   books of moralists and religious teachers. The sons and daughters of
   the house are fair and elegant; the smile of prosperity is in every
   curtained and carpeted room, and seems to beam out of every illuminated
   window; and yet the sensitive spirit cannot be rid of the idea that
   "the curse of the Lord is in the house."

   On the other hand, the honourable man whose paths have been directed by
   the Lord, no matter whether he be wealthy or merely in receipt, as the
   result of a life's labour, of his "daily bread," has a blessing in his
   house. Men trust him and honour him. [42] His wealth flows as a
   fertilizing stream, or if it run dry, his friends, who love him for
   himself, make him feel that it was a good thing to lose it in order to
   find them. In proportion as the fierce struggle of competition has made
   the path of fair dealing more difficult, they who walk in it are the
   more honoured and loved. Nowhere does Wisdom smile more graciously or
   open her hand to bless more abundantly, than in the later years of a
   life which has in its earlier days been exposed, and has offered a
   successful resistance, to the strong temptations of unrighteous gain.

   (3) Further, Wisdom commands not only justice, but generosity. She
   requires her children to yield the first-fruits of all their
   possessions to the Lord, and to look tenderly upon His poor. "Withhold
   not good from them to whom it is due, when it is in the power of thine
   hand to do it. Say not unto thy neighbour, Go, and come again, and
   to-morrow I will give; when thou hast it by thee." [43] And the
   teaching of experience is that those who act upon this precept purchase
   to themselves a good possession. The main value of the Mammon of
   unrighteousness is, as our Lord says, to make to ourselves friends with
   it, friends who shall receive us into the everlasting habitations. The
   money we spend upon our own pleasures, and to promote our own
   interests, is spent and gone; but the money given with an open hand to
   those poor children of God, to whom it is strictly due, is not spent at
   all, but laid up in the most secure of banks. There is no source of joy
   in this present world to be compared with the loving gratitude of the
   poor whom you have lovingly helped. Strangely enough, men will spend
   much to obtain a title which carries no honour with it, forgetting that
   the same money given to the needy and the suffering purchases the true
   honour, which gives the noblest title. For we are none of us so stupid
   as to think that the empty admiration of the crowd is so rich in
   blessing as the heartfelt love of the few.

   But in enumerating these external results of right living we have only
   touched incidentally upon the deeper truths which lie at the root of
   it. It is time to look at these.

   God is necessarily so much to men, men are necessarily so completely
   bereft without Him, that clear vision and strong action are utterly
   impossible apart from a humble dependence upon Him. The beginning of
   all wisdom is, as we have seen, in the recognition of God, in personal
   submission to Him, in diligent obedience to all His directions. This
   appears, before we reflect, to be a mere truism; when we have
   reflected, it proves to be a great revelation. We do not at first see
   what is meant by trusting in the Lord with all our heart; we confuse it
   with that tepid, conventional relation to God which too frequently
   passes current for faith. We do not readily apprehend what is implied
   in acknowledging God in all our ways; we suppose that it only means a
   general professing and calling ourselves Christians. Consequently, many
   of us who believe that we trust in the Lord, yet lean habitually and
   confidently upon our own understanding, and are even proud of doing so;
   we are wise in our own eyes long after our folly has become apparent to
   every one else; we resent with a vehemence of righteous indignation any
   imputation upon the soundness of our judgment. The very tone of mock
   humility in which we say, "I may be wrong, but----" shows that we are
   putting a case which seems to us practically impossible. Consequently,
   while we think that we are acknowledging God in all our ways, He does
   not direct our paths; indeed, we never gave Him an opportunity. From
   first to last we directed them ourselves. Let us frankly acknowledge
   that we do not really believe in God's detailed concern with the
   affairs of the individual life; that we do not, therefore, commit our
   way with an absolute surrender into His hand; that we do not think of
   submitting to His disposal the choice of our profession, the choice of
   our partner in life, the choice of our place of residence, the choice
   of our style of living, the choice of our field of public service, the
   choice of our scale of giving. Let us confess that we settled all these
   things in implicit and unquestioning reliance upon our own
   understanding.

   I speak only in wide and fully admitted generalities. If Christians as
   a whole had really submitted their lives in every detail to God, do you
   suppose that there would be something like fifty thousand Christian
   ministers and ten times that number of Christian workers at home, while
   scarcely a twentieth of that number have gone out from us to labour
   abroad? If Christians had really submitted their lives to God, would
   there have been these innumerable wretched marriages--man and wife
   joined together by no spiritual tie, but by the caprice of fancy or the
   exigencies of social caste? If Christians had really asked God to guide
   them, meaning what they said, would all the rich be found in districts
   together, while all the poor are left to perish in other districts
   apart? If Christians had really accepted God's direction, would they be
   living in princely luxury while the heathen world is crying for the
   bread of life? would they be spending their strength on personal aims
   while the guidance of social and political affairs is left in the hands
   of the self-interested? would they be giving such a fragment of their
   wealth to the direct service of the Kingdom of God?

   We may answer very confidently that the life actually being lived by
   the majority of Christian people is not the result of God directing
   their paths, but simply comes from leaning on their own understanding.
   And what a sorrowful result!

   But in face of this apostasy of life and practice, we can still
   joyfully point to the fact that they who do entirely renounce their own
   judgment, who are small in their own eyes, and who, with their whole
   heart trusting Him, acknowledge Him in all their ways, find their lives
   running over with blessing, and become the means of incalculable good
   to the world and to themselves. It would not be easy to make plain or
   even credible, to those who have never trusted in God, how this
   guidance and direction are given. Not by miraculous signs or visible
   interpositions, not by voices speaking from heaven, nor even by
   messages from human lips, but by ways no less distinct and infinitely
   more authoritative, God guides men with His eye upon them, tells them,
   "This is the way; walk ye in it," and whispers to them quite
   intelligibly when they turn to the right hand or the left. With a noble
   universality of language, this text says nothing of Urim or Thummim, of
   oracle or seer, of prophet or book: "He shall direct thy paths." [44]
   That is enough; the method is left open to the wisdom and love of Him
   who directs. There is something even misleading in saying much about
   the methods; to set limits to God's revelations, as Gideon did, is
   unworthy of the faith which has become aware of God as the actual and
   living Reality, compared with whom all other realities are but shadows.
   Our Lord did not follow the guidance of His Father by a mechanical
   method of signs, but by a more intimate and immediate perception of His
   will. When Jesus promised us the Spirit as an indwelling and abiding
   presence He clearly intimated that the Christian life should be
   maintained by the direct action of God upon the several faculties of
   the mind, stimulating the memory, quickening the perception of truth,
   as well as working on the conscience and opening the channels of
   prayer. When we wait for signs we show a defect of faith. True trust in
   our Heavenly Father rests in the absolute assurance that He will make
   the path plain, and leave us in no uncertainty about His will. To doubt
   that He speaks inwardly and controls us, even when we are unconscious
   of His control, is to doubt Him altogether.

   When a few years have been passed in humble dependence on God, it is
   then possible to look back and see with astonishing clearness how real
   and decisive the leadings of the Spirit have been. There were moments
   when two alternatives were present, and we were tempted to decide on
   the strength of our own understanding; but thanks be to His name, we
   committed it to Him. We stepped forward then in the darkness; we
   deserted the way which seemed most attractive, and entered the narrow
   path which was shrouded in mist. We knew He was leading us, but we
   could not see. Now we see, and we cannot speak our praise. Our life, we
   find, is all a plan of God, and He conceals it from us, as if on
   purpose to evoke our trust, and to secure that close and personal
   communion which the uncertainty renders necessary.

   Are you suspicious of the Inward Light, as it is called? Does it seem
   to open up endless possibilities of self-delusion? Are you disgusted
   with those who follow their own wilful way, and seek a sanction for it
   by calling it the leading of God? You will find that the error has
   arisen from not trusting the Lord "with the whole heart," or from not
   acknowledging Him "in all ways." The eye has not been single, and the
   darkness therefore has been, as our Lord declares that it would be,
   dense. [45] The remedy is not to be found in leaning more on our own
   understanding, but rather in leaning less. Wisdom calls for a certain
   absoluteness in all our relations to God, a fearless, unreserved, and
   constantly renewed submission of heart to Him. Wisdom teaches that in
   His will is our peace, and that His will is learnt by practical
   surrender to His ways and commandments.

   Now, is it not obvious that while the external results of wisdom are
   great and marked, this inward result, which is the spring of them all,
   is more blessed than any? The laws which govern the universe are the
   laws of God. The Stoic philosophy demanded a life according to Nature.
   That is not enough, for by Nature is meant God's will for the inanimate
   or non-moral creation. Where there is freedom of the will, existence
   must not be "according to Nature," but according to God; that is to
   say, life must be lived in obedience to God's laws for human life. The
   inorganic world moves in ordered response to God's will. We, as men,
   have to choose; we have to discover; we have to interpret. Woe to us if
   we choose amiss, for then we are undone. Woe to us if we do not
   understand, but in a brutish way follow the ordinances of death instead
   of the way of life!

   Now, the supreme bliss of the heavenly wisdom is that it leads us into
   this detailed obedience to the law which is our life; it sets us under
   the immediate and unbroken control of God. Well may it be said, "Happy
   is the man that findeth wisdom, and the man that getteth understanding.
   For the merchandise of it is better than the merchandise of silver, and
   the gain thereof than fine gold. She is more precious than rubies."
   [46] And yet rubies are very precious. I learn that the valley in
   Burmah where the most perfect rubies in the world are found is situated
   four thousand five hundred feet above the sea level, in a range of
   mountainous spurs about eighty miles due north of Mandalay; but owing
   to the difficult nature of the intervening ground, the valley can only
   be reached by a circuitous journey of some two hundred miles, which
   winds through malarious jungles and over arduous mountain passes. An
   eminent jewellers' firm is about to explore the Valley of Rubies,
   though it is quite uncertain whether the stones may not be exhausted.
   Wisdom is "more precious than rubies, and none of the things thou canst
   desire are to be compared unto her."

   To know the secret of the Lord, to walk in this world not guideless,
   but led by the Lord of life, to approach death itself not fearful, but
   in the hands of that Infinite Love for whom death does not exist,
   surely this is worth more than the gold and precious stones which
   belong only to the earth and are earthy. This wisdom is laden with
   riches which cannot be computed in earthly treasures; "she is a tree of
   life to them that lay hold upon her: and happy is every one that
   retaineth her." [47] The creation itself, in its vast and infinite
   perfections, with all its onian changes, and all the mysterious
   ministries which order its details and maintain its activities, comes
   from that same wisdom which controls the right human life. The man,
   therefore, who is led in the ways of wisdom, trusting wholly to God, is
   in harmony with that great universe of which he forms an intelligent
   part: he may lie down without being afraid; he may walk securely
   without stumbling; no sudden fear can assail him; all the creatures of
   God are his sisters and his brothers; even Sister Death, as St. Francis
   used to say, is a familiar and a friend to him.

   We have been dwelling upon the outward results of Heavenly Wisdom--the
   health, the prosperity, the friends, the favour with God and man which
   come to those who possess her. We have been led to seek out the secret
   of her peace in the humble surrender of the will to its rightful Lord.
   But there is a caution needed, a truth which has already occurred to
   the author of this chapter. It is evident that while Wisdom brings in
   her hand riches and honour, [48] health to the navel, and marrow to the
   bones, [49] it will not be enough to judge only by appearances. As we
   have pondered upon the law of Wisdom, we have become aware that there
   may be an apparent health and prosperity, a bevy of friends, and a
   loud-sounding fame which are the gift not of Wisdom, but of some other
   power. It will not do, therefore, to set these outward things before
   our eyes as the object of desire; it will not do to envy the possessors
   of them. [50] "The secret of the Lord is with the upright," and it may
   often be that they to whom His secret has become open will choose the
   frowns of adversity rather than the smile of prosperity, will choose
   poverty rather than wealth, will welcome solitude and contumely down in
   the Valley of Humiliation. For it is an open secret, in the sweet light
   of wisdom it becomes a self-evident truth, that "whom the Lord loveth
   He reproveth; even as a father the son in whom he delighteth." [51]

   There is, then, a certain paradox in the life of wisdom which no
   ingenuity can avoid. Her ways are ways of pleasantness, but we may not
   seek them because they are pleasant, for other ways are pleasant too,
   or seem to be so for a while. All her paths are peace, but we do not
   enter them to gain peace, for the peace comes often under the stress of
   a great conflict or in the endurance of a heavy chastening. A thousand
   temporal blessings accompany the entrance into the narrow way, but so
   far from seeking them, it is well-nigh impossible to start on the way
   unless we lose sight and care of them altogether. The Divine Wisdom
   gives us these blessings when we no longer set our hearts on them,
   because while we set our hearts on them they are dangerous to us.
   Putting the truth in the clearest light which has been given to us, the
   light of our Lord Jesus Christ, we are called upon to give up
   everything in order to seek first the Kingdom of Heaven, and when we
   are absorbed in that as our true object of search everything is given
   back to us a hundredfold; we are called upon to take up our cross and
   follow Him, and when we do so He bears the cross for us; we are called
   upon to take His yoke upon us and to learn of Him, and immediately we
   take it--not before--we find that it is easy. The wise, loving only
   wisdom, find that they have inherited glory; the fools, seeking only
   promotion, find that they have achieved nothing but shame. [52]
     __________________________________________________________________

   [32] Prov. ii. 21, 22.

   [33] Prov. i. 31-33.

   [34] Prov. ix. 12, 18.

   [35] Cf. xxviii. 26, "He that trusteth in his own heart is a fool: but
   whoso walketh wisely, he shall be delivered."

   [36] Prov. iii. 1-10.

   [37] Luke xviii. 29, 30.

   [38] The Hebrew word sqvy in iii. 8b is the same as that which is
   translated "my drink" in Hosea ii. 6. The LXX. render it "marrow," but
   it means the moisture which in a natural and healthy state keeps the
   bones supple, as opposed to the dryness which is produced by senility
   or disease.

   [39] Si ton Dieu veut ta mort, c'est dj trop vcu.

   [40] Prov. iii. 29.

   [41] Prov. iii. 33.

   [42] Cf. xii. 8, "A man shall be commended according to his wisdom: but
   he that is of a perverse heart, shall be despised."

   [43] Prov. iii. 27, 28.

   [44] Prov. iii. 6.

   [45] Matt. vi. 22.

   [46] Prov. iii. 13-15.

   [47] Prov. iii. 18.

   [48] Prov. iii. 16.

   [49] Prov. iii. 8.

   [50] Prov. iii. 31.

   [51] Prov. iii. 12.

   [52] Prov. iii. 35.
     __________________________________________________________________

IV.

  EDUCATION: THE CHILD'S THOUGHT OF THE PARENT. [53]


   "Wisdom doth live with children round her knees."

   Wordsworth.


   "He taught me, and said unto me," etc.--Prov. iv. 4.

   This chapter begins with a charming little piece of autobiography.
   Unhappily the writer is unknown. That it was not Solomon is plain from
   the fact that an only son is speaking, and we know from 1 Chron. iii. 5
   that Solomon was not an only son of his mother. [54] But the navet
   and beauty of the confession are the same, whoever was the speaker. The
   grateful memories of a father's teaching and of a mother's tenderness
   give point and force to the exhortations. "Do I urge upon you, young
   people, the claims of Wisdom?" the author seems to say. "Well I speak
   from experience. My parents taught me her wholesome and pleasant ways.
   Though I was an only son, they did not by a selfish indulgence allow me
   to be spoiled. They made me bear the yoke in my youth, and now I live
   to thank them for it."

   There is a great temptation to spoil an only child, a temptation which
   few are able to resist. Parents can deny themselves everything for
   their idol, except the pleasure of making the child a despot; they can
   endure any pain for their despot, except the pain of resisting him and
   instructing him. And accordingly they have sometimes to experience the
   shame and anguish of their children's curses, like that Carthaginian
   mother, of whom it is related that her son, a convicted criminal,
   passing to execution, requested that he might whisper something to her,
   and, coming near, bit off her ear, saying that it was his revenge
   because she had brought him up so badly. Very different are the
   feelings of our author; he owes much to his parents, and is eager to
   acknowledge what he owes. God has no kinder gift to give us than a
   hallowed home, the memory of lessons from the lips of father and
   mother, the early impressions of virtue and wisdom, the sacred streams
   which rise from that fountainhead, and that alone, and run freshening
   and singing and broadening all through our lives. [55]

   With this happy example of good home influence before our eyes, we will
   come to consider briefly two points which are suggested by it: first,
   the importance of these early impressions; second, the main features of
   the discipline presented in the chapter.

   I. Not without reason has a great cardinal of the Roman Church said
   that if he may have the children up to the age of five, he will not
   mind in whose hand they may be afterwards; for it is almost impossible
   to exaggerate the permanent effects of those first tendencies impressed
   on the soul before the intellect is developed, and while the soft,
   plastic nature of the child is not yet determined in any particular
   direction. Things which we learn we can more or less unlearn, but
   things which are blended with the elements of our composition, made
   parts of us before we are conscious of our own personality, defy the
   hand of time and the power of conscious effort to eradicate them.

   John Paton, that noble missionary to the New Hebrides, has given us a
   vivid picture of his early home. It was a plain lowland cottage, with
   its "but and ben," and between the two a small chamber with a
   diminutive window shedding diminutive light on the scene. To this room
   the children saw the father retire oftentimes a day, and shut to the
   door; they would occasionally hear the pathetic pleadings of the voice
   that prayed, and they learnt to slip past the door on tiptoe. They got
   to understand whence came that happy light upon their father's face;
   they recognized it as a reflection from the Divine presence, in the
   consciousness of which he lived.

   Let a child draw his first breath in a house which possesses a
   sanctuary like that; let him come to know by his quick childish
   perceptions that there is in his home a ladder set up from earth to
   heaven, and that the angels of God go up and down on it; let him feel
   the Divine atmosphere in his face, the air all suffused with heavenly
   light, the sweetness and the calm which prevail in a place where a
   constant communion is maintained,--and in after years he will be aware
   of voices which call and hands which reach out to him from his
   childhood, connecting him with heaven, and even the most convincing
   negations of unbelief will be powerless to shake the faith which is
   deep as the springs of his life.

   We learn to love, not because we are taught to love, but by some
   contagious influence of example or by some indescribable attraction of
   beauty. Our first love to Wisdom, or, to use our modern phrase,
   Religion, is won from us by living with those that love her. She stole
   in upon us and captured us without any overpowering arguments; she was
   beautiful and we felt that those whom we loved were constantly taken
   and held by her beauty. Just reflect upon this subtle and wonderful
   truth. If my infancy is spent among those whose main thought is "to
   get" riches, I acquire imperceptibly the love of money. I cannot
   rationally explain my love; but it seems to me in after life a truism,
   that money is the principal thing; I look with blank incredulity upon
   one who questions this ingrained truth. But if in infancy I live with
   those whose love is wholly centred upon Religion, who cherish her with
   unaffected ardour and respond to her claims with kindling emotion, I
   may in after life be seduced from her holy ways for awhile, but I am
   always haunted by the feeling that I have left my first love, I am
   restless and uneasy until I can win back that "old bride-look of
   earlier days."

   Yes, that old bride-look--for religion may be so presented to the
   child's heart as to appear for ever the bride elect of the soul, from
   whose queenly love promotion may be expected, whose sweet embraces
   bring a dower of honour, whose beautiful fingers twine a chaplet of
   grace for the head and set a crown of glory on the brow. [56]

   The affections are elicited, and often permanently fixed, before the
   understanding has come into play. If the child's heart is surrendered
   to God, and moulded by heavenly wisdom, the man will walk securely; a
   certain trend will be given to all his thoughts; a certain instinctive
   desire for righteousness will be engrafted in his nature; and an
   instinctive aversion will lead him to decline the way of the wicked.
   [57]

   The first thing, then, is to give our children an atmosphere to grow up
   in; to cultivate their affections, and set their hearts on the things
   eternal; to make them associate the ideas of wealth and honour, of
   beauty and glory, not with material possessions, but with the treasures
   and rewards of Wisdom.

   II. But now comes the question, What is to be the definite teaching of
   the child? for it is an unfailing mark of the parents who themselves
   are holy that they are impelled to give clear and memorable instruction
   to their children. And this is where the great and constant difficulty
   emerges. If the hallowed example would suffice we might count the task
   comparatively easy. But some day the understanding will begin to assert
   itself; the desire to question, to criticise, to prove, will awake. And
   then, unless the truths of the heart have been applied to the
   conscience in such a way as to satisfy the reason, there may come the
   desolate time in which, while the habits of practical life remain pure,
   and the unconscious influence of early training continues to be
   effective, the mind is shaken by doubt, and the hope of the soul is
   shrouded in a murky cloud.

   Now the answer to this question may for the Christian be briefly given,
   Bring your children to Christ, teach them to recognize in Him their
   Saviour, and to accept Him as their present Lord and gracious Friend.
   But this all-inclusive answer will not suffer by a little expansion on
   the lines which are laid down in the chapter before us. When Christ is
   made unto us Wisdom, the contents of Wisdom are not altered, they are
   only brought within our reach and made effectual in us. Bringing our
   children to Christ will not merely consist in teaching them the
   doctrine of salvation, but it will include showing them in detail what
   salvation is, and the method of its realization.

   The first object in the home life is to enable children to realize what
   salvation is. It is easy to dilate on an external heaven and hell, but
   it is not so easy to demonstrate that salvation is an inward state,
   resulting from a spiritual change.

   It is very strange that Judaism should ever have sunk into a formal
   religion of outward observance, when its own Wisdom was so explicit on
   this point: "My son, attend to my words; incline thine ear unto my
   sayings. Let them not depart from thine eyes; keep them in the midst of
   thine heart. For they are life unto those that find them, and health to
   all their flesh. Keep thy heart with all diligence; for out of it are
   the issues of life." [58] The Greek version, which was very generally
   used in our Lord's time, had a beautiful variation of this last clause:
   "In order that thy fountains may not fail thee, guard them in the
   heart." It was after all but a new emphasis on the old teaching of the
   book of Proverbs when Jesus taught the necessity of heart purity, and
   when He showed that out of the heart come forth evil thoughts, and all
   the things which defile a man. [59] Yet this lesson of inwardness has
   always been the most difficult of all to learn. Christianity itself has
   always been declining from it and falling into the easier but futile
   ways of externalism; and even Christian homes have usually failed in
   their influence on the young chiefly because their religious
   observances have fallen into formalism, and while the outward conduct
   has been regulated, the inner springs of action have not been touched.

   All conduct is the outcome of hidden fountains. All words are the
   expression of thoughts. The first thing and the main thing is that the
   hidden fountains of thought and feeling be pure. The source of all our
   trouble is the bitterness of heart, the envious feeling, the sudden
   outbreak of corrupt desire. A merely outward salvation would be of no
   avail; a change of place, a magic formula, a conventional pardon, could
   not touch the root of the mischief. "I wish you would change my heart,"
   said the chief Sekomi to Livingstone, "Give me medicine to change it,
   for it is proud, proud and angry, angry always." He would not hear of
   the New Testament way of changing the heart; he wanted an outward,
   mechanical way--and that way was not to be found. The child at first
   thinks in the same way. Heaven is a place to go to, not a state to be
   in. Hell is an outward punishment to fly from, not an inward condition
   of the soul. The child has to learn that searching truth which Milton
   tried to teach, when he described Satan in Paradise,--


   "... within him hell

   He brings, and round about him, nor from hell

   One step, no more than from himself, can fly

   By change of place.


   "'Which way I fly is hell,'

   cries the miserable being,


   'myself am hell;

   And in the lowest deep, a lower deep,

   Still threatening to devour me, opens wide,

   To which the hell I suffer seems a heaven.'" [60]

   We are tempted in dealing with children to train them only in outward
   habits, and to forget the inward sources which are always gathering and
   forming; hence we often teach them to avoid the lie on the tongue, to
   put away from them the froward mouth and perverse lips, [61] and yet
   leave them with the lies in the soul, the deep inward unveracities
   which are their ruin. We often succeed in bringing them up as
   respectable and decorous members of society, and yet leave them a prey
   to secret sins; they are tormented by covetousness which is idolatry,
   by impurity, and by all kinds of envious and malignant passions.

   There is something even ghastly in the very virtues which are sometimes
   displayed in a highly civilised society like ours. We perceive what
   appear to be virtues, but we are haunted by an uncomfortable misgiving
   that they are virtues only in appearance; they seem to have no
   connection with the heart; they never seem to bubble up from
   irrepressible fountains; they do not overflow. There is charity, but it
   is the charity only of the subscription list; there is pity, but it is
   the pity only of conventional humanitarianism; there is the cold
   correctness of conduct, or the formal accuracy of speech, but the
   purity seems to be prudery because it is only a concession to the
   conventional sentiments of the hour, and the truthfulness seems to be a
   lie because its very exactness seems to come, not from springs of
   truth, but only from an artificial habit.

   We are frequently bound to notice a religion of a similar kind. It is
   purely mimetic. It is explained on the same principle as the
   assimilation of the colours of animals to the colours of their
   environment. It is the unconscious and hypocritical instinct of
   self-preservation in a presumably religious society, where not to seem
   religious would involve a loss of caste. It may be regarded then as the
   first essential lesson which is to be impressed on the mind of a
   child,--the lesson coming next after the unconscious influences of
   example, and before all dogmatic religious teaching,--that
   righteousness is the condition of salvation, righteousness of the
   heart; that the outward seeming goes for nothing at all, but that God
   with a clear and quiet eye gazes down into the hidden depths, and
   considers whether the fountains there are pure and perennial.

   The second thing to be explained and enforced is singleness of heart,
   directness and consistency of aim; by which alone the inward life can
   be shaped to virtuous ends: "Let thine eyes look right on, and let
   thine eyelids look straight before thee. Make level the path of thy
   feet, and let all thy ways be established. Turn not to the right hand
   nor to the left." [62] As our Lord puts it, If thine eye be single, thy
   whole body shall be full of light. This precept has frequently been
   given in the interests of worldly wisdom. The boy is told that if he
   means to get on he must concentrate his thoughts and refuse to let any
   of the seductions around him divert his attention. Singleness of eye
   may be the most ruinous of evils--if a man has only a single eye to his
   own advantage, and pursues nothing but his own pleasure. The precept is
   given here however in the interests of heavenly wisdom, and there is
   much to be said for the view that only the truly religious mind can be
   quite single-eyed. Selfishness, though it seems to be an undivided aim,
   is really a manifold of tumultuous and conflicting passions. He only,
   strictly speaking, has one desire, whose one desire is God. The way of
   wisdom is after all the only way which has no bifurcations. The man who
   has a single eye to his own interest may find before long that he has
   missed the way: he pushes eagerly on, but he flounders ever deeper in
   the mire; for though he did not turn to the right hand nor to the left,
   he never all the time removed his foot from evil. [63]

   The right life then is a steady progress undiverted by the alluring
   sights and sounds which appeal to the senses. [64] "Look not round
   about thee," says Ecclesiasticus, [65] "in the streets of the city,
   neither wander thou in the solitary places thereof." We are to learn
   that the way goes through Vanity Fair, but admits of no divergences
   into its tempting booths or down its alluring alleys; the lust of the
   eye, the lust of the flesh, the vainglory of life, are not to distract
   the mind which has but one purpose in view. The path is to be kept
   level; [66] as we should say, an even tenor is to be preserved; we are
   to follow the plain unexciting path of duty, the beaten track of sober
   rightness. For while it is the mark of all unhallowed ways that they
   plunge up and down from despondency to wild elation, from giddy
   raptures to heartstricken depression, it is the sure sign of God's hand
   in our life when the paths are made level. [67] Ah those tempting ways,
   on which shine the false lights of imagined duty, of refined
   selfishness, or of gilded sensuality. Surely it is the result of
   Wisdom, the gift of God's grace, to keep the eyes "looking right on."

   But it is time to sum up. Here is a great contrast between those whose
   early training has been vicious or neglected, and those who have been
   "taught in the way of wisdom, led in paths of uprightness." It is a
   contrast which should constantly be present to the eyes of parents with
   a warning and an encouragement. The unfortunate child whose infancy was
   passed in the midst of baleful example, whose heart received no
   instruction from parents' lips, grows up like one stumbling in the
   dark, and the darkness deepens as he advances; observers cannot
   tell--he himself cannot tell--what it is at which he stumbles. [68]
   There is the old ingrained vice which comes out again and again after
   every attempted reformation; there is the old shuffling habit; there is
   the old unhallowed set of the thoughts and the tastes; there is the old
   incurable pharisaism, with its tendency to shift all blame on to other
   people's shoulders. It is all like the damp in the walls of an
   ill-built house. In dry weather there are only the stains, but those
   stains are the prophecy of what will be again when the wet weather
   returns. The corrupt ways have become a second nature; they are as
   sleep and food to the wretched creature; to abstain from iniquity
   creates the restlessness of insomnia; if he has not been spreading an
   influence of evil and leading others astray, he feels as if he had been
   deprived of his daily food, and he is consumed with a fiery thirst.
   [69] Even when such an one is genuinely born again, the old hideous
   habits will appear like seams in the character; and temptations will
   send the flush along the tell-tale scars.

   On the other hand, the life which starts from the sweet examples of a
   hallowed home, and all its timely chastisements and discipline,
   presents a most entrancing history. At first there is much which is
   difficult to bear, much against which the flesh revolts. The influences
   of purity are cold like the early dawn, and the young child's spirit
   shrinks and shivers; but with every step along the levelled road the
   light broadens and the air becomes warmer,--the dawn shines more and
   more unto the perfect day. [70] As the character forms, as the habits
   become fixed, as the power of resistance increases, a settled strength
   and a lasting peace gladden the life. The rays of heavenly wisdom not
   only shine on the face, but suffuse the very texture of the being, so
   that the whole body is full of light. Eventually it begins to appear
   that truth and purity, pity and charity, have become instinctive. Like
   a well-disciplined army, they spring at once into the ranks, and are
   ready for service even on a surprise. The graces of holy living come
   welling up from those untainted inner springs, and, be the surroundings
   ever so dry, the fountains fail not. The habit of single-eyed devotion
   to right avails even where there is no time for reflection; more and
   more the seductions of the senses lose their point of attack in this
   disciplined spirit. There is a freedom in the gait, for holiness has
   ceased to be a toilsome calculation,--the steps of the spiritual man
   are not straitened. There is a swiftness in all action,--the feet are
   shod with a joyous and confident preparation, for the fear of stumbling
   is gone. [71]

   With daily growing gratitude and veneration does such an one look back
   upon the early home of piety and tenderness.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [53] This subject, which occupies so large a part of the book, is
   further treated in Lect. XXIII.

   [54] It is noteworthy that the LXX. in ver. 2 seek to maintain the
   Solomonic authorship by deliberately altering the words.

   [55] Cf. the beautiful family picture of the linked and mutually
   blessed generations in the proverb, "Children's children are the crown
   of old men; and the glory of children are their fathers" (xvii. 6).

   [56] Prov. iv. 8, 9.

   [57] Prov. iv. 14.

   [58] Prov. iv. 20-23.

   [59] Matt. xv. 19.

   [60] Paradise Lost, iv. 20, etc., and 75. Cf. also ix. 120:--

   "And the more I see

   Pleasures about me, so much more I feel

   Torment within me, as from hateful siege

   Of contraries. All good to me becomes

   Bane, and in heaven much worse would be my state."

   [61] Prov. iv. 24.

   [62] Prov. iv. 25-27.

   [63] Prov. iv. 27.

   [64] Cf. xvii. 24, "Wisdom is before the face of him that hath
   understanding; but the eyes of a fool are in the ends of the earth."

   [65] Eccles. ix. 7.

   [66] Prov. iv. 26.

   [67] Prov. v. 21.

   [68] Prov. iv. 19.

   [69] Prov. iv. 16, 17.

   [70] Prov. iv. 18, margin.

   [71] Prov. iv. 12.
     __________________________________________________________________

V.

  THE WAYS AND ISSUES OF SIN.


   "His own iniquities shall take the wicked,

   And he shall be holden with the cords of his sin.

   He shall die for lack of instruction;

   And in the greatness of his folly he shall go astray."

   --Prov. v. 22, 23.

   It is the task of Wisdom, or, as we should say, of the Christian
   teacher,--and a most distasteful task it is,--to lay bare with an
   unsparing hand (1) the fascinations of sin, and (2) the deadly
   entanglements in which the sinner involves himself,--"there is a way
   which seemeth right unto a man, but the end thereof are the ways of
   death." [72] It would be pleasanter, no doubt, to avoid the subject, or
   at least to be content with a general caution and a general
   denunciation; one is tempted to take refuge in the opinion that to
   mention evils of a certain kind with any particularity is likely to
   suggest rather than to suppress, to aggravate rather than to lessen,
   them. But Wisdom is not afraid of plain speaking; she sees that shame
   is the first result of the Fall, and behind the modest veil of shame
   the devil works bravely. There is a frankness and a fulness in the
   delineations of this chapter and of chapter seven which modern taste
   would condemn; but the motive cannot be mistaken. Holiness describes
   the ways of sin in detail to create a horror and a hatred of them; she
   describes exactly what is within the tempting doors,--all the glamour,
   all the softness, all the luxury, all the unhallowed raptures,--and
   shows distinctly how these chambers are on the incline of death, in
   order that curiosity, the mother of prurience, may be stifled, and the
   unwary may be content to remove his way far from the temptress, and to
   come not nigh the door of her house. [73]

   But this, it may be said, is the plea urged by a certain school of
   modern Realism in Art. Let us depict--such is the argument--in all its
   hideous literalness the sinful life, and leave it to work its own
   impressions, and to act as a warning to those who are entering on the
   seductive but dangerous ways. From this principle--so it may be
   said--has sprung the school of writers at whose head is M. Zola. Yes,
   but to counteract vice by depicting it is so hazardous a venture that
   none can do it successfully who is not fortified in virtue himself, and
   constantly led, directed, and restrained by the Holy Spirit of God.
   Just in this point lies the great difference between the realism of the
   Bible and the realism of the French novel. In the first the didactic
   purpose is at once declared, and the writer moves with swift precision
   through the fascinating scene, to lift the curtain and show death
   beyond; in the last the motive is left doubtful, and the writer moves
   slowly, observantly, even gloatingly, through the abomination and the
   filth, without any clear conception of the Divine Eye which watches, or
   of the Divine Voice which condemns. [74]

   There is a corresponding difference in the effects of the two. Few men
   could study these chapters in the book of Proverbs without experiencing
   a healthy revolt against the iniquity which is unveiled; while few men
   can read the works of modern realism without contracting a certain
   contamination, without a dimming of the moral sense and a weakening of
   the purer impulses.

   We need not then complain that the powers of imaginative description
   are summoned to heighten the picture of the temptation, because the
   same powers are used with constraining effect to paint the results of
   yielding to it. We need not regret that the Temptress, Mistress Folly,
   as she is called, is allowed to utter all her blandishments in full, to
   weave her spells before our eyes, because the voice of Wisdom is in
   this way made more impressive and convincing. Pulpit invectives against
   sin often lose half their terrible cogency because we are too prudish
   to describe the sins which we denounce.

   I. The glamours of sin and the safeguard against them.--There is no sin
   which affords so vivid an example of seductive attraction at the
   beginning, and of hopeless misery at the end, as that of unlawful love.
   The illustration which we generally prefer, that drawn from the abuse
   of alcoholic drinks, occurs later on in the book, at xxiii. 31, 32; but
   it is not so effectual for the purpose, and we may be thankful that the
   Divine Wisdom is not checked in its choice of matter by our present-day
   notions of propriety.

   There are two elements in the temptation: there is the smooth and
   flattering speech, the outpouring of compliment and pretended affection
   expressed in vii. 15, the subtle and enflaming suggestion that "stolen
   waters are sweet;" [75] and there is the beauty of form enhanced by
   artful painting of the eyelids, [76] and by all those gratifications of
   the senses which melt the manhood and undermine the resisting power of
   the victim. [77] In our own time we should have to add still further
   elements of temptation,--sophistical arguments and oracular utterances
   of a false science, which encourages men to do for health what appetite
   bids them do for pleasure.

   After all, this is but a type of all temptations to sin. There are weak
   points in every character; there are places in every life where the
   descent is singularly easy. A siren voice waylays us with soft words
   and insinuating arguments; gentle arms are thrown around us, and
   dazzling visions occupy our eyes; our conscience seems to fade away in
   a mist of excited feeling; there is a sort of twilight in which shapes
   are uncertain, and the imagination works mightily with the obscure
   presentations of the senses. We are taken unawares; the weak point
   happens to be unguarded; the fatal bypath with its smooth descent is,
   as it were, sprung upon us.

   Now the safeguard against the specific sin before us is presented in a
   true and whole-hearted marriage. [78] And the safeguard against all sin
   is equally to be found in the complete and constant preoccupation of
   the soul with the Divine Love. The author is very far from indulging in
   allegory,--his thoughts are occupied with a very definite and concrete
   evil, and a very definite and concrete remedy; but instinctively the
   Christian ear detects a wider application, and the Christian heart
   turns to that strange and exigent demand made by its Lord, to hate
   father and mother, and even all human ties, in order to concentrate on
   Him an exclusive love and devotion. It is our method to state a general
   truth and illustrate it with particular instances; it is the method of
   a more primitive wisdom to dwell upon a particular instance in such a
   way as to suggest a general truth. Catching, therefore, involuntarily
   the deeper meanings of such a thought, we notice that escape from the
   allurements of the strange woman is secured by the inward concentration
   of a pure wedded love. In the permitted paths of connubial intimacy and
   tenderness are to be found raptures more sweet and abiding than those
   which are vainly promised by the ways of sin.


   "Here Love his golden shafts employs, here lights

   His constant lamp, and waves his purple wings,

   Reigns here and revels; not in the bought smile

   Of harlots, loveless, joyless, unendeared." [79]

   Forbidding to marry is a device of Satan; anything which tends to
   degrade or to desecrate marriage bears on its face the mark of the
   Tempter. It is at our peril that we invade the holy mystery, or brush
   away from its precincts the radiant dews which reflect the light of
   God. Nay, even the jest and the playful teasing which the subject
   sometimes occasions are painfully inappropriate and even offensive. We
   do ill to smile at the mutual absorption and tender endearments of the
   young married people; we should do better to pray that their love might
   grow daily more absorbing and more tender. I would say to brides and
   bridegrooms: Magnify the meaning of this sacred union of yours; try to
   understand its Divine symbolism. Labour diligently to keep its mystical
   passion pure and ardent and strong. Remember that love needs earnest,
   humble, self-suppressing cultivation, and its bloom is at first easily
   worn off by negligence or laziness. Husbands, labour hard to make your
   assiduous and loving care more manifest to your wives as years go by.
   Wives, desire more to shine in the eyes of your husbands, and to retain
   their passionate and chivalrous admiration, than you did in the days of
   courtship.

   Where marriage is held honourable,--a sacrament of heavenly
   significance,--where it begins in a disinterested love, grows in
   educational discipline, and matures in a complete harmony, an absolute
   fusion of the wedded souls, you have at once the best security against
   many of the worst evils which desolate society, and the most exquisite
   type of the brightest and loveliest spiritual state which is promised
   to us in the world to come.

   Our sacred writings glorify marriage, finding in it more than any other
   wisdom or religion has found. The Bible, depicting the seductions and
   fascinations of sin, sets off against them the infinitely sweeter joys
   and the infinitely more binding fascinations of this condition which
   was created and appointed in the time of man's innocence, and is still
   the readiest way of bringing back the Paradise which is lost.

   II. The binding results of sin.--It is interesting to compare with the
   teaching of this chapter the doctrine of Karma in that religion of
   Buddha which was already winning its victorious way in the far East at
   the time when these introductory chapters were written. The Buddha said
   in effect to his disciple, "You are in slavery to a tyrant set up by
   yourself. Your own deeds, words, and thoughts, in the former and
   present states of being, are your own avengers through a countless
   series of lives. If you have been a murderer, a thief, a liar, impure,
   a drunkard, you must pay the penalty in your next birth, either in one
   of the hells, or as an unclean animal, or as an evil spirit, or as a
   demon. You cannot escape, and I am powerless to set you free. Not in
   the heavens," so says the Dhammapada, "not in the midst of the sea, not
   if thou hidest thyself in the clefts of the mountains, wilt thou find a
   place where thou canst escape the force of thy own evil actions."

   "His own iniquities shall take the wicked, and he shall be holden with
   the cords of his sin." This terrible truth is illustrated with mournful
   emphasis in the sin of the flesh which has been occupying our
   attention, a sin which can only be described as "taking fire into the
   bosom or walking upon hot coals," with the inevitable result that the
   clothes are burnt and the feet are scorched. [80] There are four
   miseries comparable to four strong cords which bind the unhappy
   transgressor. First of all, there is the shame. His honour is given to
   others, [81] and his reproach shall not be wiped away. [82] The jealous
   rage of the offended husband will accept no ransom, no expiation; [83]
   with relentless cruelty the avenger will expose to ruin and death the
   hapless fool who has transgressed against him. Secondly, there is the
   loss of wealth. The ways of debauchery lead to absolute want, for the
   debauchee, impelled by his tormenting passions, will part with all his
   possessions in order to gratify his appetites, [84] until, unnerved and
   'feckless,' incapable of any honest work, he is at his wits' end to
   obtain even the necessaries of life. [85] For the third binding cord of
   the transgression is the loss of health; the natural powers decay, the
   flesh and the body are consumed with loathsome disease. [86] Yet this
   is not the worst. Worse than all the rest is the bitter remorse, the
   groaning and the despair at the end of the shortened life. "How have I
   hated instruction, and my heart despised reproof!" [87] "Going down to
   the chambers of death," wise too late, the victim of his own sins
   remembers with unspeakable agony the voice of his teachers, the efforts
   of those who wished to instruct him.

   There is an inevitableness about it all, for life is not lived at a
   hazard; every path is clearly laid bare from its first step to its last
   before the eyes of the Lord; the ups and downs which obscure the way
   for us are all level to Him. [88] Not by chance, therefore, but by the
   clearest interworking of cause and effect, these fetters of sin grow
   upon the feet of the sinner, while the ruined soul mourns in the latter
   days. [89] The reason why Wisdom cries aloud, so urgently, so
   continually, is that she is uttering eternal truths, laws which hold in
   the spiritual world as surely as gravitation holds in the natural
   world; it is that she sees unhappy human beings going astray in the
   greatness of their folly, dying because they are without the
   instruction which she offers. [90]

   But now, to turn to the large truth which is illustrated here by a
   particular instance, that our evil actions, forming evil habits,
   working ill results on us and on others, are themselves the means of
   our punishment.


   "The gods are just, and of our pleasant vices

   Make instruments to plague us." [91]

   We do not rightly conceive God or Judgment or Hell until we recognize
   that in spiritual and moral things there is a binding law, which is no
   arbitrary decree of God, but the essential constitution of His
   universe. He does not punish, but sin punishes; He does not make hell,
   but sinners make it. As our Lord puts it, the terrible thing about all
   sinning is that one may become involved in an eternal sin. [92] It is
   by an inherent necessity that this results from a sin against the Holy
   Spirit within us.

   We cannot too frequently, or too solemnly, dwell upon this startling
   fact. It is a fact established, not by a doubtful text or two, nor by a
   mere ipse dixit of authority, but by the widest possible observation of
   life, by a concurrent witness of all teachers and all true religions.
   No planetary movement, no recurrence of the seasons, no chemical
   transformation, no physiological growth, no axiom of mathematics, is
   established on surer or more irrefutable grounds. Sin itself may even
   be defined, from an induction of facts, as "the act of a human will
   which, being contrary to the Divine Will, reacts with inevitable evil
   upon the agent." Sin is a presumptuous attempt on the part of a human
   will to disturb the irresistible order of the Divine Will, and can only
   draw down upon itself those lightnings of the Divine power, which
   otherwise would have flashed through the heavens beautiful and
   beneficent.

   Let us, then, try to impress upon our minds that, not in the one sin of
   which we have been speaking only, but in all sins alike, certain bands
   are being woven, certain cords twisted, certain chains forged, which
   must one day take and hold the sinner with galling stringency.

   Every sin is preparing for us a band of shame to be wound about our
   brows and tightened to the torture-point. There are many gross and
   generally condemned actions which when they are exposed bring their
   immediate penalty. To be discovered in dishonourable dealing, to have
   our hidden enormities brought into the light of day, to forfeit by
   feeble vices a fair and dignified position, will load a conscience
   which is not quite callous with a burden of shame that makes life quite
   intolerable. But there are many sins which do not entail this scornful
   censure of our fellows, sins with which they have a secret sympathy,
   for which they cherish an ill-disguised admiration,--the more heroic
   sins of daring ambition, victorious selfishness, or proud defiance of
   God. None the less these tolerated iniquities are weaving the
   inevitable band of shame for the brow: we shall not always be called on
   only to face our fellows, for we are by our creation the sons of God,
   in whose image we are made, and eventually we must confront the
   children of Light, must look straight up into the face of God, with
   these sins--venial as they were thought--set in the light of His
   countenance. Then will the guilty spirit burn with an indescribable and
   unbearable shame,--"To hide my head! To bury my eyes that they may not
   see the rays of the Eternal Light," will be its cry. May we not say
   with truth that the shame which comes from the judgment of our fellows
   is the most tolerable of the bands of shame?

   Again, every sin is preparing for us a loss of wealth, of the only
   wealth which is really durable, the treasure in the heavens; every sin
   is capable of "bringing a man to a piece of bread," [93] filching from
   him all the food on which the spirit lives. It is too common a sight to
   see a young spendthrift who has run through his patrimony in a few
   years, who must pass through the bankruptcy court, and who has burdened
   his estate and his name with charges and reproaches from which he can
   never again shake himself free. But that is only a superficial
   illustration of a spiritual reality. Every sin is the precursor of
   spiritual bankruptcy; it is setting one's hand to a bill which, when it
   comes in, must break the wealthiest signatory.

   That little sin of yours, trivial as it seems,--the mere inadvertence,
   the light-hearted carelessness, the petty spleen, the innocent
   romancing, the gradual hardening of the heart,--is, if you would see
   it, like scratching with a pen through and through a writing on a
   parchment. What is this writing? What is this parchment? It is a
   title-deed to an inheritance, the inheritance of the saints in light.
   You are quietly erasing your name from it and blotching its fair
   characters. When you come to the day of account, you will show your
   claim, and it will be illegible. "What," you will say, "am I to lose
   this great possession for this trifling scratch of the pen?" "Even so,"
   says the Inexorable; "it is precisely in this way that the inheritance
   is lost; not, as a rule, by deliberate and reckless destruction of the
   mighty treasure, but by the thoughtless triviality, the indolent
   easifulness. See you, it is the work of your own hand. His own
   iniquities shall take the wicked."

   Again, every sin is the gradual undermining of the health, not so much
   the body's, as the soul's health. Those are, as it were, the slightest
   sins by which "the flesh and the body are consumed." "Who hath wounds
   without cause? Who hath redness of eyes?" Who is stricken and hurt and
   beaten, bitten as if by an adder, stung as if by a serpent? [94] It is
   the victim of drink, and every feature shows how he is holden by the
   cords of his sin. But there is one who is drunk with the blood of his
   fellow-men, and has thriven at the expense of the poor, who yet is
   temperate, healthy, and strong. The disease of his soul does not come
   to the light of day. None the less it is there. The sanity of soul
   which alone can preserve the life in the Eternal World and in the
   presence of God is fatally disturbed by every sin. A virus enters the
   spirit; germs obtain a lodgment there. The days pass, the years pass.
   The respected citizen, portly, rich, and courted, goes at last in a
   good old age from the scene of his prosperity here,--surely to a fairer
   home above?

   Alas, the soul if it were to come into those fadeless mansions would be
   found smitten with a leprosy. This is no superficial malady; through
   and through the whole head is sick, the whole heart faint. Strange that
   men never noticed it down there in the busy world. But the fact is, it
   is the air of heaven which brings out these suppressed disorders. And
   the diseased soul whispers, "Take me out of this air, I beseech you, at
   all costs. I must have change of climate. This atmosphere is
   intolerable to me. I can only be well out of heaven." "Poor spirit,"
   murmur the angels, "he says the truth; certainly he could not live
   here."

   Finally, the worst chain forged in the furnace of sin is Remorse: for
   no one can guarantee to the sinner an eternal insensibility; rather it
   seems quite unavoidable that some day he must awake, and standing
   shamed before the eyes of his Maker, stripped of all his possessions
   and hopelessly diseased in soul, must recognize clearly what might have
   been and now cannot be. Memory will be busy. "Ah! that cursed memory!"
   he cries. It brings back all the gentle pleadings of his mother in that
   pure home long ago; it brings back all his father's counsels; it brings
   back the words which were spoken from the pulpit, and all the
   conversations with godly friends. He remembers how he wavered--"Shall
   it be the strait and hallowed road, or shall it be the broad road of
   destruction?" He remembers all the pleas and counterpleas, and how with
   open eyes he chose the way which, as he saw, went down to death. And
   now? Now it is irrevocable. He said he would take his luck, and he has
   taken it. He said God would not punish a poor creature like him. God
   does not punish him. No, there is God making level all his paths now as
   of old. This punishment is not God's; it is his own. His own iniquities
   have taken the wicked; he is held with the cords of his sin.

   Here then is the plain, stern truth,--a law, not of Nature only, but of
   the Universe. As you look into a fact so solemn, so awful; as the
   cadence of the chapter closes, do you not seem to perceive with a new
   clearness how men needed One who could take away the sins of the world,
   One who could break those cruel bonds which men have made for
   themselves?
     __________________________________________________________________

   [72] Prov. xiv. 12.

   [73] Prov. v. 8.

   [74] The Laureate has touched with stern satire on this debased modern
   Realism:--

   "Author, atheist, essayist, novelist, realist, rhymester, play your
   part,

   Paint the mortal shame of Nature with the living hues of Art.

   Rip your brothers' vices open, strip your own foul passions bare,

   Down with Reticence, down with Reverence--forward--naked--let them
   stare!

   Feed the budding rose of boyhood with the drainage of your sewer,

   Send the drain into the fountain lest the stream should issue pure.

   Set the maiden fancies wallowing in the troughs of Zolaism,

   Forward, forward,--aye and backward, downward too into the abysm!"

   --The new Locksley Hall.

   [75] Prov. ix. 17.

   [76] Prov. vi. 25.

   [77] Prov. vii. 16, 17.

   [78] Prov. v. 15-19.

   [79] Paradise Lost.

   [80] Prov. vi. 27, 28.

   [81] Prov. v. 9.

   [82] Prov. vi. 33.

   [83] Prov. vi. 34, 35.

   [84] Prov. v. 10.

   [85] Prov. vi. 26.

   [86] Prov. v. 11.

   [87] Prov. v. 12-14.

   [88] Prov. v. 21.

   [89] It is, if we may say so, a maxim of modern science that "A sin
   without punishment is as impossible, as complete a contradiction in
   terms, as a cause without an effect" (W. R. Gregg).

   [90] Prov. v. 23.

   [91] King Lear.

   [92] Mark iii. 26.

   [93] Prov. vi. 26.

   [94] Prov. xxiii. 29, 32.
     __________________________________________________________________

VI.

  CERTAIN EXAMPLES OF THE BINDING CHARACTER OF OUR OWN ACTIONS.

     "The surety ... the sluggard ... and the worthless person."--Prov.
     vi. 1, 6, 12.

   From the solemn principle announced at the close of the last chapter
   the teacher passes, almost unconscious of the thought which determines
   his selection of subjects, to illustrate the truth by three
   examples,--that of the Surety, that of the Sluggard, that of the
   Worthless Man. And then, because the horrors of impurity are the most
   striking and terrible instance of all, this subject, coming up again at
   v. 20, like the dark ground tone of the picture, finally runs into the
   long and detailed description of chap. vii.

   These three examples are full of interest, partly because of the light
   they throw on the habits and moral sentiments of the time in which this
   Introduction was written, but chiefly because of the permanent teaching
   which is luminous in them all, and especially in the third.

   We may spend a few minutes upon the first. The young man finding his
   neighbour in monetary difficulties, consents in an easy-going way to
   become his surety; he enters into a solemn pledge with the creditor,
   probably a Phoenician money-lender, that he will himself be responsible
   if the debtor is not prepared to pay at the appointed time. He now
   stands committed; he is like a roe that is caught by the hunter, or a
   bird that is held by the fowler, in the hand of his neighbour. His
   peace of mind, and his welfare, depend no longer upon himself, but upon
   the character, the weakness, the caprice of another. This is a good
   illustration of the way in which a thoughtless action may weave cruel
   bands to bind the unwary. Looking at the matter from this point of
   view, our book strongly and frequently denounces the practice of
   suretiship. To become surety for another shows that you are void of
   understanding. So foolish is the action that it is compared to the
   surrender of one's own garments, and even to the loss of personal
   freedom. A proverb declares: "He that is surety for a stranger shall
   smart for it, but he that hateth suretiship is sure." [95]

   If then the young man has immeshed himself in obligations of this kind,
   he is recommended to spare no pains, not to stand upon a false pride,
   but to go with all urgency, with frank abasement, to the man for whom
   he has pledged his credit, and at all costs to get released from the
   obligation. "Be thou not," says Wisdom, "one of them that strike hands,
   or of them that are sureties for debts: if thou hast not wherewith to
   pay, why should he take away thy bed from under thee?" [96]

   We feel at once that there is another side to the question. There may
   be cases in which a true brotherliness will require us to be surety for
   our friend. "An honest man is surety for his neighbour, but he that is
   impudent will forsake him," says Ecclesiasticus. And from another point
   of view an injunction has to be given to one who has persuaded his
   friend to stand as his surety,--"Forget not the friendship of thy
   surety, for he hath given his life for thee. A sinner will overthrow
   the good estate of his surety, and he that is of an unthankful mind
   will leave him in danger that delivered him." But confining ourselves
   to the standpoint of the text, we may well raise a note of warning
   against the whole practice. As Ecclesiasticus himself says, "Suretiship
   hath undone many of good estate, and shaken them as a wave of the sea:
   mighty men hath it driven from their houses, so that they wandered
   among strange nations. A wicked man transgressing the commandments of
   the Lord shall fall into suretiship." [97]

   We may say perhaps that the truly moral course in these relations with
   our fellows lies here: if we can afford to be a surety for our
   neighbour, we can clearly afford to lend him the money ourselves. If we
   cannot afford to lend it to him, then it is weak and foolish, and may
   easily become wicked and criminal, to make our peace of mind dependent
   on the action of a third person, while in all probability it is hurtful
   to our friend himself, because by consenting to divide the risks with
   the actual creditor we tend to lessen in the debtor's mind the full
   realization of his indebtedness, and thus encourage him in shifty
   courses and unnerve his manly sense of responsibility. The cases in
   which it is wise as well as kind to become bail for another are so rare
   that they may practically be ignored in this connection; and when these
   rare occasions occur they may safely be left to the arbitrament of
   other principles of conduct which in the present instance are out of
   view. Here it is enough to emphasise what a miserable chain
   thoughtlessness in the matter of suretiship may forge for the
   thoughtless.

   We may now pass to our second illustration, the poverty and ruin which
   must eventually overtake the Sluggard. "I went by the field of the
   slothful, and by the vineyard of the man void of understanding; and,
   lo, it was all grown over with thorns. The face thereof was covered
   with nettles, and the stone wall thereof was broken down. Then I
   beheld, and considered well: I saw, and received instruction." [98] And
   there is the lazy owner of this neglected farm murmuring, "Yet a little
   sleep, a little slumber, a little folding of the hands to sleep." There
   seem to be in every community a certain number of people who can only
   be described as constitutionally incapable: as children they are heavy
   and phlegmatic; at school they are always playing truant, and exerting
   themselves, if at all, to escape the irksome necessity of learning
   anything; when they enter into life for themselves they have no notion
   of honest effort and steady persistency, but directly their employment
   becomes distasteful they quit it; and at length, when they end their
   days in the workhouse, or in those shameful haunts of sin and vice to
   which sloth so easily leads, they have the melancholy reflection to
   take with them to the grave that they have proved themselves an
   encumbrance of the earth, and can be welcomed in no conceivable world.
   Now the question must force itself upon our attention, Might not these
   incapables be rescued if they were taken young enough, and taught by
   wholesome discipline and a wise education what will be the inevitable
   issue of their lethargic tendencies? Might not the farm of the sluggard
   be impressed on their very eyeballs as a perpetual and effective
   warning?

   Leaving this important question to social reformers, we may note how
   beautifully this book employs the examples of insect life to teach and
   stimulate human beings. "The ants are a people not strong. Yet they
   provide their meat in summer.... The locusts have no king. Yet go they
   forth all of them by bands." [99] "Go to the ant, thou sluggard;
   consider her ways, and be wise: which having no chief, overseer, [100]
   or ruler, provideth her meat in the summer, and gathereth her food in
   the harvest." [101] By this little touch the book of Proverbs has
   turned the magnificent fields of modern scientific observation, and all
   the astonishing revelations of the microscope, into a school of moral
   and spiritual discipline for human life. Thus the ants swarm in the
   woods and the fields as if to rebuke the laziness and thriftlessness of
   man. They work night and day; they store their galleries with food;
   they capture and nourish aphides, which they use as a kind of domestic
   cattle. The vast and symmetrical mounds, which they rear as habitations
   and barns, are, relatively to the size of the builders, three or four
   times larger than the pyramids. By what mysterious instinct those long
   lines of labourers march and work in unison; by what half-human
   impulses they form in serried hosts and engage in deadly battles
   prolonged through several days; by what ludicrous freaks they are led
   to imitate men, spending their lives in pampered luxury, dependent upon
   slaves, until at last in their helplessness they are mastered by their
   bondservants in revolt; by what heavenly motive they are stirred to
   feed and nourish and nurse one another in sickness and trouble,--we
   need not here enquire, for we are only told to go to the ant in order
   to learn her ways of ceaseless activity. But in this brief precept we
   seem to receive a hint of the boundless instruction and warning to be
   derived from the humbler inhabitants of this earth which man claims as
   his own.

   Let us pass to the third illustration of the theme. The surety is the
   victim of easygoing thoughtlessness, the sluggard is the victim of
   laziness and incapacity; but now there appears on the scene the
   thoroughly worthless character, the man of Belial, and after his
   portrait is drawn in a few touches, his sudden and hopeless ruin is
   announced in a way which is all the more striking because the
   connection between the sin and its punishment is left to be guessed
   rather than explained. [102] The description of this person is
   wonderfully graphic and instructive, and we must dwell for a moment on
   the details. We see him, not in repose, but busy going from place to
   place, and talking a great deal. His lips are shaped continually to
   lie,--"he walketh with a froward mouth." There is no
   straightforwardness about him; he is full of hint, suggestion,
   innuendo; he gives you always the idea that he has an accomplice in the
   background; he turns to you and winks in a knowing way; he has a habit
   of shuffling with his feet, as if some evil spirit forbade him to stand
   still; you constantly catch him gesticulating; he points with his thumb
   over his shoulder, and nods significantly; he is never better pleased
   than when he can give the impression of knowing a great deal more than
   he cares to say. He delights to wrap himself in mystery--to smile
   blandly and then relapse into a look of inscrutability--to frown
   severely and then assume an air of gentle innocence. He is in the habit
   of beckoning one into a corner, and making a whispered communication as
   if he were your particular friend, as if he had taken a fancy to you
   directly he saw you, and was therefore eager to give you some
   information which nothing would induce him to divulge to anyone else;
   if you are foolish enough to share his confidences, he gives you very
   soon, when others are standing by, a cunning leer, as if to intimate
   that you and he are old acquaintances, and are in the secret, which the
   rest do not know. [103]

   The fact is that his heart is as deceitful as his lips; he cannot be
   true on any terms. If some simple and open course occurred to his mind
   he would shun it instinctively, because it is in devising evil that he
   lives and moves and has his being. His friendliest approaches fill an
   honest man with misgiving, his words of affection or admiration send a
   cold shudder through one's frame. His face is a mask; when it looks
   fair you suspect villainy; when it looks villainous, and then only, you
   recognize that it is true. Wherever he goes he makes mischief, he
   causes divisions; he is the Iago of every play in which he takes a
   part, the Judas of every society of which he is a member. He manages to
   sow suspicion in the mind of the least suspicious, and to cast a slur
   on the character of the most innocent. When he has created discord
   between friends he is delighted. If he sees them disposed to a
   reconciliation, he comes forward as a mediator and takes care to
   exasperate the differences, and to make the breach irreparable. Like
   Edmund in King Lear, he has a genius for setting men at variance, and
   for so arranging his plots that each party thinks he hears with his own
   ears and sees with his own eyes the proof of the other's perfidy. But,
   unlike Edmund, he does the mischief, not for any special good to
   himself, but for the mere delight of being an agent of evil.

   It is this kind of man that is the pest of commerce. He introduces
   dishonest practices into every business that he touches. He makes it a
   principle that in selling you are to impose on the customer, avail
   yourself of his ignorance or prejudice or weakness, and hide everything
   which might incline him to draw back; while in buying you are to use
   any fraud or panic or misrepresentation which might induce the seller
   to lower the price. [104] When he has been in a business for a little
   while the whole concern becomes tainted, there is a slime over
   everything; the very atmosphere is fetid.

   It is this kind of man that is the bane of every social circle. In his
   presence, all simplicity and innocence, all charity and forbearance and
   compassion, seem to wither away. If you are true and straightforward he
   manages to make you ridiculous; under his evil spell you seem a
   simpleton. All genial laughter he turns into sardonic smiles and
   sneers; all kindly expressions he transforms into empty compliments
   which are not devoid of a hidden venom. He is often very witty, but his
   wit clings like an eating acid to everything that is good and pure; his
   tongue will lodge a germ of putrescence in everything which it touches.

   It is this kind of man that is the leaven of hypocrisy and malice in
   the Christian Church; he intrigues and cabals. He sets the people
   against the minister and stirs up the minister to suspect his people.
   He undertakes religious work, because it is in that capacity he can do
   most mischief. He is never better pleased than when he can pose as the
   champion of orthodoxy, because then he seems to be sheltered and
   approved by the banner which he is defending.

   "Therefore shall his calamity come suddenly." [105] It is because the
   character is so incurably base, so saturated with lies and
   insincerities, that there can be no gradations or temperings in his
   punishment. One who is less evil may be proved and tested with slight
   troubles, if possibly he may be stirred to amendment. But this utterly
   worthless person is quite unaffected by the smaller trials, the
   tentative disciplines of life. He cannot be chastised as a son; he can
   only be broken as a vessel in which there is an intrinsic flaw; or as a
   building, which has got the plague in its very mortar and plaster.

   We are told that in Sierra Leone the white ants will sometimes occupy a
   house, and eat their way into all the woodwork, until every article in
   the house is hollow, so that it will collapse into dust directly it is
   touched. It is so with this deceitful character, so honeycombed, and
   eaten through, that though for years it may maintain its plausible
   appearance in the world, few people even suspecting the extent of the
   inward decay, on a sudden the end will come; there will be one touch of
   the finger of God, and the whole ill-compacted, worm-devoured thing
   will crumble into matchwood: "He shall be broken, and that without
   remedy."

   But while we are thus watching this worthless soul overtaken with an
   inevitable calamity, we are reminded that not only are our eyes upon
   him, but the Lord also sees him. And to that calm and holy watcher of
   the poor sinful creature there are six things which appear specially
   hateful--seven which are an abomination of His soul. [106] Is there not
   a kind of comfort in the thought that the Lord watches and knows the
   whole story of that miserable life, not leaving it to us to condemn,
   but taking upon Himself the whole responsibility? He knows whether
   there is a reason in nature for these bad hearts; He knows too what
   power outside of nature can change and redeem them. But at present we
   want only to mark and consider these seven things which are abominable
   to God--the seven prominent traits of the character which has just been
   depicted. We seem to need some spiritual quickening, that we may
   observe these hateful things not only with our own natural repugnance,
   but with something of the holy hatred and the inward loathing which
   they produce in the Divine mind.

   1. Haughty eyes. "There is a generation, Oh how lofty are their eyes!
   And their eyelids are lifted up." [107] And to that generation how many
   of us belong, and what secret admiration do we cherish for it, even
   when we can honestly disclaim any blood relationship! That haughty air
   of the great noble; that sense of intrinsic superiority; that
   graciousness of manner which comes from a feeling that no comparison
   can possibly be instituted between the great man and his inferiors;
   that way of surveying the whole earth as if it were one's private
   estate; or that supreme satisfaction with one's private estate as if it
   were the whole earth! This lofty pride, when its teeth are drawn so
   that it cannot materially hurt the rest of mankind, is a subject of
   mirth to us; but to the Lord it is not, it is hateful and abominable;
   it ranks with the gross vices and the worst sins; it is the chief crime
   of Satan.

   2. A lying tongue, though it "is but for a moment." [108] It is the
   sure sign of God's intense hatred against lies that they recoil on the
   head of the liar, and are the harbingers of certain destruction. We
   dislike lies because of their social inconvenience, and where some
   social convenience is served by them we connive at them and approve.
   But God hates the lying tongue, whatever apparent advantage comes from
   it. If we lie for personal gain He hates it. If we lie from mere
   weakness, He hates it. If we lie in the name of religion, and in the
   fashion of the Jesuit, for the welfare of men and the salvation of
   souls, He hates it none the less. The abomination does not consist in
   the motive of the lie, but in the lie itself.

   3. Hands that shed innocent blood. So hateful are they to Him that He
   could not let David His chosen servant build Him a house because this
   charge could be laid against the great king. The soldier in the
   battle-field hewing down the man who is innocent, and the man who in
   carelessness or greed is wearing the poor, who are dependent on him,
   down to death, and the man who in a passion rises up and murders his
   fellow,--these are very hateful to the Lord. There at the beginning of
   the world's history, in the blood of righteous Abel crying to the Lord,
   and in the mark set on the guilty brow of Cain, the heart of God was
   clearly and finally shown. He has not changed. He does not shed
   innocent blood Himself; He cannot away with them that shed it.

   4. Hateful too to Him is the devising heart, even where courage or
   opportunity fails of realizing the device. There are so many more
   murderers in the world than we see, so many cruel and wicked deeds
   restrained by the police or by a dominant public sentiment, which yet
   lie deep in the wicked imaginations of our hearts, and are abominable
   to God, that we may be thankful if we do not see as He sees, and may
   wonder at the forbearance of His compassion.

   5. Feet that be swift in running to mischief. Feet listless in the ways
   of brotherly service or holy worship, but swift, twinkling with eager
   haste, when any mischief is toward, are marked by God--and hated.

   6. And a false witness is abominable to Him, the poisoner of all social
   life, the destroyer of all justice between man and man. Again and again
   in this book is censure passed upon this unpardonable crime. [109]

   7. Finally, as the blessing of Heaven descends on the peacemaker, so
   the hatred of God assails the man who sows discord among brethren.

   Such is the character that God abominates, the character which binds
   itself with cords of penalty and falls into irretrievable ruin. And
   then, after this disquisition on some of the vices which destroy the
   individual life and disturb society, our author turns again to that
   snaring vice which is so much the more destructive because it comes
   under the guise, not of hate, but of love. Those other vices after all
   bear their evil on their faces, but this is veiled and enchanted with a
   thousand plausible sophistries; it pleads the instincts of nature, the
   fascinations of beauty, the faults of the present social state, and
   even advances the august precepts of science. Surely in a way where
   such a danger lurks we need a commandment which will shine as a lamp, a
   law which will be itself a light (ver. 23).
     __________________________________________________________________

   [95] See Prov. xvii. 18, xx. 16, repeated in xxvii. 13, and especially
   xi. 15.

   [96] Prov. xxii. 26, 27.

   [97] Eccles. xxix. 14, 16, 17, 18, 19.

   [98] Prov. xxiv. 30-34; see for a fuller treatment of the subject
   Lecture XX.

   [99] Prov. xxx. 25-27.

   [100] It is the word used in Exod. v. 6 of those who directed the tasks
   of the Israelites in Egypt.

   [101] Prov. vi. 6-8.

   [102] Prov. vi. 12-15.

   [103] Cf. the proverb xvi. 30--"He that shutteth his eyes, it is to
   devise froward things: he that compresseth his lips bringeth evil to
   pass."

   [104] Cf. Prov. xx. 14: "It is naught, it is naught, saith the buyer:
   but when he is gone his way, then he boasteth."

   [105] It is probably assumed that warnings and corrections have been
   given him in vain--cf. Prov. xxix. 1: "He that being often reproved
   hardeneth his neck shall suddenly be broken, and that without remedy."

   [106] Prov. vi. 16-19.

   [107] Prov. xxx. 13. See Lecture XIII. for the teaching of the Proverbs
   on Pride.

   [108] Prov. xii. 19.

   [109] See Prov. xii. 17; xiv. 5, 25; xix. 5, 9. A crime, it may be
   remembered, which would be much more common and much more fatal in a
   primitive state of society, where on the one hand legal procedure was
   less cautious and less searching, and on the other hand the inward
   sanctions of truth which Christianity has brought home to the modern
   conscience were but feebly perceived.
     __________________________________________________________________

VII.

  REALISM IN MORAL TEACHING.

     "I looked forth through my lattice; and I beheld."--Prov. vii. 6.

   The three chapters which close the introduction of our book (vii.-ix.)
   present a lively and picturesque contrast between Folly and
   Wisdom---Folly more especially in the form of vice; Wisdom more
   generally in her highest and most universal intention. Folly is
   throughout concrete, an actual woman, pourtrayed with such correctness
   of detail that she is felt as a personal force. Wisdom, on the other
   hand, is only personified; she is an abstract conception; she speaks
   with human lips in order to carry out the parallel, but she is not a
   human being, known to the writer. As we shall see in the next Lecture,
   this high Wisdom never took a human shape until the Incarnation of our
   Lord Jesus Christ; Folly, unhappily, had become incarnate in myriads of
   instances; scarcely any city or place where men congregate was, or is,
   without its melancholy example. It follows from this difference between
   the two that the picture of Folly is a piece of vigorous realism, while
   the account of Wisdom is a piece of delicate idealism. Folly is
   historical, Wisdom is prophetic. In this chapter we are concerned with
   facts which the author witnessed from the window of his house looking
   forth through the lattice. [110] In the next chapter we shall touch on
   ideas which he had not seen, and could not have seen unless it were in
   lofty vision looking out through the lattice of the soul. In the
   present chapter we have an opportunity of noticing the immense value
   and power of pictorial delineation and concrete images in moral
   teaching; in the next we shall experience the peculiar fascination and
   inspiration of beautiful abstract conceptions, of disembodied ideals
   which, so far as we know at the time, are not capable of actual
   realization.

   It is important to remember this difference in order to understand why
   Wisdom, the shadowy contrast to that Mistress Folly who was only too
   concrete and familiar, shaped itself to the writer's mind as a fair and
   stately woman, a queenly hostess inviting simple ones to her feast;
   though, as Christians have learnt, the historical embodiment of Wisdom
   was a man, the Word of God, who of God was made unto us wisdom.

   Now before we take our stand at the window and look through the lattice
   into the street, we must notice the exhortations to the young man to
   make wisdom and understanding his intimate friends, with which the
   chapter begins. The law is to be kept as the apple of the eye, which is
   so sensitive, so tender, and at the same time so surpassingly
   important, that the lid has to shield it by a quick instinctive
   movement outrunning thought, and the hand has to be ready at all times
   to come to its succour. The commandments are to be written on the
   fingers, like engraved rings, which would serve as instant reminders in
   unwary moments; the very instruments through which the evil would be
   done are to be claimed and sealed and inscribed by the righteousness
   which can preserve from evil, while in the secret tablets of the heart
   the holy truths are to be written; so that if, in the business of life,
   the writing on the fingers may get blurred or effaced, the principles
   of righteousness may yet be kept like priceless archives stored in the
   inviolable chambers of the inner man. Wisdom is to be treated as a
   sister, [111] not as if there were a natural kinship, but on the ground
   of the beautiful influence which a true sister, a pure woman soul,
   exercises over a young man's life. It is given to a sister again and
   again, by unfailing sympathy and by sweet comprehending ways, not
   teasing nor lecturing, but always believing and hoping and loving, to
   weave a magical spell of goodness and truth around a brother who is
   exposed to dangerous temptations; she will "maintain for him a saving
   intercourse with his true self;" when the fires of more ardent
   affections are burning low, or extinguished in doubt or disgust, she
   will be with him like a calm impersonal presence, unobtrusive,
   unforgotten, the more potent because she makes no show of power. Such a
   lovely fraternal relation is to be maintained with Wisdom, constant as
   a tie of blood, firm as a companionship from earliest infancy, yet
   exalted and enthusiastic in its way, and promising a lifelong
   attraction and authority.

   This blessed kinship with Understanding should save the young man from
   such a fate as we are now to contemplate.

   It is twilight, not yet absolutely dark, but the shuddering horror of
   the scene seems to quench the doubtful glimmer of evening and to plunge
   the observer suddenly into midnight. [112] There is a young man coming
   round the corner of the street. His is no manly walk, but an idle,
   effeminate saunter--a detail which is not brought out in the English
   Version. [113] He is a dandy and sadly empty-headed. Now all young men,
   good and bad alike, pass through a period of dandyism, and it has its
   uses; but the better the stuff of which the man is made, the more
   quickly he gets over the crisis, and returns to his senses. This young
   man is "void of understanding;" his dandyism will be chronic. His is a
   feeble will and a prurient mind; but his special weakness consists in
   this, that he thinks he can always resist temptation, and therefore
   never hesitates to thrust himself in its way. It is as if one were to
   pride himself on being able to hang on with his fingers to the rim of a
   well: he is always hanging there, and a touch will send him in. One who
   is in his own opinion weaker would give the dangerous place a wide
   berth, and nothing but sheer force would bring him to the edge.

   This young dandy has nothing to say for himself. A tempter need not be
   at the trouble to bring any sound arguments, or to make the worse
   appear the better reason; to this poor weakling the worse the reason is
   the better it will appear. As you see him lolling down the path with
   his leering look and his infinite self-satisfaction--good-natured, but
   without any other goodness; not with bad intentions, but with
   everything else bad--you can foresee that he will be blown over as
   easily as a pleasure skiff on a stormy ocean; if you have a
   compassionate heart you mourn over him at once, for you see the
   inevitable.

   The woman has come out to meet him--like a bird-catcher who has been
   watching for the unwary bird. Now he should escape at once, for her
   very attire warns him of her intentions. But this is just his weakness;
   he delights to place himself in such a position; he would say that it
   is the proof of his manliness that he can resist. She approaches him
   with a smirk and a smile, with an open countenance but a closed heart.
   She utters a sound, moving and pathetic like the murmur of
   harp-strings; [114] it comes from that inward tumult of passion in the
   woman's nature which always flutters the heart of a weak youth. [115]
   She is a wild undisciplined creature; she always hankers after the
   forbidden; the quiet home ways are insufferable to her; out in the
   streets, with their excitement, their variety, their suggestions, their
   possibilities, she forgets, if she does not quiet, her restlessness.
   The poor woman-nature which, rightly taught and trained, might make the
   beauty and sweetness of a home, capable of sanctified affections and of
   self-sacrificing devotion, is here entirely perverted. The passion is
   poisoned and now poisonous. The energy is diseased. The charms are all
   spurious. She goes abroad in the blackness of night because in even a
   faint light her hideousness would appear; under the paint and the
   finery she is a hag; her eyes are lustreless but for the temporary fire
   of her corruptions; behind that voice which croons and ripples there is
   a subdued moan of despair--the jarring of harp-strings which snap and
   quiver and shudder and are silent for ever. The wise man looks at her
   with compassionate loathing, God with pity which yearns to save; but
   this foolish youth is moved by her as only a fool could be moved. His
   weak understanding is immediately overcome by her flatteries; his
   polluted heart does not perceive the poison of her heartless
   endearments.

   She throws her arms round him and kisses him, and he makes no question
   that it is a tribute to the personal attractions which he has himself
   often admired in his mirror. She would have him believe that it was he
   whom she had come out specially to seek, though it would have been just
   the same whoever had caught her eye; and he, deceived by his own
   vanity, at once believes her. She has a great deal to say; she does not
   rely on one inducement, for she does not know with whom she has to do;
   she pours out therefore all her allurements in succession without
   stopping to take breath.

   First, she holds out the prospect of a good meal. She has abundant meat
   in the house, which comes from the sacrifice she has just been
   offering, and it must be eaten by the next day, according to the
   commandment of the Law. [116] Or if he is not one to be attracted
   merely by food, she has appeals to his sthetic side; her furniture is
   rich and artistic, and her chamber is perfumed with sweet spices. She
   perceives perhaps by now what a weak, faint-hearted creature, enervated
   by vice, unmanly and nervous, she has to do with, and she hastens to
   assure him that his precious skin will be safe. Her goodman is not at
   home, and his absence will be prolonged; he took money with him for a
   long journey, and she knows the date of his return. The foolish youth
   need not fear, therefore, "that jealousy which is the rage of a man;"
   he will not have to offer gifts and ransom to the implacable husband,
   because his deed will never be known. How hollow it all sounds, and how
   suspicious; surely one who had a grain of understanding would answer
   with manly scorn and with kindling indignation. But our poor young
   fool, who was so confident of himself, yields without a struggle; with
   her mere talk, playing upon his vanity, she bends him as if he were a
   water-weed in a stream--her appeals to his self-admiration drive him
   forth as easily as the goads urge an ox to the slaughter-house.

   And now you may watch him going after her to destruction!

   Is there not a pathos in the sight of an ox going to the slaughter? The
   poor dumb creature is lured by the offer of food or driven by the lash
   of the driver. It enters the slaughter-house as if it were a stall for
   rest and refreshment; it has no idea that "it is for its life." The
   butcher knows; the bystanders understand the signs; but it is perfectly
   insensible, taking a transitory pleasure in the unwonted attentions
   which are really the portents of death. It is not endeared to us by any
   special interest or affection; the dull, stupid life has never come
   into any close connection with ours. It has never been to us like a
   favourite dog, or a pet bird that has cheered our solitary hours. It
   gave us no response when we spoke to it or stroked its sleek hide. It
   was merely an animal. But yet it moves our pity at this supreme moment
   of its life; we do not like to think of the heavy blow which will soon
   lay the great slow-pacing form prostrate and still in death.

   Here is an ox going to the slaughter,--but it is a fellow-man, a young
   man, not meant for ignominious death, capable of a good and noble life.
   The poor degraded woman who lures him to his ruin has no such motive of
   serviceableness as the butcher has. By a malign influence she attracts
   him, an influence even more fatal to herself than to him. And he
   appears quite insensible,--occupied entirely with reflections on his
   glossy skin and goodly form; not suspecting that bystanders have any
   other sentiment than admiration of his attractions and approval of his
   manliness, he goes quietly, unresistingly, lured rather than driven, to
   the slaughter-house.

   The effect of comparison with dumb animals is heightened by throwing in
   a more direct comparison with other human beings. Transposing the
   words, with Delitzsch, as is evidently necessary in order to preserve
   the parallelism of the similitude, we find this little touch: "He goeth
   after her straightway, as a fool to the correction of the fetters,"--as
   if the Teacher would remind us that the fate of the young man, tragic
   as it is, is yet quite devoid of the noble aspects of tragedy. This
   clause is a kind of afterthought, a modification. "Did we say that he
   is like the ox going to the slaughter?--nay, there is a certain dignity
   in that image, for the ox is innocent of its own doom, and by its death
   many will benefit; with our pity for it we cannot but mingle a certain
   gratitude, and we find no room for censure; but this entrapped weakling
   is after all only a fool, of no service or interest to any one, without
   any of the dignity of our good domestic cattle; in his corrupt and
   witless heart is no innocence which should make us mourn. And the
   punishment he goes to, though it is ruin, is so mean and degrading that
   it awakes the jeers and scorn of the beholders. As if he were in the
   village stocks, he will be exposed to eyes which laugh while they
   despise him. Those who are impure like himself will leer at him; those
   who are pure will avert their glance with an ill-disguised contempt."
   There, then, goes the ox to the slaughter; nay, the mere empty-headed
   fool to the punishment of the fetters, which will keep him out of
   further mischief, and chain him down to the dumb lifeless creation to
   which he seems to belong.

   But the scorn changes rapidly to pity. Where a fellow-creature is
   concerned we may not feel contempt beyond that point at which it serves
   as a rebuke, and a stimulus to better things. When we are disposed to
   turn away with a scornful smile, we become aware of the suffering which
   the victim of his own sins will endure. It will be like an arrow
   striking through the liver. Only a moment, and he will be seized with
   the sharp pain which follows on indulgence. Oh the nausea and the
   loathing, when the morning breaks and he sees in all their naked
   repulsiveness the things which he allowed to fascinate him yester-eve!
   What a bitter taste is in his mouth; what a ghastly and livid hue is on
   the cheek which he imagined fair! He is pierced; to miserable physical
   sufferings is joined a sense of unspeakable degradation, a wretched
   depression of spirits, a wish to die which is balanced in horrid
   equilibrium by a fear of death.

   And now he will arise and flee out of this loathly house, which seems
   to be strewn with dead men's bones and haunted by the moaning spirits
   of the mighty host which have here gone down into Sheol. But what is
   this? He cannot flee. He is held like a bird in the snare, which beats
   its wings and tries to fly in vain; the soft yielding net will rise and
   fall with its efforts, but will not suffer it to escape. He cannot
   flee, for if he should escape those fatal doors, before to-morrow's sun
   sets he will be seized with an overmastering passion, a craving which
   is like the gnawing of a vulture at the liver; by an impulse which he
   cannot resist he will be drawn back to that very corner; there will not
   be again any raptures, real or imagined, only racking and tormenting
   desires; there will be no fascination of sight or scent or taste; all
   will appear as it is--revolting; the perfumes will all be rank and
   sickly, the meat will all be blighted and fly-blown; but none the less
   he must back; there, poor, miserable, quivering bird, he must render
   himself, and must take his fill of--loves? no, of maudlin rapture and
   burning disgust; solace himself? no, but excite a desire which grows
   with every satisfaction, which slowly and surely, like that loathsome
   monster of the seas, slides its clinging suckers around him, and holds
   him in an embrace more and more deadly until he finally succumbs.

   Then he perceives that the fatal step that he took was "for his life,"
   that is, his life was at stake. When he entered into the trap, the die
   was cast; hope was abandoned as he entered there. The house which
   appeared so attractive was a mere covered way to hell. The chambers
   which promised such imagined delights were on an incline which sloped
   down to death.

   Look at him, during that brief passage from his foolish heedlessness to
   his irretrievable ruin, a Rake's Progress presented in simple and vivid
   pictures, which are so terrible because they are so absolutely true.

   After gazing for a few minutes upon the story, do we not feel its
   power? Are there not many who are deaf to all exhortations, who will
   never attend to the words of Wisdom's mouth, who have a consummate art
   in stopping their ears to all the nobler appeals of life, who yet will
   be arrested by this clear presentation of a fact, by the teacher's
   determination not to blink or underrate any of the attractions and
   seductions, and by his equal determination not to disguise or diminish
   any of the frightful results?

   We may cherish the sweetness and the purity which reticence will often
   preserve, but when the sweetness and the purity are lost, reticence
   will not bring them back, and duty seems to require that we should lay
   aside our fastidiousness and speak out boldly in order to save the soul
   of our brother.

   But after dwelling on such a picture as this there is a thought which
   naturally occurs to us; in our hearts a yearning awakes which the book
   of Proverbs is not capable of meeting. Warnings so terrible, early
   instilled into the minds of our young men, may by God's grace be
   effectual in saving them from the decline into those evil ways, and
   from going astray in the paths of sin. Such warnings ought to be given,
   although they are painful and difficult to give. But when we have gone
   wrong through lack of instruction, when a guilty silence has prevented
   our teachers from cautioning us, while the corrupt habits of society
   have drawn us insensibly into sin, and a thousand glozening excuses
   have veiled from our eyes the danger until it is too late, is there
   nothing left for us but to sink deeper and deeper into the slough, and
   to issue from it only to emerge in the chambers of death?

   To this question Jesus gives the answer. He alone can give it. Even
   that personified Wisdom whose lofty and philosophical utterances we
   shall hear in the next chapter, is not enough. No advice, no counsel,
   no purity, no sanctity of example can avail. It is useless to upbraid a
   man with his sins when he is bound hand and foot with them and cannot
   escape. It is a mockery to point out, what is only too obvious, that
   without holiness no man can see God, at a moment when the miserable
   victim of sin can see nothing clearly except the fact that he is
   without holiness. "The pure in heart shall see God" is an announcement
   of exquisite beauty, it has a music which is like the music of the
   spheres, a music at which the doors of heaven seem to swing open; but
   it is merely a sentence of doom to those who are not pure in heart.
   Jesus meets the corrupt and ruined nature with the assurance that He
   has come "to seek and to save that which was lost." And lest a mere
   assertion should prove ineffectual to the materialised and fallen
   spirit, Jesus came and presented in the realism of the Cross a picture
   of Redemption which could strike hearts that are too gross to feel and
   too deaf to hear. It might be possible to work out ideally the
   redemption of man in the unseen and spiritual world. But actually, for
   men whose very sin makes them unspiritual, there seems to be no way of
   salvation which does not approach them in a tangible form. The horrible
   corruption and ruin of our physical nature, which is the work of sin,
   could be met only by the Incarnation, which should work out a
   redemption through the flesh.

   Accordingly, here is a wonder which none can explain, but which none
   can gainsay. When the victim of fleshly sin, suffering from the arrow
   which has pierced his liver, handed over as it seems to despair, is led
   to gaze upon the Crucified Christ, and to understand the meaning of His
   bearing our sins in His own body on the tree, he is touched, he is led
   to repentance, he is created anew, his flesh comes again to him as a
   little child, he can offer up to God the sacrifice of a contrite heart,
   and he is cleansed.

   This is a fact which has been verified again and again by experience.
   And they who have marked the power of the Cross can never sufficiently
   admire the wisdom and the love of God, who works by ways so entirely
   unlike our ways, and has resources at His command which surpass our
   conception and baffle our explanation.

   If there is a man literally broken down and diseased with sin,
   enfeebled in will and purpose, tormented by his evil appetite so that
   he seems like one possessed, the wisest counsels may be without any
   effect; paint in the most vivid hues the horrible consequences of his
   sin, but he will remain unmoved; apply the coercion of a prison and all
   the punishments which are at the disposal of an earthly judge, and he
   will return to his vicious life with a gusto increased by his
   recuperated physical strength; present to him the most touching appeals
   of wife and children and friends, and while he sheds sentimental tears
   he will continue to run the downward way. But let him be arrested by
   the spectacle of Christ crucified for him, let the moving thought of
   that priceless love and untold suffering stir in his heart, let his
   eyes be lifted never so faintly to those eyes of Divine
   compassion,--and though he seemed to have entered the very precincts of
   the grave, though the heart within him seemed to have died and the
   conscience seemed to be seared with a hot iron, you will observe at
   once the signs of returning animation; a cry will go up from the lips,
   a sob will convulse the frame, a light of passionate hope will come
   into the eyes. Christ has touched him. Christ is merciful. Christ is
   powerful. Christ will save.

   Ah, if I speak to one who is bound with the cords of his sin,
   helplessly fettered and manacled, dead as it were in trespasses, I know
   there is no other name to mention to you, no other hope to hold out to
   you. Though I knew all science, I could not effectually help you;
   though I could command all the springs of human feeling, I could not
   stir you from your apathy, or satisfy the first cries of your awaking
   conscience. But it is permitted to me to preach unto you--not abstract
   Wisdom, but--Jesus, who received that name because He should save His
   people from their sins.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [110] Prov. vii. 6.

   [111] Prov. vii. 4.

   [112] Prov. vii. 9.

   [113] Prov. vii. 8. The term tsd describes a special kind of motion,
   e.g., the slow pacing of the oxen that bare the ark (2 Sam. vi. 15), or
   the imagined efforts of idols to move (Jer. x. 5); it is therefore
   unfortunate to render it by the generic word "go." The affected dignity
   and sauntering insouciance of a dandy are immediately suggested by it,
   and the shade of meaning is fairly well preserved in the English
   "saunter."

   [114] This is the meaning of the word translated 'clamorous.'

   [115] So says the Greek version of ver. 10: he poiei neon exiptasthai
   kardias.

   [116] See Lev. vii. 16.
     __________________________________________________________________

VIII.

  THE FIRST-BORN OF THE CREATOR.

   "Doth not Wisdom cry?"--Prov. viii. 1.

   In the last chapter a dark and revolting picture of Vice was drawn.
   This chapter contains a lovely and living picture of Wisdom. In this
   contrast, as we have already seen, Vice can be presented as a vicious
   woman, because it is unhappily only too easy to find such an
   incarnation in actual experience; Wisdom, on the other hand, cannot be
   presented as an actual person, but only as a personification, because
   there was, as yet, no Incarnation of Wisdom; far from it, Solomon, the
   wisest of men, the framer of many wise proverbs, had been in practical
   conduct an incarnation of folly rather than of wisdom, had himself
   become a proverb for a wise and understanding heart in combination with
   a dark and vicious life. Yet how could the teacher fail to feel that
   some day there must be an Incarnate Wisdom, a contrast to the Incarnate
   Vice, a conqueror and destroyer of it? In describing Wisdom
   personified, and in following out her sweet and high-souled utterance,
   the teacher unconsciously to himself becomes a prophet, and presents,
   as we shall see, a faint and wavering image of Him who of God was to be
   made unto men Wisdom, of Him who was actually to live a concrete human
   life embodying the Divine Wisdom as completely as many poor stained
   human lives have embodied the undivine folly of vice. The description,
   then, is an adumbration of something as yet not seen or fully
   understood; we must be careful not to spoil its meaning by representing
   it as more, and by attempting to press the details in explanation of
   the being and the work of Christ. We shall do wisely to look at the
   whole picture as it formed itself before the eye of the writer, and to
   abstain from introducing into it colours or shades of our own. Our
   first task must be to follow the movement of the chapter as carefully
   as possible.

   Wisdom, unlike the vicious woman who lurks in the twilight at the
   corner of the street which contains her lair, stands in the open
   places; she makes herself as manifest as may be by occupying some
   elevated position, from which her ringing voice may be heard down the
   streets and up the cross-ways, and may attract the attention of those
   who are entering the city gates or the doors of the houses. As her
   voice is strong and clear, so her words are full and rounded; there is
   no whispering, no muttering, no dark hint, no subtle incitement to
   secret pleasures; her tone is breezy and stirring as the dawn; there is
   something about it which makes one involuntarily think of the open air,
   and the wide sky, and the great works of God. [117] There is the beauty
   of goodness in all that she says; there is the charming directness and
   openness of truth; she abhors tortuous and obscure ways; and if some of
   her sayings seem paradoxes or enigmas, a little difficult to
   understand, that is the fault of the hearer; to a tortuous mind
   straight things appear crooked; to the ignorant and uninstructed mind
   the eternal laws of God appear foolishness; but all that she says is
   plain to one who understands, and right to those who find knowledge.
   [118] She walks always in a certain and undeviating course--it is the
   way of righteousness and judgment--and only those who tread the same
   path can expect to perceive the meaning of what she says, or to
   appreciate the soundness of all her counsels. [119] And now she
   proclaims the grounds on which she demands the attention of men, in a
   noble appeal, which rises to a passionate eloquence and deepens in
   spiritual significance as it advances. Roughly speaking, this appeal
   seems to fall into two parts: from ver. 10 to ver. 21 the obvious
   advantages of obeying her voice are declared, but at ver. 22 the
   discourse reaches a higher level, and she claims obedience because of
   her essential nature and her eternal place in the universe of created
   things.

   In the first part Wisdom solemnly states her own value, as compared
   with the valuables which men usually covet--silver, and gold, and
   precious stones. That she is of more account than these, appears from
   the fact that they are but parts of her gifts. In her train come
   riches; but they differ from ordinary riches in being durable; her
   faithful followers obtain substantial wealth, and their treasuries
   insensibly fill. [120] To riches she adds honour, a crown which worldly
   riches seldom bring, and, what is better still, the honour which she
   confers is associated with righteousness, while the spurious honour
   which is commonly rendered to riches, being conferred without any moral
   implication, is devoid of any moral appreciation. [121] But after all,
   she herself is her own best reward; the prosperity which accompanies
   her seems trivial compared with the desirableness of her own person.
   Her queenly dwelling is prudence, and at her touch all the charmed
   regions of knowledge and discovery fly open; they who dwell with her
   and are admitted to share her secrets find the fruit and the increase
   of the intellectual life incomparably better than fine gold or choice
   silver. And what gives to her endowments their peculiar completeness is
   that she requires a moral culture to go hand in hand with mental
   development; and leading her disciples to hate evil, and to avoid the
   arrogance and the pride of the intellect, she rescues knowledge from
   becoming a mere barren accumulation of facts, and keeps it always in
   contact with the humanities and with life. Indeed, she finds it one
   great part of her mighty task to instruct the rulers of men, and to fit
   them for the fulfilment of their high functions. Her queenly
   prerogative she shares with all her faithful followers. Since Wisdom is
   the actual arbiter of human life, the wise man is, as the Stoics would
   have said, a king; nor can any king be recognized or tolerated who is
   not wise. [122]

   And all these advantages of wealth and honour, of knowledge, and power,
   and righteousness, are put within the reach of every one. Wisdom is no
   churl in loving; she loves all who love her. She does not seek to
   withdraw herself from men; rather she chooses the places and the ways
   in which she can best attract them. Queenly as she is, she condescends
   to woo them. Her invitations are general, even universal. And therefore
   if any do not find her, it is because they do not seek her; if any do
   not share in her rich gifts and graces, it is because they will not
   take the trouble to claim them. [123]

   But now we pass on to the second ground of appeal. Wisdom unveils
   herself, discloses her origin, shows her heart, stands for a moment on
   her high celestial throne, that she may make her claims upon the sons
   of men more irresistible. She was the first creation of God. [124]
   Before the earth issued out of nothingness she was there. In joyous
   activity, daily full of delight, she was beside God, as an architect,
   in the forming of the world. She saw the great earth shaped and clothed
   for the first time in the mantle of its floods, and made musical with
   the sound of its fountains. She saw the mountains and the hills built
   up from their foundations. She saw the formation of the dry land, and
   of the atoms of dust which go to make the ground. [125] She saw the sky
   spread out as a firm vault to cover the earth; and she saw God when


   "... in His hand

   He took the golden compasses, prepared

   In God's eternal store, to circumscribe

   This universe and all created things." [126]

   She saw the mighty tides of the ocean restricted to their appointed
   cisterns, and the firm outlines of the land fixed as their impassable
   barriers. [127] And this very Wisdom, who thus presided over the
   formation of land, and sea, and sky, is she who still sports with God's
   fruitful earth--yes, sports, for the great characteristic of Wisdom is
   her exultant cheerfulness, and it must by no means be supposed that the
   foolish and the wicked have all the gaiety and mirth as their own.
   [128] This Wisdom is she too who finds her peculiar delight with the
   sons of men.

   Is it not obvious, then, that men, who are her sons, ought to give ear
   to her counsels? What could establish a stronger claim for attention
   than this ancient origin, this honourable part in laying the very
   foundations of the earth, and this special interest in human life from
   the beginning? Raised to this high level, where we command so wide a
   prospect, are we not forced to see that it is our duty, our interest,
   our joy, to come as humble suitors to the gates of Wisdom, and there to
   watch, and wait, and seek until we may obtain admission? Must we not
   search after her, when in finding her we find life and obtain favour of
   the Lord? Can we not perceive that to miss her is to miss life, to
   wrong our own souls--to hate her is to love death? Evidently her
   eagerness to win us is entirely disinterested; though she delights in
   us, she could easily dispense with us; on the other hand, though we do
   not delight in her, though we constantly turn a deaf ear to her, and
   refuse to walk in her ways, she is indispensable to us.

   Such a passage as this gives rise to many reflections, and the longer
   we meditate upon it the more rich and suggestive it appears. Let us try
   to follow out some of the thoughts which readily present themselves,
   and especially such as are suggested by the verses which may be
   described as the poem of creation.

   First of all, here is the noble idea which overturns at a touch all
   mythological speculations about the origin of things--an idea which is
   in deep harmony with all the best knowledge of our own time--that there
   is nothing fortuitous in the creation of the world; the Creator is not
   a blind Force, but an Intelligent Being whose first creation is wisdom.
   He is the origin of a Law by which He means to bind Himself;
   arbitrariness finds no place in His counsels; accident has no part in
   His works; in Wisdom hath He formed them all. In all heathen
   conceptions of creation caprice is supreme, law has no place, blind
   force works in this way or that, either by the compulsion of a
   Necessity which is stronger than the gods, or by freaks and whims of
   the gods which would be contemptible even in men. But here is the clear
   recognition of the principle that God's Law is a law also to Himself,
   and that His law is wisdom. He creates the world as an outcome of His
   own wise and holy design, so that "nothing walks with aimless feet." It
   is on this theological conception that the possibility of science
   depends. Until the universe is recognized as an ordered and
   intelligible system the ordered and intelligent study of it cannot
   begin. As long as the arbitrary and fortuitous are supposed to hold
   sway inquiry is paralyzed at its starting-point.

   It may, however, be suggested that the doctrine of Evolution, which
   scientific men are almost unanimous in accepting, is inconsistent with
   this idea of Creation. By this doctrine our attention is directed to
   the apparently disordered collision of forces, and the struggle for
   existence out of which the order and progress of life are educed, and
   it is hastily assumed that a Wise Intelligence would not work in this
   way, but would exhibit more economy of resources, more simplicity and
   directness of method, and more inevitableness of result. But may we not
   say that the apparent fortuitousness with which the results are
   achieved is the clearest evidence of the wise purpose which orders and
   directs the process? for about the results there can be no question;
   order, beauty, fitness everywhere prevail; life emerges from the
   inorganic, thought from life, morality and religion from thought. The
   more our attention is called to the apparently accidental steps by
   which these results are reached, the more persuaded must we become that
   a great and a wise law was at work, that by the side of the Creator, as
   a master workman, was Wisdom from the beginning. Such a passage as
   this, then, prepares the way for all science, and furnishes the true
   conceptions without which science would be sterile. It takes us at a
   step out of a pagan into a truly religious mode of thinking; it leads
   us out of the misty regions of superstition to the luminous threshold
   of the House of Knowledge. It may be said with truth that many
   scientific facts which are known to us were not known to the writer;
   and this may raise a prejudice against our book in those minds which
   can tolerate no thought except that of the present generation, and
   appreciate no knowledge which is not, as it were, brought up to date;
   but the fruitful conception is here, here is the right way of regarding
   the universe, here the preparation of all science.

   And now to advance to another idea which is implied in the passage, the
   idea that in the very conception of the universe human life was
   contemplated, and regarded with a peculiar delight by the Wisdom of
   God. The place which Man occupies in creation has been variously
   estimated in different religious systems and by different religious
   thinkers. Sometimes he has been regarded as the centre of all things,
   the creature for whom all things exist. Then a reaction has set in, and
   he has been treated as a very insignificant and possibly transient
   phenomenon in the order of things. It is characteristic of the Bible
   that it presents a balanced view of this question, avoiding extremes in
   both directions. On the one hand, it very clearly recognizes that man
   is a part of the creation, that he belongs to it because he springs out
   of it, and rules over it only in so far as he conforms to it; on the
   other hand, it clearly insists on that relation between man and his
   Creator which is hinted at here. Man is always implicitly connected
   with God by some half-divine mediator. The Wisdom of God watches with
   an unmoved heart the growth of the physical world, but into her
   contemplation of mankind there enters a peculiar delight. There is that
   in man which can listen to her appeals, can listen and respond. He is
   capable of rising to the point of view from which she looks out upon
   the world, and can even see himself in the light in which she sees him.
   In a word, man, with all his insignificance, has a sublime possibility
   in him, the possibility of becoming like God; in this he stands quite
   alone among created things; it is this which gives him his
   pre-eminence. Thus our passage, while it does not for a moment imply
   that the material universe was made for the sake of man, or that man in
   himself can claim a superiority over the other creatures of the
   earth--and so far takes a view which is very popular with scientific
   men--yet parts company with the philosophy of materialism in claiming
   for man a place altogether unique, because he has within him the
   possibility of being linked to God by means of the Wisdom of God.

   And now we may notice another implication of the passage. While Wisdom
   celebrates her high prerogative as the first-born of the Creator and
   the instrument of the creation, and urges upon men as parts of the
   creation the observance of the Moral Law, she is implicitly teaching
   the great truth which men have been so slow to grasp, that the law of
   practical righteousness is of a piece with the very laws of creation.
   To put it in another form, the rules of right conduct are really the
   rules of the universe applied to human life. Laws of nature, as they
   are called, and laws of morality have their origin in one and the same
   Being, and are interpreted to us by one and the same Wisdom. It would
   be well for us all if we could understand how far-reaching this great
   truth is, and an intelligent study of this passage certainly helps us
   to understand it. None of us, in our wildest moments, think of pitting
   ourselves against the laws of nature. We do not murmur against the law
   of gravitation; we scrupulously conform to it so far as we can, knowing
   that if we do not it will be the worse for us. When heavy seas are
   breaking, and the spirit of the winds is let loose, we do not venture
   on the waves in a small, open boat, or if we do, we accept the
   consequences without complaint. But when we come to deal with the moral
   law we entertain some idea that it is elastic and uncertain, that its
   requirements may be complied with or not at pleasure, and that we may
   violate its eternal principles without any serious loss or injury. But
   the truth is, the Law is one. The only difference arises from the fact
   that while the natural laws, applying to inanimate objects or to
   creatures which enjoy no freedom of moral life, are necessarily obeyed,
   the moral rules apply to conscious reasoning creatures, who, possessed
   of freedom, are able to choose whether they will obey the law or not.
   Yes, the Law is one, and breaches of the Law are punished inevitably
   both in the natural and in the moral sphere. This same Wisdom, to which
   "wickedness is an abomination," and which therefore exhorts the sons of
   men to walk in the ways of righteousness, is the great principle which
   ordered the physical universe and stamped upon it those laws of
   uniformity and inevitableness which Science delights to record and to
   illustrate.

   But when we notice how the Wisdom who is here speaking is at once the
   mouthpiece of the laws which underlie the whole creation and of the
   laws which govern the moral life, it is easy to perceive how this
   passage becomes a foreshadowing of that wonderful Being who of God is
   made unto us Wisdom as well as Righteousness. Or, to put it in a
   slightly different way, we are able to perceive how this passage is a
   faint and imperfect glimpse into the nature and the work of Him whom in
   New Testament phraseology we call the Son of God--faint and imperfect,
   because this Wisdom, although represented as speaking, is still only an
   abstraction, a personification, and her relation both to God and to man
   is described in very vague and indefinite language; and yet, though
   faint and imperfect, very true as far as it goes, for it recognizes
   with wonderful distinctness the three truths which we have just been
   considering, truths that have become luminous for us in Christ; it
   recognizes, firstly, that the world was the creation of Wisdom, of
   Reason, or, if we may use the New Testament term, of the Word; it
   recognizes, secondly, that the thought of Man was contained in the very
   thought of creation, and that man was related in a direct and unique
   way with the Creator; lastly, it recognizes that goodness lies at the
   very root of creation, and that therefore natural law when applied to
   human life is a demand for righteousness.

   It is interesting to observe that this glimpse, this adumbration of a
   great truth, which was only to become quite clear in Christ Jesus our
   Lord, was advanced a little in clearness and completeness by a book
   which is not generally considered to be inspired, the so-called book of
   Wisdom, in a passage which must be quoted. "For she [i.e. Wisdom] is a
   breath of the power of God, and a pure influence flowing from the glory
   of the Almighty; therefore can no defiled thing fall into her. For she
   is the brightness of the everlasting light, the unspotted mirror of the
   power of God, and the image of His goodness. And being but one, she can
   do all things; and remaining in herself, she maketh all things new; and
   in all ages entering into holy souls, she maketh them friends of God
   and prophets. For God loveth none but him that dwelleth with Wisdom.
   For she is more beautiful than the sun, and above all the order of
   stars; being compared with the light, she is found before it." [129]

   In this passage Wisdom is still a mere impersonation, but the language
   employed is evidently very near to that which the New Testament applies
   to Christ. When Philo came to treat of the idea, and wished to describe
   this intermediate being between God and man, he employed another term;
   changing the feminine into the masculine, he spoke of it as the Logos.
   And this expression is adopted by the Fourth Gospel in describing the
   Eternal Son before He became flesh; the Word of the fuller revelation
   is the Wisdom of the Proverbs.

   How far Christ recognized in this impersonation of our book a
   description or representation of Himself it is impossible to say. It is
   certain that on one occasion, in defending His action against the
   charges of the Pharisees, He declared, "Wisdom is justified of her
   children," [130] a defence which can be most simply explained by
   supposing that Wisdom stands for Himself. It is certain, too, that He
   spoke of His own pre-existence, [131] and that the Evangelist assigns
   to Him in that life before the Incarnation a position not unlike that
   which is attributed to Wisdom in our passage: "All things were made by
   Him; and without Him was not anything made that hath been made.... No
   man hath seen God at any time; the only begotten Son, which is in the
   bosom of the Father, He hath declared Him." [132] But whether our Lord
   expressly acknowledged the forecast of Himself which is contained in
   the passage or not, we cannot fail to mark with joy and wonder how
   strikingly all that is best in the utterance and in the delineation of
   Wisdom is produced, concrete, tangible, real, in Him.

   He, like Wisdom in the book of Proverbs, appears in the busy haunts of
   man, appeals to them, invites them with large, open-armed generosity.
   His voice is to the sons of men. He, like Wisdom, can say with absolute
   truth, "All the words of My mouth are in righteousness; there is
   nothing crooked or perverse in them." He too could speak of His
   teaching as "plain and right," and could with simple literalness
   declare that His words were more precious than gold, while obedience to
   Him would cause men "to inherit substance." With what force He might
   claim that even kings rule by Him we shall only know when the kingdoms
   of the world have become His in their integrity; but we can see at once
   how appropriate in His lips is the beautiful saying, "I love them that
   love Me, and those that seek Me early shall find Me."

   With equal suitability might He, the First-born of all creation, the
   beginning of the creation of God, use the sublime language which
   follows. And He too could say that His delight was with the sons of
   men. Yes, how much that means to us! If His delight had not been with
   us, how could ours ever have been with Him? What a new meaning
   irradiates every human being when we realize that with him, with her,
   is the delight of the Son of God! What a revelation lies in the fact, a
   revelation of what man was by his origin, made in the image of God, and
   of what he may be in the last event, brought to "the fulness of the
   measure of the stature of Christ." We must not speak as if He delights
   in us because He has redeemed us; no, He redeemed us because He
   delighted in us. Is not this a ground on which He may appeal to us,
   "Now therefore, my sons, hearken unto Me; for blessed are they that
   keep My ways"? And can we not say to Him with a fervour which the cold
   abstraction of Wisdom could not possibly excite, "We would watch daily
   at Thy gates, waiting at the posts of Thy doors. For when we find Thee
   we find life and obtain favour of the Lord. When we sin against Thee we
   wrong our own souls; when we hate Thee we love death"?

   Yes, in place of this ancient Wisdom, which, stately and lovely as she
   is, remains always a little intangible and unapproachable, Christ is
   made unto us Wisdom, and He speaks to us the old words with a deeper
   meaning, and new words which none but He could ever speak.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [117] Prov. viii. 1-6.

   [118] Prov. viii. 7-9.

   [119] Prov. viii. 20.

   [120] Prov. viii. 8, 9.

   [121] Prov. viii. 18.

   [122] Prov. viii. 10-16.

   [123] Prov. viii. 17.

   [124] Prov. viii. 22. There is unfortunately an ambiguity in the word
   qnh. It may mean either "to possess" or "to create." Cf. Gen. xiv. 19,
   22, where it is impossible to decide between "Possessor of the earth"
   and "Maker of the earth." That the word might be rendered "got" in this
   passage is evident from iv. 7, where it is employed; on the other hand,
   the LXX. renders ektise, and the author of Ecclesiasticus evidently
   took it in this sense; cf. i. 4, "Wisdom hath been created before all
   things, and the understanding of prudence from everlasting." In Gen.
   iv. it is rendered "gotten," but it is quite possible that the joyful
   mother called her son qyn with the feeling that she had created him
   with the help of the Lord.

   [125] Prov. viii. 26.

   [126] Milton, Paradise Lost, vii. 225.

   [127] Prov. viii. 29. It is hardly necessary to point out that the
   language betrays a complete ignorance of those facts with which
   astronomy and geology have made us familiar. The author puts into the
   lips of Wisdom the scientific conceptions of his own time, when the
   earth was regarded as a flat surface, covered by a solid circular
   vault, in which the sun, and moon, and stars were fixed. The "circle
   upon the flood" is probably the apparent circle which is suggested to
   the observer by the horizon. No one had as yet dreamed that the
   mountains were thrown up by, not settled in, the surface of the earth,
   nor was it dreamed that the bounds of the sea are far from being
   settled, but subject to gradual variations, and even to cataclysmal
   changes. It may be observed, however, that the voyage of the Challenger
   seems to have established beyond question that the great outlines of
   land and ocean have remained approximately the same from the beginning.
   Ocean islands are of volcanic origin or the work of the coral-insect;
   but the great continents and all contained within the fringe of a
   thousand-fathom depth from their shores have remained practically
   unaltered despite the numerous partial upheavals or submergences. A
   passage so full of spiritual and moral significance, and yet so
   entirely untouched by what are to us the elementary conclusions of
   science, should furnish a valuable criterion in estimating what we are
   to understand by the Inspiration of such a book as this.

   [128] Cf. x. 23.

   [129] Wisdom vii. 25-29. The book of Wisdom, a work of the second
   century b.c., at one time had a place in the canon, and owes its
   exclusion, in all probability, to the fact that it was written in
   Greek; as there was no Hebrew original, it was evident that Solomon was
   not the author. But the use which the Epistle to the Hebrews makes of
   the passage quoted in the text may suggest how very unnecessary the
   exclusion from the canon was.

   [130] Luke vii. 35; Matt. xi. 19.

   [131] John viii. 58.

   [132] John i. 3, 18.
     __________________________________________________________________

IX.

  TWO VOICES IN THE HIGH PLACES OF THE CITY.

   Ch. ix., vv. 14 with 3, and 16 with 4.

   After the lengthened contrast between the vicious woman and Wisdom in
   chaps. vii. and viii., the introduction of the book closes with a
   little picture which is intended to repeat and sum up all that has gone
   before. It is a peroration, simple, graphic, and beautiful.

   There is a kind of competition between Wisdom and Folly, between
   Righteousness and Sin, between Virtue and Vice; and the allurements of
   the two are disposed in an intentional parallelism; the colouring and
   arrangement are of such a kind that it becomes incredible how any
   sensible person, or for that matter even the simple himself, could for
   a moment hesitate between the noble form of Wisdom and the meretricious
   attractions of Folly. The two voices are heard in the high places of
   the city; each of them invites the passers-by, especially the simple
   and unsophisticated--the one into her fair palace, the other into her
   foul and deadly house. The words of their invitation are very similar:
   "Whoso is simple, let him turn in hither: as for him that is void of
   understanding, she saith to him;" but how different is the burden of
   the two messages! Wisdom offers life, but is silent about enjoyment;
   Folly offers enjoyment, but says nothing of the death which must surely
   ensue. [133]

   First of all we will give our attention to the Palace of Wisdom and the
   voices which issue from it, and then we will note for the last time the
   features and the arts of Mistress Folly.

   The Palace of Wisdom is very attractive; well built and well furnished,
   it rings with the sounds of hospitality; and, with its open colonnades,
   it seems of itself to invite all passers-by to enter in as guests. It
   is reared upon seven well-hewn marble pillars, in a quadrangular form,
   with the entrance side left wide open. [134] This is no shifting tent
   or tottering hut, but an eternal mansion, that lacks nothing of
   stability, or completeness, or beauty. Through the spacious doorways
   may be seen the great courtyard, in which appear the preparations for a
   perpetual feast. The beasts are killed and dressed; the wine stands in
   tall flagons ready mixed for drinking; the tables are spread and
   decked. All is open, generous, large, a contrast to that unhallowed
   private supper to which the unwary youth was invited by his seducer.
   [135] There are no secret chambers, no twilight suggestions and
   insinuations: the broad light shines over all; there is a promise of
   social joy; it seems that they will be blessed who sit down together at
   this board. And now the beautiful owner of the palace has sent forth
   her maidens into the public ways of the city: theirs is a gracious
   errand; they are not to chide with sour and censorious rebukes, but
   they are to invite with winning friendliness; they are to offer this
   rare repast, which is now ready, to all those who are willing to
   acknowledge their need of it. "Come, eat ye of my bread, and drink of
   the wine which I have mingled." [136]

   We were led to inquire in the last chapter how far our Lord identified
   Himself with the hypostatic Wisdom who was speaking there, and we were
   left in some doubt whether He ever consciously admitted the identity;
   but it is hardly a matter of doubt that this passage was before His
   mind when He spoke His parable of the Wedding Feast. [137] And the
   connection is still more apparent when we look at the Greek version of
   the LXX., and notice that the clause "sent forth her bond-servants" is
   precisely the same in Prov. ix. 3 and in Matt. xxii. 3. Here, at any
   rate, Jesus, who describes Himself as "a certain king," quite
   definitely occupies the place of the ancient Wisdom in the book of
   Proverbs, and the language which in this passage she employs He, as we
   shall see, in many slight particulars made His own.

   Yes, our Lord, the Wisdom Incarnate, has glorious ideas of hospitality;
   He keeps open house; His purpose is to call mankind to a great feast;
   the "bread and the wine" are prepared; the sacrifice which furnishes
   the meat is slain. His messengers are not commissioned with a mournful
   or a condemnatory proclamation, but with good tidings which they are to
   publish in the high places. His word is always, Come. His desire is
   that men should live, and therefore He calls them into the way of
   understanding. [138] If a man lacks wisdom, if he recognizes his
   ignorance, his frailty, his folly, if he is at any rate wise enough to
   know that he is foolish, well enough to know that he is sick, righteous
   enough to know that he is sinful, let him approach this noble mansion
   with its lordly feast. Here is bread which is meat indeed; here is wine
   which is life-giving, the fruit of the Vine which God has planted.

   But now we are to note that the invitation of Wisdom is addressed only
   to the simple, not to the scorner. [139] She lets the scorner pass by,
   because a word to him would recoil only in shame on herself, bringing a
   blush to her queenly face, and would add to the scorner's wickedness by
   increasing his hatred of her. Her reproof would not benefit him, but it
   would bring a blot upon herself, it would exhibit her as ineffectual
   and helpless. The bitter words of a scorner can make wisdom appear
   foolish, and cover virtue with a confusion which should belong only to
   vice. "Speak not in the hearing of a fool; for he will despise the
   wisdom of thy words." [140] Indeed, there is no character so hopeless
   as that of the scorner; there proceeds from him, as it were, a fierce
   blast, which blows away all the approaches which goodness makes to him.
   Reproof cannot come near him; [141] he cannot find wisdom, though he
   seek it; [142] and as a matter of fact, he never seeks it. [143] If one
   attempts to punish him it can only be with the hope that others may
   benefit by the example; it will have no effect upon him. [144] To be
   rid of him must be the desire of every wise man, for he is an
   abomination to all, [145] and with his departure contention disappears.
   [146] They that scoff at things holy, and scorn the Divine Power, must
   be left to themselves until the beginnings of wisdom appear in
   them--the first sense of fear that there is a God who may not be
   mocked, the first recognition that there is a sanctity which they would
   do well at all events to reverence. There must be a little wisdom in
   the heart before a man can enter the Palace of Wisdom; there must be a
   humbling, a self-mistrust, a diffident misgiving before the scorner
   will give heed to her invitation.

   There is an echo of this solemn truth in more than one saying of the
   Lord's. He too cautioned His disciples against casting their pearls
   before swine, lest they should trample the pearls under their feet, and
   turn to rend those who were foolish enough to offer them such treasure.
   [147] Men must often be taught in the stern school of Experience,
   before they can matriculate in the reasonable college of Wisdom. It is
   not good to give that which is holy to dogs, nor to display the
   sanctities of religion to those who will only put them to an open
   shame. Where we follow our own way instead of the Lord's, and insist on
   offering the treasures of the kingdom to the scorners, we are not
   acting according to the dictates of Wisdom, we get a blot for that
   goodness which we so rashly offer, and often are needlessly rent by
   those whom we meant to save. It is evident that this is only one side
   of a truth, and our Lord presented with equal fulness the other side;
   it was from Him we learnt how the scorner himself, who cannot be won by
   reproof, can sometimes be won by love; but our Lord thought it worth
   while to state this side of the truth, and so far to make this
   utterance of the ancient Wisdom His own.

   Again, how constantly He insisted on the mysterious fact that to him
   that hath shall be given, and from him that hath not shall be taken
   what he hath, precisely in the spirit of this saying: "Give instruction
   to a wise man, and he will be yet wiser: teach a righteous man, and he
   will increase in learning." [148] The entrance into the kingdom, as
   into the house of Wisdom, is by humility. Except a man turn, and become
   as a little child, he cannot enter. Wisdom is only justified of her
   children: until the heart is humble it cannot even begin to be wise;
   although it may seem to possess a great deal, all must be taken away,
   and a new beginning must be made--that beginning which is found in the
   fear of the Lord, and in the knowledge of the Holy One. [149]

   The closing words in the invitation of Wisdom are entirely appropriate
   in the lips of Jesus, and, indeed, only in His lips could they be
   accepted in their fullest signification. There is a limited sense in
   which all wisdom is favourable to long life, as we saw in chap. iii.,
   but it is an obvious remark, too, that the wise perish even as the
   fool; one event happens to them both, and there appears to be no
   difference. But the Incarnate Wisdom, Jesus Christ, was able to say
   with a broad literalness, "By Me thy days shall be multiplied, and the
   years of thy life shall be increased." With Him the outlook widened; He
   could speak of a new life, of raising men up at the last day; He could
   for the first time give a solution to that constant enigma which has
   puzzled men from the beginning, How is it that Wisdom promises life,
   and yet often requires that her children should die? how is it that the
   best and wisest have often chosen death, and so to all appearance have
   robbed the world of their goodness and their wisdom? He could give the
   answer in the glorious truth of the Resurrection; and so, in calling
   men to die for Him, as He often does, He can in the very moment of
   their death say to them with a fulness of meaning, "By Me thy days
   shall be multiplied, and the years of thy life shall be increased."

   And then how entirely is it in harmony with all His teaching to
   emphasize to the utmost the individual choice and the individual
   responsibility. "If thou art wise, thou art wise for thyself: and if
   thou scornest, thou alone shalt bear it." There can be no progress,
   indeed no beginning, in the spiritual life, until this attitude of
   personal isolation is understood. It is the last result of true
   religion that we live in others; but it is the first that we live in
   ourselves; and until we have learnt to live in ourselves we can be of
   no use by living in others. Until the individual soul is dealt with,
   until it has understood the demands which are made upon it, and met
   them, it is in no position to take its rightful place as a lively stone
   in the temple of God, or as a living member in the body of Christ. Yes,
   realize this searching assurance of Wisdom, let us say, rather, of
   Christ: if you are like the wise virgins in the parable, it is for your
   own everlasting good, you shall enter into the hall with the
   Bridegroom; but if you are like the foolish virgins, no wisdom of the
   wise can avail you, no vicarious light will serve for your lamps; for
   you there must be the personal humiliation and sorrow of the Lord's "I
   know you not."

   If with scornful indifference to your high trust as a servant of the
   Master you hide your talent, and justify your conduct to yourself by
   pleading that the Master is a hard man, that scorn must recoil upon
   your own head; so far from the enlarged wealth of the others coming to
   meet your deficiencies, the misused trifle which you still retain will
   be taken from you and given to them. Men have sometimes favoured the
   notion that it is possible to spend a life of scornful indifference to
   God and all His holy commandments, a life of arrogant self-seeking and
   bitter contempt for all His other creatures, and yet to find oneself at
   the end entirely purged of one's contempt, and on precisely equal terms
   with all pious and humble hearts; but against this notion Wisdom loudly
   exclaims; it is the notion of Folly, and so far from redeeming the
   folly, it is Folly's worst condemnation; for surely Conscience and
   Reason, the heart and the head, might tell us that it is false; and all
   that is sanest and wisest in us concurs in the direct and simple
   assurance, "If thou scornest, thou alone shalt bear it."

   Such is the invitation, and such the warning, of Wisdom; such is the
   invitation, and such the warning, of Christ. Leave off, ye simple ones,
   and live. After all, most of us are not scorners, but only very
   foolish, easily dazzled with false lights, easily misled with smooth
   utterances which happen to chime in with our own ignorant prejudices,
   easily seduced into by-paths which in quiet moments we readily
   acknowledge to be sinful and hurtful. The scorners are but a few; the
   simple ones are many. Here is this gracious voice appealing to the
   simple ones, and with a winsome liberality inviting them to the feast
   of Wisdom.

   At the close of ver. 12 the LXX. give a very interesting addition,
   which was probably translated from a Hebrew original. It seems to have
   been before our Lord's mind when He drew the description of the unclean
   spirit walking through waterless places, seeking rest and finding none.
   [150] The passage is a figurative delineation of the evils which result
   from making shams and insincerities the support of life, in place of
   the unfailing sureness and available strength of wisdom; it may be
   rendered thus: "He who makes falsehood his support shepherds the winds,
   and will find himself pursuing birds on the wing; for it means leaving
   the paths of his own vineyard, and wandering over the borders of his
   own husbandry; it means walking through a waterless wilderness, over
   land which is the portion of the thirsty; he gathers in his hands
   fruitlessness." What a contrast to the spacious halls and the bountiful
   fare of Wisdom! A life based upon everlasting verities may seem for the
   time cold and desolate, but it is founded upon a rock, and not a barren
   rock either, for it sends forth in due course corn, and wine, and oil.
   The children in that house have bread enough and to spare. But when a
   man prefers make-believe to reality, and follows the apparently
   pleasant, instead of the actually good, what a clutching of winds it
   is! what a chase after swift-vanishing birds of joy! The wholesome
   ways, fruitful, responsive to toil, are left far behind; and here soon
   is the actual desert, without a drop of water to cool the lips, or a
   single fruit of the earth which a man can eat. The deluded soul
   consumed his substance with harlots, and he gathers the wind. The ways
   of vice are terrible; they produce a thirst which they cannot quench;
   and they fill the imagination with torturing images of well-being which
   are farther removed from reality by every step we take. Wisdom bids us
   to make truth our stay, for after all the Truth is the Way and the
   Life, and there is no other way, no other life.

   And now comes the brief closing picture of Folly, to which again the
   LXX. give a short addition. Folly is loud, empty-headed as her victims,
   whom she invites to herself, not as Wisdom invites them, to leave off
   their simplicity, but rather as like to like, that their ignorance may
   be confirmed into vice, and their simplicity into brutishness. She has
   had the effrontery to build her house in the most prominent and lofty
   place of the city, where by good rights only Wisdom should dwell. Her
   allurements are specially directed to those who seem to be going right
   on in their wholesome ways, as if she found her chief delight, not in
   gratifying the vicious, but in making vicious the innocent. Her charms
   are poor and tawdry enough; seen in the broad sunlight, and with the
   wholesome air all round her, she would be revolting to every
   uncorrupted nature; her clamorous voice would sound strident, and her
   shameless brow would create a blush of shame in others; she naturally
   therefore seeks to throw a veil over herself and a glamour over her
   proposals; she suggests that secrecy and illicitness will lend a charm
   to what in itself is a sorry delight. It is clandestine, therefore it
   is to be sweet; it is forbidden, therefore it is to be pleasant. Could
   anything be more sophistical? That which owes its attraction to the
   shadows of the night must obviously be intrinsically unattractive. It
   is an argument fit only for the shades of the lost, and not for those
   who breathe the sweet air and behold the sun. Her house is indeed
   haunted with ghosts, and when a man enters her portal he already has
   his foot in hell. Well may the LXX. add the vehement warning, "Spring
   away from her clutches; do not linger in the place; let her not have
   thy name, for thou wilt traverse another's waters; from another's
   waters hold aloof, from another's fountains do not drink, in order that
   thou mayest live long, and add to thy years of life."

   And now, before leaving this subject, we must briefly remark the great
   change and advance which Christ has brought into our thought of the
   relation between the two sexes. This Book of Wisdom is a fair
   illustration of the contempt in which woman was held by the wise men of
   Israel. One would suppose that she is the temptress, and man is the
   victim. The teacher never dreams of going a step backward, and asking
   whose fault it was that the temptress fell into her vicious ways. He
   takes no note of the fact that women are first led astray before they
   lead others. Nor does he care to inquire how the men of his day ruined
   their women by refusing to them all mental training, all wholesome
   interest and occupation, shutting them up in the corrupting atmosphere
   of the seraglio, and teaching them to regard the domestic sphere, and
   that only in its narrowest sense, as the proper limit of their thought
   and affection. It was reserved for the Great Teacher, the Incarnate
   Wisdom Himself, to redress this age-long injustice to woman, by sternly
   holding up to men the mirror of truth in which they might see their own
   guilty hearts. [151] It was reserved for him to touch the conscience of
   a city woman who was a sinner, and to bring her from her clamorous and
   seductive ways to the sweetness of penitential tears, and the rapturous
   love which forgiveness kindles. It is He, and not the ancient Wisdom,
   which has turned the current of men's thoughts into juster and kindlier
   ways on this great question. And thus it is that the great Christian
   poet represents the archangel correcting the faulty judgment of man.
   [152] Adam, speaking with the usual virtuous indignation of the
   stronger sex in contemplation of the soft vision of frail women
   presented to his eyes, says:--


   "O pity and shame, that they, who to live well

   Entered so fair, should turn aside to tread

   Paths indirect, or in the midway faint!

   But still I see the tenour of man's woe

   Holds on the same, from woman to begin."

   The correction is the correction of Christ, though Michael is the
   speaker:--


   "From man's effeminate slackness it begins,"

   Said the angel, "who should better hold his place,

   By wisdom and superior gifts received."

   Our Lord draws no such pictures as these in the book of Proverbs; they
   have their value; it is necessary to warn young men against the
   seductions which the vices of other men have created in woman's form;
   but He prefers always to go to the root of the matter; He speaks to men
   themselves; He bids them restrain the wandering eye, and keep pure the
   fountains of the heart. To that censorious Wisdom which judges without
   any perception that woman is more sinned against than sinning He would
   oppose His severe command to be rid of the beam in one's own eye,
   before making an attempt to remove the mote from another's. It is in
   this way that He in so many varied fields of thought and action has
   turned a half truth into a whole truth by going a little deeper, and
   unveiling the secrets of the heart; and in this way He has enabled us
   to use the half truth, setting it in its right relation to the whole.
   [153]
     __________________________________________________________________

   [133] Cf. for this contrast between the two xxiii. 26-28, where Wisdom
   speaks, and expressly warns against her rival.

   [134] The arrangement of the house is that of an open courtyard,
   surrounded with apartments, the general roof supported on the pillars
   thus. Provill

   [135] Prov. vii. 14.

   [136] Prov. ix. 5.

   [137] Matt. xxii. 1, et seq.

   [138] Prov. ix. 6.

   [139] Prov. ix. 7.

   [140] Prov. xxiii. 9.

   [141] Prov. xiii. 1.

   [142] Prov. xiv. 6.

   [143] Prov. xv. 12.

   [144] Prov. xix. 25.

   [145] Prov. xxiv. 9.

   [146] Prov. xxii. 10.

   [147] Matt. vii. 6.

   [148] Prov. ix. 9. Cf. xviii. 15, "The heart of the prudent getteth
   knowledge; and the ear of the wise seeketh knowledge."

   [149] Prov. ix. 10.

   [150] Matt. xii. 43.

   [151] See John viii. 1 et seq.

   [152] Milton, Paradise Lost, xi. 650 etc.

   [153] The fuller teaching of the book on the subject of Woman will be
   found in Lect. XXXI.
     __________________________________________________________________

X.

  WEALTH.


   "Treasures of wickedness profit nothing:

   But righteousness delivereth from death."--Prov. x. 2.


   "O'erweening statesmen have full long relied

   On fleets and armies and external wealth;

   But from within proceeds a Nation's health."

   Wordsworth.

   No moral system is complete which does not treat with clearness and
   force the subject of wealth. The material possessions of an individual
   or of a nation are in a certain sense the pre-requisites of all moral
   life; for until the human being has food to eat he cannot be virtuous,
   he cannot even live; until he has clothing he cannot be civilised; and
   unless he has a moderate assurance of necessaries, and a certain margin
   of leisure secured from the toil of life, he cannot live well, and
   there can be no moral development in the full sense of that term. And
   so with a nation: it must have a sufficient command of the means of
   subsistence to maintain a considerable number of people who are not
   engaged in productive labour, before it can make much advance in the
   noblest qualities of national life, progress in the arts, extension of
   knowledge, and spiritual cultivation. The production of wealth,
   therefore, if not strictly speaking a moral question itself, presses
   closely upon all other moral questions. Wisdom must have something to
   say about it, because, without it, Wisdom, in a material world like
   ours, could not exist.

   Wisdom will be called upon to direct the energies which produce wealth,
   and to determine the feelings with which we are to regard the wealth
   which is produced.

   Moral problems weightier still begin to emerge when the question of
   Distribution presents itself. Moral considerations lie at the root of
   this question; and Political Economy, so far as it attempts to deal
   with it apart from moral considerations, must always be merely a
   speculative, and not a practical or a fruitful science.

   If Production is in a sense the presupposition of all moral and
   spiritual life, no less certainly correct moral conceptions--may we not
   even say true spiritual conditions?--are the indispensable means of
   determining Distribution. For a society in which every individual is
   striving with all his strength or cunning to procure for himself the
   largest possible share of the common stock, in which therefore the
   material possessions gravitate into the hands of the strong and the
   unscrupulous, while the weak and the honourable are left
   destitute--such a society, if it ever came into existence, would be a
   demoralised society. Such a demoralisation is always probable when the
   means of production have been rapidly and greatly improved, and when
   the fever of getting has overpowered the sense of righteousness and all
   the kindlier human feelings. Such a demoralisation is to be averted by
   securing attention to the abiding moral principles which must govern
   men's action in the matter of wealth, and by enforcing these principles
   with such vividness of illustration and such cogency of sanction that
   they shall be generally accepted and practised.

   In our own day this question of the distribution of wealth stands in
   the front rank of practical questions. Religious teachers must face it,
   or else they must forfeit their claim to be the guides and instructors
   of their generation.

   Socialists are grappling with this question not altogether in a
   religious spirit: they have stepped into a gap which Christians have
   left empty; they have recognised a great spiritual issue when
   Christians have seen nothing but a material problem of pounds,
   shillings, and pence, of supply and demand, of labour and capital.
   Where Socialism adopts the programme of Revolution, Wisdom cannot give
   in her adhesion; she knows too well that suffering, impatience, and
   despair are unsafe, although very pathetic, counsellors; she knows too
   well that social upheaval does not produce social reconstruction, but a
   weary entail of fresh upheavals; she has learnt, too, that society is
   organic, and cannot, like Pelops in the myth, win rejuvenescence by
   being cut up and cast into the cauldron, but can advance only by a
   quiet and continuous growth, in which each stage comes naturally and
   harmoniously out of the stage which preceded. But all Socialism is not
   revolutionary. And Wisdom cannot withhold her sympathy and her aid
   where Socialism takes the form of stating, and expounding, and
   enforcing truer conceptions concerning the distribution of wealth. It
   is by vigorous and earnest grappling with the moral problem that the
   way of advance is prepared; every sound lesson therefore in the right
   way of regarding wealth, and in the use of wealth, is a step in the
   direction of that social renovation which all earnest men at present
   desire.

   The book of Proverbs presents some very clear and decisive teaching on
   this question, and it is our task now to view this teaching, scattered
   and disconnected though it be, as a whole.

   I. The first thing to be noted in the book is its frank and full
   recognition that Wealth has its advantages, and Poverty has its
   disadvantages. There is no quixotic attempt to overlook, as many moral
   and spiritual systems do, the perfectly obvious facts of life. The
   extravagance and exaggeration which led St. Francis to choose Poverty
   as his bride find no more sanction in this Ancient Wisdom than in the
   sound teaching of our Lord and His Apostles. The rich man's wealth is
   his strong city, [154] we are told, and as an high wall in his own
   imagination, while the destruction of the poor is their poverty. The
   rich man can ransom himself from death if by chance he has fallen into
   difficulties, though this benefit is to some extent counterbalanced by
   the reflection that the poor escape the threats of such dangers, as no
   bandit would care to attack a man with an empty purse and a threadbare
   cloak. [155] The rich man gains many advantages through his power of
   making gifts; it brings him before great men, [156] it procures him
   universal friendship, such as it is, [157] it enables him to pacify the
   anger of an adversary, [158] for indeed a gift is as a precious stone
   in the eyes of him that hath it, whithersoever it turneth it
   prospereth. [159] Not only does wealth make many friends, [160] it also
   secures positions of influence and authority, over those who are
   poorer, enabling a man to sit in Parliament or to gain the governorship
   of a colony. [161] It gives even the somewhat questionable advantage of
   being able to treat others with brusqueness and hauteur. [162]

   On the other hand, the poor man has to use entreaties. [163] His
   poverty separates him from his neighbours, and even incurs his
   neighbours' hatred. [164] Nay, worse than this, his friends go far from
   him, his very brethren hate him, if he calls after them they quickly
   get out of his reach; [165] while the necessity of borrowing from
   wealthier men keeps him in a position of continual bondage. [166]
   Indeed, nothing can compensate for being without the necessaries of
   life: "Better is he that is lightly esteemed, and is his own servant,
   than he that honoureth himself, and lacketh bread." [167]

   Since then Poverty is a legitimate subject of dread, there are urgent
   exhortations to diligence and thrift, quite in accordance with the
   excellent apostolic maxim that if a man will not work he shall not eat;
   while there are forcible statements of the things which tend to
   poverty, and of the courses which result in comfort and wealth. Thus it
   is pointed out how slack and listless labour leads to poverty, while
   industry leads to wealth. [168] We are reminded that the obstinate
   refusal to be corrected is a fruitful source of poverty, [169] while
   the humble and pious mind is rewarded with riches as well as with
   honour and life. [170] In the house of the wise man are found treasures
   as well as all needful supplies. [171] Drunkenness and gluttony lead to
   poverty, and drowsiness clothes a man with rags. [172] And there is a
   beautiful injunction to engage in an agricultural life, which is the
   only perennial source of wealth, the only secure foundation of a
   people's prosperity. As if we were back in patriarchal times, we are
   thus admonished in the later proverbs of Solomon [173] :--


   "Be thou diligent to know the state of thy flocks,

   And look well to thy herds;

   For riches are not for ever;

   And doth the crown endure unto all generations?

   The hay is carried, and the tender grass showeth itself,

   And the herbs of the mountains are gathered in.

   The lambs are for thy clothing,

   And the goats are the price of the field:

   And there will be goats' milk enough for thy food, for the food of thy
   household;

   And maintenance for thy maidens."

   II. But now, making all allowance for the advantages of wealth, we have
   to notice some of its serious drawbacks. To begin with, it is always
   insecure. If a man places any dependence upon it, it will fail him;
   only in his imagination is it a sure defence. [174] "Wilt thou set
   thine eyes upon it? it is gone. For riches certainly make themselves
   wings, like an eagle that flieth toward heaven." [175]

   But, further, if the wealth has been obtained in any other way than by
   honest labour it is useless, at any rate for the owner, and indeed
   worse than useless for him. [176]

   As the text says, treasures of wickedness profit nothing. In the
   revenues of the wicked is trouble. [177] Got in light and fallacious
   ways, the money dwindles; only when gathered by labour does it really
   increase. [178] When it is obtained by falsehood--by the tricks and
   misrepresentations of trade, for example--it may be likened to a vapour
   driven to and fro--nay, rather to a mephitic vapour, a deadly
   exhalation, the snares of death. [179] Worst of all is it to obtain
   wealth by oppression of the poor; one who does so shall as surely come
   to want as he who gives money to those who do not need it. [180] In
   fact, our book contains the striking thought that ill-earned wealth is
   never gathered for the benefit of the possessor, but only for the
   benefit of the righteous, and must be useless until it gets into hands
   which will use it benevolently. [181]

   And while there are these serious drawbacks to material possessions, we
   are further called upon to notice that there is wealth of another kind,
   wealth consisting in moral or spiritual qualities, compared with which
   wealth, as it is usually understood, is quite paltry and unsatisfying.
   When the intrinsic defects of silver and gold have been frankly stated,
   this earthy treasure is set, as a whole, in comparison with another
   kind of treasure, and is observed to become pale and dim. Thus "riches
   profit not in the day of wrath, but righteousness delivereth from
   death." [182] Indeed it is only the blessing of the Lord which brings
   riches without drawbacks. [183] In the house of the righteous is much
   treasure. [184] Better is a little with righteousness than great
   treasure without right. [185] In the light of these moral
   considerations the relative positions of the rich and the poor are
   reversed; it is better to be an honest poor man than a perverse rich
   man; the little grain of integrity in the heart and life outweighs all
   the balance at the bank. [186]

   A little wisdom, a little sound understanding, or a little wholesome
   knowledge is more precious than wealth. How much better is it to get
   wisdom than gold. Yea, to get understanding is rather to be chosen than
   silver. [187] There may be gold and abundance of rubies, but the lips
   of knowledge are a precious jewel. [188]

   Nay, there are some things apparently very trifling which will so
   depreciate material wealth that if a choice is to be made it is well to
   let the wealth go and to purchase immunity from these trivial troubles.
   Better is a little with the fear of the Lord than great treasure and
   trouble therewith. Better is a dinner of herbs where love is than a
   stalled ox and hatred therewith. [189] Better is a dry morsel and
   quietness therewith than an house full of feasting with strife. [190]
   Yes, the good will and affectionate regard of our fellow-men are on the
   whole far more valuable than a large revenue. A good name is rather to
   be chosen than great riches, and loving favour rather than silver and
   gold. [191] Indeed, when the relations of the rich and the poor are
   brought up into God's presence our whole conception of the matter is
   liable to change; we observe the rich and the poor meet together, and
   the Lord the maker of them all; [192] we observe that any slur cast on
   the poor or any oppression of them is practically a reproach against
   the Maker, [193] whilst any act of pity or tenderness to the needy is
   in effect a service rendered to God; and more and more we get to feel
   that notwithstanding the rich man's good opinion of himself he presents
   rather a sorry spectacle in the presence of the wise, even though the
   wise may be exceedingly poor. [194]

   Taking into account therefore the intrinsic insecurity of wealth, and
   the terrible flaws in the title which may result from questionable ways
   of obtaining it, and estimating at a right value the other things which
   are not usually reckoned as wealth,--goodness, piety, wisdom,
   knowledge, and love,--we can quite understand that enlightened men
   might be too busy in life to make money, too occupied with grave
   purposes and engrossed with noble objects of pursuit to admit the
   perturbations of mammon into their souls. [195] Making all allowance
   for the unquestionable advantages of being rich, and the serious
   inconveniences of being poor, we may yet see reasons for not greatly
   desiring wealth, nor greatly dreading poverty.

   III. But now we come to the positive counsels which our Teacher would
   give on the strength of these considerations about money and its
   acquisition. And first of all we are solemnly cautioned against the
   fever of money-getting, the passion to get rich, a passion which has
   the most demoralising effect on its victims, and is indeed an
   indication of a more or less perverted character. The good man cannot
   be possessed by it, and if he could he would soon become bad. [196]

   These grave warnings of Wisdom are specially needed at the present time
   in England and America, when the undisguised and the unrestrained
   pursuit of riches has become more and more recognised as the legitimate
   end of life, so that few people feel any shame in admitting that this
   is their aim; and the clear unimpassioned statements of the result,
   which always follows on the unhallowed passion, receive daily
   confirmation from the occasional revelations of our domestic, our
   commercial, and our criminal life. He that is greedy of gain, we are
   told, troubleth his own house. [197] An inheritance may be gotten
   hastily at the beginning, but the end thereof shall not be blessed.
   [198] A faithful man shall abound with blessings, but he that maketh
   haste to be rich (and consequently cannot by any possibility be
   faithful) shall not be unpunished. [199] He that hath an evil eye
   hasteth after riches, and knoweth not that want shall come upon him.
   [200] "Weary not thyself," therefore, it is said, "to be rich;" which,
   though it may be the dictate of thine own wisdom, [201] is really
   unmixed folly, burdened with a load of calamity for the unfortunate
   seeker, for his house, and for all those who are in any way dependent
   upon him.

   Again, while we are cautioned not to aim constantly at the increase of
   our possessions, we are counselled to exercise a generous liberality in
   the disposal of such things as are ours. Curiously enough,
   niggardliness in giving is associated with slothfulness in labour,
   while it is implied that the wish to help others is a constant motive
   for due diligence in the business of life. "There is that coveteth
   greedily all the day long, but the righteous giveth and withholdeth
   not." [202] The law of nature,--the law of life,--is to give out and
   not merely to receive, and in fulfilling that law we receive unexpected
   blessings: "There is that scattereth and increaseth yet more, and there
   is that withholdeth more than is meet, and it tendeth only to want. The
   liberal soul shall be made fat; and he that watereth shall be watered
   also himself." [203] "He that giveth to the poor shall not lack; but he
   that hideth his eyes shall have many a curse." [204] "He that hath pity
   on the poor lendeth unto the Lord, and his good deed will He pay him
   again." [205] "He that hath a bountiful eye shall be blessed; for he
   giveth of his bread to the poor." [206]

   Such a wholesome shunning of the thirst for wealth, and such a generous
   spirit in aiding others, naturally suggest to the wise man a daily
   prayer, a request that he may avoid the dangerous extremes, and walk in
   the happy mean of worldly possessions: "Give me neither poverty nor
   riches; feed me with the food that is needful for me; lest I be full
   and deny thee, and say, Who is the Lord? or lest I be poor and steal,
   and use profanely the name of my God." [207] It is a request not easy
   to make with perfect sincerity; there are not many who, like Emerson's
   grandfather, venture to pray that neither they nor their descendants
   may ever be rich; while there have been not a few who in a "show of
   wisdom in will-worship and humility and severity to the body" have
   sought for an unnecessary and an unwholesome poverty. But it is a wise
   request; it finds an echo in the prayer which our Lord taught His
   disciples, and constantly appears inwoven in the apostolic teaching.
   And if the individual is to desire such things for himself, he must
   naturally desire that such may be the lot of his fellow-creatures, and
   he must make it the aim of his efforts after social reform to
   indefinitely increase the number of those who occupy this happy middle
   position, and have neither riches nor poverty.

   And now we have followed the lines of teaching contained in this book
   on the subject of wealth, and it is impossible to miss the wisdom, the
   moderation, the inspiration of such counsels. We cannot fail to see
   that if these principles were recognised universally, and very
   generally practised; if they were ingrained in the constitution of our
   children, so as to become the instinctive motives and guides of action;
   the serious social troubles which arise from the unsatisfactory
   distribution of wealth would rapidly disappear. Happy would that
   society be in which all men were aiming, not at riches, but merely at a
   modest competency, dreading the one extreme as much as the other; in
   which the production of wealth were constantly moderated and controlled
   by the conviction that wealth gotten by vanity is as the snares of
   death; in which all who had become the owners of wealth were ready to
   give and glad to distribute, counting a wise benevolence, which in
   giving to the needy really lends to the Lord, the best investment in
   the world.

   If these neglected principles are hitherto very faintly recognised, we
   must recollect that they have never been seriously preached. Although
   they were theoretically taught, and practically lived out, in the words
   and the life of Jesus Christ, they have never been fully incorporated
   into Christianity. The medival Church fell into the perilous doctrines
   of the Ebionites, and glorified poverty in theory while in practice it
   became an engine of unparalleled rapacity. Protestantism has generally
   been too much occupied with the great principle of Justification by
   Faith to pay much attention to such a writing as the Epistle of St.
   James, which Luther described as "a letter of straw"; and thus, while
   we all believe that we are saved by faith in Christ Jesus, it seldom
   occurs to us that such a faith must include the most exact and literal
   obedience to His teachings. Christian men unblushingly serve Mammon,
   and yet hope that they are serving God too, because they believe on Him
   whom God sent--though He whom God sent expressly declared that the two
   services could not be combined. Christian men make it the effort of a
   lifetime to become rich, although Christ declared that it was easier
   for a camel to enter the eye of a needle than for a rich man to enter
   the kingdom of heaven; and when they hear that Christ required an
   intending follower to sell all that he had and give to the poor, they
   explain it away, and maintain that He does not require such a sacrifice
   from them, but simply asks them to believe in the Atonement.

   In this way Christians have made their religion incredible, and even
   ridiculous, to many of the most earnest spirits of our time. When
   Christ is made unto them Wisdom as well as Redemption, they will see
   that the principles of Wisdom which concern wealth are obligatory upon
   them, just because they profess to believe in Christ.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [154] Prov. x. 15; xviii. 11.

   [155] Prov. xiii. 8.

   [156] Prov. xviii. 16.

   [157] Prov. xix. 6; xiv. 20.

   [158] Prov. xxi. 14.

   [159] Prov. xvii. 8. More literally: "A precious stone is the gift in
   the eyes of him who gets possession of it, whithersoever he turneth he
   deals wisely." That is to say, the man who receives the gift, whether a
   judge or a witness or an opponent, is as it were retained for the
   giver, and induced to use his best faculties in behalf of his retainer.

   [160] Prov. xix. 4: "Wealth addeth many friends, but the poor--his
   companion separates from him."

   [161] Prov. xxii. 17.

   [162] Prov. xviii. 23.

   [163] Prov. xviii. 23.

   [164] Prov. xiv. 20; xix. 4.

   [165] Prov. xix. 7. The sense of the Authorised Version is here
   retained, but it will be seen in Lecture XII. that there is good reason
   for treating the third clause of the verse as a mutilated fragment of
   another proverb: see p. [1]166.

   [166] Prov. xxii. 7.

   [167] Prov. xii. 9. This reading is obtained by following the LXX.,
   whose translation ho douleuon eauto shows that they pointed vvd lv. Cf.
   Eccles. x. 27: "Better is he that laboureth and aboundeth in all things
   than he that boasteth himself and lacketh bread."

   [168] Prov. x. 4.

   [169] Prov. xiii. 18.

   [170] Prov. xxii. 4.

   [171] Prov. xxi. 20.

   [172] Prov. xxiii. 21.

   [173] Prov. xxvii. 23-27.

   [174] Prov. xi. 28.

   [175] Prov. xxiii. 5 (marg.).

   [176] Cf. the Turkish proverb: "Of riches lawfully gained the devil
   takes half, of riches unlawfully gained he takes the whole and the
   owner too."

   [177] Prov. xv. 6, cf. xiv. 24, "A crown of the wise is their riches,
   but the folly of fools, (though they be rich, remains nothing but)
   folly."

   [178] Prov. xiii. 11.

   [179] Prov. xxi. 6. It is evident from their translation epi pagidas
   thanatou that the LXX. read mvqsymvt as in Psalm xviii. 6, and this
   gives a very graphic and striking sense, while the received text of the
   Hebrew, mvqsymvt, is hardly intelligible.

   [180] Prov. xxii. 16.

   [181] Prov. xiii. 22; xxviii. 8.

   [182] Prov. xi. 4.

   [183] Prov. x. 22.

   [184] Prov. xv. 6.

   [185] Prov. xvi. 8.

   [186] Prov. xix. 1. The parallelism in this verse is not so complete as
   in xxviii. 6. The Peshitto reads, "than he who is perverse in his lips
   and is rich," but it is better to retain the text and understand: There
   is a poor man walking in his integrity, and everyone thinks that he is
   to be commiserated; but he is much better off than the fool with
   perverse lips, though no one thinks of commiserating this last.

   [187] Prov. xvi. 16.

   [188] Prov. xx. 15.

   [189] Prov. xv. 16, 17.

   [190] Prov. xvii. 1.

   [191] Prov. xxii. 1. This proverb is inscribed in the cupola which
   lights the Manchester Exchange. It is a good skylight, but apparently
   too high up for the busy merchants on the floor of the Exchange to see
   without more effort than is to be expected of them.

   [192] Prov. xxii. 2.

   [193] Prov. xiv. 31; xvii. 5.

   [194] Prov. xxviii. 11. Cf. an interesting addition to xvii. 6 in the
   LXX.-- tou pistou holos ho kosmos ton chrematon tou de apistou oude
   obolos. The faithful man owns the whole world of possessions, the
   unfaithful owns not a farthing.

   [195] It is said of Agassiz that he excused himself from engaging in a
   profitable lecturing tour on the ground that he had not time to make
   money.

   [196] Cf. the saying of Sirach: "Winnow not with every wind and go not
   into every way, for so doth the sinner that hath a double tongue."
   (Eccles. v. 9).

   [197] Prov. xv. 27.

   [198] Prov. xx. 21.

   [199] Prov. xxviii. 20.

   [200] Prov. xxviii. 22.

   [201] Prov. xxiii. 4.

   [202] Prov. xxi. 26.

   [203] Prov. xi. 24, 25.

   [204] Prov. xxviii. 27.

   [205] Prov. xix. 17.

   [206] Prov. xxii. 9.

   [207] Prov. xxx. 8, 9.
     __________________________________________________________________

XI.

  GOODNESS.

     "The righteousness of the upright shall deliver them."--Prov. xi. 6.

     "An unjust man is the abomination of the righteous, and he who goes
     right in his way is the abomination of the wicked."--Prov. xxix. 27.

   The book of Proverbs abounds with sayings which have the sound of
   truisms, sayings which repeat, with innumerable variations and shades
   of colouring, that wickedness is an evil, hateful to God and to men,
   and that righteousness is a blessing not only to the righteous
   themselves, but to all with whom they are connected. We are disposed to
   say, Surely no reasonable person can question such an obvious truth;
   but on reflection we remember that the truth was not perceived by the
   great religions of antiquity, is not recognised now by the vast
   majority of the human race, and even where it is theoretically admitted
   without question is too frequently forgotten in the hurry and the
   pressure of practical life. There is good reason therefore why the
   truism, as we are inclined to call it, should be thrown into the form
   of maxims which will find a hold in the memory, and readily occur to
   the mind on occasions of trial. And as we pass in review what
   Proverbial Religion has to say upon the subject, we shall perhaps be
   surprised to find how imperfectly we have apprehended the supreme
   importance of goodness, and how insidiously teachings, which were
   originally meant to enforce it, have usurped its place and treated it
   with contumely. It will begin to dawn upon us that the truth is a
   truism, not because it is carried out in practice, but only because no
   one has the hardihood to question it; and perhaps we shall receive some
   impulse towards transforming the conviction which we cannot dispute
   into a mode of conduct which we cannot decline.

   To begin with, our book is most unflinching in its assertions that,
   notwithstanding all appearances to the contrary, wickedness is a
   mistake, a source of perpetual weakness and insecurity, always in the
   long run producing ruin and death; while righteousness is in itself a
   perpetual blessing, and is weighted with beautiful and unexpected
   fruits. The very reiteration becomes most impressive.

   The hope of the righteous shall be gladness; but the expectation of the
   wicked shall perish. [208] The righteous shall never be removed, but
   the wicked shall not dwell in the land. [209] The house of the wicked
   shall be overthrown, but the tent of the upright shall flourish. [210]
   The wicked earneth deceitful wages, but he that soweth righteousness
   hath a sure reward. [211] A man shall not be established by wickedness,
   while the root of the righteous shall never be moved. [212] The wicked
   really falls by his own wickedness, and is swept away by his own
   violence. [213] He sows iniquity and reaps calamity. [214] His crooked
   way, his malignant thoughts, the hatred against his neighbour, the
   guile in his heart, and the flood of evil things which comes out of his
   lips, have one issue--destruction. [215] When he comes to die, his
   expectation perishes, all the hope of iniquity ends in disappointment.
   [216] His lamp goes out not to be relit. [217] Meanwhile, the light of
   the righteous man rejoices, because he attains unto life as surely as
   the wicked works towards death. [218]

   It is true that the appearance of things is different. Hand joins in
   hand to promote evil. [219] Men follow out what seems right in their
   own hearts, evil as they are. [220] Success seems to attend them, and
   one is tempted to envy the sinners, and to fret at their ways. [221]
   But the envy is misplaced; the evil man does not go unpunished; the
   wicked are overthrown and are not. [222] The way which seemed right in
   a man's eyes proves to be the way of death. [223] A righteous man
   falleth seven times and riseth up again; but the wicked are overthrown
   by calamity, [224] and the righteous are obliged to look upon their
   fall. [225]

   On the other hand, goodness is its own continual reward. While
   treacherous men are destroyed by their perverseness, the upright are
   guided by their own integrity. [226] While the sinner is overthrown by
   his wickedness, righteousness guardeth him that is upright in the way.
   [227] If the righteous gets into trouble he is delivered, while the
   wicked falls into his place: [228] there is a kind of substitution; a
   ransom is paid to enable the righteous to escape, and the ransom is the
   person of the wicked. [229] Not only does the righteous come out of
   trouble, [230] but, strictly speaking, no mischief really happens to
   him; it is only the wicked that is filled with evil. [231] The
   righteous eats to the satisfying of his own soul, but the belly of the
   wicked shall want. [232] The good man walks on a highway and so
   preserves his soul. [233] Mercy and truth shine upon him because he
   devises good. [234] He only followed after righteousness and mercy, but
   he found life, righteousness, and honour. [235] His heart is flooded
   with joy, he actually sings as he journeys on. [236] He seems like a
   tree in the green leaf, a tree of life, the fruits of which cannot fail
   to be attractive; so that he unconsciously wins favour. [237] The fruit
   does not fail, because the root is alive. [238] And if in actual life
   this blessedness of the good man does not appear, if by reason of the
   evil in the world the righteous seem to be punished, and the noble to
   be smitten, [239] that only creates a conviction that the fruit will
   grow in another life; for when we have closely observed the inseparable
   connection between goodness and blessedness, we cannot avoid the
   conviction that "the righteous hath hope in his death." [240] Yes,
   practical goodness is the source of perpetual blessing, and it cannot
   be altogether hidden. Even a child maketh himself known by his doings,
   whether his work be pure and right. [241] To the good we must assign
   the supremacy; the evil must bow before them and wait at their gates.
   [242] And it is easy to understand why it appears so incongruous--so
   abnormal, like a troubled fountain and a corrupted spring, when the
   righteous give way to the wicked. [243]

   Nor is the blessing of goodness at all limited to the good man himself.
   It falls on his children too. A just man that walketh in his integrity,
   blessed are his children after him. [244] It reaches even to the third
   generation. A good man leaveth an inheritance to his children's
   children. [245] The righteous is a guide to his neighbour also. [246]
   He is a joy to his sovereign; he that loveth pureness of heart, for the
   grace of his lips the king shall be his friend. [247] His character and
   his well-being are a matter of public, even of national concern, for
   there is something winning in him; he acts as a saving influence upon
   those who are around him. [248] Therefore, when the righteous increase
   the people rejoice, [249] when they triumph there is great glory. [250]
   When it goeth well with the righteous the city rejoiceth, just as when
   the wicked perish there is shouting. By the blessing of the upright the
   city is exalted, just as it is overthrown by the mouth of the wicked.
   [251] Yes, righteousness exalteth a nation, while sin is a reproach to
   the whole people. [252]

   It is the grand public interest to see the wicked perish in order that
   the righteous may increase: [253] for the way of the wicked causes
   other people to err. [254] His lips are like a scorching fire; [255]
   his presence brings a general atmosphere of contempt, ignominy, and
   shame. [256] When the wicked rise men hide themselves, [257] when they
   bear rule the people sigh. [258] Well may the national feeling be
   severe on all those who encourage the wicked in any way. He that saith
   unto the wicked, Thou art righteous, peoples shall curse him, nations
   shall abhor him; but to them that rebuke him shall be delight, and a
   good blessing shall come upon them. [259] It is a sure sign that one is
   forsaking the law when one ceases to contend with the wicked and begins
   to praise them. [260]

   Blessing to himself, blessing to his children, his neighbours, his
   country, is the beautiful reward of the good man; ruin to himself, a
   spreading contagion of evil to others, and general execration, is the
   lot of the wicked. Well may the former be bold as a lion, and well may
   the latter flee when no man pursues, for conscience makes cowards of us
   all. [261]

   But at present we have not touched on the chief blessedness of the
   good, and the chief curse of the evil, on that which is really the
   spring and fountain-head of all. It is the great fact that God is with
   the righteous and against the wicked, that He judges men according to
   their integrity or perverseness, and accepts them or rejects them
   simply upon that principle. By looking at this lofty truth we get all
   our conceptions on the subject cleared. The perverse in heart are an
   abomination to the Lord; such as are perfect in their way are His
   delight. [262] A good man shall obtain favour of the Lord, but a man of
   wicked devices will He condemn. [263] Evil devices are an abomination
   to the Lord, [264] and so is the wicked, but He loveth the righteous.
   [265] To justify the wicked or to condemn the righteous is equally
   abominable to Him. [266] He considers the house of the wicked, how the
   wicked are overthrown to their ruin. [267] He overthrows the words of
   the treacherous man, while His eyes preserve him that hath knowledge.
   [268] He weighs the heart and keeps the soul and renders to every man
   according to his work. [269] Thus His way is a stronghold to the
   upright, but a destruction to the workers of iniquity. [270] He does
   not regard prayer so much as righteousness; he that turneth away his
   ear from hearing the law, even his prayer is an abomination. [271]
   Sacrifice goes for nothing in His sight if the life is not holy. To do
   justice and judgment is more acceptable to the Lord than sacrifice.
   [272] The sacrifice of the wicked is an abomination: how much more when
   he bringeth it with a wicked mind? [273] Yes, it is an abomination to
   the Lord, just as the prayer of the upright is His delight. The Lord is
   far from the wicked, but He heareth the prayer of the righteous. [274]
   When the foolish sinner offers a sin-offering instead of relinquishing
   his sin, the very offering mocks him, for it is only the righteous who
   find favour with the Lord. [275]

   It is this solemn truth, the truth of God's own way of regarding
   goodness and wickedness, which makes earnestness on the subject
   essential. If goodness were only pleasing to man, if sin were only an
   offence against creatures like ourselves, ordinary prudence would
   require us to be good and to avoid evil, but higher sanction would be
   wanting. When, however, the matter is taken up into the Divine
   presence, and we begin to understand that the Supreme Ruler of all
   things loves righteousness and hates iniquity, visits the one with
   favour and the other with reprobation, quite a new sanction is
   introduced. The wicked man, who makes light of evil, to whom it is as a
   sport, appears to be nothing short of an absolute fool. [276] In God's
   presence it is not difficult to perceive that goodness is wisdom, the
   only wisdom, the perfect wisdom.

   But now it may occur to some of us that it is surely nothing very
   wonderful to lay this stress upon the close connection between goodness
   and God-pleasing. Is it not, we are inclined to say, the most obvious
   and unquestioned of facts that God requires goodness at our hands, and
   is angry with the wicked every day? It is not very wonderful to us,
   because Revelation has made it familiar, but none the less it is a
   truth of Revelation, and if we were to ask in what the Inspiration of
   this book consists, no simpler and truer answer could be given than
   that it teaches, as we have just seen, the alliance of God with
   righteousness and the abhorrence in which He holds wickedness.

   Yes, a truism, but it was a discovery which the world was very slow to
   make, and it is still a principle on which the world is very unwilling
   to act.

   The main characteristic of all heathen religions is that their gods do
   not demand righteousness, but certain outward and formal observances;
   sacrifices must be offered to them, their vindictive temper must be
   propitiated, their anger averted; if the dues of the gods are paid, the
   stipulated quantity of corn and wine and oil, the tithes, the
   firstfruits, the animals for the altar, the tribute for the temple,
   then the worshipper who has thus discharged his obligations may feel
   himself free to follow out his own tastes and inclinations. In the
   Roman religion, for example, every dealing with the gods was a strictly
   legal contract; the Roman general agreed with Jupiter or with Mars that
   if the battle should be won a temple should be built. It was not
   necessary that the cause should be right, or that the general should be
   good; the sacrifice of the wicked, though offered with an evil intent,
   was as valid as the sacrifice of the good. In either case the same
   amount of marble and stone, of silver and gold, would come to the god.

   In the Eastern religions not only were goodness and righteousness
   dissociated from the idea of the gods, but evil of the grossest kinds
   was definitely associated with them. The Phoenician deities, like those
   of the Hindoos, were actually worshipped with rites of murder and lust.
   Every vice had its patron god or goddess, and it was forgotten by
   priest and people that goodness could be the way of pleasing God, or
   moral evil a cause of offence to Him.

   Even in Israel, where the teaching of Revelation was current in the
   proverbs of the people, the practice generally followed the heathen
   conceptions. All the burning protests of the inspired prophets could
   not avail to convince the Israelite that what God required was not
   sacrifice and offering, but to do justice, to love mercy, and to walk
   humbly with Him. Again and again we find that the high places were
   frequented and the ritual supported by men who were sensual, unjust,
   and cruel. The Sabbath Day was kept, the feasts were duly observed, the
   priests were handsomely maintained, and there, it was supposed, the
   legitimate claims of Jehovah ceased. What more could He desire?

   This is surely the most impressive proof that the Truth which is under
   consideration is far from being obvious. Israel himself, the chosen
   channel for communicating this truth to the world, was so slow to
   understand and to grasp it, that his religious observances were
   constantly degenerating into lifeless ceremonies devoid of all moral
   significance, and his religious teachers were mainly occupied in
   denouncing his conduct as wholly inconsistent with the truth.

   So far from treating the truth as a truism, our Lord in all His
   teaching laboured to bring it out in greater clearness, and to set it
   in the forefront of His message to men. He made it the very keynote of
   the Gospel that not every one who says, Lord, Lord, shall enter into
   the kingdom of heaven, but he that doeth the will of His Father in
   heaven. He painted with exquisite simplicity and clearness the right
   life, the conduct which God requires of us, and then likened every one
   who practised this life to a man who builds his house on a rock, and
   every one who does not practise it to a man who builds his house on the
   sand. He declared, in the spirit of all that we have just read from the
   book of Proverbs, that teachers were to be judged by their fruits, and
   that God would estimate our lives not by what we professed to do, but
   by what we did; and He took up the very language of the book in
   declaring that every man should be judged according to his works. [277]
   In every word He spoke He made it plain that goodness is what God
   loves, and that wickedness is what He judges and destroys. In the same
   way every one of the Apostles insists on this truth with a new
   earnestness. St. John more especially reiterates it, in words which
   sound even more like a truism than the sayings of this book: "He that
   doeth righteousness is righteous even as He is righteous;" and, "If ye
   know that He is righteous, ye know that every one also that doeth
   righteousness is begotten of Him." [278]

   The Gospel itself is accompanied by a new and more earnest assertion of
   this cardinal truth, that God loves goodness, and that He judges men
   according to their works. And even now, after many centuries of
   Christian faith, and notwithstanding all the teachings of the Bible and
   the witness of the Spirit, it is very difficult for many of us to
   understand that religion is goodness, and religion without goodness is
   impiety of the worst kind. It is supposed by some, in face of all the
   accumulated truth and wisdom of the ages which have passed since this
   book was written, that God's last and highest message is a dispensation
   from practical righteousness--that the Gospel of Grace means God's
   willingness to accept men because they believe, apart from the actual
   goodness to which all faith is calculated to lead; as if the Gospel
   were an announcement that God had entirely changed His nature, and that
   all the best and noblest teachings of His Spirit in the past were set
   aside by His final revelation. Behind some figment or other, some
   perverted notion of imputed righteousness, men try to hide their guilty
   countenance, and to persuade themselves that now, in virtue of the
   Cross, they can see God without holiness, without purity of heart.
   Heaven has been treated as a place where men can enter who work
   abomination and make a lie; and in order to secure a full acceptance
   for our dogma we try to depreciate goodness as if it were a thing of
   little worth, and even come to look with some suspicion on those who
   are only good--only moral, I think we call it--and do not hold our own
   views of speculative truth. Meanwhile religious teachers "tell the
   wicked they are righteous," and earn the curse of the nation, because
   they thereby enable men to be hard and cruel and unjust and selfish and
   proud and contemptuous, and yet to esteem themselves as justified by
   faith. Others "justify the wicked," accepting a verbal profession in
   place of a virtuous practice; and that, as we have seen, is abominable
   to the Lord.

   Justification by faith loses all its meaning and all its value unless
   it is fully admitted that to be just is the great end and aim of
   religion. Salvation becomes a delusion unless it is perceived that it
   means righteousness. Heaven, and the saints' everlasting rest, become
   worthless and misleading ideas unless we recognise that it is the abode
   of goodness, and that saints are not, as we sometimes seem to imply,
   bad people regarded as holy by a legal fiction, but people who are made
   good and are actually holy.

   Strong as the language of our book is upon the subject, it is not
   possible to bring out in mere proverbial sayings the eternal necessity
   of this great truth. Goodness and blessedness are actually identical,
   the reverse and the obverse sides of the same coin. If a man is made
   good he is made blessed; but if he is made blessed to all appearance,
   and not good, the blessedness proves to be an illusion. It could not
   possibly avail to be justified by faith, unless we were made just by
   faith; a sore body is not healed by covering it up, a dead man is not
   quickened by a smiling mask. There have been many people who counted
   themselves the elect, and made no question that they were saved, though
   they remained all the time inwardly wicked; they were miserable, sour,
   discontented, censorious, a burden to themselves, an eyesore to others;
   they were persuaded that they would be happy in heaven, and they
   supposed that their constant wretchedness was due to their being
   pilgrims in a strange land; but the fact was they would be more
   wretched still in heaven, for nowhere is evil such a curse as in a
   place where good prevails; their misery arose from their own wicked
   hearts, and in the next world, their hearts still being wicked, their
   misery must continue and increase.

   May God grant us a clear vision in this matter, that we may see the due
   relation of things! Goodness is the principal thing--for it faith
   itself and all religion exists. God is goodness--man is evil; what God
   means by saving us is to make us good like Himself. That we must be
   saved by faith means that we must be made good by faith, not that we
   must take faith in place of goodness. That righteousness is imputed to
   us by the goodness of God means that the goodness of Christ is reckoned
   as ours for the purpose of making us good, not in order to spare us the
   necessity of being good. And in this way, and this only, we must
   estimate one another. What a man believes in his heart we can never
   fully know; but whether he is good or not is a matter plain as the day.
   It is easy to bandy words of reproach, to call men unbelievers,
   sceptics, atheists; but there is only one wise way of speaking and
   thinking. If we see goodness, let us thank God, for there, be sure, His
   Spirit is; [279] if we see the lovely graces which shine in our Lord
   Jesus Christ gleaming, however fitfully, in our fellow-men, let us
   recognise Christ there. And where we see wickedness, let no
   consideration of outward Christian profession or orthodoxy of belief
   restrain us from fully recognising that it is evil, or from
   courageously contending against it.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [208] Prov. x. 28.

   [209] Prov. x. 30.

   [210] Prov. xiv. 11. Cf. Prov. xii. 7: "Overthrow the wicked; and they
   are not (i.e., there is no rising again for them), but the house of the
   righteous shall stand."

   [211] Prov. xi. 18.

   [212] Prov. xiii. 3.

   [213] Prov. xi. 5, 6; xxi. 7.

   [214] Prov. xxii. 8.

   [215] Prov. xxi. 7, 8, 10, 15; xxvi. 24, 26; xv. 28.

   [216] Prov. xi. 7.

   [217] Prov. xiii. 9; xxiv. 20.

   [218] Prov. xi. 19.

   [219] Prov. xi. 21.

   [220] Prov. xiv. 12; xvi. 5, 25; xxi. 2.

   [221] Prov. xxiii. 17, 18; xxiv. 1, 19.

   [222] Prov. xii. 7.

   [223] Prov. xiv. 12; xvi. 25.

   [224] Prov. xxiv. 15, 16.

   [225] Prov. xxix. 16.

   [226] Prov. xi. 3.

   [227] Prov. xiii. 6. Cf. Prov. xiv. 14: "The backslider in heart shall
   be sated from his own ways, and the good man from himself." Though
   probably we ought to read, with Nowack, mmllyv, which would give a
   completer parallelism: "The backslider shall be sated from his own
   ways, and the good man from his own doings."

   [228] Prov. xi. 8. Cf. Prov. xxviii. 18.

   [229] Prov. xxi. 18.

   [230] Prov. xii. 13.

   [231] Prov. xii. 21.

   [232] Prov. xiii. 25.

   [233] Prov. xvi. 17; xix. 16.

   [234] Prov. xiv. 22.

   [235] Prov. xxi. 21.

   [236] Prov. xxi. 15; xxix. 6. Unless, with Delitzsch, we are to read
   bphs for bphs, and yrvts for yrvn, which would give: "In the steps of a
   bad man lie snares, but the righteous runs and rejoices."

   [237] Prov. xi. 27, 30.

   [238] Prov. xii. 12.

   [239] Prov. xvii. 26: "To punish the righteous is not good, nor to
   smite the noble for their uprightness."

   [240] Prov. xiv. 32.

   [241] Prov. xx. 11.

   [242] Prov. xiv. 19.

   [243] Prov. xxv. 26.

   [244] Prov. xiv. 26: "In the fear of the Lord is strong confidence: and
   his children shall have a place of refuge." So Prov. xx. 7: "A just man
   that walketh in his integrity: blessed are his children after him."

   [245] Prov. xiii. 22.

   [246] Prov. xii. 26.

   [247] Prov. xxii. 11. Cf. Prov. xvi. 13.

   [248] Prov. xi. 31.

   [249] Prov. xxix. 2.

   [250] Prov. xxviii. 12.

   [251] Prov. xi. 10, 11.

   [252] Prov. xiv. 34.

   [253] Prov. xxviii. 28.

   [254] Prov. xii. 26.

   [255] Prov. xvi. 27.

   [256] Prov. xviii. 3.

   [257] Prov. xxviii. 28.

   [258] Prov. xxix. 2.

   [259] Prov. xxiv. 24, 25.

   [260] Prov. xxviii. 4.

   [261] Prov. xxviii. 1.

   [262] Prov. xi. 20.

   [263] Prov. xii. 2.

   [264] Prov. xv. 26.

   [265] Prov. xv. 9.

   [266] Prov. xvii. 15, 26; xviii. 5.

   [267] Prov. xxi. 12, where "one that is righteous" seems to mean God
   Himself; see the margin of R.V.

   [268] Prov. xxii. 12.

   [269] Prov. xxiv. 12.

   [270] Prov. x. 29.

   [271] Prov. xxviii. 9.

   [272] Prov. xxi. 3.

   [273] Prov. xxi. 27.

   [274] Prov. xv. 8, 29.

   [275] Prov. xiv. 9. This seems to be the meaning of this difficult
   verse, which should be translated: The sin-offering mocks fools, but
   among the righteous is favour.

   [276] Prov. x. 23.

   [277] Matt. xvi. 27.

   [278] 1 John iii. 7, 10; ii. 29.

   [279] "If ye know that He is righteous," says St. John, "ye know that
   every one also that doeth righteousness is begotten of Him." (1 John
   ii. 29).
     __________________________________________________________________

XII.

  THE TONGUE.

     "A man shall be satisfied with good by the fruit of his mouth: and
     the doings of a man's hands shall be rendered unto him."--Prov. xii.
     14.

     "In the transgression of the lips is a snare to an evil man: but the
     righteous shall come out of trouble."--Prov. xii. 13.

     "A fool's vexation is presently known: but a prudent man concealeth
     shame."--Prov. xii. 16.

     "He that uttereth truth showeth forth righteousness, but a false
     witness deceit."--Prov. xii. 17.

     "The lip of truth shall be established for ever: but a lying tongue
     is but for a moment."--Prov. xii. 19.

     "Lying lips are an abomination unto the Lord: but they that deal
     truly are His delight."--Prov. xii. 22.

     "There is that speaketh rashly like the piercings of a sword: but
     the tongue of the wise is health."--Prov. xii. 18.

     "A prudent man concealeth knowledge: but the heart of fools
     proclaimeth foolishness."--Prov. xii. 23.

     "The words of the wicked are a lying in wait for blood: but the
     mouth of the upright shall deliver them."--Prov. xii. 6.

     "Heaviness in the heart of a man maketh it stoop; but a good word
     maketh it glad."--Prov. xii. 25.

   There is nothing which seems more insubstantial than speech, a mere
   vibration in the atmosphere which touches the nerves of hearing and
   then dies away. There is no organ which seems smaller and less
   considerable than the tongue; a little member which is not even seen,
   and, physically speaking, soft and weak. But the word which issues out
   of the lips is the greatest power in human life. That "soft tongue
   breaketh the bone." [280] Words will change the currents of life: look
   for instance at a great orator addressing his audience; how miraculous
   must it seem to a deaf man watching the speaker that the quiet opening
   of a mouth should be able to produce such powerful effects upon the
   faces, the movements, the conduct of the listeners!

   We are coming to consider the importance of this diminutive organ, the
   ill uses and the good uses to which it may be turned, and the
   consequent necessity of fitly directly and restraining it.

   On the use of the tongue depend the issues of a man's own life. It may
   be regarded as a tree which bears fruits of different kinds, and such
   fruits as his tongue bears a man must eat. If his words have been good,
   then he shall be satisfied with good by the fruit of his mouth. [281]
   "A man's belly shall be filled with the fruit of his mouth, with the
   increase of his lips shall he be satisfied." [282] The fruits which
   grow on this tongue-tree are death and life--the tongue produces
   them--and he that loves the tree shall according to his love eat the
   one fruit or the other; if he loves death-bearing speech he shall eat
   death; if he loves life-bearing speech he shall eat life. [283] So
   deadly may be the fruit of the tongue that the mouth of the fool is
   regarded as a present destruction. [284] So wholesome may be the fruit
   of the tongue that the tongue of the wise may be actually denominated
   health. [285]

   In the case of the fool it is always very obvious how powerfully the
   tongue affects the condition of the speaker. His lips are always coming
   into strife, and his mouth is always calling for stripes. It is his
   destruction, and his lips are the snare of his soul. [286] In the
   transgression of the lips always lies the snare for the evil man:
   ultimately all men are in effect condemned out of their own mouths.
   [287] The tongue proves to be a rod for the back of the proud and
   foolish owner of it, while the good man's tongue is a constant
   life-preserver. [288] As an old proverb says, a fool's tongue is always
   long enough to cut his own throat. On the other hand, where the tongue
   is wisely used it always brings back joy to the speaker in the end.
   [289] Thus whoever keeps his mouth and his tongue keeps his soul from
   troubles, [290] but the man who does not take the pains to hear, but
   gives his testimony falsely, shall perish. [291] While the use of the
   tongue thus recoils on the speaker for good or for evil, it has a wide
   influence also on others. "He that hath a perverse tongue falleth into
   mischief," [292] but when speech is good, and such as it ought to be,
   "the words of a man's mouth are like deep waters, a gushing brook, a
   well of wisdom." [293]

   Thus it is of vast and obvious importance how we use our tongue. If our
   speech is gracious we shall win the friendship of the king, [294] and
   it is a pleasant thing if we "keep the words of the wise within us and
   if they be established together upon our lips." [295] It is better for
   us to be poor than perverse or untruthful in our speech. [296] Our
   teacher, especially our Divine Lord, will rejoice inwardly and deeply
   "when our lips speak right things." [297]

   We are now cautioned against some of the evil purposes to which the
   tongue may be turned, and as all the heads of evil are passed in review
   we realize why St. James spoke of the tongue as "the world of iniquity"
   (iii. 6); and how profound was our Lord's teaching that out of the
   mouth proceed the things which defile a man (Matt. xv. 18).

   First of all, the tongue is a fruitful source of Quarrelling and
   discord. A fool cannot hide his vexation, but must immediately blurt it
   out with the tongue. [298] When he is angry he must utter it all at
   once, [299] though a wise man would keep it back and still it, so
   concealing shame. No one is more certain to come to grief than "he who
   provokes with words." [300] These irritating taunts and threats are
   like coals to hot embers, and wood to fire; [301] in their absence the
   contention would quickly die out. It is therefore the wise counsel of
   Agur to one who has done foolishly in exalting himself, or has even
   entertained for a moment the arrogant or quarrelsome thought, "Hand on
   thy mouth!" for speech under such circumstances produces strife as
   surely as churning produces butter from milk, or a blow on the nose
   blood. [302] Rash, inconsiderate, angry words are like the piercings of
   a sword. [303] If only our wrathful spirit made us immediately dumb,
   anger would never go far, it would die out as a conflagration dies when
   there is no wind to fan the flames.

   But again, the tongue is the instrument of Lying; one of its worst
   disservices to man is that when it is well balanced, so that it easily
   wags, it often betrays him into untruths which his heart never
   contemplated nor even approved. It is the tongue which by false witness
   so often condemns the innocent. [304] A worthless witness mocketh at
   judgment; and the mouth of the wicked swalloweth iniquity. [305] And
   though such a witness shall not in the long run go unpunished, nor
   shall the liar escape, [306] yet, as experience shows, he may have
   brought ruin or calamity on others before vengeance falls upon him. The
   false witness shall perish, [307] but often not before he has like a
   mace or a hammer bruised and like a sword or a sharp arrow pierced his
   unfortunate neighbour. [308] It is the tongue which glozes over the
   purposes of hate, and lulls the victim into a false security; the
   fervent lips and the wicked heart are like a silver lining spread over
   an earthen vessel to make it look like silver; the hatred is cunningly
   concealed, the seven abominations in the heart are hidden; the pit
   which is being dug and the stone which is to overwhelm the innocent are
   kept secret by the facile talk and flatteries of the tongue; the more
   the tongue lies in its guileful machinations the more the heart hates
   the victims of its spite. [309] A righteous man hates lying, but the
   wicked, by his lies, brings disgrace and shame. [310] The lie often
   appears to prosper for a moment, [311] but happily it is an abomination
   to the Lord, [312] and in His righteous ordering of events he makes the
   falsehood which was as bread, and sweet to the lips, into gravel which
   breaks the teeth in the mouth. [313] The curse which is causeless is
   frustrated, and so also is the empty lie; it wanders without rest,
   without limit, like a sparrow or a swallow. [314]

   Closely allied to lying is Flattery; and to this vile use the tongue is
   often put. Flattery is always a mistake. It does not attain its end in
   winning the favour of the flattered; for in the long run "he that
   rebuketh a man shall find more favour than he that flattereth with the
   tongue." [315] If it is believed, as often unfortunately it is, it
   proves to be a net spread in the path, which may trip up, and may even
   capture and destroy, the unwary walker. [316]

   Another evil use of the tongue is for Whispering and tale-bearing. "He
   that goeth about as a tale-bearer revealeth secrets"--he is not to be
   trusted, it is better to have nothing to do with him. Disclosing the
   secret of another is a sure way of incurring reproach and lasting
   infamy. Such a habit is a fruitful source of rage and indignation, it
   brings black wrath to the countenance of him whose secret has been
   published, just as a north wind spreads the rain clouds over the sky.
   [317] The temptation to tattling is great; the business of a gossip
   brings an immediate reward; for the corrupt heart of man delights in
   scandal as an epicure in tit-bits: "The words of a whisperer are as
   dainty morsels which go down into the chamber of the belly." [318] But
   what mischief they do! They separate bosom friends, sowing suspicion
   and distrust. [319] Where there is already a little misunderstanding,
   the whisperer supplies wood to the fire and keeps it burning; apart
   from him it would soon die out. [320] But if he thinks there is any
   prospect of a reconciliation he will be constantly harping on the
   matter; one who seeks love would try to hide the transgression, but the
   scandalmonger is a foe to love and the unfailing author of enmity.
   [321]

   But there is Mischief, more deliberate and more malignant still, which
   the tongue is employed to plot, to plan and to execute. "With his mouth
   the godless man destroyeth his neighbour." [322] "The words of the
   wicked are a lying in wait for blood." [323] "The mouth of the wicked
   poureth out evil things," [324] blasphemies, obscenities, curses,
   imprecations. "A froward man scattereth abroad strife." [325] He
   deceives, and in bitter raillery declares that he was only jesting; he
   is like a madman casting firebrands, arrows, and death. [326] We know
   what it is to hear a man pouring out foul, abusive, and impious
   language, until the very atmosphere seems enflamed with firebrands, and
   arrows fly hither and thither through the horrified air. We know, too,
   what it is to hear the smooth and well-turned speech of the hypocrite
   and the impostor, which seems to oppress the heart with a sense of
   decomposition; righteousness, truth, and joy seem to wither away, and
   in the choking suffocation of deceit and fraud life itself seems as if
   it must expire.

   It is a relief to turn from those worst uses of the tongue to the more
   pardonable vices of Rashness and Inopportuneness of speech. Yet these
   too are evil enough in their way. To pass a judgment before we are in
   possession of the facts, and before we have taken the pains to
   carefully investigate and consider them, is a sign of folly and a
   source of shame. [327] So impressed is our teacher with the danger of
   ill-considered speech that he says, "Seest thou a man that is hasty in
   his words? there is more hope of a fool than of him." [328] And even
   where the utterance of the tongue is in itself good it may be rendered
   evil by its untimeliness; religious talk itself may be so introduced as
   to hinder the cause of religion; pearls may be cast before swine:
   "Speak not in the hearing of a fool, for he will despise the wisdom of
   thy words." [329] There must be some preparation of spirit before we
   can wisely introduce Divine and heavenly things, and circumstances must
   not be chosen which will tend to make the Divine things seem mean and
   contemptible. It may be good to rebuke an evildoer, or to admonish a
   friend; but if the opportunity is not fitting, we may make the evildoer
   more evil,--we may alienate our friend without improving him.

   Considering then what mischief may be done with the tongue, it is not
   to be wondered at that we are cautioned against excessive speech. "In
   the multitude of words there wanteth not transgression, but he that
   refraineth his lips doeth wisely." [330] "He that guardeth his mouth
   keepeth his life; who opens wide his lips gets destruction, and a fool
   spreadeth out folly." [331] "In all labour is profit, the talk of the
   lips tends only to poverty." [332] "Wisdom rests in the heart of the
   understanding, but even in the inward part of fools all is blabbed."
   [333] "In the fool are no lips of knowledge" because he is always
   talking. [334] "The tongue of the wise uttereth knowledge aright, but
   the mouth of fools poureth out folly." [335] "A fool hath no delight in
   understanding, but only that his heart may reveal itself." [336] One
   who is always pouring out talk is sure to be pouring out folly. The
   wise man, feeling that all his words must be tested and weighed, is not
   able to talk very much. When your money is all in copper, you may
   afford to throw it about, but when it is all in gold you have to be
   cautious. A Christian feels that for every idle word he utters he will
   have to give account, and as none of his words are to be idle they must
   be comparatively few; the word that kindles wrath, the lie, the
   whisper, the slander, can therefore find no place on his lips.

   This brings us to the Good and beautiful uses of the tongue, those uses
   which justify us in calling the tongue of the wise Health. [337] First
   of all the tongue has the gracious power of soothing and restraining
   anger. It is the readiest instrument of peace-making. Gentleness of
   speech allays great offences, [338] and by preventing quarrels,
   disarming wrath, and healing the wounds of the spirit, it maintains its
   claim to be a tree of life. [339] If in the tumult of passion, when
   fiery charges are made and grievous provocations are uttered, the
   tongue can be held in firm restraint, and made to give a soft answer,
   the storm will subside, the angry assailant will retire abashed, [340]
   and the flaming arrows will be quenched in the buckler of meekness
   which opposes them. Nor is the tongue only defensive in such cases. The
   pleasant words, spoken out of a kindly and gentle nature, have a
   purifying effect; [341] they cleanse away the defilements out of which
   the evil passions sprang; they purge the diseased humours which produce
   the irritations of life; they supply a sweet food to the poor hearts of
   men, who are often contentious because they are hungry for sympathy and
   love. Pleasant words are as a honeycomb, sweet to the soul, health to
   the bones. [342] They must be true words, or they will not in the end
   be pleasant, for, as we have seen, the sweet bread of falsehood turns
   to gravel in the mouth. But what a different world this would become if
   we all spoke as many pleasant words as we honestly could, and were not
   so painfully afraid of showing what tenderness and pity and healing
   actually exist in our hearts! For another beautiful use of the tongue
   is to comfort the mourners, of whom there are always so many in the
   world. "Heaviness in the heart of a man maketh it stoop." There are
   these stooping, bowed-down hearts everywhere around us. We wish that we
   could remove the cause of sorrow, that we could effectually change the
   conditions which seem unfavourable to joy; but being unable to do this,
   we often stand aloof and remain silent, because we shrink from giving
   words without deeds, pity without relief. We forget that when the heart
   is heavy it is just "a good word that maketh it glad." [343] Yes, a
   word of genuine sympathy, a word from the heart,--and in trouble no
   other word can be called good,--will often do more to revive the
   drooping spirit than the grosser gifts of material wealth. A coin
   kindly given, a present dictated by a heart-felt love, may come as a
   spiritual blessing; on the other hand, money given without love is
   worthless, and seldom earns so much as gratitude, while a word in
   season, how good it is! [344] It is better than silver and gold; the
   discouraged and despondent heart seems to be touched with the delicate
   finger of hope, and to rise from the ashes and the dust with a new
   purpose and a new life. It must, of course, be in season. "As vinegar
   upon nitre so is he that sings songs to a sad heart." [345] But the
   seasonable word, spoken just at the right moment and just in the right
   tone, brief and simple, but comprehending and penetrating, will often
   make the sad heart sing a song for itself.

   Great stress is to be laid on this seasonableness of speech, whether
   the speech be for comfort or reproof. A word fitly spoken, or to
   preserve the image implied in the original, a word that runs on its
   wheels in the just and inevitable groove, is compared to a beautiful
   ornament consisting of golden apples set in an appropriate framework of
   silver filigree. [346] In such an ornament the golden apples torn from
   their suitable foil would lose half their beauty, and the silver
   setting without the apples would only suggest a void and a missing. It
   is in the combination that the artistic value is to be found. In the
   same way, the wisest utterance spoken foolishly [347] jars upon the
   hearers, and misses the mark, while a very simple saying, a platitude
   in itself, may by its setting become lovely and worthy. The best sermon
   in a social gathering will seem out of place, but how often can the
   Christian man by some almost unobserved remark correct unseasonable
   levity, rebuke unhallowed conversation, and lead the minds of the
   company to nobler thoughts. The timely word is better than the best
   sermon in such a case.

   The use of the tongue in Reproof is frequently referred to in these
   proverbs. "A wise reprover upon an obedient ear" is compared to "an
   earring of gold, an ornament of fine gold." [348] And rebuke is, as we
   have seen, preferred before flattery. [349] But how wise we must be
   before our tongue can fitly discharge this function! How humble must
   the heart be before it can instruct the tongue to speak at once with
   firmness and tenderness, without a touch of the Pharisee in its tone,
   to the erring brother or the offending stranger! A rebuke which springs
   not from love but from vanity, not from self-forgetfulness but from
   self-righteousness, will not be like an earring of gold, but rather
   like an ornament of miserable tinsel chafing the ear, the cause of
   gangrene, a disfigurement as well as an injury. But if we live in close
   communion with Christ, and daily receive His stern but tender rebukes
   into our own souls, it is possible that we may be employed by Him to
   deliver timely rebukes to our fellow-men.

   There are two other noble uses of the tongue to which reference is
   constantly made in our book; the Instruction of the ignorant, and the
   Championship of the distressed. With regard to the first, we are told
   that "the lips of the wise disperse knowledge," while of course the
   heart of the foolish not being right cannot possibly impart rightness
   to others. [350] It is only the wise in heart that can claim the title
   of prudent, but where that wisdom is "the sweetness of the lips
   increaseth learning." [351] "The heart of the wise instructeth his
   mouth and addeth learning to his lips." [352] The lips of knowledge are
   compared to a precious vessel which is more valuable than gold or
   rubies. [353] To teach well requires earnest preparation, "the heart of
   the righteous studieth to answer." [354] But when the right answer to
   the pupil is discovered and given it is beautifully compared to a kiss
   on the lips. [355]

   But never is the tongue more divinely employed than in using its
   knowledge or its pleadings to deliver those who are in danger or
   distress. "Through knowledge the righteous may often be delivered."
   [356] The mouth of the upright will deliver those against whom the
   wicked are plotting. [357] It is a great prerogative of wise lips that
   they are able to preserve not themselves only but others. [358] The
   true and faithful witness delivers souls. [359] It is this which gives
   to power its one great attraction for the good man. The ruler, the
   judge, the person of social consideration or of large means is in the
   enviable position of being able to "open his mouth for the dumb, in the
   cause of all such as are left desolate, to judge rightly and minister
   judgment to the poor and needy." [360]

   The Press--that great fourth estate--which represents for us the more
   extended use of the tongue in modern times, illustrates in the most
   vivid way the service which can be rendered where speech is fit, and
   also the injury that can be done where it is rash, imprudent,
   dishonest, interested, or unjust.

   After thus reviewing some of the good uses of the tongue, and observing
   how they depend on the state of the heart, [361] we cannot help again
   laying stress on the need of a wise self-control in all that we say. He
   that refraineth his lips doeth wisely. A man of understanding holdeth
   his peace. [362] "He that spareth his words hath knowledge." [363]
   "Even a fool when he holdeth his peace is counted wise, when he
   shutteth his lips he is prudent." [364] If only the uninstructed and
   foolish person has sense enough to perceive that wisdom is too high for
   him he will not open his mouth in the gate, [365] and so in listening
   he may learn. "Of thine unspoken word thou art master," says an Indian
   proverb, "but thy spoken word is master of thee." We are to be swift to
   hear, but slow to speak: we are to ponder all that we hear, for it is
   only the simple that believes every word, the prudent man looks well to
   his going. [366] As St. James says, summing up all the teaching that we
   have reviewed, "If any man thinketh himself to be religious, while he
   bridleth not his tongue, but deceiveth his heart, this man's religion
   is vain." [367]

   And now there is only one other point to be noticed, but it is one of
   vast importance. As we realize the immense power of the tongue and the
   great issues which depend on its right or wrong employment; as we sum
   up all the evil which its tiny unobserved movements can accomplish, and
   all the rich blessings which it is, under right supervision, capable of
   producing; and as from personal experience we recognise how difficult
   it is to bridle the unruly member, how difficult it is to check the
   double fountain so that it shall send forth sweet waters only, and no
   bitter, we may be awed into an almost absolute silence, and be inclined
   to put away the talent of speech which our Lord has given to us, not
   daring to use it lest in using we should abuse it. But here is the
   answer to our misgiving: the plans and preparations of our hearts
   belong to us, but the answer of the tongue is from the Lord. [368] This
   most uncontrollable organ of the body can be put under our Lord's
   control. He is able to give us "a mouth and wisdom," and to make our
   words not our own but the utterance of His Holy Spirit. There may be
   "an ocean round our words which overflows and drowns them," the
   encircling influences of God, turning even our faultiest speech to good
   account, neutralising all our falterings and blunderings, and silencing
   our follies and perversities.

   Shall we not put our lips under our Lord's control, that the answer of
   our tongue may be from Him? While we seek daily to subject our hearts
   to Him, shall we not in a peculiar and a direct manner subject our
   tongues, to Him? for while a subjected heart may keep the mouth from
   speaking evil, if the tongue is to speak well and to be employed for
   all its noble uses it must be immediately moved by God, our lips must
   be touched with a coal from the altar, our speech must be chastened and
   purified, inspired and impelled, by Him.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [280] Prov. xxv. 15.

   [281] Prov. xiii. 2.

   [282] Prov. xviii. 20.

   [283] Prov. xviii. 21.

   [284] Prov. x. 14.

   [285] Prov. xii. 18.

   [286] Prov. xviii. 6, 7.

   [287] Prov. xii. 13.

   [288] Prov. xiv. 3.

   [289] Prov. xv. 23.

   [290] Prov. xxi. 23.

   [291] Prov. xxi. 28.

   [292] Prov. xvii. 20.

   [293] Prov. xviii. 4.

   [294] Prov. xxii. 11.

   [295] Prov. xxii. 18.

   [296] Prov. xix. 1, 22.

   [297] Prov. xxiii. 16.

   [298] Prov. xii. 16.

   [299] Prov. xxix. 11.

   [300] Prov. xix. 7. All the Proverbs in this selection are in the form
   of a distich. This affords a fair presumption that this verse with its
   three clauses is mutilated; and the presumption is confirmed by the
   fact that the third clause adds nothing of value, even if it be
   intelligible at all, to the sense. There is good reason, therefore, for
   believing that this third clause is the half of a distich which has not
   been preserved in its integrity; all the more because the LXX. have a
   complete proverb which runs thus: ho polla kakopoion telesiourgei
   kakian, hos de erethizei logous ou sothesetai. "He that does much evil
   is a craftsman of iniquity, and he that uses provoking words shall not
   escape." Perhaps in the Hebrew text which was before the Greek
   translators mndph appeared instead of mrdph, and l' hyh instead of
   l'hmh.

   [301] Prov. xxvi. 21.

   [302] Prov. xxx. 32, 33.

   [303] Prov. xii. 18.

   [304] Prov. xii. 17.

   [305] Prov. xix. 28.

   [306] Prov. xix. 5, rep. ver. 9.

   [307] Prov. xxi. 28.

   [308] Prov. xxv. 18.

   [309] Prov. xxvi. 23-28.

   [310] Prov. xiii. 5.

   [311] Prov. xii. 19.

   [312] Prov. xii. 22.

   [313] Prov. xx. 17.

   [314] Prov. xxvi. 2.

   [315] Prov. xxviii. 23.

   [316] Prov. xxix. 5.

   [317] Prov. xi. 13 and xx. 19; xxv. 2, 23. Cf. "Whoso discovereth
   secrets loseth his credit and shall never find friend to his mind"
   (Eccles. xxvii. 16).

   [318] Prov. xviii. 8, rep. xxvi. 22.

   [319] Prov. xvi. 28.

   [320] Prov. xxvi. 20.

   [321] Prov. xvii. 9.

   [322] Prov. xi. 9.

   [323] Prov. xii. 6.

   [324] Prov. xv. 28.

   [325] Prov. xvi. 28.

   [326] Prov. xxvi. 18, 19.

   [327] Prov. xviii. 13.

   [328] Prov. xxix. 20.

   [329] Prov. xxiii. 9.

   [330] Prov. x. 19.

   [331] Prov. xiii. 3, 16.

   [332] Prov. xiv. 23.

   [333] Prov. xiv. 33.

   [334] Prov. xiv. 7. There is a quaint and pertinent passage in Lyly's
   Euphues:--"We may see the cunning and curious work of Nature, which
   hath barred and hedged nothing in so strongly as the tongue, with two
   rowes of teeth, and therewith two lips, besides she hath placed it
   farre from the heart, that it should not utter that which the heart had
   conceived; this also should cause us to be silent, seeinge those that
   use much talke, though they speake truly, are never beleeved."

   [335] Prov. xv. 2.

   [336] Prov. xviii. 2.

   [337] Prov. xii. 18.

   [338] Eccl. x. 4.

   [339] Prov. xv. 4. mrp' is best rendered here and in Eccl. x. 4 by
   "gentleness." It is just that quality of humility and submission and
   tranquillity which our Lord blessed as meekness.

   [340] Prov. xv. 1.

   [341] Prov. xv. 26.

   [342] Prov. xvi. 24.

   [343] Prov. xii. 25.

   [344] Prov. xv. 23.

   [345] Prov. xxv. 20.

   [346] Prov. xxv. 11.

   [347] Cf. Eccles. xx. 20: "A wise sentence shall be rejected when it
   cometh out of a fool's mouth, for he will not speak it in due season."

   [348] Prov. xxv. 12.

   [349] Prov. xxviii. 23.

   [350] Prov. xv. 7.

   [351] Prov. xvi. 21.

   [352] Prov. xvi. 23.

   [353] Prov. xx. 15.

   [354] Prov. xv. 28.

   [355] Prov. xxiv. 26.

   [356] Prov. xi. 9.

   [357] Prov. xii. 6.

   [358] Prov. xiv. 3.

   [359] Prov. xiv. 5, 25.

   [360] Prov. xxxi. 8, 9.

   [361] Note the intimate connection between conduct and speech in such a
   proverb as xvii. 4. When we do evil we are always ready to listen to
   evil talk, when we talk deceitfully we are preparing to go on to worse
   deeds of evil, to listen to tongues of destruction. Note, too, how in
   xii. 5 the thoughts and the counsels of the heart come before the words
   and the mouth in v. 6.

   [362] Prov. xi. 12.

   [363] Prov. xvii. 27.

   [364] Prov. xvii. 28. Cf. the old Norse proverb:--

   "An unwise man when he comes among the people

   Had best be silent: no one knows

   That he nothing knows unless he talks too much."

   [365] Prov. xxiv. 7.

   [366] Prov. xiv. 15.

   [367] James i. 26.

   [368] Prov. xvi. 1.
     __________________________________________________________________

XIII.

  PRIDE AND HUMILITY.

     "A wise son heareth his father's instruction, but a scorner heareth
     not rebuke."--Prov. xiii. 1.

     "Poverty and shame shall be to him that refuseth correction, but he
     that regardeth reproof shall be honoured."--Prov. xiii. 18.

     "By pride cometh only contention, but with the well advised is
     wisdom."--Prov. xiii. 10.

     "Whoso despiseth the word bringeth destruction on himself; but he
     that feareth the commandment shall be rewarded."--Prov. xiii. 13.

     This last proverb appears in another form, as, "He that giveth heed
     unto the word shall find good, and whoso trusteth in the Lord happy
     is he."--Prov. xvi. 20.

   By a proud man we mean one who esteems himself better than others; by a
   humble man we mean one who counts others better than himself. The proud
   man is so convinced of his intrinsic superiority that if appearances
   are against him, if others obtain more recognition, honour, wealth than
   he, the fault seems to him to lie in the evil constitution of the
   world, which cannot recognize merit; for his own intrinsic superiority
   is the axiom which is always to be taken for granted; "his neighbours
   therefore find no favour in his eyes, and he even desires their
   calamity and ruin," in order, as he would put it, that every one may be
   set in his due place. [369] Meanwhile he is always boasting of
   possessions, dignities, and gifts which do not yet, but some day will,
   appear to the public eye. He is like clouds which overcast the sky, and
   wind which frets the earth, without bringing any wholesome rain. [370]
   If, on the other hand, appearances are with him, if wealth, dignity,
   and honour fall to his share, he is affably convinced of his own
   supreme excellence; the proof of his own conviction is written large in
   his broad acres, his swelling dividends, and his ever-increasing troops
   of flatterers and friends; and he moves smoothly on to--what?--strange
   to say, little as he thinks it, to destruction, for "Pride goeth before
   destruction, and a haughty spirit before a fall." [371] If he only knew
   he would say, "Better is it to be of a lowly spirit with the meek than
   to divide the spoil with the proud;" [372] for "before destruction the
   heart of man is haughty, and before honour goeth humility." [373] The
   event shows, if not in this world, yet the more surely in the next,
   that it is well to "let another man praise thee, and not thine own
   mouth; a stranger, and not thine own lips." [374]

   When our eyes are open to see things as they are, we are no longer in
   the least impressed by the "proud and haughty man whose name is scorner
   working in the arrogance of pride." [375] We may not live to see it,
   but we are quite persuaded that "a man's pride shall bring him low, but
   he that is of a lowly spirit shall obtain honour." [376] "Seest thou a
   man wise in his own conceit? There is more hope of a fool than of him."
   [377]

   Now what are the evil effects of pride, and what are the blessings that
   follow on humility?

   First of all, pride cuts a man off from all the salutary effects of
   reproof, rebuke, criticism, and counsel, without which it is not
   possible for any of us to become wise. "A wise son" is the result of "a
   father's correction," says the text, and such a son makes his father
   glad; [378] but the pride in a child's heart will often prevent him
   from receiving even the correction of a father, and will lead him to
   despise his mother. And if the parents have not firmness and wisdom
   enough to overcome this childish resistance, it will grow with years,
   and prove more and more disastrous. "He is in the way of life that
   heedeth correction, but he that forsaketh reproof erreth." [379] If he
   had loved reproof he would have acquired knowledge, but hating it he
   becomes brutish. [380] It is evident then that this pride is folly. He
   is a fool that despises his father's correction, but he that regardeth
   reproof getteth prudence. [381] He that refuseth correction despiseth
   his own soul, but he that hearkeneth to reproof getteth understanding.
   [382]

   When we are grown up, and no longer under the tutelage of parents who
   love us, pride is still more likely to harden our hearts against
   criticism and counsel. The word of warning falls on the proud ear in
   vain, just because it is the word of warning, and often does the wilful
   heart mourn as it suffers the penalty of its stubbornness. [383] A man
   who refuses correction is a synonym for poverty and shame. [384] These
   words which we in our pride despise might be an incalculable benefit to
   us. Even the most witless criticism may be useful to a humble mind,
   even the most unjust attacks may lead us to wholesome self-searching,
   and to a more careful removal of possible offences. While if the
   criticism is fair, and prompted by a kind heart, or if the rebuke is
   administered by one whose wisdom and justice we respect, it is likely
   to do us far more good than praise and approval. "A rebuke entereth
   deeper into one that hath understanding than a hundred stripes into a
   fool." [385] "Better is open rebuke than love that is hid." [386] If we
   were wise we should value this plain and honest speaking much more than
   the insipid flattery which is often dictated by interested motives.
   [387] In fact, praise is a very questionable benefit; it is of no use
   at all unless we carefully test it, and try it, and accept it with the
   greatest caution, for only a small part of it is pure metal, most of it
   is mere dross; [388] and praise that is not deserved is the most
   dangerous and deleterious of delights. But rebuke and criticism cannot
   do us much harm. Many great and noble men have been ruined by
   admiration and popularity, who might have thriven, growing greater and
   nobler, in the fiercest and most relentless criticism. Donatello, the
   great Florentine sculptor, went at one time of his life to Padua, where
   he was received with the utmost enthusiasm, and loaded with approbation
   and honours. But soon he declared his intention of returning to
   Florence, on the ground that the sharp assaults and the cutting
   criticisms which always assailed him in his native city were much more
   favourable to his art than the atmosphere of admiration and eulogy. In
   this way he thought that he would be stimulated to greater efforts, and
   ultimately attain to a surer reputation. In the same spirit the
   greatest of modern art critics has told us how valuable to him were the
   criticisms which his humble Italian servant made on his drawings.
   Certainly, "with those who allow themselves to be advised is wisdom."
   [389] "He that trusteth in his own heart," and cannot receive the
   advice of others, "is a fool; but whoso walketh wisely he shall be
   delivered," sometimes perhaps by the humble suggestions of very simple
   people. [390]

   Yes, "with the lowly is wisdom:" [391] they "hearken to counsel," [392]
   and in doing so they get the advantage of many other wits, while the
   proud man is confined strictly to his own, and however great his
   capacity may be, it is hardly probable that he will sum up all human
   wisdom in himself. The lowly gives heed to the word, no matter who
   speaks it, and finds good; [393] he abides among the wise, because he
   is always ready to learn; consequently, he becomes wise, and eventually
   he gets the honour which he deserves. [394] It is in this way that
   people of lowly station and very moderate abilities often come to the
   front. "A servant that deals wisely has rule over a son that causes
   shame, and has part in the inheritance among the brethren." [395] To a
   crafty son no good shall be, but to a servant who is wise his actions
   shall prosper and his way be made straight. [396] The consciousness of
   not being clever, and a wise diffidence in our own judgment, will often
   make us very thankful to learn from others and save us from the follies
   of wilfulness; and thus very much to their own astonishment the humble
   find that they have outdistanced their more brilliant competitors in
   the race, and, walking in their humility, unexpectedly light upon
   recognition and admiration, honour and love.

   This first point, then, becomes very clear in the light of experience.
   One of the most injurious effects of Pride is to cut off its miserable
   victim from all the vast help and service which rebuke and criticism
   can render to the humble. One of the sweetest results of a genuine
   humility is that it brings us to the feet of all wise teachers; it
   multiplies lessons for us in all the objects which surround us; it
   enables us to learn even from those who seem to be too captious to
   teach, or too malevolent to be even wise. The humble mind has all the
   wisdom of the ages as its possession, and all the folly of fools as an
   invaluable warning.

   Secondly, by pride comes nothing but strife, [397] and he loveth
   transgression that loveth strife; he that raiseth high his gate, i.e.,
   builds a lofty house, seeketh destruction. [398] It is the pride of
   monarchs and nations which produces war; the sense of personal dignity
   which is always sudden and quick in quarrel; the feeling of swollen
   self-importance which is afraid to make peace lest it should suffer in
   the eyes of men. And in the affairs of private life our pride, rather
   than our sense of right, usually creates, fosters, and embitters
   divisions, alienations, and quarrels. "I am perfectly innocent," says
   Pride; "I bear no resentment, but it would be absurd for me to make the
   first advances; when those advances are made, I am willing to forgive
   and to forget." "I think I am innocent," says Humility, "but then I may
   have been very provoking, and I may have given offence without knowing
   it; in any case, I may as well make an offer of apology; if I fail, I
   fail."

   Nor is this the only way in which strife grows out of pride, for "by
   pride comes nothing but strife." All the foolish extravagances of
   social competition are to be traced to the same source. One man "raises
   high his gate," builds a fine house, and furnishes it in the best way.
   He flatters himself that his "little place" is tolerably comfortable,
   and he speaks with some contemptuous pity of all his neighbours'
   houses. Immediately all his neighbours enviously strive to excel him,
   and pride vies with pride, heartburnings are many and bitter. Then
   there comes on the scene one who in wealth and ostentation of wealth
   exceeds them all, and the first man is now racked with envy, strains
   every nerve to outdo the insolent intruder, suffers his debts to far
   exceed his assets, and soon incurs the inevitable crash. That is how
   pride works in one very obvious department of social life. But it is
   the same in every other department. Who can calculate the miseries
   which are produced by the grotesque assumptions of poor mortals to be
   superior to their fellow-mortals? Parents will mar their children's
   lives by refusing their consent to marriages with those who, for some
   perfectly artificial reason, are held to be beneath them; or will still
   more fatally ruin their children's happiness by insisting on alliances
   with those who are held to be above them. Those who prosper in the
   world will heartlessly turn their backs on relations who have not
   prospered. Men who earn their living in one particular way, or in no
   particular way, will loftily contemn those who earn their living in
   another particular way. Those who dress in the fashion will look in
   another direction when they pass people who do not dress in the
   fashion, though they may be under deep obligations to these slighted
   friends. This is all the work of pride. Then there are the sneers, the
   taunts, the sarcasms, the proud man's scorn, like "a rod in the mouth"
   indeed, [399] which falls with cutting cruelty on many tender backs and
   gentle faces. The overbearing temper of one who "bears himself
   insolently and is confident" [400] will sometimes take all the
   sweetness out of life for some delicate woman, or shrinking child, or
   humble dependent, bruising the poor spirit, rending the terrified
   heart, unnerving and paralysing the weaker and more helpless nature.

   From first to last this haughty spirit is a curse and a torment to
   everyone, and not least to itself. It is like a cold and biting wind.
   It is like an erosive acid. It produces more sorrows than the north
   wind produces icicles. It mars more lives than anyone but God is able
   to count. It breaks the hearts of the humble, it excites the passions
   of the wrathful, it corrupts the conduct of the weak. It ruins
   children, it poisons social life, it inflames differences, and plunges
   great nations into war.

   If it were permitted to enter heaven, it would turn heaven into hell,
   it would range the hosts of heaven in envious cliques and mutually
   scornful castes, it would make the meek spirit sigh for earth, where
   there was at least the hope of death, and would turn the very presence
   and power of God into a constant object of envy and an incentive to
   rebellion. It is obvious, then, that pride cannot enter heaven, and the
   proud man, if he is to enter, must humble himself as a little child.

   Third--and this leads us to contemplate the worst result of Pride and
   the loveliest outcome of Humility--"Every one that is proud of heart is
   an abomination to the Lord; though hand join in hand he shall not be
   unpunished." [401] "The Lord will root up the house of the proud; but
   He will establish the border of the widow." [402] In a word, Pride is
   hateful to God, who resists the proud and gives grace to the humble.
   The proud man, whether he knows it or not, comes into direct conflict
   with God: he may not intend it, but he is pitting himself against the
   Omnipotent. That hardening of the face is a sign of evil, just as the
   patient humble ordering of the way is a sign of righteousness. [403] In
   that high look and proud heart there seems to be something dignified,
   flashing, and luminous; it is undoubtedly much admired by men. By God
   it is not admired; it is regarded merely as the lamp of the wicked, and
   as sin. [404] The light, such as it is, comes from hell; it is the same
   light that burned on the faces of the apostate angels "o'erwhelmed with
   floods and whirlwinds of tempestuous fire." The proud man dares the
   thunderbolts of God. He scorns men whom he sees, and in doing so he
   scorns God whom he has not seen; the men whom he consciously scorns
   cannot, but the God whom he unwittingly scorns will, take vengeance
   upon him. He has hardened his heart, he has grown great in his own
   eyes, he has despised the creatures made in God's image; he will
   suddenly be cut off, and that without remedy.

   On the other hand, by humility men learn to know and to fear the Lord.
   [405] God reveals Himself to the humble heart, not as a King of
   Terrors, but kind and good, with healing in His wings, leading the
   contrite spirit to implicit trust in Himself, and "whoso trusteth in
   the Lord, happy is he." [406] When we realize this we cannot wonder
   that so few people seem to know God; men are too proud; they think of
   themselves more highly than they ought to think, and consequently they
   do not think at all of Him; they receive honour one of another, and
   eagerly desire such honour, and consequently they cannot believe in
   Him, for to believe in Him implies the desire of no honour except such
   as comes from Him.

   It is a strange truth that God should dwell in a human heart at all,
   but it is almost self-evident that if He is to dwell in any human heart
   it must be in one which has been emptied of all pride, one which has,
   as it were, thrown down all the barriers of self-importance, and laid
   itself open to the incoming Spirit. If we cling to ever so little of
   our natural egotism; if we dwell on any imagined excellence, purity, or
   power of our own; if we are conscious of any elation, any springing
   sense of merit, which would set us, in our own judgment, on some
   equality with God,--how could the High and Lofty One that inhabiteth
   Eternity enter in? That thought of vanity would seek to divide our
   nature with Him, would enter into negotiations for a joint occupation,
   and the insulted Spirit of God would depart.

   If in ordinary human affairs "before destruction the heart of man is
   haughty, and before honour goeth humility;" [407] if even in our
   dealings with one another happiness and success and prosperity depend
   on the cultivation of a modest spirit, how much more when we come to
   deal with God must haughtiness appear the presage of destruction, and
   humility the only way of approach to Him!

   It is not possible to think too humbly of yourself, it is not possible
   to be too lowly, you cannot abase yourself too much in His Holy
   Presence. Your only attitude is that of Moses when he took off his
   shoes because the place he stood on was holy ground; or that of Isaiah
   when he cried out that he was "a man of unclean lips." To those who
   know you your humiliations may sound excessive,--as we are told the
   disciples of St. Francis remonstrated with him for his
   self-depreciation [408] --but not to God or to your own heart. And He,
   if He has set His love upon you, and purposes to make you a temple for
   His indwelling, will use method after method of humbling you to prepare
   for His entrance. Again and again you will say, Surely now I am low
   enough, am I not humbled in the dust? But His hand will still be upon
   you, and He will show you heads of pride which have yet to be levelled
   down. In the last humbling you will find that there is rising within
   you a certain pride in the humility itself. That also will He subdue.
   And some day, if you are willing, you shall be lowly enough for the
   Most High to dwell in, humble enough to offer a perpetual incense of
   praise.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [369] Prov. xxi. 10.

   [370] Prov. xxv. 14.

   [371] Prov. xvi. 18, 19.

   [372] Prov. xvi. 18, 19.

   [373] Prov. xviii. 12.

   [374] Prov. xxvii. 2.

   [375] Prov. xxi. 24.

   [376] Prov. xxix. 23.

   [377] Prov. xxvi. 12.

   [378] Prov. xiii. 1; xv. 20.

   [379] Prov. x. 17.

   [380] Prov. xii. 1.

   [381] Prov. xv. 8.

   [382] Prov. xv. 32.

   [383] Prov. xiii. 13 should be translated: "Whoso despiseth the word
   (sc. of warning and rebuke) shall be under a pledge to it (i.e. he has
   contracted an obligation to the word by hearing it, and in case of
   disobedience will have to redeem this implicit pledge by suffering and
   remorse), but he that feareth the commandment shall be rewarded."

   [384] Prov. xiii. 17.

   [385] Prov. xvii. 10.

   [386] Prov. xxvii. 5.

   [387] Prov. xxviii. 23.

   [388] Prov. xxvii. 21: "The fining pot is for silver and the furnace
   for gold, and a man for the mouth of his praise." This somewhat obscure
   aphorism is most simply explained thus:--A man should make his
   conscience a kind of furnace, in which he tries all the laudatory
   things which are said of him, accepting only the refined and pure metal
   which results from such a test, and rejecting the dross. This is
   simpler than, with Delitzsch, to explain, "a man is tested by the
   praise which is bestowed upon him as silver and gold are tested in the
   fire."

   [389] Prov. xiii. 10.

   [390] Prov. xxviii. 26.

   [391] Prov. xi. 2.

   [392] Prov. xii. 15b.

   [393] Prov. xvi. 20.

   [394] Prov. xv. 31, 33.

   [395] Prov. xvii. 2.

   [396] This is an addition of the LXX. to xiii. 13, and may represent an
   original Hebrew text. For the idea cp. Eccles. x. 25, "Unto the servant
   that is wise shall they that are free do service."

   [397] Prov. xiii. 10.

   [398] Prov. xvii. 19.

   [399] Prov. xiv. 3.

   [400] Prov. xiv. 16.

   [401] Prov. xvi. 5.

   [402] Prov. xv. 25.

   [403] Prov. xxi. 29.

   [404] Prov. xxi. 4.

   [405] Prov. xxii. 4. The probable rendering is, "The outcome of
   humility is the fear of the Lord, riches, honour, and life."

   [406] Prov. xvi. 20.

   [407] Prov. xviii. 12.

   [408] The answer of the saint was very characteristic. Could he really
   believe that he was so vile as he said, when he compared himself with
   others who were obviously worse? "Ah," he said, "it is when I recount
   all God's exceptional mercies to me that I seem to myself the worst of
   men, for others have not had such favours at His hands."
     __________________________________________________________________

XIV.

  THE INWARD UNAPPROACHABLE LIFE.

     "The heart knoweth its own bitterness, and a stranger doth not
     intermeddle with its joy."--Prov. xiv. 10.

     "Even in laughter the heart is sorrowful, and the end of mirth is
     heaviness."--Prov. xiv. 13.


   "Yes! in the sea of life enisled,

   With echoing straits between us thrown,

   Dotting the shoreless watery wild,

   We mortal millions live alone.

   The islands feel the enclasping flow,

   And then their endless bounds they know."

   Matthew Arnold.

   We know each other's appearance, it is true, but there for the most
   part our mutual knowledge ceases. Some of us unveil nothing of
   ourselves to anyone; some of us unveil a little to all; some a good
   deal to a few; but none of us can unveil all even to the most intimate
   friend. It is possible to live on terms of complete confidence and even
   close intimacy with a person for many years, to become thoroughly
   acquainted with his habits, his turns of expression, his modes of
   thought, to be able to say with a certain infallibility what course he
   will take in such and such circumstances--and yet to find by some
   chance uplifting of a curtain in his life that he cherished feelings
   which you never even suspected, suffered pains of which you had seen no
   trace, and enjoyed pleasures which never came to any outward
   expression.

   How true this is we realize at once if we turn inwards and review all
   the thoughts which chase each other through our brain, and all the
   emotions which throb in our heart for a single day, and then deduct
   those which are known to any human being, known or even suspected; the
   sum total we find is hardly affected at all. We are quite startled to
   discover how absolutely alone we live, how impossible it is for a
   stranger, or even for an intimate friend, to meddle with more than a
   fragment of our inner life. This is not because we have any wish to
   conceal, but rather because we are not able to reveal, our silent
   unseen selves; it is not because others would not like to know, but
   because they have not the instruments to investigate, that within us
   which we on our part are quite helpless to express.

   For instance, "the desire accomplished is sweet to the soul," [409] yet
   no one can know how sweet but he who cherished the desire. When a man
   has laboured for many years to secure an adequate maintenance for his
   family, and at length finds himself in easy circumstances, with his
   children growing up around him well and happy, no one besides himself
   can in the least gauge the sense of satisfaction, contentment, and
   gratitude which animates his heart, because no one can realize without
   actual experience the long and anxious days, the sickening fears, the
   blighted hopes, the rigorous sacrifices, through which he passed to
   attain his end. Or, when an artist has been toiling for many years to
   realize upon canvas a vision of beauty which floats before the inward
   eye, and at last succeeds, by some happy combination of colours, or by
   some dexterous sweep of the brush, or by some half-inspired harmony of
   form and composition, in actually bodying forth to the senses that
   which has haunted his imagination, it is hopeless for any one else to
   understand the thrilling joy, the light-hearted ecstasy, which are
   hidden rather than expressed by the quiet flush on the cheek and the
   sparkling glance of the eye.

   The mystical joy of a love which has just won an answering love; the
   deep-toned joy of the mother in the dawning life of her child; the joy
   of the poet who feels all the beauty of the earth and the sky pulsing
   through his nerves and raising his heart to quick intuitions and
   melodious numbers; the joy of the student, when the luminous outlines
   of truth begin to shape themselves before his mind in connected form
   and startling beauty; the joy of one who has toiled for the restoration
   of lost souls, and sees the fallen and degraded awaking to a new life,
   cleansed, radiant and strong; the joy of the martyr of humanity, whose
   dying moments are lit with visions, and who hears through the
   mysterious silences of death the voices of those who will one day call
   him blessed,--joys like these may be described in words, but they who
   experience them know that the words are, relatively speaking,
   meaningless, and they who do not experience them can form no conception
   of them. "When the desire cometh it is a tree of life," [410] which
   suddenly springs up in the garden of the heart, puts forth its jubilant
   leaves of healing, flashes with white wings of scented blossom, and
   droops with its full offering of golden fruit, as if by magic, and we
   are surprised ourselves that those around us do not see the wonder, do
   not smell the perfume, do not taste the fruit: we alone can sit under
   its branches, we alone can catch the murmur of the wind, the music of
   achievement, in its leaves.

   But this thought becomes very pathetic when we think of the heart's
   bitterness, which the heart alone can know,--the hope deferred which
   makes it sick, [411] the broken spirit which dries up the bones, [412]
   the spirit which for so long bore a man's infirmity, and then at last
   broke because it could bear no more, and became itself intolerable.
   [413] The circumstances of a man's life do not give us any clue to his
   sorrows; the rich have troubles which to the poor would seem
   incredible, and the poor have troubles which their poverty does not
   explain. There are little constitutional ailments, defects in the
   blood, slight deformities, unobserved disabilities, which fill the
   heart with a bitterness untold and unimaginable. There are crosses of
   the affections, disappointments of the ambitions; there are frets of
   the family, worries of business; there are the haunting Furies of past
   indiscretions, the pitiless reminders of half-forgotten pledges. There
   are weary doubts and misgivings, suspicions and fears, which poison all
   inward peace, and take light out of the eye and elasticity out of the
   step. These things the heart knows, but no one else knows.

   What adds to the pathos is that these sorrows are often covered with
   laughter as with a veil, and no one suspects that the end of all this
   apparently spontaneous mirth is to be heaviness. [414] The bright
   talker, the merry jester, the singer of the gay song, goes home when
   the party separates, and on his threshold he meets the veiled sorrow of
   his life, and plunges into the chilly shadow in which his days are
   spent.

   The bitterness which surges in our brother's heart would probably be
   unintelligible to us if he revealed it; but he will not reveal it, he
   cannot. He will tell us some of his troubles, many of them, but the
   bitterness he must keep to himself.

   How strange it seems! Here are men and women around us who are
   unfathomable; the heart is a kind of infinite; we skim the surface, we
   cannot sound the depths. Here is a merry heart which makes a cheerful
   countenance, but here is a countenance unclouded and smiling which
   covers a spirit quite broken. [415] Here is a cheerful heart which
   enjoys a continual feast, [416] and finds in its own merriment a
   medicine for its troubles; [417] but we cannot find the secret of the
   cheerfulness, or catch the tone of the merriment, any more than we can
   comprehend what it is which is making all the days of the afflicted
   evil. [418]

   We are confined as it were to the superficial effects, the lights and
   shadows which cross the face, and the feelings which express themselves
   in the tones of the voice. We can guess a little of what lies
   underneath, but our guesses are as often wrong as right. The index is
   disconnected, perhaps purposely, from the reality. Sometimes we know
   that a heart is bitter, but do not even surmise the cause; more often
   it is bitter and we do not know it. We are veiled to one another; we
   know our own troubles, we feel our own joys, that is all we can say.

   And yet the strangest thing of all is that we hunger for sympathy; we
   all want to see that light in the eyes of our friends which rejoices
   the heart, and to hear those good things which make the bones fat.
   [419] Our joy is eager to disclose itself, and often shrinks back
   appalled to find that our companions did not understand it, but mistook
   it for an affectation or an illusion. Our sorrow yearns for
   comprehension, and is constantly doubled in quantity and intensity by
   finding that it cannot explain itself or become intelligible to others.
   This rigid and necessary isolation of the human heart, along with such
   a deep-rooted desire for sympathy, is one of the most perplexing
   paradoxes of our nature; and though we know well that it is a fact, we
   are constantly re-discovering it with a fresh surprise. Forgetting it,
   we assume that every one will know how we need sympathy, though we have
   never hung out the signals of distress, and have even presented a most
   repellent front to all advances; forgetting it, we give expression to
   our joy, singing songs to heavy hearts, and disturbing others by
   unseasonable mirth, as if no icy channels separated us from our
   neighbours' hearts, making our gladness seem frigid and our merriment
   discordant before it reaches their ears. Yes the paradox forces itself
   on our attention again; human hearts are isolated, alone, without
   adequate communication, and essentially uncommunicative, yet all of
   them eagerly desiring to be understood, to be searched, to be fused. Is
   it a paradox which admits of any explanation? Let us see.

   It has been very truly said, "Man is only partially understood, or
   pitied, or loved by man; but for the fulness of these things he must go
   to some far-off country." In proportion as we are conscious of being
   misunderstood, and of being quite unable to satisfy our longing for
   sympathy and comprehension at human fountains, we are impelled by a
   spiritual instinct to ask for God; the thought arises in us that He,
   though He be very far off, must, as our Creator, understand us; and as
   this thought takes possession of the heart a tremulous hope awakes that
   perhaps He is not very far off. There lie before us now some beautiful
   sayings which are partly the expression of this human conviction, and
   seem partly to be inspired by the Divine response to it. "If thou
   sayest, Behold, we knew not this man; doth not He that weigheth the
   heart consider, and he that keepeth the soul, doth not He know?" [420]
   "The hearing ear, and the seeing eye, the Lord hath made even both of
   them." [421] How obvious is the inference that the Maker of the ear and
   the eye hears those silent things which escape the ear itself, and sees
   those recesses of the human heart which the human eye is never able to
   search! "The eyes of the Lord are in every place, keeping watch upon
   the evil and the good." [422] "Sheol and Abaddon are before the Lord:
   how much more then the hearts of the children of men." [423] He sees in
   the heart what the heart itself does not see. "All the ways of a man
   are clean in his own eyes, but the Lord weigheth the spirits." [424] In
   fact, the spirit of man itself, the consciousness which clears into
   self-consciousness, and becomes in moral matters conscience, this
   "spirit, is the lamp of the Lord, searching all the innermost parts of
   the belly," [425] so that a "man's goings are of the Lord;" and he is
   often moved by this indwelling spirit and guided by this mysterious
   lamp in a way which "he can hardly understand." [426]

   This intimacy of knowledge is not without its most solemn, and even
   terrible, side. It means of course that the Lord knows "the thoughts of
   the righteous which are just, and the counsels of the wicked which are
   deceit." [427] It means that out of His minute and infallible knowledge
   He will render to every man according to his works, judging with
   faultless accuracy according to that "desire of a man which is the
   measure of his kindness," recognizing the "wish of the poor man,"
   which, though he has not power to perform it, is more valuable than the
   boasted performances of those who never act up to their power of
   service. [428] It means that "the Lord trieth the hearts just as the
   fining pot tries the silver, and the furnace the gold." [429] It means
   that in thought of such a searching eye, such a comprehensive
   understanding on the part of the Holy One, none of us can ever say, "I
   have made my heart clean, I am pure from my sin." [430]

   All this it means, and there must be some terror in the thought; but
   the terror, as we begin to understand, becomes our greatest comfort;
   for He who thus understands us is the Holy One. Terrible would it be to
   be searched and known in this minute way by one who was not holy, by
   one who was morally indifferent, by one who took a curious interest in
   studying the pathology of the conscience, or by one who had a malignant
   delight in cherishing vices and rewarding evil thoughts. Though we
   sometimes desire human sympathy in our corrupt passions and unhallowed
   desires, and are eager for our confederates in sin to understand our
   pleasures and our pains,--and out of this desire, it may be observed,
   comes much of our base literature, and all of our joining with a
   company to do evil,--yet after all we only desire this confederacy on
   the understanding that we can reveal as little, and conceal as much, as
   we like; we should no longer be eager to share our feelings if we
   understood that in the first contact our whole heart would be laid
   bare, and all the intricacies of our mind would be explored. We must
   desire that He who is to search us through and through should be holy,
   and even though He be strict to mark iniquity, should be one who tries
   the heart in order to purify it. And when we are awakened and
   understand, we learn to rejoice exceedingly that He who comes with His
   lamp to search the inmost recesses of our nature is He who can by no
   means tolerate iniquity, or pass over transgression, but must burn as a
   mighty fire wherever He finds the fuel of sin to burn.

   Have we not found a solution of the paradox? The human heart is
   isolated; it longs for sympathy, but cannot obtain it; it seems to
   depend for its happiness on being comprehended, but no fellow-creature
   can comprehend it; it knows its own bitterness, which no one else can
   know; it broods over its own joys, but no one can share them. Then it
   makes discovery of the truth that God can give it what it requires,
   that He fully understands, that He can enter into all these silent
   thoughts and unobserved emotions, that He can offer an unfailing
   sympathy and a faultless comprehension. In its need the lonely heart
   takes refuge in Him, and makes no murmur that His coming requires the
   searching, the chastisement, and the purging of sin.

   No human being needs to be misunderstood or to suffer under the sense
   of misunderstanding. Let him turn at once to God. It is childish to
   murmur against our fellows, who only treat us as we treat them; they do
   not comprehend us, neither do we comprehend them; they do not give us,
   as we think, our due, neither do we give them theirs; but God
   comprehends both them and us, and He gives to them and to us accurately
   what is due.

   No human being is compelled to bear his bitterness alone, for though he
   cannot tell it or explain to his fellows, he can tell it, and he need
   not explain it, to God. Is the bitterness an outcome of sin, as most of
   our bitterness is? Is it the bitterness of a wounded egotism, or of a
   remorseful conscience, or of spiritual despondency? Or is it the
   bitterness which springs from the cravings of an unsatisfied heart, the
   thirst for self-completeness, the longing for a perfect love? In either
   case God is perfectly able and willing to meet the need. He delights to
   turn His knowledge of our nature to the purpose of cleansing and
   transforming the sinful heart: "By His knowledge shall My righteous
   servant justify many," He says. He is ready, too, to shed abroad His
   own rich love in our hearts, leaving no room for the hankering desire,
   and creating the peace of a complete fulfilment.

   No human being need imagine that he is unappreciated; his fellow-men
   may not want him, but God does. "The Lord hath made every thing for His
   own purpose, yea, even the wicked for the day of evil." [431] He
   apprehends all that is good in your heart, and will not suffer a grain
   of pure gold to be lost; while He sees too every particle of evil, and
   will not suffer it to continue. He knows where the will is set upon
   righteousness, where the desire is turned towards Him, and will
   delicately encourage the will, and bountifully satisfy the desire. He
   sees, too, when the will is hardened against Him, and the desire is set
   upon iniquity, and He is mercifully resolved to visit the corrupt will
   and the evil desire with "eternal destruction from the face of the
   Lord, and from the glory of His might,"--mercifully, I say, for no
   torture could be more terrible and hopeless than for the evil man to
   live eternally in the presence of God.

   Finally, no human being need be without a sharer of his joy: and that
   is a great consideration, for joy unshared quickly dies, and is from
   the beginning haunted by a vague sense of a shadow that is falling upon
   it. In the heart of the Eternal dwells eternal joy. All loveliness, all
   sweetness, all goodness, all truth, are the objects of His happy
   contemplation; therefore every really joyful heart has an immediate
   sympathiser in God; and prayer is quite as much the means by which we
   share our gladness as the vehicle by which we convey our sorrows to the
   Divine heart. Is it not beautiful to think of all those timid and
   retiring human spirits, who cherish sweet ecstasies, and feel glowing
   exultations, and are frequently caught up in heavenly raptures, which
   the shy countenance and stammering tongue never could record? They feel
   their hearts melt with joy in the prospect of broad skies and sunlit
   fields, in the sound of morning birds and rushing streams; they hear
   great choirs of happy spirits chanting perpetually in heaven and in
   earth, and on every side of their obscure way open vistas of inspired
   vision. No stranger meddles with their joy, or even knows of it. God is
   not a stranger; to Him they tell it all, with Him they share it, and
   their joy is part of the joy of the Eternal.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [409] Prov. xiii. 19.

   [410] Prov. xiii. 12.

   [411] Prov. xiii. 12.

   [412] Prov. xvii. 22.

   [413] Prov. xviii. 14.

   [414] Prov. xiv. 13.

   [415] Prov. xv. 13.

   [416] Prov. xv. 15b.

   [417] Prov. xvii. 22.

   [418] Prov. xv. 15.

   [419] Prov. xv. 30.

   [420] Prov. xxiv. 12, marginal reading.

   [421] Prov. xx. 12.

   [422] Prov. xv. 3.

   [423] Prov. xv. 11.

   [424] Prov. xvi. 2, rep. xxi. 2.

   [425] Prov. xx. 27.

   [426] Prov. xx. 24.

   [427] Prov. xii. 5.

   [428] Prov. xix. 22.

   [429] Prov. xvii. 3.

   [430] Prov. xx. 9.

   [431] Prov. xvi. 4. This strange saying, interpreted in the light of
   the Gospel, cannot mean that wicked people are actually made in order
   to exhibit the righteousness and judgment of God in their punishment on
   the day of wrath, though that was probably the thought in the mind of
   the writer. But it reminds us of the truth that every human being is a
   direct concern of the Maker, who has His own wise purpose to fulfil in
   even the most inconsiderable and apparently abortive life.
     __________________________________________________________________

XV.

  A PASSIONATE DISPOSITION.

     "A soft answer turneth away wrath: but a grievous word stirreth up
     anger." In the LXX. there is another clause inserted at the
     beginning, Orge apollusi kai phronimous, apokrisis de hupopiptousa
     apostrephei thumon, logos de luperos egeirei orgas."--Prov. xv. 1.

     "A meek tongue is a tree of life: but perverseness therein is a
     breaking of the spirit."--Prov. xv. 4.

     "A wrathful man stirreth up contention: but he that is slow to anger
     appeaseth strife."--Prov. xv. 18.

   Bad temper causes more suffering than the modified severity with which
   we judge it would imply. It is in a home what toothache is in the body:
   the pain is insufferable and yet it is not treated as serious. A
   passionate man or woman spreads a pervading sense of irritation in the
   house or in the workshop, and all the other occupants of the place are
   as if they dwelt in a country subject to earthquakes; life for them is
   divided between anxiety to avoid the explosion and a painful effort to
   repair its devastations. We are not severe enough on these faults of
   temper in ourselves or in others; we are too prone to excuse them on
   the ground of temperament, as if we were no more responsible for
   outbreaks of passion than for the colour of our hair or the tone of our
   complexion. It will, therefore, do us good to see what the Wise Man
   says on the subject.

   First of all, we have several proverbs which remind us how irritating
   an angry disposition is: it is the constant occasion of strife; it
   grows itself by each fresh annoyance that it gives, so that it quickly
   becomes ungovernable, and thus "the wrathful man aboundeth in
   transgression." [432] A fierce ungovernable temper will set a whole
   city in a flame, [433] and lead to disasters of national and even
   world-wide extent. However peaceful and happy a community may be, if a
   choleric man enters it, signs of combustion will soon begin to appear.
   There are always hot embers which wise men are earnestly trying to damp
   down, [434] there are trivial irritations, petty annoyances, incipient
   envies, which are only too easily inflamed; the cool spirit and the
   conciliatory word and the ingenious diversion of thought will keep the
   embers choked until the heat dies away, but "as coals to hot embers,
   and wood to fire, so is a contentious man to inflame strife." [435]

   We may well be cautioned to give such an inflammatory character a wide
   berth; "Make no friendship with a man that is given to anger; and with
   a wrathful man thou shalt not go: lest thou learn his ways, and get a
   snare to thy soul." [436] Even a sweet temper may be chafed into
   peevishness by constant irritations; with passionate people the
   gentlest become passionate in self-defence. When this unbridled,
   ill-disciplined nature approaches, we should avoid it as if it were a
   bear robbed of her whelps, for such is this fool in his folly. [437]

   This leads us to notice that anger and folly are very closely allied.
   The passionate nature is constantly betrayed into actions which sober
   wisdom must condemn,--"He that is soon angry will deal foolishly.... He
   that is slow to anger is of great understanding: but he that is hasty
   of spirit exalteth folly." [438] Any one with a grain of sense will put
   a check upon his rising temper; his discretion makes him slow to anger,
   and he never feels to have won such true glory as when he bridles his
   wrath and passes by an offence without a sign of annoyance or
   resentment. [439] You may almost be sure that a man is wise if you find
   that he has a cool spirit. [440] When you see a person who cautiously
   avoids the ground where strife is apt to be excited, and builds his
   house on a spot where contention is impossible, you instinctively
   respect him, for you know it betokens wisdom; but when you see a man
   always getting involved in quarrels, always showing his teeth, [441]
   you rightly conclude that he is a fool. [442] "A fool uttereth all his
   anger: but a wise man keepeth it back and stilleth it." [443] If we are
   naturally irritable or splenetic, wisdom will incline us to avoid
   occasions which excite us, and to keep a watchful guard over our
   spirits where the occasions are inevitable. If we neglect such
   precautions we shall justly be counted fools, and the consequent
   outbreaks of passion will lead us into fresh exhibitions of folly, and
   more completely justify the harsh judgment which has been passed upon
   us.

   But not the least sign of the folly which is inherent in passion is the
   shocking effect which it has upon those who give way to it. As the LXX.
   version says at the beginning of this chapter, "Anger destroys even the
   wise." And one whose spirit is without restraint is forcibly compared
   to a city that is broken down and has no wall; [444] every foe can go
   up and possess it, every thoughtless child can fling a firebrand into
   it; the barest word, hint, smirk, shrug of the shoulders, any
   unintentional slight or reflection, nay, even silence itself, will
   suddenly set the powder-train on fire, and the consequent explosion
   will be more destructive to the city itself than to those who are
   outside. "A man of great wrath shall bear the penalty," and, poor
   fellow, perhaps it is best that he should, for if you deliver him from
   the consequence of his passion, that will only encourage him in further
   outbreaks, and so he will become worse, and your deliverance will be an
   endless task. [445]

   Our great King Henry II. was subject to fits of uncontrollable passion,
   in which he would roll on the floor and bite the dust, impotent with
   rage; and all the sorrows of his life and reign, falling heavily upon
   him in his later years, were occasioned by this unhappy temper. At the
   present time we are told that the Chinese frequently indulge in fits of
   passionate wrath, which react terribly upon their health and make them
   physically ill. The wrathful man does mischief to many, but his wrath
   is like an old arquebus, which, when it is fired, hurts the bearer
   almost as much as the enemy. It may fail to hit the mark, but it is
   sure to knock down the marksman.

   Probably here the plea will be urged that we cannot help our temper,
   and it may be said, the suffering which it brings upon us is the best
   proof that it is an infirmity rather than a vice. Now this excuse
   cannot be allowed to pass; a certain good bishop on one occasion
   hearing it urged, in extenuation of a man's conduct, that he had such
   an unfortunate temper, exclaimed, "Temper, why temper is nine-tenths of
   Christianity!" If we are not to be blamed for bad temper, then there is
   no fault or defect or vice which we cannot shift off our own shoulders
   and lay to the charge of our constitution. But our constitution is no
   excuse for sin; the most that can be urged is that if we are
   constitutionally inclined to any particular sin we must seek for a
   special strength to fortify us against it. If in building a city an
   ancient engineer had one side more exposed than the rest, protected by
   no natural escarpments of rock or bends of the river, there he would
   concentrate all his skill to make the wall impregnable. If you find
   that one of your bodily organs betrays a tendency to disease, you are
   careful to avoid the exposure, or the strain, or the derangement, which
   would unfavourably affect it. If your lungs are delicate you shun fogs
   and chills; if your heart is feeble you are careful to avoid any sudden
   excitement; if your eyes are weak you notice very particularly by what
   light you read, and are sensitive to the least weariness in those
   delicate instruments. In the same way, if your special infirmity lies
   in the temper; if you are easily provoked, or apt to fall into
   sullenness; if a sudden annoyance excites an uncontrollable passion in
   your mind, or drops into your heart seeds of bitterness which rapidly
   grow and become ineradicable; you have your work cut out for you; your
   daily task will be to avoid the things which produce such ill effects,
   and to cultivate the habits which lessen the virulent action of these
   irritant poisons. Few of us realize how wonderfully our constitution is
   subjected to our own control, and how much we ourselves have to do with
   the making of it.

   You know, we will suppose, that you are easily entangled in a quarrel;
   you must then prepare yourself before you go out into the business of
   the day,--"Go not forth hastily to strive, lest.... What wilt thou do
   in the end, when thy neighbour hath put thee to shame?" [446] This
   realization of what will probably result from your hasty temper will
   act as a check upon it, and you will be inclined, if you have any
   ground of offence against your neighbour, to go quietly and debate it
   with him alone. [447] Or if the contention has been sprung upon you
   unawares, take care that over the floodgates of your passion has been
   written this wholesome warning, "The beginning of strife is as when one
   letteth out water: therefore leave off contention, before there be any
   setting of the teeth." [448] Knowing your danger you must summon to
   your aid all the heroism of your nature, and remember that this is the
   time and the occasion to exercise it. Others have to win their spurs on
   the battlefield; this is your battlefield, and here your spurs are to
   be won. Others have to win kingdoms or capture cities; here is the
   kingdom where you are to reign, this is the city which you are to take.
   "He that is slow to anger is better than the mighty; and he that ruleth
   his spirit than he that taketh a city." [449]

   Get at some grand root principle like this: "Hatred stirreth up
   strifes: but love covereth all transgressions." [450] Ah, yes, if you
   are disposed to be angry with men, fill your spirit with love to them;
   that will soothe your irritable nerves, and will flow over their
   transgressions so that they cease to annoy you because you cease to see
   them; when we are fervent in love to one another, the love covers a
   multitude of sins. [451] Where love comes into the soul we are more
   anxious to convert those who offend us than to be angry with them.
   [452] Love saves us from the self-vaunting which exposes us to the
   annoyances, and provokes the attacks, of the malignant; [453] and it
   enables us to bear all things, almost without a ruffle or a
   perturbation. Strange to say, passionate temperaments are often very
   affectionate; let them cultivate the love in themselves, and it will be
   the destruction of the evil temper. And where the evil passion comes
   from a true moroseness, then the fruit can only be destroyed with the
   root, and the root can only be destroyed when love is shed abroad in
   the heart.

   Or possibly your anger is not of the passionate kind, but rather stern
   and resentful, arising from an exaggerated sense of self-importance. A
   meek [454] heart is not wrathful, and it is the life of the flesh; but
   where meekness fails, envy enters as rottenness of the bones, and with
   envy, hatred and malice. [455] A meek [456] tongue not only checks
   wrath in itself, but soothes it in others; it is a tree of life, just
   as perverseness in it is a breaking of the spirit. [457] If you thought
   less of yourself, you would not so frequently feel your dignity
   offended; you would not require this weapon of wrath always at hand to
   leap forth and avenge your outraged pride. From the meek heart
   vengeance dies away. "Say not thou, I will recompense evil: wait on the
   Lord, and He shall save thee." [458] You are sudden and quick in
   quarrel, because you think of yourself more highly than you ought to
   think; and because others do not share your opinion of yourself, you
   must summon all your artillery of wrath to make them bend the stubborn
   knee and offer you the due tribute of deference or admiration. For if
   bad temper comes often from constitutional infirmities which must be
   carefully watched and controlled, it comes just as frequently from that
   subtle enemy of our souls, Pride.

   But now we come to the important question, How are our evil passions to
   be cured? And we must frankly admit that our book has no suggestions to
   offer. Its tendency is to regard our disposition as fixed, our
   temperament as irreversible, our character as unchangeable. It points
   out with crystalline clearness the mischief of wrath and the merit of
   meekness, but it never so much as entertains the possibility that the
   wrathful man might become meek, the passionate man patient and gentle.

   We have in our analysis of the evil observed that in order to avoid it
   we must be vigilant to mark and control the first risings of passion;
   we have noted too that if we were truly loving, anger would die away,
   and if we were truly humble, the resentments which stir our anger would
   have nothing to feed upon. But the main difficulty is, how are we to
   become watchful, since it is the special characteristic of a hasty
   temper that it overpowers our sentinels before it assaults the city?
   And how are we to become loving and humble? It is only throwing the
   difficulty back a step or two, and showing us how insuperable it is, to
   say that we must become good in one direction in order to escape the
   evil which lies in another direction. It does not help the Ethiopian to
   become a European to tell him that Europeans have white skins instead
   of black; nor can a leopard change his kind because he learns that his
   spots are his distinctive mark.

   There must be a deeper message than that of the Proverbs to solve this
   practical difficulty; though we may well feel that the book is
   invaluable in setting before us how greatly we need a deeper message.
   No infirmity of human nature proves more forcibly than the one with
   which we are dealing that "some thing out of Nature" must come in if a
   change is to be effected. "We must be born again;" it is only a
   regenerate heart which will have the impulse and the ability to watch
   against the eruption of a passionate disposition. It is only a
   regenerate heart which can love in such a way that irritations cease to
   fret, or that can be humble enough to escape the exasperations of
   wounded pride. Many of us think lightly of these particular faults, and
   scarcely designate ill-temper a sin at all; but however we may regard
   it, the wrathful disposition requires nothing less than Christ, and Him
   crucified, to cure it, and God deemed it worth while to send His
   only-begotten Son in order to effect the cure. In Christ Jesus are
   forces, moral and spiritual, strong enough to control the most
   uncontrollable rage and to soothe the most irritable temper; and as we
   can point to no other power which is sufficient for such a change, so
   few things manifest so strikingly the blessed presence of Christ in the
   heart as the softened and gentle temper, the removal of all those
   explosive elements which before He entered were constantly causing
   trouble and suffering and alarm.

   Here is an example taken from a country where the knowledge of the
   Gospel is comparatively recent. A Japanese gentleman living at Fujioka,
   who was much addicted to the use of ske, a strong intoxicant, which
   produced the worst results on his temper, was led through reading a
   tract on the subject to renounce the evil habit, and to accept Jesus
   Christ as his Saviour. In proportion as the Divine power mastered him
   he became a new creature. One day his wife had been careless about some
   silkworms' eggs, which had become partially destroyed, and she trembled
   with fear that he would become enraged when he discovered it, and
   punish her severely, as he had done before. But to her great
   astonishment, when he found out what had happened he remained perfectly
   calm, and then said, "We can distribute them among our poor neighbours,
   and so they will have a larger crop. Thus it will perhaps be better
   than if we had sold them and taken all the money ourselves." His wife
   was so impressed with this change of character that she said, "This is
   the result of Christianity; I want to become a Christian too." She
   sought and found, and her whole family sought and found. And not only
   so, but the neighbours were struck by this "living epistle," and
   shortly afterwards when the missionary went to Fujioka there were ten
   persons awaiting baptism. At the present time a good Christian Church
   is growing up in the place. [459]

   Where the Lord Jesus Christ reigns evil passions subside and die away.
   "Learn of Me: for I am meek and lowly of heart." "Blessed are the meek:
   for they shall inherit the earth." One who is born again, one whose
   life is hidden with Christ in God, is necessarily meek, meek as the
   Lord Himself: not, as we well know, devoid of noble anger or fiery
   indignation, for indeed it is only the meek heart from which all
   personal pretensions have been eradicated, and to which no personal
   feeling can be attributed, that is able to pour out vials of wrath,
   undeterred and unquenchable, upon all that is base and mean, impure and
   false, corrupt and cruel; but meek in this beautiful sense, that it
   never takes offence, never suspects evil, never resents any wrong
   except moral wrong that is done to others, or spiritual wrong done to
   God. All the tinder on which angry passions feed has been removed by
   the Cross of Christ, and therefore the only wrath which can be
   entertained is such wrath as God feels,--the deep intense glow of
   consuming indignation against sin.

   For our evil tempers, then, our passion, our wrath, our sullen pride,
   our fretful irritability, our outbreaks of sarcasm, our malignant
   sneers, there is only one possible cure; we must bring the heart, out
   of which all the evil comes, to Jesus Christ, that He may create it
   anew; we must accept our failures as evidence of an imperfect
   surrender, and come afresh with a more insistent cry, and a more
   perfect faith, that He may reign in our hearts as undisputed Lord,
   checking, subduing, warring down, every evil motion there.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [432] Prov. xxix. 22.

   [433] Prov. xxix. 8.

   [434] Prov. xxix. 8.

   [435] Prov. xxvi. 21.

   [436] Prov. xxii. 24.

   [437] Prov. xvii. 12.

   [438] Prov. xiv. 17, 29.

   [439] Prov. xix. 11. "When Lanfranc was prior of Bec he ventured to
   oppose Duke William's Flemish marriage. In a wild burst of wrath
   William bade his men burn a manor house of Bec and drive out Lanfranc
   from Norman ground. He came to see the work done, and found Lanfranc
   hobbling on a lame horse towards the frontier. He angrily bad him
   hasten, and Lanfranc replied by a cool promise to go faster out of his
   land if he would give him a better steed. 'You are the first criminal
   that ever asked gifts from his judge,' retorted William, but a burst of
   laughter told that the wrath had gone, and William and Lanfranc drew
   together again."--Green's Conquest of England, p. 551.

   [440] Prov. xvii. 27.

   [441] This word htnl, which only occurs here (xx. 3) and in xvii. 14
   and xviii. 1, would seem from the cognate root in Arab. and Syr. to
   mean "setting the teeth together," which is a much more vivid and
   specific idea than quarrelling.

   [442] Prov. xx. 3.

   [443] Prov. xxix. 11.

   [444] Prov. xxv. 28.

   [445] Prov. xix. 19.

   [446] Prov. xxv. 8.

   [447] Prov. xxv. 9.

   [448] Prov. xvii. 14. See note 4, p. 205.

   [449] Prov. xvi. 32.

   [450] Prov. x. 12.

   [451] 1 Peter iv. 8.

   [452] James v. 20.

   [453] 1 Cor. xiii. 4.

   [454] This meaning of mrp', as was observed in Lecture XII., p. [2]172,
   seems to yield the best sense in these two passages (cp. xii. 18; xiii.
   17), as in Eccl. x. 4, "gentleness allayeth great offences," which is a
   good commentary on our text.

   [455] Prov. xiv. 30.

   [456] This meaning of mrp', as was observed in Lecture XII., p. [3]172,
   seems to yield the best sense in these two passages (cp. xii. 18; xiii.
   17), as in Eccl. x. 4, "gentleness allayeth great offences," which is a
   good commentary on our text.

   [457] Prov. xv. 4.

   [458] Prov. xx. 22.

   [459] Missionary Review of the World, Feb. 1889, p. 143.
     __________________________________________________________________

XVI.

  A JUST BALANCE.

     "A just balance and scales are the Lord's: all the weights of the
     bag are His work."--Prov. xvi. 11.

     "A false balance is an abomination to the Lord: but a just weight is
     His delight."--Prov. xi. 1.

     "Divers weights, and divers measures, both of them alike are an
     abomination to the Lord."--Prov. xx. 10.

     "Divers weights are an abomination to the Lord; and a false balance
     is not good."--Prov. xx. 23.

   The sixteenth chapter opens--and we may annex to it the last verse of
   chap. xv.--with a series of sayings which are grouped together on the
   principle that the name of the Lord occurs in each. There is no obvious
   connection between the successive verses, and some of them have been
   already touched on in previous lectures, but it will be worth while to
   glance at the series as a whole.

   The Lord's presence must be recognised and reverenced before we can
   make any progress in wisdom, and in His presence we must humble
   ourselves before we can expect any honour. [460] We are entirely
   dependent upon Him; although our hearts may form plans, we cannot utter
   anything aright unless He controls our tongue. [461] However
   self-satisfied we may be with our own ways, however convinced we may be
   of our own innocence, He weighs our spirit, and will often find a guilt
   which our conceit ignores, an impurity which our vanity would hide.
   [462] We should do well, therefore, to commit all our works to Him, in
   order that He may revise and correct our purposes and establish those
   which are good. [463] We cannot think too much of His all-inclusive
   wisdom and knowledge; everything lies in His hands and is designed for
   His ends; even the wicked who rebel against Him--men like Pharaoh,
   Nebuchadnezzar, Judas, Elymas--must in their inevitable punishment
   glorify His righteousness and truth. [464] For punishment is absolutely
   sure; the proud are an abomination to Him, and though they combine to
   oppose His will and to escape the penalty, it will be quite in vain.
   [465] On the other hand, where He sees mercy and truth He will purge
   iniquity, and when men fear Him they will depart from evil. [466] When
   His smile is upon them and He approves their ways, He will make their
   path plain, pacifying their enemies, and making their hearts glad.
   [467] He will guide them, even directing their steps, in such a manner
   that their own imperfect counsels shall turn to a happy and successful
   issue. [468] "Whoso trusteth in the Lord, happy is he." [469] Indeed we
   cannot exaggerate the minute observation of the Lord; no detail escapes
   His eye, no event is beyond His control; even what is generally called
   Chance is but another name for His unmarked and unknown direction; the
   very lot--that lot which settles contentions and separates the strong
   [470] --cast into the lap is actually disposed by Him; [471] much more,
   therefore, are the deliberate transactions of commerce--those subtle
   bonds of the cash nexus which twine man to man and nation to
   nation--under His constant inspection and a subject of His most
   interested concern,--"a just balance and scales are the Lord's: all the
   weights of the bag are His work."

   It is, then, as part of the Lord's watchful activity and direct,
   detailed connection with all the affairs of human life, that He is
   interested in our business and trade. We may notice at once that this
   is very characteristic of the Old Testament religion. In the
   Deuteronomic Law it was written: "Thou shalt not have in thy bag divers
   weights, a great and a small. Thou shalt not have in thine house divers
   measures, a great and a small. A perfect and a just weight shalt thou
   have; a perfect and just measure shalt thou have: that thy days may be
   long upon the land which the Lord thy God giveth thee. For all that do
   such things, even all that do unrighteously, are an abomination unto
   the Lord thy God." [472] Again, in the Levitical Law we find: "Ye shall
   do no unrighteousness in judgment, in meteyard, in weight, or in
   measure. Just balances, just weights, a just ephah, and a just hin,
   shall ye have: I am the Lord your God, which brought you out of the
   land of Egypt." [473]

   The Israelite was encouraged to think that all the work in which he
   engaged was ordained by, and therefore under the observation of, his
   God. "Hate not laborious work, neither husbandry which the Most High
   hath ordained," says Ecclesiasticus. [474] And there is a striking
   passage in Isaiah where the operations of agriculture are described in
   detail, and all are attributed to God, who instructs the husbandman
   aright and teaches him. It all comes from the "Lord of hosts, which is
   wonderful in counsel, and excellent in wisdom." [475]

   But at present we are concerned only with trade as a department of
   industrial life, and especially with the actual chaffering of exchange,
   the barter of goods for goods, the weights and measures which settle
   the quantities, and the rules which must govern all such transactions.
   We should gather that the commercial fraud of those primitive times
   took this comparatively simple form: the merchant would have, let us
   say, a half shekel which came a little short of the regulation weight;
   or he would have a cubit measure (1 ft. 9 in.) half an inch under a
   cubit; or he would have a vessel professing to hold a hin (i.e. a
   little more than a gallon), but actually holding a little less than a
   gallon; or he would have a dry measure, marked as an ephah (i.e. about
   three pecks), but incapable of holding the ostensible quantity. In an
   ordinary way he would use these inadequate measures, and thus nibble a
   little from every article which he sold to a customer. But in the event
   of a purchaser presenting himself who had a fuller knowledge or might
   conceivably act as an inspector and report the fraud to the judge,
   there would be a just half shekel weight in the bag, a full cubit rule
   hidden behind the counter, a hin or an ephah measure of legal
   dimensions within easy reach. You may smile at such primitive methods
   of deception, but it requires many generations for a civilized society
   to elaborate commercial fraud on the large scale.

   Now passing at once to our own times and bringing the truth of our text
   to illuminate them, I should like to say a little to people engaged in
   business, whether as employers or employed, whether the business is
   wholesale or retail. And let me assure you that I am not going to
   attempt a detailed examination and criticism of your business concerns.
   Such an attempt would be grossly impertinent, and might well expose me,
   not only to your indignation, but to your ridicule. No, I do not
   believe that it is the part of the preacher to meddle with matters
   which he does not understand; he only discredits his message by
   affecting an omniscience which he cannot possibly possess. I have no
   doubt that the youth who has been in a warehouse or behind the counter
   for six months already knows more of commercial habits, of trade
   practices, of the temptations and difficulties which practically press
   upon people in business, than I know, or am likely to know if I live to
   twice my present age. I shall not therefore insult you by attempting to
   point out evils and expose abuses, to denounce particular frauds, and
   to hold up any special people or classes of people to moral
   reprobation. My task is quite different; it is this:--I am to remind
   you, first, that God possesses that omniscience to which I can lay no
   claim, and therefore is intimately acquainted with all the transactions
   of your bank, your warehouse, your office, your counter, your workshop;
   and, secondly, that He regards with intense satisfaction all fair
   dealing, and with vindictive indignation every fraud, and trick, and
   lie. And on the strength of this I am to ask you very earnestly to
   review your lives and your practices in the light of His judgment, and
   to consider how you may bring all your doings in business into
   conformity with His will.

   Perhaps you will let me, as a man speaking to his fellow-men, as a
   Christian, I hope, speaking to his fellow-Christians, expand these
   three points a little.

   First. We are all of us tempted to think that a considerable proportion
   of our life is too insignificant to attract the particular attention of
   God. We can understand that He takes notice of our entrance into, and
   our exit from, the world, but we think that between the two limits He
   leaves us to "devise our own ways." Or possibly we can recognise His
   interest in the crises of our life, but are inclined to question His
   minute care of the common and monotonous routine. He marks what
   business we enter, but, when we are in it, lets us alone. He is
   interested in our marriage, but, when we are married, leaves husband
   and wife to adjust their own relations. Or He marks a large business
   transaction in which there is room for a really gigantic fraud, but
   cannot pay any attention to a minute sale over the counter, the trivial
   adulteration of a common article, the ingenious subterfuge for
   disposing of a damaged or useless stock. Is not this our unspoken but
   implicit mode of reasoning? And could anything be more illogical? The
   Divine Power which could create this infinitely diversified universe
   must be able to mark every tiniest detail of the tiniest object in it.
   Great and small are relative terms, and have no significance to Him.
   Naturalists tell us that in the scale of living creatures, arranged
   according to size, the common beetle occupies the middle point, the
   smallest living creature being as much smaller as the largest is larger
   than it. And yet the microscope, so far from showing that God takes
   less care with the infinitesimal creations of His hand, rather inclines
   us to say that the smaller the creature is, the more delicate
   adjustment, the more exquisite proportions, the more brilliant hues,
   does it display. Our Lord brought home to us this minuteness of the
   Divine Mind, this infinite power of embracing the veriest trifles of
   the creation in His thought and care, by assuring us that not a sparrow
   falls without His notice and that the hairs of our heads are all
   numbered.

   There is then no logical resting-place, when we are thinking of the
   Mind of God. If He knows us at all, He knows all about us. If He marks
   what we consider the important things in our life, He marks equally
   what we consider the unimportant things. The whole life, with every
   detail from birth to death, is accurately photographed in the light of
   His omniscience; and as the exposed plate of the camera receives many
   details which escape the observation of our eyes, so the smallest and
   least observed transaction in the daily business, every figure entered
   truly or falsely in the ledger, every coin dropped justly or
   dishonestly into the till, every bale, every packet, every thread,
   every pin, which changes hands in the market, passes at once into the
   observant and comprehending mind of God. [476]

   Second. But in this exhaustive and detailed knowledge of the way in
   which you are conducting your business, His warm approval follows
   everything that is honest and just, His vehement censure lights on all
   that is dishonest or unjust. It may come as a great comfort to you to
   know that a little business matter which cost you a considerable
   struggle the other day was duly noted and recorded by the Lord. I was
   not present at the time, nor did any one who was near you in the least
   surmise what was passing. But you suddenly recognised the possibility
   of making a large profit by simply adopting a very slight subterfuge;
   what made the case peculiarly difficult was that neighbouring and rival
   firms to your certain knowledge did the like every day; the innocent
   faces of wife and children at home seem to urge you, for what a
   difference would this sum of money make to their comfort and welfare in
   the coming year! you weighed the little trick over and over again, and
   set it now in this light, now in that, until at last the black began to
   seem grey, and the grey almost white. After all, was it a subterfuge?
   was it not merely a quite legitimate reserve, an even laudable
   commercial prudence? And then, as you wavered, some clear light of
   truth fell upon your mind; you saw distinctly what was the right
   course, and very quietly you took it; the prospect of gain was
   surrendered, you saw the advantage pass over to your rival; he availed
   himself of it, and went to church next Sunday just the same. Sometimes
   you have wondered whether after all you were not too scrupulous.

   Now all that God knows; it is His delight; He has recorded it already
   in His Book, and also in your own moral nature, which is the stronger
   and the better for it.

   On the other hand, it must be a subject of some concern to many that
   the same all-observing, all-recording Mind regards with hatred all the
   sharp practices by which in business we deceive and defraud one
   another. I suppose there is a way of making up books which would pass
   any accountant in London, and yet would not pass the audit of God. I
   suppose there are gains which to the average commercial conscience of
   to-day appear fair enough, and yet to the One who weighs the spirits of
   men seem to be quite illicit. There must be men who made their money
   long ago in certain ways best known to themselves, and are now living
   in great comfort; but all the time in the books of God a terrible
   record stands against them, and as the eye of God falls upon those
   pages, the moan of the ruined, the cry of the fatherless and the widow,
   and the horrified entreaties of the helpless come up into His ear.

   We have no reason for thinking that the unjust balance has become any
   less abominable to the Lord because the eager and relentless
   competition of modern industrial life has multiplied, while it has
   refined, the methods of fraud, and has created a condition of things in
   which, as so many people urge, questionable practices have become
   actually necessary for one who would keep his head above water. We have
   no reason to think that God regards it as at all essential that any of
   us should keep his head above water. The warm and honourable reception
   given to Lazarus in heaven, when his head had gone under the waters on
   earth, might lead us to think that what we call failures here may
   possibly be regarded as grand successes there. But we have every reason
   to think that double dealing, no matter what may be the plea, is
   abominable in the sight of the Lord.

   It is in vain to point to the great prosperity which has fallen to the
   lot of some whose dishonourable practices have been notorious. It is
   beyond a doubt that knavery may be successful in its way and a clever
   rogue may outdistance an honest dullard. The proverb "Honesty is the
   best policy" is not, as some people seem to think, in the Bible;
   honesty may or may not be the best policy, according to the object
   which you have in view. If your object is simply to amass wealth, the
   saying will read, "Honesty is the best policy; and where it is not, be
   dishonest." God does not judge in the least by worldly prosperity. From
   the parable just alluded to one would conclude that it is, in heaven, a
   certain presumption against a man; there may yet prove to be truth in
   the hard saying, "He that dies rich is damned." If God hates these
   questionable practices which are said to exist in modern trade, and if
   He enters them all in His black books, they who prosper by employing
   them are none the less failures: their ruin is sure; their remorse will
   be as inevitable as their recovery will be impossible.

   Third. I come therefore now to urge upon all of you that you should
   order all your business ways as in the sight of God, and concern
   yourselves chiefly with the thought how they may be in conformity with
   His holy Will. Do not be content with estimating your conduct by the
   judgment which other men would pass upon it. While such an estimate
   might reveal many things which would not pass muster, it is doubtful
   whether their problematical censure will afford an adequate motive for
   reform, and it is sure to overlook many of the evils which they are
   bound to wink at, because their own hands are not clean. Do not be
   content even with estimating your conduct by the standard of your own
   unaided conscience. Your conscience may at any given time be in a
   degraded state; in order to keep it quiet you may have brought it down
   to the level of your conduct. A thief's conscience seldom troubles him
   unless his theft is unsuccessful, in which case it reproaches him for
   not being more careful and more skilful. You may, like St. Paul, know
   nothing against yourself and yet not be thereby justified. For
   doubtless most of the evil practices of our time represent a conscience
   that has been stupefied with sophistry and deadened with selfishness,
   so that the worst culprits are the first to put on an air of injured
   innocence, and those who are least guilty suffer most just because the
   conscience is still sensitive and has not yet been seared with the
   usual hot iron.

   No, the only safe and effectual method is to bring all your business
   habits, all the practices of the counter and the counting-house, under
   the searching eye of the All-seeing One. Unless you realize that He
   sees and knows, and unless you humbly submit everything to His
   judgment, you are sure to go wrong; your standard will insensibly fall,
   and you will insensibly fall away even from the fallen standard. It is
   said that peculiar difficulties beset you in the present day; it is
   said that it was never so hard to be straightforward and aboveboard in
   commercial dealings; it is said that the insane Moloch of competition
   imperatively demands the blood of our youth, and even makes assaults on
   the established virtues of maturity. It may be so, though we are
   generally inclined to exaggerate the peculiar temptations of our own
   time in comparison with those of a former age; but if it is so, then
   there is all the more urgent a necessity that you should bring your
   affairs to God's judgment, seek diligently to understand His will, and
   then ask Him for a peculiar strength to enable you to overcome these
   peculiar temptations. You will not alter His judgment of your conduct
   by attempting to ignore it. But by seeking to understand it, and by
   laying your heart open to be influenced by it, you will find that your
   conduct is perceptibly altered and apparent impossibilities are
   overcome, because "by the fear of the Lord men depart from evil." [477]
     __________________________________________________________________

   [460] Prov. xv. 33.

   [461] Prov. xvi. 1.

   [462] Prov. xvi. 2.

   [463] Prov. xvi. 3.

   [464] Prov. xvi. 4. See note 430, p. [4]201.

   [465] Prov. xvi. 5.

   [466] Prov. xvi. 6.

   [467] Prov. xvi. 7.

   [468] Prov. xvi. 9. Cf. Prov. xix. 21: "There are many devices in a
   man's heart; but the counsel of the Lord, that shall stand."

   [469] Prov. xvi. 20.

   [470] Prov. xviii. 18. John Paton, the missionary to the New Hebrides,
   uncertain whether to go back to Scotland and plead for more
   missionaries, and receiving no light from human counsel, says, "After
   many prayers and wrestlings and tears, I went alone before the Lord,
   and on my knees cast lots with a solemn appeal to God, and the answer
   came 'Go home.' In my heart I believe that ... the Lord condescended to
   decide for me the path of duty, otherwise unknown; and I believe it the
   more truly now, in view of the aftercome of thirty years of service to
   Christ that flowed out of the steps then deliberately and devoutly
   taken." See the Autobiography, Second Part (Hodder and Stoughton,
   1889).

   [471] Prov. xvi. 33.

   [472] Deut. xxv. 13-16.

   [473] Lev. xix. 33, 36.

   [474] Eccles. vii. 15.

   [475] Isa. xxviii. 23-29.

   [476] It seems impossible that a general and perfect morality in
   business can ever be attained apart from this apprehension of an
   Omniscient Mind weighing and judging, as well as accurately observing,
   everything done even in secret. In medival Europe, when this faith was
   practically unquestioned, there was a certain honesty and sincerity in
   handicrafts and in general dealing, until the Church made the fatal
   blunder of granting indulgences for men's peccadilloes, and professing
   to exonerate them from the consequences of the truth which she herself
   in theory held.

   [477] Prov. xvi. 6.
     __________________________________________________________________

XVII.

  FRIENDSHIP.

     "A friend loveth at all times, and as a brother is born for
     adversity."--Prov. xvii. 17. (This rendering, based upon the margin
     of the R.V., yields a much better sense than the loosely connected,
     "And a brother is born for adversity.")

   One of the most striking contrasts between the ancient and the modern
   world is in the place which is given to Friendship by moralists and
   religious teachers. In Aristotle's famous treatise on Ethics two books
   out of nine are devoted to the moral bearings of Friendship, and these
   books form the climax of the work, and are the natural transition to
   the work on Politics, or the science of the State. This central
   position given to the subject by the greatest and most systematic
   teacher of antiquity, compared with the very subordinate part which
   friendship plays in Christian ethics, is calculated to make us reflect
   and enquire. Is not the explanation probably this? Our Lord gave a
   great new commandment to His disciples, that they should love one
   another; and though Christian men have as yet but imperfectly
   understood what He meant, or carried out what they have understood, an
   ideal was created which far transcended that lower relationship of
   antiquity. Greek friendship was to be merged in Christian love. The
   meaning of such a change will appear if we remember two characteristics
   of mere friendship, on which Aristotle dwells. One is that it is
   necessarily based upon selfishness; springing from a wish to realize
   oneself in the life of another, fed by the benefit or pleasure derived
   from the mutual intercourse, it lies under the necessary limitation
   that we shall not wish for our friend a good which would remove him
   from us, or an improvement which would raise him too far above us. For
   the second point is that friendship can only exist between equals, and
   the best friendship is that between good men who stand upon the same
   level of virtue. Christian love, on the other hand, springs from a
   complete abnegation of Self. It seeks nothing: it gives all. So far
   from laying stress upon the equality of conditions, it is never better
   pleased than when it can raise another to a position of excellence far
   surpassing its own, and instead of seeking its highest satisfaction in
   intercourse with its spiritual peers,--the good, the great, the
   saintly,--it attains its apotheosis when it is allowed to embrace the
   weak, the sinful, the fallen, and to lavish all its Divine resources
   upon those who may never be able to repay it even with gratitude.

   It is obvious, then, that friendship is on a lower plane than Christian
   love, and it marks a great advance in ideal ethics when the lesser star
   pales in presence of the greater; but it may be urged with truth that
   friendship still has its place in life, and deserves a more careful
   attention than it receives. In the individual, as in the race,
   friendship may be a prelude and a practice of the nobler and wider
   relation. And there is this further reason for trying to understand the
   nature of friendship, that it is more than once in the Bible used as a
   type and a figure of the relationship which may exist between the soul
   and its God.

   We will proceed then to examine some of the characteristics of
   friendship referred to in the book of Proverbs.

   Friends, according to the original sense of the Hebrew word, are those
   who delight in one another's companionship; either they are useful to
   one another because each possesses gifts which the other has not, or
   they are agreeable to one another because they have certain tastes in
   common. Thus there may of course be a friendship in evil, in vice, in
   destructive practices; thieves may enter into a league to carry out
   their antisocial designs, and may be very true to one another; vicious
   men may find a bond of friendship in the common indulgence of their
   vices; and in this way friendship, so called, may be a means of ruining
   the friends. "There are friends for mutual shattering," just as "there
   is a lover that cleaves more than a brother." [478] There may also be
   an interested comradeship which is entirely hypocritical; such a
   friendship is usually marked by a loud and ostentatious demonstration:
   "He that blesseth his friend with a loud voice, rising early in the
   morning, it shall be counted a curse to him." [479] But, in the main,
   friendship implies a certain amount of goodness; for it is in itself a
   virtue. The suspicious, malignant nature of evil men speedily snaps the
   ties which bind them together for a time; and where honour exists among
   thieves it affords a strong presumption that the thieves are the
   product of a wrong social state, rather than of a naturally evil
   disposition.

   We may then practically, in thinking of friendship, confine our
   attention to that which exists between well-meaning people, and tends
   on the whole to bless, to strengthen, and to improve them. We may come
   to look at some of the uses and the delights of friendship. "As in
   water face answers to face, so in the heart man answers to man." [480]
   In the heart of our friend we see our own character reflected just as
   gazing into a still pool we see the reflection of our own face. It is
   in the frank and sympathetic intercourse of friendship that we really
   get to know ourselves, and to realize what is in us. We unfold to one
   another, we discover our similarities and mark our differences. Points
   which remained unobserved in our own hearts are immediately detected
   and understood when we see them also in our friends; faculties which
   remained unused are brought into play to supplement the discovered
   defects in our friend's nature. We hardly guess what a fund of happy
   humour is in us until we are encouraged to display it by observing how
   its flashes light up the face we love. Our capacities of sympathy and
   tenderness remain undeveloped until we wish eagerly to comfort our
   friend in a sudden sorrow. In a true friendship we find that we are
   living a life which is doubled in all its faculties of enjoyment and of
   service; [481] we quite shudder to think what cold, apathetic,
   undeveloped creatures we should have been but for that genial touch
   which unfolded us, and warmed our hearts into genuine feeling while it
   brought our minds into active play. This intellectual value of
   friendship is brought out in the happy saying: "Iron sharpeneth iron;
   so a man sharpeneth the countenance of his friend." [482] A friendless
   person has a lack-lustre face; his talk has a dull edge; his emotions a
   poor and feeble flow. That delightful readiness of thought and
   expression which makes all the charm of social intercourse, the easy
   tact which rubs off the angles and smooths all the relations of life,
   the bright coruscations which seem like sunlight playing over summer
   seas, are usually the result of close and intimate communion with
   congenial friends. Reading may make a learned man, and without hard
   study few people can accomplish much permanent good in the world, but
   reading does not necessarily make a really social man, one who brings
   his fellow-creatures together in happy and helpful relationships; that
   beautiful faculty is only acquired by the fostering and stimulating
   influences of heart companionships. When we have real friends, though
   they be only a few, we diffuse a friendly feeling amongst others,
   wherever we go. Possibly also in the simile of the iron lies a reminder
   of the discipline which friendship gives to character, a discipline
   which is not always unaccompanied by pain. Friends "rub each other's
   angles down," and sometimes the friction is a little distressing to
   both sides. The blades are sharpened, by a few imperceptible filings
   being ground off each of their edges. The use of friendship depends
   very largely on its frankness, just as its sweetness depends upon
   mutual consideration. When the frankness hurts we have to remind
   ourselves of the wholesome truth that the soft speaking is not always a
   token of love, and the hard sayings of our friend may be uttered at a
   great personal cost, for our good rather than his. "Faithful are the
   wounds of a friend: but the kisses of an enemy are profuse." [483]

   If, however, friendship ripens through many years of kindly growth, or
   if a swift elective affinity forestalls at once the fruit of years, all
   the pain of mutual counsel and correction disappears, and may be
   changed into a joy very sweet to the soul. "Ointment and perfume
   rejoice the heart: so doth the sweetness of a man's friend that cometh
   of soul counsel." [484] It is a very beautiful condition of things
   which is referred to in this proverb. Two people have learnt thoroughly
   to understand one another, and have become in a certain sense one. Each
   recognises the service that the other renders, and welcomes the advice
   or even the rebuke which is made possible by their relationship. The
   interchange of affection is naturally sweet, but as sweet, or even
   sometimes sweeter, is the delicate aroma which arises when one sees a
   fault in the other, and with a tenderness begotten of affection, and a
   humility which trembles to presume, speaks gently but frankly to his
   friend. Never do the eyes more eagerly respond to one another, never is
   the hand-clasp so firm and hearty, as after such a passage between true
   friends.

   But the decisive test and the most beautiful proof of real friendship
   will be found in the day of adversity. A friend is never known till
   needed. [485] When calamity falls upon us, false friends make excuses
   and go; lip-friends relapse into silence; but we begin then for the
   first time to find out who is a friend indeed. Then it appears that the
   true friend is entirely unchanged by the changed aspect of affairs; it
   seems as if he had been born into a brotherhood with us for this
   express occasion. There is no wish to cry off; he seems even to press
   the brotherly tie in a way which we should not have presumed to expect,
   and thus he contrives to lighten the oppressive burden of obligation
   for the favour that he confers on us, by making it appear that he was
   bound to act as he does by a necessity of kinship. This seems to be the
   meaning of our text. Such a friend, if he be near at hand and in
   constant contact with us, is of more service than our own brother;
   [486] and when through his timely aid or effectual comfort we have come
   out of the furnace, and our tears are dried, we say constantly to
   ourselves that we doubt whether our own brother would have clung to us
   so faithfully, would have borne with our querulous murmurs so
   patiently, or relieved our necessities so delicately and so liberally.
   [487]

   If you have such a friend as this, your own or your father's, take care
   to retain him; do not alienate him by negligence or a deficient
   consideration. Put yourself out of the way to show that you appreciate
   and value him; do not allow a false reserve or a foolish shyness to
   check your expression of gratitude. A friendship is a delicate growth;
   and even when it has become robust, it can easily be blighted. The
   results of years may be lost in a few days. And if a root of bitterness
   springs up, if a division occurs, it may be quite impossible by every
   effort in your power to heal the breach or to pluck up that obstinate
   root. "A brother offended is harder to be won than a strong city: and
   such contentions are like the bars of a castle." [488] The closer the
   intimacy had been, the tenderer the friendship, so much the sterner
   will be these bars, so much the more inexpugnable the castle. For it
   will be felt, if such protestations, such interchange of affection,
   such mutual delights, could have been deceptive, mere hypocrisies or
   delusions, what hope can there be that the same things broken and
   patched up again can be of any worth? A difference with a chance
   acquaintance is easily removed; further knowledge may improve our
   opinion of one another, and even if we separate we have no deep
   resentment. But a difference between true friends may quickly become
   irreparable. They feel that there is no more to know; they have seen
   the best and that has proved disappointing. The resentment springs from
   a sense of abused confidence and injured love.

   If you have real friends then, take pains to keep them. Watch carefully
   for the small beginnings of a rupture and hasten to heal it. Think no
   effort is wasted, and no apology or explanation is too humiliating,
   which may avert that great calamity,--the loss of a true soul-comrade;
   one whom you have learnt to honour with the name and dignity of friend.


   "The friends thou hast, and their adoption tried,"

   says our wise poet,


   "Grapple them to thy soul with hooks of steel."

   Such a friendship as we have been considering, rare and beautiful as it
   is, forms a noble stepping-stone to the loftier relationship of
   Christian love. In tone and quality it is almost the same; it differs
   only in its range and in its motive. What one man feels to another in
   an ideal friendship, the Christian is called upon, according to his
   capacity and opportunity, to feel to man as man, to all his
   fellow-creatures. We cannot of course fulfil all the offices of
   friendship to every one, and we are not as Christians required to abate
   one jot of our love to those who are our friends by affinity and by
   choice. But where the heart is truly Christian it will become more
   expansive, and it will be conscious of the powerful claims which
   weakness, misery, solitude, or even moral failings, make upon its
   friendship; it will shrink from the selfishness inherent in all
   affections which are merely selective and exclusive; it will earnestly
   desire to feel an affection which is inclusive and quite unselfish.
   Where is to be found the motive for such an enlarged spirit of
   friendship? Whence is to come the impulse to such a self-surrender?

   Surely such a motive and such an impulse are to be discovered only in
   that relation of friendship which God Himself deigns to sustain towards
   the human soul. Jehoshaphat in his prayer appeals to God on the ground
   that He had given the land to "Abraham His friend for ever." [489] And
   we read of Moses that "the Lord spake unto him face to face, as a man
   speaketh unto his friend." [490] But in this position of one who is
   called the father of the faithful, and of one who was the leader of his
   people, we cannot but recognise a promise and a foreshadowing of a
   relation with God which was meant to become more general. The whole
   tendency of the Gospel is to put every believer in our Lord Jesus
   Christ on a spiritual level with the most favoured and richly endowed
   of a former dispensation. And since the Incarnate Son lived on earth,
   and called the simple peasants of Galilee to be, not His servants, but
   His friends, if they did whatsoever He commanded them, [491] we may
   without presumption--nay, we must if we would not grieve Him by
   unbelief--accept the mysteriously dignified position of God's friends.
   The feeblest and the poorest, as well as the strongest and most gifted,
   believing in Jesus Christ, in proportion as he heartily accepts the
   authority and obeys the commandment of his Lord, is a friend of God. It
   is a very unequal friendship, as we must all feel. He has all the
   strength, all the wisdom, all the goodness, all the gifts; but the
   sense of inequality is removed by His own gracious friendliness: He
   attaches such importance to a heartfelt love that He is willing to
   accept that as the fair equivalent of all that He does and gives to us;
   and He remedies the terrible inferiority of His friends by realizing
   His own life in them and merging their imperfection in His perfectness,
   their limitations in His infinity.

   Now, shall we venture to assume that you and God are friends; that the
   beautiful relation which we have examined, the delight in mutual
   companionship, the interchange of thought and feeling, the quick and
   quickening response of love and comprehension, exist between you and
   Him? Come and read some of these sayings again and apply them to Him.
   You may gaze into the heart of God, and as face answers to face in a
   quiet pool, you may find yourself in Him,--a larger self, a truer self,
   a holier self, than you could ever find in any human fellowship, or
   than you had ever dared to imagine. This familiar intercourse with God,
   which has its roots in a profound reverence and its fruits in an
   unutterable joy, is the new creation of a human soul. A man will be
   known by his friends, and most assuredly he will be known, if his
   Friend and most constant Companion is God. He will regard that status
   as his highest title and distinction, just as Lord Brooks was so proud
   of knowing Sir Philip Sydney that he wished his epitaph to be "Here
   lies Sir Philip Sydney's friend."

   Again, in this close fellowship with God, in His warnings and
   encouragements and chastisements, even in the "faithful wounds" that He
   inflicts, does not the heart perceive His sweetness as an ointment and
   perfume? Does not the quiet place where these passages of tender
   friendship between your soul and God occur become redolent with a
   precious fragrance, as of incense or of fresh flowers?

   And then the deep meaning which the friendship of God brings into our
   text, "A friend loveth at all times, and as a brother"--yes, our Divine
   Brother, the Lord Jesus Christ--"is born for adversity;" or into that
   other saying, "There is a lover that cleaves more than a brother"! Let
   us have no loud pharisaical ways in blessing our Friend, [492] but let
   no effort seem too exacting to retain unbroken this priceless blessing
   of the Divine Communion!

   Now, where the soul counts God its nearest and dearest Friend,--the
   Friend of whom nothing in life or death can rob it,--this effect
   follows by a beautiful necessity: the chief and all-inclusive
   friendship being secured, we are at leisure from ourselves to soothe
   and sympathise, we are able to extend our thoughts and our ministries
   of love to all around us, and to reflect in our relations with men that
   exquisite relation which God has deigned to establish with us. Our own
   private friendships then produce no exclusiveness, but rather they
   become the types of our feelings to others, and the ever-springing
   fountainhead of friendly thoughts and courteous deeds; while these
   private friendships and our wider relations alike are all brought up
   into the lofty and purifying friendship which we hold with our God and
   He with us.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [478] Prov. xviii. 24. This sense is obtained by what appears a
   necessary change in the text; we must read ys for 'ys. A similar error
   occurs 2 Sam. xiv. 19 and Micah vi. 10.

   [479] Prov. xxvii. 14.

   [480] Prov. xxvii. 19.

   [481] "Sorrows by being communicated grow less and joys
   greater."--Bacon.

   [482] Prov. xxvii. 17.

   [483] Prov. xxvii. 6.

   [484] Prov. xxvii. 9.

   [485] "Amicus certus in re incerta cernitur."--Cicero.

   [486] Prov. xxvii. 10.

   [487] Prov. xviii. 24.

   [488] Prov. xviii. 19.

   [489] 2 Chron. xx. 7.

   [490] Exod. xxxiii. 11.

   [491] John xv. 14.

   [492] Prov. xxvii. 14.
     __________________________________________________________________

XVIII.

  THE EVIL OF ISOLATION.

     "He that separates himself follows after his own desire, but against
     all sound wisdom he shows his teeth."--Prov. xviii. 1.

   From the value of friendship there is a natural and easy transition to
   the evil of isolation. We must try to fathom the profound meaning which
   is hidden under this simple but striking proverb. To begin with, what
   are we to understand by "one that separates himself"? This same word
   occurs in 2 Sam. i. 23 concerning Saul and Jonathan, that "in their
   death they were not separated." Theirs was a togetherness which
   accompanied them to the grave. On the other hand, there are people who
   shun all togetherness in their lives,--they are voluntarily,
   deliberately separated from their kind, and they seem for the first
   time to blend with their fellows when their undistinguished dust mixes
   with the dust of others in the common grave. We are to think of a
   person who has no ties with any of his fellow-creatures, who has broken
   such ties as bound him to them, or is of that morbid and unnatural
   humour that makes all intercourse with others distasteful. We are to
   think more especially of one who chooses this life of solitariness in
   order to follow out his own desire rather than from any necessity of
   circumstance or disposition; one who finds his pleasure in ignoring
   mankind, and wishes for intercourse with them only that he may vent his
   spleen against them; in a word, we are to think of a Misanthrope.

   We must be careful in catching the precise idea, because there are men
   who shut themselves off from their kind, rightly or wrongly, in order
   to seek the common welfare. A student or an inventor, sometimes even a
   teacher or a preacher, will find the solitude of the study or the
   laboratory the only condition on which he can accomplish the work to
   which he is called. The loss of domestic life or of social pleasures,
   the withdrawal from all the "kindly ways of men," may be a positive
   pain to him, a cross which he bears for the direct good of those whose
   company he forswears, or for the cause of Truth, in whose service alone
   it is possible to permanently benefit his fellows. Such a "separation"
   as this--painful, difficult, unrewarded--we must exclude from the
   intention of our text, although possibly our text might convey a
   warning even to these benevolent eremites, that unless the heart is
   kept warm by human sympathies, unless the mind is kept in touch with
   the common cares and joys of our kind, the value of even intellectual
   work will be considerably diminished, while the worker himself must
   inevitably and perhaps needlessly suffer. But, on the whole, we must
   except these nobler instances of isolation, if we would feel the full
   force of the judgment which is pronounced in the text.

   The misanthrope is one who has no faith in his fellows, and shrinks
   into himself to escape them; who pursues his own private ends, avoiding
   all unnecessary speech with those who are around him, living alone,
   dying unobserved, except for the mischief which consciously or
   unconsciously he does to those who survive him. Such an one is aptly
   described as showing his teeth [493] in an angry snarl against all the
   approaches of a true wisdom.

   Shakespeare might have had this proverb before him in that grim
   delineation of Richard the Third, who boasts that he has neither pity,
   love, nor fear. He was, he had been told, born with teeth in his mouth.


   "And so I was," he exclaims; "which plainly signified

   That I should snarl, and bite, and play the dog."

   And then he explains his terrible character in these significant
   lines:--


   "I have no brother, I am like no brother:

   And this word Love, which greybeards call divine,

   Be resident in men like one another,

   And not in me; I am myself alone." [494]

   Yes, Love can only exist among men who are like one another; and no
   more damning indictment can be brought against a human being than this,
   that he is himself alone.

   The truth is that every man is not only a "self," a personality, but he
   is a very complex being made up of many relations with other men. He is
   a son, a brother, a friend, a father, a citizen. Suppose him to be
   stripped of all sonship, brotherhood, friendship, fatherhood, and
   citizenship; there is left, not a man, but a mere self, and that is his
   hideous condemnation. In the same way, a woman that is neither
   daughter, nor sister, nor wife, nor friend, nor ministrant, does not
   deserve the grand name of woman; she is a mere self, a point of exigent
   and querulous desires. The most appalling discovery in a great city is
   that multitudes have become mere selves,--hungry, hollow, ravening,
   thirsty, shrivelled selves. The father and mother are dead, or left far
   away, probably never known; no one is brother to them, they are
   brothers to no one. Friend has no significance to their understanding,
   or means only one who, from most interested motives, ministers to their
   craving appetites; they are not citizens of London, nor of any other
   city; they are not Englishmen, though they were born in England, nor
   have they any other nationality,--hideous, clamorous, esurient selves,
   nothing more. An old Greek saying declared that one who lives alone is
   either a god or a wild beast; [495] while, as we have already seen,
   there are a few of the isolated ones who are isolated from noble and
   even Divine motives, the vast majority are in this condition because
   they have fallen from the level of humanity into the roving and
   predatory state of wild animals, that seek their meat by night and lurk
   in a lonely lair by day.

   The "sound wisdom" against which the isolated rage is nothing less than
   the kindly law which makes us men, and ordains that we should not live
   to ourselves alone, but should fulfil our noble part as members one of
   another. The Social Instinct is one of two or three striking
   characteristics which mark us out as human: a man by himself is only an
   animal, and a very poor animal too; in size he is far beneath the
   greatest of the creatures that inhabit land and sea; he is not as swift
   as the winged denizens of the air; his strength in proportion to his
   bulk is debility compared with that of the tiniest insects. His
   distinction in the creation, and his excelling dignity, are derived
   from the social relations which make him in combination strong, in the
   intercourse of speech and thought, wise, and in the loving response of
   heart to heart, noble. If by some unhappy accident a human being
   wanders early from his place into the forests, is suckled by wild
   beasts, and grows up among them, the result is an animal inconceivably
   repulsive, fierce, cunning, and ugly; vulpine, but without the wolf's
   agile grace; bearish, but without the bear's slow-pacing dignity.

   The "sound wisdom" is the wisdom of the Creator, who from the beginning
   determined that it is not good for men to live alone, and marked His
   conception of the unity which should bind them together by the gift of
   the woman to the man, to be bone of his bone and flesh of his flesh.

   It becomes therefore a necessity to every wise human being to
   recognise, to maintain, and to cultivate all those wholesome
   relationships which make us truly human. "As a bird that wandereth from
   her nest, so is a man that wandereth from his place." [496] Sometimes
   when a great ship is far off in mid-ocean, a tired land-bird will fall
   panting and exhausted upon the deck: the wings can beat no longer; the
   eyes glaze; and the eager wanderer fails and dies. The true bird-life
   is the life of the woods, of the toilsomely-woven nest, of the mate and
   the brood and the fledglings. In the same way on those ocean
   steamers--ay, and in many a weary bye-path and lonely desert of the
   earth--may be found men who have broken away from the ties which formed
   their strength and their truer being, and now fall, faint and
   purposeless, to languish and to die. For true human life is the life of
   our fellows, of the diligent laborious housebuilding, of the home, of
   the young, of the rising nestlings which are to form the next link in
   the long chain of the generations.

   Neighbourliness is the larger part of life; we are not to go to our
   distant "brother's house in the day of our calamity, for better is a
   neighbour that is near than a brother far off." [497] Our life is rich
   and true and helpful just in proportion as we are entwined with those
   who live around us in bonds of mutual respect and consideration, of
   reciprocal helpfulness and service, of intimate and intelligent
   friendship.

   It is hardly necessary to say that there is neighbourliness and
   neighbourliness. Our relation to our neighbours may be that of mere
   busybodies, tattlers, and whisperers; it may be devoid of tact and
   consideration: there is need therefore of a warning to "hold back thy
   foot from thy neighbour's house; lest he be sated with thee, and hate
   thee." [498] But this possible abuse does not affect the broad and
   salutary principle: we are meant to live in one another; our nature can
   realize itself, and accomplish its mission, only in generous and noble
   relations with those who are about us. The home is at the foundation of
   all; a good son or daughter will generally make a good man or woman;
   good brothers will prove good citizens, good sisters good ministrants
   and teachers to the poor and the ignorant; good fathers will be the
   best rulers in Church and State. The home will be the preparation for
   the larger life of the town, or the social circle, or the state. And
   thus from the cradle to the grave no man should live alone, but every
   one should be a member of a larger body, holding a definite place in a
   system or organism, depending on others, with others depending on him.
   Nerves should run through the body politic, motor nerves and sensory
   nerves; the joys and pains of a community should be shared, the
   activities of a community should be united. No one should live to
   himself; all should live, and rejoice to live, in the great
   co-operative society of the world, in which personal interests are
   mutual interests and the gains of each are the gains of all.

   But we can hardly probe to the depths of this Proverbial Philosophy
   without becoming aware that we are touching on an idea which is the
   mainspring of Christianity on its earthly and visible side. We seem to
   have detected in all the preceding discussion echoes, however faint, of
   the Apostolic teaching which gave practical shape and body to the work
   of our Lord Jesus Christ.

   The relation of Christ, as the Son of God, to the human race as a
   whole, immediately opened up the possibility of a world-wide society in
   which all nations, all classes, all castes, all degrees, all
   individualities, should be not so much merged as distinctly articulated
   and recognised in a complete and complex whole. The kingdom of heaven,
   while borrowing its terminology from earthly kingdoms, was unlike any
   one of them because it was to include them all. Into that kingdom all
   the peoples, nations, and languages should pass.

   The Catholic Church, as the first attempt to realize this grand idea,
   presented for a time a certain faint and wavering reflection of the
   image in the heavens. The fault of seeking the unity of the race in a
   priesthood instead of in the people was of course a fatal one to its
   own ultimate success, but at least one great service was rendered to
   humanity; the idea became familiar of a Unity, in which the narrower
   unities of the family, the social circle, and the nation were to find
   their completion. And when the intelligence and the faith of men broke
   with the Catholic Church, it was not a breach with the Catholic idea,
   but merely a transition to a nobler and a more living realization of
   the idea. At present the idea is daily clearing and assuming vaster
   proportions; humanity is seen to be one; the Great Father presides over
   a family which may be sundered, but cannot be really parted; over a
   race which is divided, but not actually separated.

   Strange and rapturous have been the emotions of men as they have
   entered into the realization of this idea, and the thrill of their vast
   fellowship has passed through their hearts. Sometimes they have turned
   away in bitterness of revolt from the Christian Church, which with
   harsh dogmatisms and fierce anathemas, with cruel exclusiveness and
   sectarian narrowness, seems rather to check than to further the sublime
   thought of the One Father, of whom all the family is named in heaven
   and in earth. But whatever justification there may be for complaint
   against the Church, we cannot afford to turn our thoughts from the Son
   of Man, who has redeemed the race to which we belong, and who, as the
   Divine Power, is alone able to carry out in effect the great conception
   which He has given us in thought.

   And now I am going to ask you for a moment to consider how the text
   reads in the light of the work and the presence and the person of Jesus
   Christ, who has come to gather together in one those that are scattered
   abroad.

   The person of Christ is the link which binds all men together; the
   presence of Christ is the guarantee of the union; the work of Christ,
   which consists in the removal of sin, is the main condition of a
   heart-unity for all mankind. When therefore you put your trust in
   Christ and your sinful nature is subdued, you are incorporated into a
   body of which He is the head, and you must pass out of the narrow
   self-life into the broad Christ-life; you can no longer live for
   yourself alone, because as the member of a body you exist only in
   relation to all the other members. "But," it is said, "am I not to seek
   my own salvation, and then to work it out with fear and trembling? am I
   not to withdraw from the world, and to labour hard to make my calling
   and election sure?" In a certain sense, the answer to that question is,
   Yes. But then it is only in a certain sense; for you make sure of your
   own salvation precisely in proportion as you are really incorporated
   into Christ, and are made a genuine member of the body: as St. John
   says, "We know that we are passed from death unto life because we love
   the brethren," and "if we walk in the light we have fellowship one with
   another, and the blood of Jesus Christ cleanseth us from all sin." We
   work out our salvation therefore only by losing the self in others; we
   withdraw from the world and make our calling sure, just as our thoughts
   become identified with God's thoughts, and as our lives are passed in
   cheerful and victorious service.

   If, then, on the ground of our humanity we are cautioned against
   separating ourselves, because by so doing we set our teeth against all
   sound wisdom, on the ground of our Christianity we must be warned not
   to separate ourselves, because that means to harden our hearts against
   the faith itself. When we say to ourselves, "We will live our Christian
   life alone," that is equivalent to saying, "We will not live the
   Christian life at all." We do not know what the life in heaven may
   be,--though from the casual glimpses we obtain of it, we should say
   that it is a great social gathering, at which we shall sit down with
   Abraham and all the saints of God, a kind of marriage festivity to
   celebrate the union of the Lord with His bride,--but it is plain that
   the Christian life, as it is revealed to us here, must be the life of a
   community, for it is likened to a vine, from which all dead branches
   are cut off, and plainly all cut-off branches are dead.

   "But," say many people amongst us, "we put our faith in the Lord Jesus
   Christ; we trust to Him; why should you impose any further conditions?"
   Do they put their faith in Him? Does not faith imply obedience? Did He
   not require His disciples to be united in a fellowship, and did He not
   give His body and His blood as a symbol of this fellowship, and command
   them to take the symbols in remembrance of Him until He comes? Are
   these isolated believers obeying Him, or are they not cutting at the
   root of His glorious purpose of human fellowship in the Divine Head?
   And if they are thus breaking His expressed commandment, has He not
   warned them that He will say, "I never knew you, depart from Me,"
   although they have taught in His name, and even cast out devils and
   done many wonderful works?

   And in thus reminding you of our Lord's thought, I am not speaking only
   of what we call the fellowship of the Church; for there are many who
   are merely nominal members of the Church, and though their names are
   enrolled they "separate themselves" and live the life of unhallowed
   isolation, just as they did before they professedly entered into the
   Christian society. This is a larger question than that of Church
   membership; Church membership derives its vast importance from being a
   part of this larger question. Will you, therefore, let me close with a
   personal appeal addressed to each one of you?

   You know that the Son of Man would make men one; you know that He calls
   His disciples into a holy family of mutual love and service, so that
   men may know that they are His, and may recognise Him because they love
   one another. Are you venturing to disregard His commandment and to
   frustrate His will by separating yourself for your own desire? have you
   fallen out of all relations with His family, so that the sonship, the
   brotherhood, the friendship, the fatherhood, the citizenship, of the
   heavenly kingdom are as good as meaningless to you? If so, may I say in
   the words of the text, you are setting "your teeth against all sound
   wisdom"?
     __________________________________________________________________

   [493] See note on htnl in Lecture XV., p. [5]205.

   [494] III. King Henry VI., Act v., Sc. 6.

   [495] e theos e therion.

   [496] Prov. xxvii. 8.

   [497] Prov. xxvii. 10.

   [498] Prov. xxv. 17.
     __________________________________________________________________

XIX.

  HUMAN FREEDOM.


   "The foolishness of man subverteth his way;

   And his heart fretteth against the Lord."--Prov. xix. 3.

   There is such a valuable expansion and commentary on this proverb in
   the book of Ecclesiasticus that it seems worth while to quote it in
   full: "Say not, it is through the Lord that I fell away, for the things
   He hates thou shalt not do. Say not, it is He that caused me to err,
   for He has no use for a sinful man. Every abomination the Lord hates,
   neither is it lovely to those that fear Him. He Himself at the outset
   made Man, and left him in the power of his own control, that, if thou
   wilt, thou shouldst keep His commandments, and to do faithfully what is
   pleasing to Him. He set fire and water before thee, that thou shouldst
   stretch out thy hand to which thou wilt. In front of men is life and
   death, and whichever a man pleases shall be given to him. Because wide
   is the wisdom of the Lord; He is mighty in power, beholding all things;
   and His eyes are upon them that fear Him, and He Himself will take note
   of every work of man. He never enjoined any one to do wickedly, and He
   never gave to any one licence to sin." [499]

   It is our constant tendency to claim whatever good we do as our own
   doing, and to charge whatever evil we do on causes which are beyond our
   control,--on heredity, on circumstances of our birth and upbringing, or
   even on God. The Scriptures, on the other hand, regard all our good
   deeds as the work which God works within us, when our will is given to
   Him, while all our evil is ascribed to our own foolish and corrupt
   will, for which we are, and shall be, held responsible. This is
   certainly a very remarkable contrast, and we shall do well to take
   account of it. It is not necessary to run into any extreme statement,
   to deny the effects either of taints in the blood which we receive from
   our parents, or of early surroundings and education, or even the
   enormous influence which other people exercise over us in later life;
   but when all allowance is made for these recognised facts, the
   contention of the text is that what really subverts our lives is our
   own folly,--and not uncontrollable circumstances,--and our folly is
   due, not to our misfortune, but to our fault.

   Now we will not attempt to deal with all the modifications and
   reservations and refinements which ingenuity might offer to this
   doctrine; however charity may require us to make allowance for others
   on the ground of disadvantages, it is questionable whether we help
   them, and it is certain that we weaken ourselves, by turning attention
   constantly from the central fact to the surrounding circumstances; we
   will therefore try to steadily look at this truth of Individual
   Responsibility, and lay it to heart. When we have acquitted ourselves
   of blame, and have obtained a discharge in the forum of our own
   conscience, it will be time to seek other causes of our guilt, and to
   "fret against the Lord."

   But before we turn inwards and appeal to our own consciousness, may we
   not observe how absurd it is that the Lord should be charged with
   responsibility for our sins? What do we know of the Lord except that He
   hates and abominates sin? It is as the Hater of sin that He is revealed
   to us in ever-clearer forms from the first page of revelation to the
   last. But more, the most powerful proof that we possess of His
   existence is to be found in the voice of conscience within us; we
   instinctively identify Him with that stern monitor that denounces so
   vigorously and unsparingly all our offences against holiness. The God
   of revelation is from the first declared to be "He who will by no means
   clear the guilty, visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the
   children." The God of conscience is by the very nature of the case
   identified with the uncompromising sentence against evil; is it not
   then obviously inconsistent to lay our sins to the charge of God? We
   are more assured of His Holiness than of His omnipotence; we cannot
   therefore bring His omnipotence to impeach His holiness. We see Him as
   the Avenger of sin before we see Him in any other capacity; we cannot
   therefore bring any subsequent vision of Him to discredit the first. It
   is surely the dictate of plain common sense, as St. James says, that
   "God cannot be tempted with evil, and He Himself tempteth no man: but
   each man is tempted, when he is drawn away by his own lust, and
   enticed. Then the lust, when it hath conceived, beareth sin: and the
   sin, when it is full grown, bringeth forth death." [500]

   Now our actual responsibility for our own sins, and the troubles which
   result from them, will perhaps come out in the clear light of
   conscience, if we regard our conduct in the following way. We must make
   an appeal to consciousness. There are actions which, consciousness
   tells us, rest entirely on our own choice, and concerning which no
   sophistry, however ingenious, can furnish an adequate exculpation.
   There was in these cases, as we well remember, the plain offer of an
   alternative "Fire or Water, Life or Death." We knew at the time that we
   were equally able to take either of them; we felt no compulsion; there
   was, it is true, a great tumult of conflicting motives, but when the
   motives were balanced and the resulting verdict was declared, we were
   perfectly conscious that we could, if we chose, reverse the verdict and
   give our judgment against it. Our first deviations from truth, from
   purity, from charity, come up before us as we reflect; the struggle
   which went on survives vividly in memory; and when we yielded to the
   evil power we were conscious at the time, as we remember still, that
   our will was to blame. As the lie glided from the lips, as the
   unhallowed thought was allowed to pass into act, as the rein was thrown
   on the neck of the evil passion, we knew that we were doing wrong, we
   felt that by an adequate exercise of the will we could do right. Cast
   your eye back on the steps by which your character was formed, on the
   gradual destruction of your finer feelings, on the steady decline of
   your spiritual instincts, on the slow deadening and searing of your
   moral sense. Do you not remember how deliberately you submitted to the
   fascinations of that dangerous friend, whom your conscience entirely
   disapproved? how wilfully you opened and perused the pages of that foul
   book, which swept over your soul like a mud-torrent and left its slimy
   sediment there ever after? how you consciously avoided the influence of
   good people, made every excuse to escape the prayer, the reading, the
   sermon, which was to you a conscience-stirring influence, an appeal of
   God to the soul?

   As you retrace those fatal steps, you will be surprised to discover how
   entirely your own master you were at the time, although the evil deeds
   done then have forged a chain which limits your freedom now. If at any
   of those critical moments some one had said to you, Are you free to do
   just which of the two things you please? you would have replied at
   once, Why, of course I am. Indeed, if there had been any compulsion to
   evil, you would have rebelled against it and resisted it. It was really
   the complete liberty, the sense of power, the delight in following your
   own desire, that determined your choice. The evil companion persuaded,
   your conscience dissuaded, neither compelled; when the balance hung
   even you threw the weight of your will into the scale. The book lay
   open; curiosity, prurience, impurity, bade you read; your best
   conviction shamed you and called you away: when the two forces pulled
   even, you deliberately gave your support to the evil force. The solemn
   voice of prayer and worship called you, moving you with mystical power,
   waking strange desires and hopes and aspirations; the half-mocking
   voice of the earth was also in your ear, tempting, luring, exciting,
   and when the sounds were about balanced, you raised up your own voice
   for the one and gave it the predominance.

   Or if now in the bondage of evil you can no longer realize that you
   were once free, you can look at others who are now where you were then;
   notice even when you try to tempt your younger companions into evil,
   how the blush of shame, the furtive glance, the sudden collapse of
   resistance, plainly proves that the action is one consciously
   determined by an evil choice; notice how your first blasphemies, your
   first devil-born doubts, suggestions, and innuendoes, bring the pained
   expression to the face, and raise a conflict which the will has to
   decide. In this appeal to consciousness or to observation we must be
   scrupulously honest with ourselves; we must take infinite pains not to
   garble the evidence to suit a foregone conclusion or to excuse an
   accomplished fall. I think we may say that when men are honest with
   themselves, and in proportion as they are pure and innocent, and not
   yet bound hand and foot by the bondage of their own sins, they know
   that they have been free, that in the face of all circumstances they
   still stood uncommitted; that if they yielded to temptation it was
   their own "foolishness that subverted their way."

   But now we may pass from these inward moral decisions which have
   determined our character and made us what we are, to the ordinary
   actions which form the greater part of our everyday conduct. Here again
   we are generally inclined to take credit for every course which has a
   happy issue, and for every unfortunate decision to cast the blame on
   others. We are reminded, however, that our misfortunes are generally
   the result of our own folly; we are too impatient, too hasty, too
   impetuous, too self-willed. "Desire without knowledge is not good, and
   he that hasteth with his feet misseth the way." [501] If we look back
   upon our mistakes in life, it is surprising to see how many were due to
   our own headstrong determination to follow our own way, and our
   complete disregard of the prudent counsels which our wiser friends
   ventured to offer us. "The way of the foolish is right in his own eyes:
   but he that is wise hearkeneth unto counsel." [502] "Where there is no
   counsel, purposes are disappointed: but in the multitude of counsellors
   they are established." [503] "Hear counsel," is the command of this
   chapter, "and receive instruction, that thou mayest be wise in thy
   latter end." [504] "Every purpose is established by counsel,"--affairs
   of state, whether civil [505] or military, [506] --and so by counsel a
   man is made strong and is able to carry out the warfare of his own
   personal life. [507] It is well for us therefore not only to accept
   counsel which is proffered to us, but to be at pains to get it, for it
   often lies, like the waters of a well, deep down in a man's mind, and
   requires some patience and skill in order to elicit it. [508]

   Our false steps are due to a rash precipitancy which prevents us from
   looking at the question on all its sides, and learning the views of
   those who have had experience and know. The calamities which befell us
   were foreseen by many onlookers, and were even foretold by our friends,
   but we could accept no advice, no warning. And while therefore it is
   perfectly true that our own judgment was not sufficient to ward off the
   evil or prevent the faux pas, we are none the less to blame, our own
   foolishness has none the less subverted our way, for it was our own
   fault that we refused to be advised, it was our own incredible folly
   that made us form so wrong an idea of our wisdom.

   Suppose then that in our retrospect of life and in the estimation of
   our errors, we mark off all those sins for which our conscience duly
   charges us with direct responsibility, and all those blunders which
   might have been avoided if we had wisely submitted to more prudent
   judgments than our own, what is there that remains? Can we point out
   any group of actions or any kind of errors which are yet unaccounted
   for, and may possibly be charged on some other person or thing than
   ourselves? Is there yet some opening by which we may escape
   responsibility? Are there any effectual and valid excuses that we can
   successfully urge?

   Now it appears that all these possible excuses are netted and
   completely removed--and every avenue of escape is finally blocked--by
   this broad consideration; God is at hand as the wisest of Counsellors,
   and we might by simple appeal to Him, and by reverently obeying His
   commandments, avoid all the evils and the dangers to which we are
   exposed. So far from being able to excuse ourselves and to lay the
   blame on God, it is our chief and all-inclusive fault, it is the
   clearest mark of our foolishness, that we do not resort to Him for
   help, but constantly follow our own devices; that we do not rely upon
   His goodness, but idly fret against Him and all His ordinances. "There
   are many devices in a man's heart," but over against these feeble,
   fluctuating, and inconsistent ideas of ours is "the counsel of the
   Lord, which shall stand." [509] "The fear of the Lord tendeth to life:
   and he that hath it shall abide satisfied; he shall not be visited with
   evil." [510] There is a way of life, there is a plain commandment, a
   law of God's appointing: "He that keepeth the commandment keepeth his
   soul: but he that is careless of his ways shall die." [511] It is
   simply our own carelessness that is our ruin; if we would pay the
   slightest heed, if there were one grain of seriousness in us, we should
   be wise, we should get understanding, and so find good in the salvation
   of the soul; [512] we should not, as we so often do, "hear instruction,
   only to err from the words of knowledge." [513]

   We may wonder at the strong conviction with which this truth was urged
   even under the Jewish law; it may seem to us that the requirements then
   were so great, and the details so numerous, and the revelation so
   uncertain, that a man could scarcely be held responsible if he missed
   the way of life through inadvertence or defective knowledge. Yet even
   then the path was plain, and if a man missed it he had but himself and
   his own folly to blame. But how much more plain and sure is everything
   made for us! Our Lord has not only declared the way, but He is the Way;
   He has not only given us a commandment to keep, but He has Himself kept
   it, and offers to the believing soul the powers of an inward life, by
   which the yoke of obedience becomes easy, and the burden of service is
   made light. He has become "the end of the law to every one that
   believeth." He has made His offer of Himself not only general, but
   universal, so that no human being can say that he is excluded, or
   murmur that he is not able to "keep his soul." His word is gone out
   into all the world, and while they who have not heard it, being without
   a law are yet a law unto themselves, and are responsible by virtue of
   that self-witness which God has given everywhere in Nature, in Society,
   and in the conscience of man, how can we sufficiently emphasize our own
   responsibility, to whom God has spoken in the latter days by His own
   Son! Surely "whoso despiseth the word bringeth destruction on himself."
   [514]

   If even in that old and darker dispensation the light was so clear that
   it was chargeable to a man's own folly when he disobeyed,--and
   "judgments were prepared for scorners, and stripes for the backs of
   fools," [515] --what must come upon us who have the clearer light if we
   wilfully and foolishly disobey? The counsel of the Lord stands sure:
   "There is no wisdom nor understanding nor counsel against the Lord."
   [516] No authority of wise men, no sneers of wits, no devices of the
   clever, can in the least avail to set aside His mighty ordinance or to
   excuse us for disregarding it. "The horse is prepared against the day
   of battle: but victory is of the Lord." [517] There can be no evasion,
   no escape. He Himself, by His own invincible power, will bring home to
   the hearts of the rebellious the evil of their rebellion, and will send
   the cruel messenger against them. [518]

   Does it not behove us to remember and to consider? to remember our
   offences, to consider our guilt and the Lord's power? Here is a way of
   life marked out before you, and there is the way of death; here is the
   water held out to you, and there is the fire; and you may choose. The
   way of life is in the Gospel of God's dear Son; you know that its
   precepts are perfect, converting the soul, and that Christ Himself is
   holy, such an one as the earth never bore before or since; you know too
   that this Holy One came to give His life a ransom for many, that He
   invited all to come unto Him, and promised to all who came everlasting
   life. You know that He did give His life a ransom,--as the Good
   Shepherd He gave Himself for the sheep, and then took again the life
   which He laid down. You know that He ever liveth to make intercession
   for us, and that His saving power was not exercised for the last time
   years and years ago, but this very day, probably just at the moment
   that I am now speaking to you. The way is plain, and the choice is
   free; the truth shines, and you can open your eyes to it; the life is
   offered, and you can accept it. What pretext can you give for not
   choosing Christ, for not coming to the truth, for not accepting the
   life?

   Is it not clear to you that if you refuse Him that speaketh, and your
   way is thus subverted,--as indeed it must be,--it is your own folly
   that is to blame? You fret against the Lord now, and you charge Him
   foolishly, but some day you will see clearly that this is all a blind
   and a subterfuge; you will admit that the choice was open to you, and
   you chose amiss; that life and death were offered to you, and you
   preferred death.

   If any question might be entertained about those who have only the
   light of conscience to guide them, and have not heard of the direct
   relation of succour and support which God is ready to give to those who
   depend upon Him, there can be no doubt of the complete freedom of every
   human being, who hears the message of the Gospel, to accept it. You may
   put it aside, you may decline to accept it on the ground of
   disinclination, or because you consider the historical evidence
   insufficient, but you will be the first to admit that in doing so you
   exercise your discretion and consciously choose the course which you
   take.

   Nay, leaving all metaphysical discussion about the freedom of the will,
   I put it to you simply, Can you not, if you choose, come to Christ now?

   Oh, hear counsel and receive instruction: is not the Spirit pleading
   with you, counselling, teaching, warning you? Do not harden your heart,
   do not turn away. Attend to Christ now, admit Him now, that you may be
   wise in your latter end. [519]
     __________________________________________________________________

   [499] Eccles. xv. 11-20.

   [500] James i. 13-15.

   [501] Prov. xix. 2.

   [502] Prov. xii. 15.

   [503] Prov. xv. 22.

   [504] Prov. xix. 20.

   [505] Prov. xi. 14.

   [506] Prov. xx. 18.

   [507] Prov. xxiv. 5, 6.

   [508] Prov. xx. 5.

   [509] Prov. xix. 21.

   [510] Prov. xix. 23.

   [511] Prov. xix. 16.

   [512] Prov. xix. 8.

   [513] Prov. xix. 27.

   [514] Prov. xiii. 13.

   [515] Prov. xix. 29.

   [516] Prov. xxi. 30.

   [517] Prov. xxi. 31.

   [518] Prov. xvii. 11.

   [519] Prov. xix. 20.
     __________________________________________________________________

XX.

  IDLENESS.

     "After the autumn gathering the slothful does not plough; he asks in
     the harvest, and there is nothing."--Prov. xx. 4.

   We have already in the sixth lecture caught a glimpse of the sluggard,
   and in the ninth we have seen in passing that diligence in work is
   enjoined by the teacher; but we must give a more concentrated attention
   to this subject if we would realize the stress which this book of
   Wisdom lays on work as the grand condition of life in this earnest
   world. They who will not work have no place in an order of things which
   is maintained by work, and in which the toil itself is the great
   discipline of character and the preparation of joy. It is no churlish
   or envious spirit which pronounces a doom on the idle, but it is the
   very necessity of the case; that idleness which in moments of excessive
   strain we so eagerly covet is, if it is accepted as the regular and
   continuous state of the soul, a more ruinous and miserable curse than
   the hardest labour. By a law which we all break at our peril, we are
   required to have an honest end and a strenuous occupation in our life;
   and we are further required to labour diligently for the end, and to
   spare no pains to achieve it. We have many faculties lying dormant, and
   we must wake them into activity; we have many gifts half used or not
   used at all; we must turn them all to account, if we would be
   wholesome, happy, and in the true sense successful.

   First of all, let us look at the portrait of the sluggard as it is
   delineated in some of these proverbial sayings. We see him in bed, at
   the board, in the house, out of doors. He will not get up in the
   morning; he turns from side to side, just like a door which swings
   backwards and forwards on its hinges, but of course never gets any
   further. [520] "Yet a little sleep," he says, "a little slumber, a
   little folding of the hands in sleep." [521] Or when at last he has
   brought himself to get up and to sit down to table, he is too lethargic
   even to eat: "He buries his hand in the dish, and will not so much as
   bring it to his mouth again;" [522] or if he raises the morsel to his
   lips, he does it with an air of indescribable languor and weariness.
   [523] Then the time comes for him to go out to his daily duties. But he
   has a number of ingenious, though utterly absurd, excuses why he should
   not leave the house: "There is a lion in the streets," he says, "a lion
   in the way;" [524] "There is a lion without; I shall be murdered in the
   streets." [525] When he is told that this is a delusion, he is prepared
   to argue the matter, and to show that his fear is well grounded; he is
   quite scornful of all the people who assure him to the contrary,
   because they have been out and seen for themselves: "The sluggard is
   wiser in his own eyes than seven men that can render a reason." [526]
   And when at length he is launched on the business of the day, arriving
   late, his wits gone wool-gathering, his will as inactive as his mind is
   inattentive, he drags through every duty with the air of one who is
   walking "through a hedge of thorns." [527] Where another person would
   proceed with easy alacrity, he seems held back by invisible obstacles;
   his garments are always getting caught in the briars; there is not
   impetus enough to carry him over the slightest difficulty; and after
   frequent and somnolent pauses, the end of the day finds him more weary
   than the busiest, though he has nothing to show but futile efforts and
   abortive results.

   That is a complete picture of the sluggard. We do not of course see him
   fully developed very often; but we recognise at once the several
   tendencies in our own characters--the slothfulness, the listlessness,
   the idle procrastination, the inertia--which may, if unresisted and
   unconquered, gradually bring us nearer to this finished portrait.

   The result of this sluggishness must now be sketched. "Love not sleep,"
   we are told, "lest thou come to poverty; open thine eyes, and thou
   shalt be satisfied with bread." [528] The means of subsistence in this
   world are the result of labour; toilers win them from the reluctant
   earth and sea; the only condition on which we can partake in them is
   that we should toil, either directly in producing the means of
   subsistence, or indirectly in doing for the producers helpful service
   for which they are willing to exchange the fruits of their labour. One
   who sleeps away the golden hours of work, cast by slothfulness into a
   deep sleep, has no claim whatever on the earth or the community for
   daily food; he shall suffer hunger. [529] And if by craft or chance he
   is able to get his bread without any service rendered to the workers,
   he shall suffer from a soul-hunger more terrible than starvation--the
   unutterable ennui, weariness, disgust, and self-loathing which an idle
   and useless life inevitably produces.

   As the text reminds us, there is an alternation of seasons. There is a
   time to plough, when the earth has yielded her full autumn fruits;
   there is a time to sow; there is a harvest. If a man is too lazy to
   plough at the right time and to sow at the right time, his fields will
   of course give him no crops: "Slothfulness catcheth not his prey."
   [530] Nor must we think that God in any grudging spirit has ordered
   this law of the seasons. The appetite which forces us to labour,
   because "our mouth craves it of us," [531] the apparent rigour with
   which nature requires us to be up betimes and not to let the
   opportunity slip, and the threat of poverty which hangs over our heads
   if we neglect her requirements, are all parts of a beneficent law,--the
   law that by work itself our life is sweetened and our spirit is
   developed. They are not to be congratulated who, escaping the spur of
   appetite, and liberated by the toil of others from the rigorous edicts
   of nature which require the laborious ploughing and sowing, are enabled
   to eat the bread of idleness. The hardest worker, worn to the bone and
   ill-remunerated, is really more enviable than they. The abundance of
   food is a poor equivalent for the loss of discipline which the desire
   of food was designed to exact through honest and earnest work. Men come
   to us and say in effect, "Behold after the autumn gathering we did not
   plough, and we asked in harvest, and got all that our hearts desired,"
   and we are constrained to pity rather than to congratulate them. It is
   not good for men to slip through the laws of God and nature thus, for
   their chastisement is heavier in the end than in the beginning.

   The truth of this appears when we remember that a worse result of
   slothfulness than poverty is the spiritual rust, decay, and degradation
   which slothfulness itself implies: "The desire of the slothful killeth
   him, for his hands refuse to labour;" [532] "He also that is slack in
   his work is brother to him that is a destroyer." [533] It is indeed a
   strange illusion which makes man desire idleness. Idleness is ruin; the
   soul rusts away like the sword in Hudibras, which--


   "... ate into itself, for lack

   Of something else to hew and hack."

   It is death, it is deadly; the idle soul slowly dies, and spreads
   destruction around it. It is the same with a country. Idleness is its
   ruin: whether it be that the generosity of nature removes the necessity
   of work, as in the South Seas, where the missionaries find one of their
   chief difficulties in the absolute laziness resulting from the softness
   of the climate and the fertility of the soil; or that the vast
   accumulations of wealth procure idleness for its possessors, and
   enforce idleness on thousands of the unfortunate unemployed,--the
   melancholy result ensues in the enervation of manhood and the
   corruption of womanhood. On the other hand, as Thucydides observed in
   the case of Attica, a rigorous climate and a niggardly soil, eliciting
   all the energies of the people in order to improve their condition or
   even to live, have been found favourable to the development of a noble
   nationality. Slackness of work, from whatever cause it may arise,
   brings its victims into this sorrowful kinship with the destroyer.

   It may be noted that the idle, whether they be rich or poor, are
   denominated "vain persons," and sensible people are cautioned solemnly
   to avoid their society, as their emptiness is contagious, and the
   habits which are quickly acquired in their company lead straight to
   ruin: "He that tilleth his land shall have plenty of bread, but he that
   followeth after vain persons is void of understanding;" [534] "He that
   followeth after vain persons shall have poverty enough." [535]

   The truth which is here enforced receives ample illustration in our own
   society. Two centuries ago Daniel Defoe defined the English as the
   "most lazy diligent nation" in the world. Hard work is common; idleness
   is equally common. Our people are on the whole highly gifted, and
   produce rapidly when they give their attention to their work; but we
   seem to have a strange vein of dissoluteness and laziness running
   through us, and consequently the worst and most shameful idleness is
   often found amongst the best workmen, who through their own bad habits
   have missed their opportunities, and become a burden to themselves and
   to the community. In no country is the leisured class, of those who do
   nothing at all, or pass their aimless days in a round of engagements
   which are only strenuous idleness, so large; in no country is the
   unemployed or the pauper class so ruinously great in proportion to the
   population. Hence this curious paradox: the foreigner hears that
   England is the richest and the most industrious country in the world;
   he comes to our shores expecting to see cities of gold and fields
   teeming with produce. On his arrival he becomes aware of a degrading
   poverty such as cannot be matched in the poorest country on earth; he
   finds a vast population of the unemployed rich lounging in the streets
   and the parks, and of the unemployed poor hanging about the doors of
   the innumerable drink-shops, and infesting every highway and byway of
   the country. He finds the land of the agricultural districts often
   lying idle and unproductive; those who till it untaught, ill-fed, and
   discontented; those who possess it discontented, though well fed and
   instructed. Our subject does not lead us to inquire into the deeper
   causes of these anomalies, but it leads us to this observation: we are
   a "lazy diligent nation" because we have not yet learned, or have
   forgotten, that the thing most to be dreaded is not poverty, but
   idleness; and the thing most to be desired is not wealth, but
   strenuous, earnest, and useful toil. Our desperate and eager work is
   not for the work's sake, but in order to get rich; our ambition is to
   be idle rather than to be employed, to be raised above the necessity of
   labour which is our health by the possession of wealth which is our
   ruin. We have cherished the fatal and foolish error that work was
   degrading, and have ranked those highest who did the least. "Where no
   oxen are," we have said in our fastidious way, "the crib is clean,"
   forgetting the other side of the matter, that "much increase is by the
   strength of the ox." [536] Thus we have ignorantly despised the workers
   who make us rich, looking down upon trade, upon business, and more than
   all upon manual labour; and have with strange fatuity admired most
   those who were most useless, whose peculiar boast would be that they
   never did a day's work in their lives.

   Happily now there are signs of a revolution in our thought. We are
   beginning to see that work is good, not for what it earns, but for the
   occupation and the training which it gives to the body and the mind;
   and that idleness is an evil, not only where work is a necessity, and
   the appetite craves it of us, but everywhere and under all
   circumstances. In useful employment we find our life; in the sluggard's
   life we see our death.

   We must observe then the good effects which result from honest and
   earnest toil. But, first, we cannot help noticing what an important
   place is here given to agriculture. This is not accidental to the time
   in which the book was written. It is an eternal principle. Out of the
   soil comes our wealth; by the soil therefore we live; and accordingly
   God has ordained that in the tilling of the ground man shall find his
   wholesomest, sweetest, and most strengthening employment--that no
   community shall inwardly flourish when its agricultural life declines;
   and that therefore the happiest and soundest society will be that in
   which the largest proportional number are engaged in producing the
   fruits of the earth, and are directly and vitally attached to their
   mother soil. "He that tilleth his land shall have plenty of bread."
   [537] When a nation is in the case of the sluggard, when you pass by
   its fields and its vineyards and see them grown over with thorns and
   nettles and its stone walls broken down, you will find Pauperism coming
   as a robber, and Want, gaunt and hideous, stalking through the land
   like an armed man. [538] "Be thou diligent," therefore we are told, "to
   know the state of thy flocks, and look well to thy herds"--(take care
   that no foolish pride or negligence prevent you from seeing that the
   agricultural life is properly maintained, for it is the only sure basis
   of prosperity); "riches are not for ever, and even the government of
   kings does not endure to all generations." But in the sweet ordinances
   of nature the great Giver provides His unfailing wealth: "The hay is
   carried, and immediately the tender grass begins to grow again, and
   even the barren mountains yield their herbs for ingathering. The lambs
   appear every spring with their wool for our clothing, and the field
   will maintain goats equal in value to its own price. And from these
   miraculous sources of eternal reproduction our food and our maintenance
   are to be drawn." [539]

   Thus at the foundation of all industries is the agricultural industry.
   At the root of all social and economical questions is the land
   question. When you wish to commend diligence and to discourage idleness
   in a nation that is "lazy diligent," the first thing is to inquire into
   the condition or the use of the land. The land is God's gift to a
   people. English land is God's gift to the English people. If it is
   misapplied, ill-used, neglected; if it does not produce its full tale
   of wealth; if it does not support its full burden of living creatures,
   and give employment to its full number of hands, we are flying in the
   face of God's ordinances; we must not expect to prosper; His gracious
   will is frustrated, and we must have the shame and sorrow of seeing our
   million of paupers, and our second million of enforced idlers, and our
   myriads of lazy cumberers of the ground, and our whole population
   disorganized and unsettled, torn with the frenzy of insane work, or
   gangrened with the corruption of destroying idleness. For the gifts of
   God are without repentance, and the abuse of His gifts is without
   remedy.

   But turning now to the good effects which result from honest and
   earnest toil, we are taught to distinguish three more
   particularly--plenty, power, and personal worth.

   First, Plenty. "The soul of the sluggard desireth and hath nothing, but
   the soul of the diligent shall be made fat." [540] Nor must we think
   that diligence is only manual; it is also mental. It implies thought,
   forethought, planning, arranging. We have a contrast drawn between the
   really diligent man, whose prudence foresees, and whose reflection
   orders his work for the best ends, and the fussy, unreflecting activity
   of one who is always busy, but never accomplishes anything. It is only
   the diligence of the first kind that leads to the desired end; the
   diligence of mere restlessness is not much better than idleness. We
   learn that "the thoughts of the diligent tend only to plenteousness,
   but every one that is hasty hasteth only to want." [541] Effectual
   labour implies thought; only a wise man, with all his faculties brought
   into full and harmonious play, can work with any good result, or can
   thriftily use the fruits of his labour; a foolish, thoughtless, witless
   person may work hard and earn a good deal of money, but it is gone even
   faster than it came. Thus "there is precious treasure and oil in the
   dwelling of the wise, but a foolish man swalloweth it up." [542] There
   are exceptions, no doubt; but the general rule is borne out by
   experience, that they who honestly and earnestly use the gifts of mind
   and body which God has given them, obtain the things which are needful
   in this life, if not to overflowing, yet in sufficiency; and where
   means fail we generally have to admit that our own industry or prudence
   was at fault.

   Then, secondly, it is industry rather than genius which commends us to
   our fellow-men, and leads us to positions of influence and power:
   "Seest thou a man diligent in his business? he shall stand before
   kings, he shall not stand before mean men;" [543] "The hand of the
   diligent shall bear rule, but the slothful shall be put under
   task-work." [544] It is this golden faculty of persistence,
   concentration, diligence, which makes every great ruler and leader of
   men, and raises even the very ordinary person out of the drudgery of
   mere task-work into the dignity of large and noble and delightful toil.

   For, thirdly, it is diligence, the capacity of taking pains, that gives
   to a man his actual worth, making him compact and strong and
   serviceable: "The precious substance of men is to be diligent." [545]
   It is the quality itself which is all important. The greatest gifts are
   of little worth, unless there is this guarantee of the conscientious
   and intelligent employment of them. While if the gifts with which God
   has endowed us are of the simplest order, if we can only use a spade or
   a saw or a broom effectively, that faculty diligently exercised is our
   value to the world; and a great value it is--greater than the value of
   high genius which is erratic, unbridled, undirected, and uncertain. Of
   every man or woman in this world the highest praise which can be
   uttered is that which underlies the commendation of the good wife: "She
   looketh well to the ways of her household, and eateth not the bread of
   idleness." [546] There is the epitome of all trustworthy and honourable
   character.

   We have been dwelling all this time on a simple virtue of a very
   mundane type. But all that has been said may be immediately raised to a
   higher plane by one observation. Our Lord and Master was diligent about
   His Father's business, and has left on record this saying: "I must work
   the works of Him that sent Me while it is called to-day; for the night
   cometh, in which no one can work." As each one of us comes under His
   influence and passes into His faith and obedience, the joyful
   seriousness of our life-work deepens; it is lit by the rich glow of a
   sunset glory. We want to do diligently what our hand finds to do--to do
   it earnestly as unto the Lord. By patient and industrious exercise of
   every faculty which He has given us, we wish to be prepared for any
   task which He may appoint here or hereafter. Some of us He only
   apprentices in this world; and according to the faithfulness with which
   we discharge our humble and unnoticed duties will be the service to
   which He will one day appoint us. Others are called out of
   apprenticeship into the rough and eager work of the journeyman, and His
   eye is always upon us as He tries us to find whether we may ever be
   appointed over one, or five, or ten cities. A few supreme souls have
   been called even on earth to shape, to create, to control; a Paul, an
   Augustine, a Luther, can work with an emancipated hand. But the law is
   one all through the workshops, the fields, the vineyards of our Lord.
   The diligent shall stand before Him, and the slothful shall be shamed.
   He that does not plough will not reap. Wasted opportunities vanish for
   ever, and leave only their doleful record in the emasculated and
   nerveless soul.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [520] Prov. xxvi. 14.

   [521] Prov. xxiv. 34.

   [522] Prov. xix. 24.

   [523] Prov. xxvi. 15.

   [524] Prov. xxvi. 13.

   [525] Prov. xxii. 13.

   [526] Prov. xxvi. 16.

   [527] Prov. xv. 19.

   [528] Prov. xx. 13.

   [529] Prov. xix. 15.

   [530] Prov. xii. 27.

   [531] Prov. xvi. 26.

   [532] Prov. xxi. 25.

   [533] Prov. xviii. 9.

   [534] Prov. xii. 11.

   [535] Prov. xxviii. 19.

   [536] Prov. xiv. 4.

   [537] Prov. xxviii. 19.

   [538] Prov. xxiv. 30-34.

   [539] Prov. xxvii. 23-27.

   [540] Prov. xiii. 4.

   [541] Prov. xxi. 5.

   [542] Prov. xxi. 20.

   [543] Prov. xxii. 29.

   [544] Prov. xii. 24.

   [545] Prov. xii. 27.

   [546] Prov. xxxi. 27.
     __________________________________________________________________

XXI.

  WINE.


   "He that loveth pleasure shall be a poor man:

   He that loveth wine and oil shall not be rich."

   Prov. xxi. 17.

   The Septuagint translation has an interesting addition to the proverb
   in xii. 11. After "He that tilleth his land shall have plenty of bread,
   but he that followeth after vain persons is void of understanding," it
   adds, "He who is sweet in pastimes of wine-drinking shall leave
   dishonour in his strongholds." Drinking is the natural opposite of hard
   and honest work. When the love of it takes possession of a man he is
   sure to become a useless and unproductive member of society. A drunken
   people are in the end an incapable people; their wealth declines, their
   industries pass over to soberer rivals, their qualities of brain and
   muscle gradually disappear. This is partly owing to the deterioration
   of mind and body which results from the excessive use of stimulants;
   but it is still more due to a wider cause: drinking in all its branches
   is indulged in as a pleasure. Why do we not admit it? why do we always
   try to present it in another light, saying that it is for health's
   sake, by a doctor's orders; or for work's sake, by a proved necessity?
   Is it not that we are secretly conscious of taking the drink because we
   like it? We know it is a self-indulgence, and we are a little ashamed
   of it; and as self-indulgence is always fatal in the long run to all
   the habits and activities which men very properly honour, we should
   dearly like to screen it under a decent pretext which might preserve
   our self-respect. We know quite well that "he that loveth pleasure
   shall be a poor man; he that loveth wine and oil shall not be rich."
   [547] Drinking is after all only a pronounced symptom of a large
   vice--self-indulgence.

   A great step is taken when we have learnt to quietly and candidly face
   this fact: we drink, as a society, as a nation,--each of us drinks in
   public or in private,--simply because it is pleasant. It is a habit
   governed by one supreme and absolute law--we like it. We know quite
   well that alcohol is not a food; that is proved by the most
   irrefragable scientific evidence; and if in alcoholic drinks there are
   certain nutritive elements, we could if we chose secure the benefit of
   them without any admixture of alcohol. We know that in many cases the
   alcohol is actually deleterious, that it produces specific and very
   terrible diseases, that it lowers the tone of the whole system and
   makes us liable to all kinds of secondary troubles. We may urge that
   alcohol is a medicine, and a useful medicine; but it is not as a
   medicine we use it. If a doctor prescribes castor-oil, or quinine, we
   throw aside the medicine on the first opportunity, often before it has
   done its work. Alcohol is the only medicine which we continue to take
   for a lifetime because the doctor prescribed it for a month. Would it
   not be better then to clear our minds of cant, and to set the whole
   matter on its right basis? Intoxicants are drunk as a form, as the most
   universal form, of self-indulgence. In some mysterious way, for some
   mysterious reasons which we cannot fathom, they gratify an instinctive
   appetite, they are naturally and generally attractive, they exercise a
   spell over the physical system. If the taste is, as some people say,
   acquired, it was acquired by mankind in prehistoric times, and is part
   of our inherited constitution as men. For instance, Mr. Gaule, a
   police-court missionary in Birmingham, relates a recent experience, one
   out of many in his fourteen years of labour. A young married woman,
   twenty-eight years of age, died a shocking death from drinking. Up to
   the age of twenty-six she had been a teetotaller, and did not know what
   the taste of drink was. She was a leading member of the Gospel
   Temperance Mission, and sang the solos at the meetings. Then she was
   taken ill, the doctor ordered brandy, and it proved like the first
   taste of blood to a tame tiger. She could never again be kept from it,
   and at last it killed her. The craving there must have been in the very
   blood.

   We have a taste for these intoxicants, latent or realized. The
   stimulating influence is pleasant, the narcotic influence is pleasant.
   The immediate effect on the body is pleasant, the immediate effect on
   the mind is pleasant. Drink produces a sense of great
   self-satisfaction, promotes a flow of conversation and a feeling of
   good fellowship; it quickens at first several of our mental faculties;
   it excites the imagination, and carries its devotee far away from the
   actual, which is painful and harassing, into a kind of ideal world,
   which is cheerful and agreeable. So powerful is its temporary influence
   that in the "words of King Lemuel" there is positively a recommendation
   to "give strong drink unto him that is ready to perish, and wine unto
   the bitter in soul; let him drink and forget his poverty, and remember
   his misery no more." [548] An injunction which must not of course be
   mistaken for a Divine precept, but only for a reminder of the fact--a
   fact which may be observed without any moral judgment being passed upon
   it--that while men who require all their mental and moral faculties to
   be in full activity [549] must eschew the use of intoxicating drinks,
   the dying, the despairing, the very poor and miserable, may find a
   certain relief in drinking. Men who are in the enjoyment of health, and
   wish to discharge effectively the day's duties, have no excuse for the
   employment of an agent which only serves to lull the mind into
   forgetfulness and to reduce the pain of consciousness to the lowest
   possible point.

   Strange to say, while men are thus naturally inclined to use
   intoxicants, nature has been most lavish in pandering to their tastes.
   There are trees in tropical climates which have but to be gashed, and
   an intoxicating juice flows out ready at once for use. Almost every
   natural juice ferments if it is left alone. The palm-tree, the
   potato-plant, the sugar-cane, beet-root, the cereals, as well as the
   grape, yield readily these intoxicating drinks, at a surprisingly low
   cost. Very little human labour is needed, very simple apparatus will
   suffice, so that a very few enterprising firms can deluge a whole
   continent with fiery intoxicants.

   We drink because we like it,--not for our good, as we pretend, but for
   our pleasure, as we are half ashamed to confess. The taste is natural
   to us,--natural to savages, natural to civilised men, natural, so far
   as we know, to men of all climates and all races. And nature has made
   it singularly easy to gratify the taste.

   Now one might almost suppose that the conclusion to be drawn would be,
   "Let us drink, let us take this element as a good gift of God." And
   that was the feeling of more primitive times. In the Vedas, for
   instance, Indra is praised as reeling with the intoxicating Soma which
   his worshippers have offered to him; drunkenness is regarded as a kind
   of inspiration. But no; as wisdom asserts herself, and demands a
   hearing, she more and more decisively classes this taste for
   intoxicants with certain other tastes which are natural to us, but none
   the less dangerous; and she treats the bountiful provision which nature
   has made for the gratification of the taste as one of those innumerable
   temptations with which men in this present life are surrounded,--in
   conflict with which they prove their manhood,--by victory over which
   they acquire strength of moral principle and consistency in virtue.

   As the reason within gathers power and authority, and as her clear
   light is replenished by the revelation of Divine Wisdom, all the
   spurious attractions of drinking are weakened, the glamour is
   destroyed, and the truth is recognised that "wine is a mocker, strong
   drink a brawler, and whosoever erreth thereby is not wise;" [550] more
   and more it appears that the power of wine is the power of the animal
   within us, and that the widespread influence of it is a sign that the
   animal within us dies slowly; we learn to measure the growth of reason
   by the degree of mastery which has been obtained over the low appetite;
   and we understand that striking antithesis of the New Testament
   religion, "Be not drunk with wine, wherein is excess, but be filled
   with the Spirit."

   The way then in which we are brought to look at the drink question is
   this: here is a powerful natural temptation, a seduction which nature
   herself offers to the body, a foe which always has a traitor in
   collusion with it inside the assaulted citadel. This enemy is ingenious
   in its argumentation: it approaches usually under the guise of a
   friend; it says--and not without truth--that it comes to give pleasure
   to poor harassed and toilworn mortals; it persuades them that it is a
   wholesome food, and when that contention is shattered it would have
   them believe that it is a medicine. When it has gained an entrance into
   the fortress, by fair means or foul, it at first proceeds very doucely,
   and seems to justify its presence by numberless obvious benefits.
   Sometimes it will successfully hide all the evil it is working, as if
   its purpose were to beguile new victims and to acquire a more unbounded
   sway over the old.

   As religious men, as spiritual beings, whom God claims to become His
   children, we are called upon to face this subtle, powerful, and
   all-persuasive foe. We are to do our best to understand its ways--we
   look to science to help us and to teach us. We are then to take every
   weapon within our reach to resist its approach,--argument, persuasion,
   entreaty; we are to lose no opportunity of unveiling the tactics of the
   foe, and rousing those who are imperilled to a sense of their danger;
   then as Christian citizens we are bound to use all the influence we
   possess to hold this terrible natural temptation within the straitest
   limits, and to fortify all the powers of resistance in our fellow-men
   to the highest possible degree.

   In such a crusade against the enemy of our race, few things are more
   effectual than a vivid and accurate delineation of the effects which
   drink produces--such a delineation, for instance, as that which is
   given in chap. xxiii. 29-35. Let us proceed to examine this remarkable
   passage.

   "Whose is Oh? whose is woe?" asks the Teacher. Who is it whose constant
   and appropriate language is that of lamentation--the piteous cry of
   pain, the agonised exclamation of remorse? "Whose are contentions?" Who
   is it that lives in an atmosphere of perpetual strife and loud
   quarrellings? "Whose is groaning?"--that sustained sigh of desponding
   and irremediable misery. "Whose are causeless wounds?"--not only the
   bruise and the gash which result from furious sparrings or unforeseen
   falls, but also wounds of the spirit, self-loathing, and shame, the
   thought of what might have been, the realization of a ruined home, and
   of suffering wife and little ones, and the conviction that the evil can
   now never be undone. "Whose is the darkling of the eyes?" [551] Who is
   it whose eyes have that horrible inflamed, lack-lustre look, which is
   the exact opposite of the light and clearness and sparkle proper to the
   human eye?

   The answer to these questions is given in a sentence, "Theirs who tarry
   over the wine, theirs who go to try the mixture." It is not of course
   suggested that all who drink wine, nor even all who take it habitually,
   fall into the horrible condition which has just been described; this
   condition is the result of lingering over the drink, spending hours in
   tippling, devoting time and thought to tasting various brands and
   samples, becoming a connoisseur of strong beverages, allowing the
   subject to occupy an appreciable proportion of one's time. It is not
   the use, but the abuse, of the thing which in this passage is
   reprobated. But now we are reminded of the great difficulty which
   occurs in distinguishing between the use and the abuse. There is no
   sharply-defined limit. There is no mechanical monitor which at once
   reminds us, "Here use ceases and abuse begins." Almost the only rule
   that can be given is, that whenever the cup seems in the least degree
   attractive, then danger is near and it is necessary to abstain. "Look
   not on wine when it reddens, when it gives its gleam in the cup; it
   goes down so smoothly!" It is the peculiarity of this substance that it
   can only be taken safely when it has comparatively no attractions, when
   it is taken under orders, and as it were against the grain. If it is
   really pleasant to us, we can never tell where the pleasantness melts
   into a dangerous fascination, where the colour and the sparkle and the
   agreeable tingle which make it pass so easily down the throat have
   become the lure and the spell of a poisonous reptile. For this pleasant
   indulgence, which seems to be perfectly innocent, what is the issue of
   it? "Its end--like a serpent it bites, and like a basilisk it stings."
   One evil result of it is that it rouses into perilous activity the
   dormant passions; even pure men and women under this potent influence
   become impure. The eyes which are excited with wine will turn readily
   to loose and degraded women. [552] The fall which might have been
   easily avoided in a state of sobriety will be inevitable when the
   reason is silenced, the will enfeebled, and the desire inflamed by this
   seductive poison.

   Another evil effect is that the sense of truth entirely disappears.
   What a misleading maxim is that of the Romans, In vino veritas! While
   it is a fact that the intoxicated man will blab many things which were
   best kept concealed, there is nothing which deteriorates truthfulness
   so rapidly as the use of alcohol. The drinker becomes crafty and
   deceitful and untrustworthy. The miserable brain is haunted with
   chimras, the imperious appetite suggests all kinds of subterfuges and
   evasions, the very "heart speaks frauds." Yes, nothing could be more
   accurate than this: the effect of drink is not so much to make the lips
   lie, as to make the inner man essentially insincere and deceptive. No
   man admits that he is a drunkard, even to his own heart; long after all
   his friends know it, and are beginning to despair of him, even when he
   has had several attacks of delirium tremens and is a confirmed
   dipsomaniac, the most he will allow is that he has sometimes taken a
   little more than is good for him, but so very little seems to upset
   him. Ah, "thine heart shall utter froward things," i.e., frauds. Every
   one who has had any dealings with the miserable victims of drink will
   sorrowfully confirm this statement.

   The insecurity of the habit is incredible. It leads to the destruction
   of every faculty which God has mercifully given us to protect us from
   danger and guide us through life. The ready perception of things is
   marred, the quick rallying of the attention is delayed, the exercise of
   the understanding is prevented, the will is paralysed, the conscience
   dies. "Thou shalt be as he who lieth down in the heart of the sea,"--as
   one in a calenture who strides into the merciless waves under the
   impression that he is walking on flowery meadows. Thou shalt be "as he
   that goeth to bed on the mast's head,"--where the position is
   precarious even if the sea be perfectly calm, but becomes sure
   destruction if the winds awake and the ship begins to climb large
   billows and to plunge down into their unquiet troughs.

   And then, worst of all, when there is a temporary recovery from this
   abominable state of drunkenness, and the feeble wails of repentance
   begin to be heard, what can be more disconnected--more futile--more
   abject--more irrational than his words? "They have smitten me," he
   says; "I have not been sick,"--as if forsooth he were the victim of
   some violence offered to him by others, instead of being the author of
   his own stripes; as if he were quite right and well, and the disease
   were not deep in his own passion-haunted heart. "They have stricken
   me," he continues to whine, "I have not known it." Footpads have
   attacked him, he would have us believe, and that is the explanation of
   his begrimed and blood-smeared face, his torn clothes, and his empty
   pockets. "When shall I awake?" he mutters, as the swimming sensation in
   the head, and the unsteady stagger in his step, remind him that he is
   not quite himself. And then--is it possible? Yes, his next remark is,
   "I will seek it again." I will go and get another drink. His miserable
   mind, the victim and the mint of lies, having persuaded him that all
   the mischief came from some cause other than himself, and had nothing
   to do with the one degrading habit which really produced it, he
   proposes at once to seek the very agent which is his undoing, to heal
   his intoxication by getting drunk again. [553]

   This vivid and forcible picture of the miserable sufferings, the
   contemptible vices, and the helpless bondage which result from
   intoxicating drinks, is all the more impressive because there is no
   attempt made to enforce total abstinence as a principle. If however it
   is duly considered and understood, it is very likely to produce total
   abstinence as a practice, just as the object lesson of the drunken
   helot led every Spartan youth to turn with unspeakable loathing from
   the embruting vice. Modest minds, observing how the mighty are fallen,
   how this one cause has ruined the strongest, the best, and the most
   attractive of their fellow-creatures, insidiously leading them on,
   mocking them, and luring them into dangerous and poisonous marshes,
   will be inclined to say, as Daniel said, "I will abstain; I may be safe
   or I may not; if I am safe all I gain is a certain amount of animal
   pleasure; if I am not, what I lose is health, honour, wealth, even life
   itself,--not the body only, but the soul too." The gain from the use of
   these things is very measurable and insignificant; the loss from their
   abuse is immeasurable, and the passage from use to abuse escapes at
   once our observation and control.

   But, after all, wisdom urges temperance in drinking only as a part of a
   much larger principle. If temperance in drinking stands alone and
   unconnected with this larger principle, it is a blessing of a very
   doubtful kind, so doubtful indeed that the pharisaism, the intolerance,
   the dogmatism, which are able to subsist with "Temperance" in the
   limited sense, have often been the most serious hindrance to temperance
   in its larger and nobler meaning.

   It is the desire of pleasure which is at the root of the mischief: "He
   that loveth pleasure shall be a poor man." Men are "lovers of pleasure
   rather than lovers of God." [554] The appetites which are natural to us
   hold undisputed sway, they are fleshly; the great spiritual appetites,
   which are supernatural, are quite feeble and inoperative. Men ask for
   that which is pleasant, and even when they become religious it is only
   to obtain pleasure, a greater and a more lasting pleasure; thus there
   is an intemperance, which we call fanaticism, even in religious beliefs
   and in religious practices. But what men need is that the desire of
   God, for His own sake, should be so inflamed in them as to burn up all
   other desires. And this desire can only be created by His Holy Spirit.
   The competing and manifold desires of pleasure can only be mastered and
   expelled when that great, absorbing, and embracing desire of God has
   been securely settled in the human heart by the Holy Spirit. True
   temperance is really one of the ninefold fruits of the Spirit, and is
   of little value, a mere spurious product, unless it is accompanied by
   love, joy, peace, longsuffering, kindness, goodness, faithfulness, and
   meekness. Such passages as we have been considering in the book of
   Proverbs may give us a wholesome horror and hatred of drunkenness, and
   may even lead us to a prudential temperance--they may even make us as
   sober as pious Mohammedans or Buddhists; but if we are to become really
   temperate a higher power must intervene, we must be "born of the
   Spirit." Is it not remarkable how nothing short of the highest
   remedy--the new birth--is effectual for curing even the slightest of
   human infirmities and sins?
     __________________________________________________________________

   [547] Prov. xxi. 17.

   [548] Prov. xxxi. 6, 7.

   [549] Prov. xxxi. 4, 5.

   [550] Prov. xx. 1.

   [551] The difficulty of the word chkllvt, which means "dimming," is
   that in the only other place where it occurs (Gen. xlix. 12: "His eyes
   shall be red with wine, and his teeth white with milk") the redness is
   evidently regarded as an advantageous attribute. But perhaps the
   explanation is to be sought in the fact that the immediate effect of
   wine upon the eye is to darken it in one sense, and the ultimate effect
   is to darken it in another. In the first moment of excitement the pupil
   of the drinker's eye dilates and flashes with a darkling fire; but it
   is not long before the eye becomes heavy, dim, watery, and maudlin. It
   is in this last sense that we must understand the word here.

   [552] Prov. xxiii. 33. zrvt must, as in xxii. 14, be rendered "strange
   women" (Bertheau). The alternative rendering, "the strange, or the
   rare" (Nowack) is logically inadmissible, because the verse is
   obviously describing the moral effects of drink, and no one can say
   that to see strange or rare visions is a moral effect to be specially
   deprecated.

   [553] "The primary discomforts of an act of drunkenness," says Dr. G.
   W. Balfour, "are readily removed for the time by a repetition of the
   cause. Thus what has been an act may readily become a habit, all the
   more readily that each repetition more and more enfeebles both the will
   and the judgment."--Art. "Drunkenness" in Encycl. Brit.

   [554] 2 Tim. iii. 4--philedonoi mallon e philotheoi, pleasure-loving
   rather than God-loving; which means, not that men place pleasure before
   them consciously as a substitute for God, but only that the instinctive
   desire of pleasure has not been mastered by the love of God.
     __________________________________________________________________

XXII.

  THE TREATMENT OF THE POOR.

     "The rich and the needy meet together; the Lord is the maker of them
     all."--Prov. xxii. 2.

     "He that hath a bountiful eye shall be blessed, for he giveth of his
     bread to the poor."--Prov. xxii. 9.

     "He that oppresseth the poor, it is for his increase; he that giveth
     to the rich, it is for want."--Prov. xxii. 16.

     "Rob not the poor because he is poor, neither oppress the humble in
     the gate, for the Lord will plead their cause and despoil of life
     those that despoil them."--Prov. xxii. 22, 23.

   If we would understand and lay to heart the very striking lessons of
   this book on the treatment of the poor, it will be well for us to
   observe that there are four words in the Hebrew original which are
   rendered by our English words "poor" or "needy." These words we will
   try to discriminate and to use with more exactness in the present
   lecture, that we may not miss any of the teaching by the blur and
   obscurity of careless language. First, there is a word (dl) for which
   we will reserve our English word "poor"; it signifies a person who is
   weak and uninfluential, but not necessarily destitute or even in want.
   The "poor" are those who form the vast majority of every society, and
   are sometimes described by the word "masses." Secondly, there is a word
   (rs) which may be rendered "needy." It covers those who are in actual
   want, people who through bereavement, or infirmity, or unavoidable
   calamity are unable to secure a sufficiency of the necessaries of life.
   Thirdly, there is a word (ny) which we may perhaps render by "humble,"
   for though it more literally describes the afflicted and sad, it
   contains within it a hint of moral commendation which suggests a
   transition from the idea of simple weakness and helplessness to that of
   patient and humble dependence on God. Lastly, there is a word ('kyvn)
   which we will render "destitute." If we keep these notions--"poor,"
   "needy," "humble," "destitute"--distinct, and yet combined, to form one
   conception, we shall find that the proverbs before us refer to that
   large section of mankind who are in a worldly and material sense
   considered the least fortunate; those to whom it is a lifelong effort
   merely to live; those who have no margin of security on which to fall
   back in case of disaster or sickness; those who are engaged in
   precarious employments or in casual labour; those who may keep their
   heads above water by diligence and unremitting exertions, but may at
   any time go under; those who owing to this constant pressure of the
   elementary needs have but little leisure to cultivate their faculties,
   and little opportunity to maintain their rights. We are to think of the
   large class of persons who in more primitive times are slaves, who in
   feudal times are serfs, who in modern times are called the
   proletariate; those in whose interest the laws of society have not
   hitherto been framed, because they have not until quite recently been
   admitted to any substantial share in the work of legislation; those who
   have always found it peculiarly difficult to secure justice, because
   justice is a costly commodity, and they have no means to spare, since
   "the destruction of the poor is precisely their poverty." [555] We are
   not to think of the idle and the vicious, who are so often classed with
   the poor, because they, like the poor, are without means,--we must
   rigorously exclude these, for they are not in the mind of the writer
   when he gives us these golden precepts. We must remember that it is
   part of our peculiar English system, the result of our boasted Poor
   Law, to discredit the very word poverty, by refusing to discriminate
   between the poor in the scriptural sense, who are honourable and even
   noble, and the pauper in the modern sense, who is almost always the
   scum of a corrupt social order, in four cases out of five a drunkard,
   and in the fifth case the product of some one else's moral failings. It
   requires quite an effort for us to see and realize what the Scriptures
   mean by the poor. We have to slip away from all the wretched
   associations of the Poor House, the Poor Law, and the Guardians. We
   have to bring before our minds a class which in a wholesome state of
   society would be a small, numerable minority, but in our own
   unwholesome state of society are a large and well-nigh innumerable
   majority,--not only the destitute and the actually needy, but all the
   people who have no land on which to live, no house which they can call
   their own, no reserve fund, no possibility of a reserve fund, against
   the unavoidable calamities and chances of life, the people who are
   trodden down--who tread each other down--in the race of competition;
   all those, too, who, according to the godless dogma of the day, must go
   to the wall because they are weak, and must give up the idea of
   surviving because only the fittest must expect to survive. There rise
   up before our imagination the toiling millions of Europe--of
   England--worn, pale, despondent, apathetic, and resigned; or bitter,
   desperate, and resentful; not destitute, though they include the
   destitute; not needy, though they include the needy; but poor, without
   strength except in combination, and often when combined without light
   or leading.

   I. Now the first thing we have to observe is that the poor, in the
   sense we have tried to define, are a special concern to the Lord. "Rob
   not the poor," says the text, "because he is poor, neither oppress the
   humble in the gate, for the Lord will plead their cause, and despoil of
   life those that despoil them." "Remove not the ancient landmark, and
   enter not into the fields of the fatherless; for their Redeemer is
   strong, He shall plead their cause against thee." [556] "The Lord will
   establish the border of the widow." [557] So intimate is the connection
   between the Lord and His poor creatures that "he that oppresseth the
   poor reproacheth his Maker, but he that hath mercy on the destitute
   honoureth Him." [558] "Whoso mocketh the needy reproacheth his Maker,
   and he that is glad at calamity shall not be unpunished." [559] On the
   other hand, "He that hath pity on the poor lendeth unto the Lord, and
   his good deed will He pay him again." [560]

   Not, of course, that there is any favouritism with God, not that He has
   an interest in a man because of his means or lack of means; but just
   because of His large and comprehensive impartiality. "The needy man and
   the oppressor meet together; the Lord lighteneth the eyes of them
   both." [561] "The rich and the needy meet together, the Lord is the
   Maker of them all." [562] His special interest in the poor arises only
   from their special need, from the mute cry which goes up to Him, from
   the appeal to Him as their only friend, deliverer, and protector: just
   as His lesser interest in the rich arises from their self-satisfied
   independence of Him, from their infatuated trust in themselves, and
   from their conviction that already all things belong to them. We should
   make a mistake if we supposed that the Lord recognises any class
   distinctions, or that He valued a man because he is poor, just as we
   value a man because he is rich. The truth rather is that He absolutely
   ignores the class distinctions, regarding the mingled mass of human
   beings, rich and poor, oppressor and oppressed, as on a plane of dead
   equality, and then distinguishing between them on a totally different
   principle,--on a moral, a spiritual principle; and, if there is any
   preference, it is on the ground of certain valuable moral effects which
   poverty sometimes produces that He takes the poor into His peculiar and
   tender care, honouring them with so close a friendship that service to
   them becomes service to Him.

   This is certainly good news to the masses. "You are undistinguished,
   and unobserved,"--the voice of wisdom seems to say,--"In this world,
   with its false distinctions and perverted ideals, you feel at a
   constant disadvantage. You dare hardly claim the rights of your manhood
   and your womanhood. This great personage, possessing half a city,
   drawing as much unearned money every day as you can earn by unremitting
   toil in fifteen or twenty years, seems to overshadow and to dwarf you.
   And there are these multitudes of easy, comfortable, resplendent
   persons who live in large mansions and dress in costly garments, while
   you and your family live in a couple of precarious rooms at a weekly
   rental, and find it all you can do to get clean and decent clothes for
   your backs. These moneyed people are held in much estimation; you, so
   far as you know, are held in none. Their doings--births, marriages,
   deaths--create quite a stir in the world; you slip into the world,
   through it, and out of it, without attracting any attention. But be
   assured things wear a different appearance from the standpoint of God.
   Realize how you and your fellow-men appear to Him, and you at once
   recover self-respect, and hold up your head in His presence as a man.
   That simple truth which the Ayrshire peasant sang [563] you may take as
   God's truth, as His revelation; it is the way in which He habitually
   thinks of you."

   How the scales seem to fall away from one's eyes directly we are
   enabled to see men and things as God sees them! The sacred worth of
   humanity shines far brighter than any of its tinsel trappings. We learn
   to estimate ourselves aright, undisturbed and unabashed by the false
   estimates which are current in the world. Our true distinction is that
   we are men, that we belong to a race which was made in the image of
   God, was dear to His heart, and is redeemed by His love. The equality
   we claim for men is not a levelling down--it is quite the reverse; it
   is raising them up to the higher level which they have deserted and
   forgotten; it is teaching them to live as men, distinguished not by
   their accidental circumstances or possessions, but by their manhood
   itself. It is giving men self-respect instead of self-esteem, teaching
   them not to vaunt themselves as one against another, but to claim their
   high and honourable title, one and all, as the sons of God.

   II. But now it follows that, if the Lord Himself espouses the cause of
   the poor, and even identifies Himself with them, ill-treatment of them,
   injustice to them, or even a wilful neglect of them and disregard of
   their interests, must be a sin, and a very terrible sin. "He that
   despiseth his neighbour sinneth; but he that hath pity on the humble,
   happy is he." [564]

   In the East to this day the proverb, "He that withholdeth corn, the
   people shall curse him; but blessing shall be upon the head of him that
   selleth it," [565] has its full significance. But even in the West,
   where the name of Christ is borne by the nations, it is a common thing
   for one or two greedy and selfish capitalists to form a "corner"--as
   the commercial slang of the day denominates it--in some article of
   industry, i.e., to secure all the raw material in the market, and to
   hold it until a famine price can be demanded. Meanwhile, the mills are
   idle, the looms are silent, the workpeople are unemployed, and their
   families suffer. Our moral sense is not yet sufficiently cultivated to
   condemn this hideous selfishness as severely as it deserves, and to
   regard the perpetrators of it as enemies of the human race. "The people
   curse" them, that is all. But as we have seen that the cause of the
   wage-earners is the cause of the Lord, we may rest quite confident that
   He to whom vengeance belongs enters every action of the kind in His
   unerasable accounts, and reserves the inevitable punishment for these
   "oppressors of the poor."

   There is another evil of modern industrial life which is alluded to in
   the Proverbs before us. No oppression of the poor is more terrible than
   that which is exercised by those who themselves are needy. The system
   which results from necessity of this kind is termed "sweating." The
   hungry contractor undertakes the job at the lowest possible price, and
   secures his profit by getting hungrier and weaker creatures than
   himself to do the work at a price lower than possible, literally at
   starvation wages. What force, then, to modern ears is there in the
   saying, "A needy man that oppresseth the poor is like a sweeping rain
   which leaveth no food"! [566]

   The Divine oversight of these industrial abuses is not, as we sometimes
   suppose, pretermitted. Wisdom and Justice and Love hold the reins, and
   though the rapacity and cupidity of men seem to have a wide range, they
   are inevitably pulled up in the end, if not in this partial and
   transient life, yet in that long Eternity through which the Eternal
   will work out His purposes. As He Himself sides with the poor and
   pities them, and turns with indignation against their oppressors, it
   follows necessarily that "he that augments his substance by usury and
   increase gathereth it for him that pities the poor." [567] In fact, the
   merciful and pitiful nature has all the forces that rule the universe
   on its side, notwithstanding appearances to the contrary: "The merciful
   man doeth good to his own soul, but he that is cruel troubleth his own
   flesh." [568]

   It is the strange paradox of all selfishness that the selfish man is
   really quite blind to his own true interests. He most conscientiously
   lives for himself, and seeks his own good, but the good he sought
   proves to be his evil, and of all his innumerable foes he finds at last
   that he himself is the worst. The selfish man is always coming to want,
   while the unselfish man whose whole thought has been for others is
   richly provided for. "He that giveth unto the needy shall not lack, but
   he that hideth his eyes shall have many a curse." [569] "There is that
   scattereth and increaseth yet more, and there is that withholdeth more
   than is meet, but it tendeth only to want." [570]

   "He that hideth his eyes shall have many a curse!" Yes, nothing is more
   striking than this truth, that not only positive oppression of the
   poor, but mere indifference to their state, mere neglect of their
   sufferings, involves us in sin. There are many who can honestly say
   that they have not deliberately wronged their fellow-men, and will on
   that ground plead innocent; but that is not enough. We are as members
   one of another responsible in a degree for all the injustice and
   cruelty which are practised in the society to which we belong. If we
   are drawing an income from invested money, we are responsible for the
   cruel exactions of excessive work, for the heartless disregard of life
   and limb, and for the constant under-payment of the workers which makes
   the dividends so princely. [571] Nay, when we buy and use the cheap
   goods, which are cheap because they have been made at the cost of
   health and happiness and life to our brothers and our sisters, their
   blood is upon our heads, though we choose to forget it. For
   listen--"Whoso stoppeth ears at the cry of the poor," whoso tries to
   ignore that there is a labour question, and that the cry for increased
   or even regular wages, and for tolerable homes, and wholesome
   conditions of work, is a reality, and in form of unions, or strikes, or
   low wails of despair, is addressed to us all--"he shall cry and shall
   not be heard." [572] Such is the inexorable law of God. And again:
   "Deliver those that are carried away unto death,"--those who are
   sacrificing the sweetness of life, the sap of the bones, the health of
   the marrow, to the ruthless exigencies of the industrial machine; "and
   those tottering to slaughter see thou hold back,"--not leaving them to
   "dree their own sad weird," helpless and unregarded. "If thou say,
   Behold we knew not this man,"--how could we make ourselves acquainted
   with all the toiling masses of the city by whose labour we lived and
   were maintained in comfort?--"Doth not He that weigheth the hearts
   consider it; and He that keepeth thy soul, doth not He know it, and
   shall not He render to every man according to his work?" [573] That is
   to say, if we plead, "When saw we Thee ahungred, or athirst, or sick
   and in prison, and came not to Thee?" our Lord will say, "Inasmuch as
   ye did it not to one of the least of these, ye did it not to Me." And
   we "shall go away" into everlasting punishment, while the righteous go
   into life eternal.

   III. For it follows, from the whole consideration of this subject, that
   those who make their life a ministry to the poor obtain a
   blessing,--yes, the only true and permanent blessing that life is
   capable of yielding. "He that hath a bountiful eye shall be blessed;
   for he giveth of his bread to the poor." [574] The very form of the
   saying is significant. Does it not imply: "It is obvious that to give
   our bread to the poor is a blessing to ourselves, so obvious that it
   needs only to be stated to be admitted, and therefore, as the bountiful
   eye, the philanthropic observation, the readiness to see suffering and
   to search out the sufferers, necessarily leads to this generous
   distribution, it must be a blessing to its possessor." Indeed, this is
   a true test of righteousness, as the Lord teaches in the parable just
   quoted. It is "the righteous that takes knowledge of the cause of the
   poor, while the wicked understands not to know it." [575] A religion
   which takes no knowledge of the masses is a false religion; a Church
   and a Ministry which "understand not to know" the condition of the
   people and the needs of the poor are not Christ's Church and Christ's
   Ministry, but flagrantly apostate; and nothing is plainer than
   this--that from such a Church and Ministry He will accept no orthodoxy
   of belief or valiant defence of the creed in lieu of obedience to all
   His plain and unmistakable commandments.

   If we look at governments, the test is practically the same. "The king
   that faithfully judgeth the poor, his throne shall be established for
   ever." [576] And it is because the Messianic King, alone of all
   sovereigns and governments, rightly and fully understands and maintains
   the cause of the poor, that He alone of sovereigns shall be established
   for ever, and of the increase of His government there shall be no end.
   And for the flagrant neglect of this vital question on the part of all
   governing persons and assemblies, that King will call to account those
   pompous and wordy magnates who have borne the sword in vain,
   considering all interests rather than those of the poor, whom they were
   specially appointed to judge; and of the needy, to whose succour they
   were peculiarly bound to run.

   And what holds in the state holds in the family. The virtuous woman,
   and head of the household--she whom God can approve and welcome into
   everlasting habitations--is emphatically not she who is always striving
   for social aggrandisement, always seeking for her children wealthy
   settlements and spurious honours; but is one who "spreadeth out her
   hand to the poor, yea, she reacheth forth her hands to the needy."
   [577]

   Well may we try to take God's view of this question, to understand what
   He means by the poor, and how He regards them, and how He expects us to
   treat them. For this, if it is not the secret and the centre of all
   true religious life, is at least the infallible test of whether our
   religious life is true or not. By our treatment of His poor, the Son of
   Man, who is to judge the world, declares that we shall be judged. "By
   that we shall be condemned or by that we shall be acquitted."
     __________________________________________________________________

   [555] Prov. x. 15.

   [556] Prov. xxiii. 10, 11.

   [557] Prov. xv. 25.

   [558] Prov. xiv. 31.

   [559] Prov. xvii. 5.

   [560] Prov. xix. 17.

   [561] Prov. xix. 13.

   [562] Prov. xxii. 2.

   [563]

   "What though on hamely fare we dine,

   Wear hoddin-grey, and a' that;

   Gie fools their silks and knaves their wine,

   A man's a man for a' that.

   For a' that and a' that,

   Their tinsel show and a' that,

   The honest man, tho' e'er sae poor,

   Is king o' men for a' that."

   [564] Prov. xiv. 21.

   [565] Prov. xi. 26. The following description of Persia, in the
   Missionary Review of the World, October, 1889, p. 782, aptly
   illustrates the practices against which the text inveighs:--"The sole
   end for which the Persian Government exists is the collection of the
   revenue, the fleecing of the people. Large portions of the land,
   confiscated from time to time, belong to the Sovereign, and are farmed
   out on terms well-nigh ruinous to the tenant. Even where property
   belongs to the subject, it is taxed to the last degree as a
   starting-point, while the successions of sub-rulers and collectors make
   still further drains upon the moiety that must save the labourer's
   family from absolute want. The whole burden of taxation thus comes
   really upon the labouring class. Added to this extortion is the
   constant uncertainty as to whether the planter will be permitted to
   reap his crop at all. Downright robbery of fields or households by the
   retainers of petty chiefs is of frequent occurrence, and the poor are
   liable any day to be deprived of their very last resource. Agriculture
   and other industries so discouraged and paralysed barely sustain the
   lives of the people at the best, and when drought is added thousands
   must perish." In times of scarcity, "The king sets the example--locks
   up his granaries, and withholds every kernel of wheat except at famine
   prices. Every nabob and landowner who has a stock on hand follows this
   example. Rapacity and cupidity rule; money is coined out of the
   sufferings of the poor."

   [566] Prov. xxviii. 3. Oddly enough the commentators, who seem never to
   have heard of "sweating," propose to read for rs, either syr = rich, or
   rs = r's = head, for the head of the State; an example of conjectural
   emendation which may well make us cautious of the mere scholar's method
   of treating the sacred text. "The cruellest landlords, receiving 10,
   20, and 30 per cent. from detestable habitations (in London), are
   nearly connected by birth and circumstance to those they oppress"
   (Lecture delivered at Essex Hall, November 18th, 1889, by Thomas Locke
   Worthington).

   [567] Prov. xxviii. 8. The difficult verse Proverbs xxii. 16 should
   find a place here, "He that oppresses the poor to increase for him, he
   that gives to the rich only for need," but it is impossible to
   accurately determine its meaning. If the rendering of the English Bible
   is correct, we may interpret the proverb as a statement of the folly of
   oppression which leads to want as inevitably as the more obvious folly
   of giving to the rich. But possibly Nowack is right in an
   interpretation which gives quite another turn to the saying, and makes
   it not a condemnation of the oppressor, but a suggestion of the
   advantage which may be gained from the oppression by the oppressed. "He
   who oppresses the poor--it turns to his (viz., the poor man's) gain,"
   because it calls out all his energy and endurance, "while he who gives
   to the rich--it turns only to want," because it still further enervates
   and unfits him for the duties of life. This is not very satisfactory,
   and is decidedly far-fetched; but it is better than Delitzsch's
   suggestion, which strips the proverb of all moral significance, viz.,
   "He that oppresses the poor, it is at any rate for his own gain; but he
   who gives to the rich, it is only to get want." The conclusion from
   this would be, that it is better to oppress the poor than to give to
   the rich, a sentiment quite out of harmony with the ethical teaching of
   the Proverbs. In a case like this we can only suppose that the saying
   has reached us in a mutilated form.

   [568] Prov. xi. 17.

   [569] Prov. xxviii. 27.

   [570] Prov. xi. 24.

   [571] Can the shareholders of the G. W. R., for instance, hold
   themselves free from responsibility in the case referred to in the
   following paragraph from the Journal of the People's Palace? "The
   Saturday Review, always trustworthy and read-worthy on subjects of law,
   calls attention to a case which concerns a great many. It is a case in
   which the decision is most unfortunate to the interests of all working
   men. One Membery was employed at Paddington to shunt trunks: he was
   taken on by a contractor, but his real employers were the G.W.R. The
   trucks were drawn by a horse, and the horse ought to have had a boy to
   hitch on or off at a moment's notice: but the contractor refused to
   supply boys. Membery in vain asked for one, pointing out the great
   dangers to which he was exposed. He complained on the very day of the
   accident by which he was knocked down and injured seriously. He sued
   the Company; he won his case with damages; the Company, being a rich
   body, appealed. Now, considering the vexation, the anxiety, and the
   expense of carrying on such a case, a Company which appeals ought in
   justice to have the damages doubled if it loses. The Company lost. They
   appealed to the Lords, still on the principle of being rich and their
   opponent poor. This time the Company won. The Lords have ruled that the
   Company did not employ Membery, and that he was not obliged to work
   without a boy: he might have refused to work at all. Indeed! Then, if
   he refused to work, what about the children at home? A more mischievous
   doctrine was never upheld. Why, there are thousands and thousands of
   men and women who work daily under ineffectual protest,--who work at
   trades unwholesome, for wages inefficient, and for excessive hours; yet
   they work because they must--because they must. Membery worked without
   a boy, knowing that he would some day be run over and perhaps killed,
   because he must: he had no choice. When all the Trade Unions are merged
   into one immense Trade Union, it will not be the wages alone that will
   be determined, but the cases of such unfortunate men as Membery."

   [572] Prov. xxi. 13.

   [573] Prov. xxiv. 11, 12.

   [574] Prov. xxii. 9.

   [575] Prov. xxix. 7.

   [576] Prov. xxix. 14. Has William II. of Germany been considering this
   text? If so, it is full of promise for the prosperity of Germany and of
   Europe? (International Labour Conference, March 1890.)

   [577] Prov. xxxi. 30.
     __________________________________________________________________

XXIII.

  EDUCATION: THE PARENT'S THOUGHT OF THE CHILD.

     "Train up a child according to his way, and even when he is old he
     will not depart from it."--Prov. xxii. 6.

     "Withhold not correction from the child; if thou beat him with the
     rod he shall not die. Thou shalt beat him with the rod and shalt
     deliver his soul from Sheol."--Prov. xxiii. 13, 14.

   In Lecture IV. we examined two of the main principles which should be
   inculcated on children in a Christian home. In the present lecture we
   approach the question of education again. It is necessary for us to
   examine two features of parental training on which the book of Proverbs
   lays repeated stress. First, the need of method in bringing up the
   young; and second, the way of punishing their delinquencies.

   In the first we have an eternal principle, which applies and must apply
   as long as human nature endures, a principle which is even emphasized
   by the demands of our Christian faith. In the second we have a
   principle which is so modified and altered by the Christian spirit,
   that unless we make the largest allowance for the change, it may be, as
   it often has been, misleading and hurtful in a high degree. If we could
   trace out all the dark cruelties and injustice, the vindictiveness, the
   stupidity of parents, guardians, and teachers, who have sheltered
   themselves under the authority of the text, "Foolishness is bound up in
   the heart of a child, but the rod of correction shall drive it far from
   him," [578] we might read with a new application our Saviour's stern
   censure of accepting the letter of Scripture in place of coming to Him
   and learning of Him who is meek and lowly of heart. [579]

   But our first duty is to understand the wholesome and eternally valid
   teaching that is here given us about education. "Train up a child in
   the way he should go." We gain a good deal in vividness if we go back
   to the meaning of the word which is rendered "train." Derived from a
   noun which signifies the palate and the inner part of the mouth, its
   literal meaning is "to put into the mouth." The metaphor suggested is
   that of feeding an infant. Every parent recognises the necessity of
   giving to the helpless children suitable nourishment. At first the
   mother feeds the babe at the breast. After the weaning she still feeds
   it with food carefully chosen and prepared. As the child grows older
   she changes the food, but she does not relax her care; and the father
   admits the responsibility of procuring the necessary diet for his
   little one, a responsibility which does not cease until the child is
   fully grown, fully formed, and fully able to provide for himself. Here
   is the suitable analogy for mental, moral, and spiritual teaching. The
   parents must feed their child with morsels suitable to his age, with
   the "milk of the word" at first, afterwards with strong meat. It all
   requires infinite care and forethought and wisdom, for there is a
   certain way of development, a certain ideal which the child must
   realize, and if the training is to be on the lines of that development,
   according to that "way," if it is to achieve that ideal, the teaching
   must all be accurately adapted to the age or stage of development, and
   to the particular character and disposition of the child. If the
   preliminary work of the parents is wisely done, if the influence
   exercised by them while their child is still entirely in their hands is
   exactly what it ought to be, there is no fear for the rest of
   life--"when he is old he will not depart from it." A great master of
   modern literature, who wandered through many ways of thought far from
   the opinions and faith of his parents, when in his old age he sat down
   to write the reminiscences of his life, discovered that the original
   bent given to his mind by his peasant parents had remained unexhausted
   to the end. [580] Many beliefs currently held had faded and grown dim,
   much of the historical foundation of his religion had crumbled away,
   but there was a truth which he had learned from his mother's lips and
   had seen exemplified in his father's life, and it returned to him in
   its full force, and remained unsubmerged in the tides of doubt,
   unaffected by the breath of change, it even acquired a fresh hold upon
   him in the decline of his days:--The chief end of man is to glorify God
   and to enjoy Him for ever.

   It is a good illustration of the unrivalled power of the parents over a
   man's life. "The Lord hath given the father honour over the children,
   and hath confirmed the authority of the mother over the sons," says
   Ecclesiasticus. [581] It is a rare opportunity which is given to
   parents. No sphere of influence which they may acquire can be like it;
   it may be wider, but it can never be so intense or so decisive. A
   father who abdicates the throne on which God has set him, who foregoes
   the honour which God has given him, or turns it into dishonour, must
   one day answer for his base renunciation before the Eternal Father. A
   mother who uses the authority over her sons which God has given her,
   merely to gratify her own vanity and selfishness, and to retain a love
   which she has ceased to deserve; or one who wantonly throws away the
   authority because its exercise makes large demands upon the spirit, has
   much to answer for at the Divine judgment-seat. Parental powers are so
   absolute, parental possibilities are so great, parental joys are so
   rare and wonderful, that they must of necessity be balanced by
   corresponding disadvantages in case of failure. "He that begetteth a
   fool doeth it to his sorrow, and the father of a fool hath no joy."
   [582] "A foolish son is a grief to his father, and bitterness to her
   that bare him." [583] It must therefore constantly press upon all wise
   parents, how are they to act, what methods are they to adopt, in order
   to rightly discharge their duties, and to win that precious reward of
   "a wise son"? [584] "My son, if thy heart be wise, my heart shall be
   glad, even mine, yea, my reins shall rejoice when thy lips speak right
   things." "The father of the righteous shall greatly rejoice, and he
   that begetteth a wise child shall have joy of him." [585]

   The answer which is constantly suggested by the book of Proverbs, and
   especially by our text, is this:--A successful parent will be one who
   makes the training of the children a constant and religious study. It
   is the last subject in the world to be left to haphazard. From the
   first a clear aim must be kept in view. "Is my great object that this
   boy shall be a true, a noble, a God-fearing man, serving his day and
   generation in the way God shall appoint? Is this object purged of all
   meaner thought? Can I renounce the idea of worldly success for him, and
   be indifferent to wealth and reputation, to comfort and ease for him?"
   When this question is satisfactorily settled, then comes a second, How
   is the aim to be realized? Is not the parent at once driven to God with
   the cry, "Who is sufficient for these things?" A mistake may be so
   fatal, and it is so hard to clearly see, to rightly judge, to firmly
   act, that nothing can avail but the direct teaching, inspiration, and
   power of the Spirit of God. Happy are the father and the mother who
   have been forced in their helplessness to seek that Divine help from
   the very first!

   If we only knew it, all education is useless apart from the Spirit of
   God. "Where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty." And liberty
   is just what is most needed. Mechanical schemes, cut-and-dried
   precepts, are quite insufficient. Moving in the liberty of the Spirit
   you have insight and adaptiveness; at once you perceive that each child
   is a separate study, and must be approached in a different way. One is
   sanguine and over-confident, and he must constantly be humbled; another
   is diffident and desponding, and must be encouraged with the bright
   word of sympathy, spoken at the right moment. "I see it all, my child;
   I know what a fight it is in which you are engaged." [586] One is a
   born sceptic, and would know the reason why; he must be met with
   patient and comprehending arguments according to his mental powers.
   Another has no speculative instincts, and questions have to be raised,
   doubts suggested, in order to save him from drifting into the
   easy-going acceptance of everything which he is told. One seems
   naturally inclined to be religious, and must be carefully watched lest
   the sensitiveness should become morbid, and a dominant thought should
   lead to mania, melancholy, or a possible reaction. Another seems to
   have no religious instinct, and the opportunity must be sought for
   awaking the sense of need, rousing the conscience, opening the eyes to
   God.

   But again, in proportion as parents are led by the Spirit, and make
   their sacred charge a matter of constant and beseeching prayer, they
   will in their own person and conduct represent God to the children, and
   so supplement all the possible defects of the express training and
   discipline. If the command "Be thou in the fear of the Lord all the day
   long" [587] is to have any weight with a child, he must live with those
   who themselves are in the fear of the Lord all the day long. A man must
   live near to God if he is to make God real to his children. A mother
   must hold very real converse with her Lord if His reality is to become
   obvious to her little ones. "As a child," says one, [588] "I always had
   a feeling that God and Jesus were such particular friends of mamma's,
   and were honoured more than words could tell." If such an impression is
   to be created, depend upon it God and Jesus must be particular friends
   of yours. No talk, however pious, can create that impression unless the
   hallowed friendship actually exists.

   Again, led by the Spirit, we are filled with Divine love; and no
   training of children can have any valuable or permanent effect which
   does not issue from, which is not guided by, and does not result in,
   love. For love is the Divine educator. It is this which accounts for
   the frequently observed anomaly that children who seem to have inferior
   home advantages and very inadequate education turn out better than
   others for whom no labour or expense or care seems to be grudged. If
   love is not there, all the efforts will fail. Love is the only
   atmosphere in which the spirits of little children can grow. Without it
   the wisest precepts only choke, and the best-prepared knowledge proves
   innutritious. It must be a large love, a wise love, an inclusive love,
   such as God alone can shed abroad in the heart. Love of that kind is
   very frequently found in "huts where poor men lie," and consequently
   the children issuing out of them have been better trained than those
   whose parents have handed them over to loveless tutors or underlings.

   And this may perhaps fitly lead us to consider the other point which is
   before us--the prominence which is, in the Proverbs, given to
   chastisement. "He that spareth his rod hateth his son, but he that
   loveth him, chasteneth him betimes." [589] "Chasten thy son, seeing
   there is hope, and set not thy heart on his destruction." [590]
   "Stripes that wound are a cleansing of evil, strokes of the recesses of
   the belly." [591] "Withhold not correction from the child; when thou
   beatest him with a rod he shall not die. Thou shalt beat him with the
   rod, and shalt deliver his soul from Sheol." [592] "The rod and reproof
   give wisdom, but a child left to himself causeth shame to his mother."
   [593] "Correct thy son and he shall give thee rest, yea, he shall give
   delight unto thy soul." [594]

   Corporal punishment seems to the Christian, and to the common sense of
   a society which is the product of the Christian spirit, degrading,
   brutalising, and essentially futile! It can only have even a modicum of
   good effect where it is inflicted by a loving hand, and in a loving
   spirit, without a trace of temper or cruelty, and obviously costing
   more to inflict than to bear. But even with all these conditions
   granted it is a most unsatisfactory method of punishment; it arouses
   vindictive feelings and savage passions. A whipped boy is almost sure
   to bully the next creature weaker than himself that he encounters; and
   acting only as a deterrent, it never reaches the conscience, or creates
   a sense of revolt from the sin for the sin's sake, which is the object
   of all wise, or at least of all paternal, punishment. We can only,
   therefore, set aside the precept to use the rod as one which was in
   harmony with darker and harder times before the Saviour of the world
   had come to reveal the inner life and to teach us how we are to deal
   with those mysterious and wonderful beings, our fellow-creatures.

   But with this modification, and substituting "wise and merciful
   punishments" for "rod and stripes," these teachings remain of permanent
   validity. Our Heavenly Father chastens His children; by most gracious
   punishments He brings home to them the sense of sin, and leads them to
   repentance and amendment. [595] And earthly parents, in proportion as
   they are led by the Spirit and filled with love, will correct their
   children, not for their own pleasure, but for their children's good.
   The truth which underlies these apparently harsh injunctions is this:
   Love inflicts punishments, nor are any punishments so severe as those
   which Love inflicts; and only the punishments which Love inflicts are
   able to reform and to save the character of the delinquent.

   We all of us know that weak and sentimental nature--too common among
   modern parents--which shrinks from inflicting pain under all
   circumstances. Seizing on the ill-understood doctrine that Love is the
   sovereign power in life and in education, it pleads in the name of Love
   that the offender may be spared, that he may escape the due penalty of
   his fault. That is not a love like God's love: and if you are careful
   to observe, it has not the remedial or saving effect which the love of
   God has. "He that declines to punish his child hates him; he that
   loveth him chasteneth him betimes." In the poor child's heart so much
   foolishness is bound up, so much wilfulness and temper, so much vanity
   and pride, so much sensuality and selfishness, so much unwholesome
   craving for amusement, it is so natural to the child to make pleasure
   the be-all and the end-all of life, that, if all this foolishness is to
   be driven away, there must be much sharp discipline and painful
   correction. The Divine method of punishment seems to be to let men eat
   of the fruit of their doings until they loathe it. They rebelliously
   call out for meat in the wilderness, and it turns into a satiety, a
   bitterness, and a plague, while it is between their teeth. Is it
   possible that parents too, under the guidance of the Spirit, may
   chasten their children in the same way, bringing home to the wilful the
   painful effects of wilfulness, to the vain the ridiculous effects of
   vanity, to the selfish the disastrous issue of selfishness, to the
   sensual the ruin and the misery of sensuality? Might not the most
   effectual punishment for every fault be an enforced quiet in which the
   culprit is confronted with the inevitable outcome of the sin? Does not
   even the hardest heart begin to melt, does not the dullest conscience
   begin to grow sensitive, when the sure results of evil are aptly
   pourtrayed before the mind? What pride would have courage to grow if it
   had a glimpse of the hard, dry, loveless, unloved, heart which is its
   inevitable fruit? What young man would venture to take the first
   downward steps in impurity if he had ever formed a conception of the
   devastation of brain and heart and life which must ensue?

   The rod cannot open the eyes; it can but set the cunning intellect to
   work to find a way of enjoying the sin and escaping the rod. But the
   opening of the eyes--at which all true punishment must aim--reveals a
   rod which is bound up with the sin, sure as the sin itself. It is the
   parents' solemn task--and many an inward sorrow must it cost--to bring
   home to his child's heart these truths of experience which the child
   cannot at present know. Wise penalties and "reproof give wisdom, but a
   child left to himself causeth shame to his mother." [596]

   There is a voice, the voice of Divine Wisdom, which speaks continually
   to every parent, to every teacher of youth: "Incline thine ear," it
   says, "and hear the words of the wise, and apply thy heart unto my
   knowledge"--without attention and application this heavenly wisdom
   cannot be known. "For it is a pleasant thing," so the voice continues,
   "if thou keep these words within thee, if they be established together
   upon thy lips. That thy trust may be in the Lord,"--without whom the
   best-meant efforts will fail,--"I have made them known to thee this
   day, even to thee. Have not I written to thee excellent things of
   counsels and knowledge, to make thee know the certainty of the words of
   truth, that thou mayest carry back words of truth to them," those
   helpless and ignorant children whose needs "send thee" to me for
   instruction? [597]

   The failures are numerous, disastrous, heart-breaking, but they are
   unnecessary. Your children are holy; they belong to the Saviour in whom
   you yourselves believe. Grasp that truth; go to Him in sublime faith.
   "Lord, it is not with Thee to save a part, to choose this one and save
   that. Thou wilt glorify Thyself in every one." [598] Surrender yourself
   to Him that He may use you to exhibit His Divine graces and saving love
   to the children. Live with Him daily, that the glory of the communion
   may not pass away from your face, or appear only by fits and
   starts--and so train up your child according to his way; and when he is
   old he will not depart from it.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [578] Prov. xxii. 15.

   [579] John v. 39.

   [580] "I am the eldest child, born in 1795, December 4th, and trace
   deeply in myself the character of both parents, also the upbringing and
   example of both."--Carlyle's Reminiscences, vol. i., p. 54.

   [581] Eccles. xxx. 2.

   [582] Prov. xvii. 21.

   [583] Prov. xvii. 25, xix. 13, 26.

   [584] Prov. xv. 20. Cf. x. 1, xxvii. 11, xxix. 3.

   [585] Prov. xxiii. 15, 16, 24.

   [586] See that invaluable little book, "The Education of a Christian
   Home," edited by Ella S. Armitage.

   [587] Prov. xxiii. 17.

   [588] "The Education of a Christian Home."

   [589] Prov. xiii. 24.

   [590] Prov. xix. 18.

   [591] Prov. xx. 30.

   [592] Prov. xxiii. 13, 14.

   [593] Prov. xxix. 15.

   [594] Prov. xxix. 17.

   [595] Lev. xxvi. 41: "If then their uncircumcised heart be humbled, and
   they then accept of the punishment of their iniquity, then will I
   remember My covenant with Jacob."

   [596] Prov. xxix. 15.

   [597] Prov. xxiii. 17-21.

   [598] "The Education of a Christian Home."
     __________________________________________________________________

XXIV.

  FORGIVING.

     "Be not a witness against thy neighbour without cause, and deceive
     not with thy lips. Say not, I will do so to him as he hath done to
     me; I will render to the man according to his work."--Prov. xxiv.
     28, 29.

     "Rejoice not when thine enemy falleth, and let not thy heart be glad
     when he is overthrown, lest the Lord see it and it displease Him,
     and He turn away His wrath from him."--Prov. xxiv. 17, 18.

     "He that is glad at calamity shall not be unpunished."--Prov. xvii.
     5.

     "If thine enemy be hungry, give him bread to eat, and if he be
     thirsty give him water to drink; for thou shalt heap coals of fire
     upon his head, and the Lord shall reward thee."--Prov. xxv. 21, 22.

   There is no subject on which the teaching of the Proverbs more
   strikingly anticipates the morality of the New Testament than that of
   forgiveness to our enemies. Our Lord Jesus Christ could take some of
   these sayings and incorporate them unchanged into the law of His
   kingdom, for indeed it is not possible to surpass the power and beauty
   and truth of the command to feed those who have injured us if they are
   hungry, to give them drink when they are thirsty, and in this Divine
   way to kindle in them repentance for the injury which they have done.
   This is the high-water mark of moral excellence. No better state can be
   desired. When a human spirit is habitually in this tender and forgiving
   mood, it is already united with the Father of spirits, and lives.

   It is almost superfluous to point out that even the saints of the Old
   Testament fall very far short of the lofty standard which is here set
   before us. The Psalmist, for example, is thinking of coals of a quite
   different sort when he exclaims: "As for the head of those that compass
   me about, let the mischief of their own lips cover them. Let burning
   coals fall upon them; let them be cast into the fire; into deep pits
   that they rise not up again." [599] That is the old elemental hate of
   human nature, the passionate, indignant appeal to a righteous God
   against those who have been guilty of a wrong or an injury. Even
   Jeremiah, one of the latest, and certainly not the least holy, of the
   prophets could cry out concerning his enemies: "Yet, Lord, Thou knowest
   all their counsel against me to slay me; forgive not their iniquity,
   neither blot out their sin from Thy sight; but let them be overthrown
   before Thee; deal Thou with them in the time of Thine anger." [600]
   Words painfully natural, words echoed by many a persecuted man of God,
   but yet quite inconsistent with the teaching of the Saviour in the
   Sermon on the Mount, the teaching already foreshadowed in this
   beautiful proverb.

   But it may not be superfluous to notice that the Proverbs themselves,
   even those which stand at the head of this chapter, do not all touch
   the high-water mark of xxv. 21. Thus, for example, the motive which is
   suggested in xxiv. 18 for not rejoicing in the fall of an enemy is none
   of the highest. The idea seems to be, if you see your enemy undergoing
   punishment, if calamity is falling upon him from the Lord, then do not
   indulge in any insolent exultation, lest the Lord should be offended
   with you, and, in order to chastise your malignity, should cease to
   plague and trouble him. In such a view of the question, God is still
   regarded as a Nemesis that will resent any unseemly rejoicing in the
   calamity of another; [601] in proportion therefore as you wish to see
   your enemy punished, you must abstain from that joy in his punishment
   which would lead to its diminution. From a precept of that kind there
   is a vast moral stride to the simple prohibition of retaliation,
   announced without any reason given or suggested in xxiv. 29--"Say not,
   I will do so to him as he hath done to me, I will render to the man
   according to his work." And from this again there is an incalculable
   stride to the positive spirit of love, which, not content with simply
   abstaining from vindictiveness, actually turns the tables, and repays
   good for evil, looking with quiet assurance to the Lord, and the Lord
   alone, for recognition and reward. Our wonder is occasioned not because
   all the Proverbs do not reach the moral altitude of this one, but
   rather that this one should be so high. When an ideal is set up far in
   advance of the general practice and even of the general thoughts of the
   time, we can ascribe it only to the promptings of the Holy Spirit.

   It needs no proof that forgiveness is better than revenge. We all know
   that--


   "Revenge, at first though sweet,

   Bitter ere long back on itself recoils." [602]

   We all know that the immediate effect of forgiving our enemy is a sweet
   flow of tenderness in the soul, which surpasses in delight all the
   imagined joys of vindictiveness; and that the next effect is to soften
   and win the foe himself; the scornful look relents, the tears of
   passion give place to those of penitence, the moved heart is eager to
   make amends. We all know that nothing more powerfully affects our
   fellow-men than the exhibition of this placable temper. [603] We all
   know that in forgiving we share God's prerogative, and come into
   harmony with His Spirit.

   Yet here is the melancholy fact that notwithstanding this proverbial
   truth, taken up into the teaching of our Saviour, and echoed in the
   writings of His Apostles, [604] even in a Christian society,
   forgiveness is almost as rare as it was in the days of King Solomon.
   Men are not ashamed--even professing Christians are not ashamed--to say
   about their enemies, "I will do so to him as he has done to me, I will
   render to the man according to his work." We even have a lurking
   admiration for such retaliatory conduct, calling it spirited, and we
   still are inclined to contemn one who acts on the Christly principle as
   weak or visionary. Still the old bad delight in seeing evil fall on the
   head of our enemies glows in our hearts; still the act of vengeance is
   performed, the bitter retort is given, the abusive letter is written,
   with the old sense of unhallowed pride and triumph. How is this? Ah,
   the simple truth is that it is a small matter to get right principles
   recognised, the whole difficulty lies in getting them practised. We
   need a power which can successfully contend against the storm of
   passion and self-will, in those terrible moments when all the calm
   lights of reason are quenched by the blinding surf of passion, and all
   the gentle voices of goodness are drowned by its roaring waves.

   Sometimes we hear it said that the moral teaching of Christ is not
   original, but that all His precepts may be found in the words and
   writings of ancient sages, just as His teaching about forgiveness is
   anticipated by the proverb. Yes, but His claim does not rest upon His
   teaching, but upon the Divine and supernatural power which He has at
   His command to carry out His doctrines in the conduct of His disciples.
   This is the point which we must realize if this sweet and beautiful
   ideal is to be worked out in our lives. We have but touched the fringe
   of the question when we have conned His words, or shaped conceptions of
   what a life would be passed in conformity to them. The centre of
   Christian doctrine is power, the power of Christ, the fountain of
   living waters opened in the heart, the grafting of the withering
   branches upon a living stock, the indwelling of Christ Himself, as the
   spring and principle of every holy action, and the effectual restraint
   on all our ungovernable passions.

   But before looking more closely at this, we ought to pay some attention
   to the constant motive which our Lord, even in His teaching, presents
   for the practice of a forgiving disposition. He always bases the duty
   of forgiveness on the need which we have of God's forgiveness; He
   teaches us to pray, "Forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that
   trespass against us;" and in the moving story of the unmerciful
   servant, who demanded the full payment from his fellow-servant just
   when his lord had pitifully remitted his own debt, He tells us that
   forgiveness of our enemies is an indispensable condition of our being
   forgiven by God. "His lord was wroth, and delivered him to the
   tormentors, till he should pay all that was due. So shall also My
   Heavenly Father do unto you, if ye forgive not every one his brother
   from your hearts." [605] It is not therefore only, as it is sometimes
   stated, that we ought to be moved to pity by remembering what God has
   done for us. No, there is a much sterner thought in our Lord's mind; it
   is that if we do not forgive we shall not and cannot be forgiven. The
   forgiving spirit manifested to our fellow-men is that without which it
   is vain for us to come near and to ask God for pardon. If we have come,
   and are just about to offer our prayer, and if we then remember that we
   have aught against a brother, we must go first and be reconciled to
   him, before our prayer can be so much as heard.

   Here is certainly a motive of a very powerful kind. Which of us would
   dare to cherish the bitter thought, or proceed with our plan of
   vengeance, if we remembered and realized that our vindictiveness would
   make our own pardon at the hands of God impossible? Which of the
   countless deeds of retaliation that stain with blood the pages of
   history would have been perpetrated, and which of the perpetrators
   would not have tremblingly relinquished all thought of reprisals, if
   they had seen that in those savage acts of vengeance they were not, as
   they supposed, executing lawful justice, but actually cutting off their
   own hope of pardon before the throne of God?

   If we avenge ourselves, if society is constantly torn by the quarrels
   and the mutual recriminations of hostile men whose one thought is to
   give as good as they have got, it can only be because we do not
   believe, or do not realize, this solemn teaching of the Lord. He seems
   a faint and doubtful voice compared with the loud tumult of passion
   within; His authority seems weak and ineffectual compared with the
   mighty domination of the evil disposition. Powerful, therefore, as the
   motive is to which He constantly appeals, if He had left us nothing but
   His teaching on the subject we should not be materially better off than
   they who listened with attention to the teaching of the wise authors of
   these ancient Proverbs. What more has He left us?

   It is His prerogative to give to those who believe in Him a changed
   heart. How much is meant by that, which only the changed heart can
   know! Outwardly we seem much alike; outwardly there is little sign of
   an inward transformation; but far as the east is from the west is the
   unregenerate heart from the regenerate, the Christless heart from one
   which He has taken in His hands, and by His great redemption created
   anew. Now without stopping to follow the processes of faith by which
   this mighty change is effected, let us simply mark the characteristics
   of the change so far as it affects the matter in hand.

   The first and most radical result of the New Birth is that God takes
   the place which Self has occupied. All the thoughts which have
   clustered about your own being now turn to His Being, as stray
   fragments of iron turn to the magnet. Consequently, all the emotions
   and passions which are stimulated by self-love give place to those
   which are stimulated by the love of God. It is as if the pipes of your
   aqueduct had been changed at the fountain head, disconnected from the
   malarious waters of the marsh, and connected with the pure and
   sparkling water of the hills. God's ways of regarding men, God's
   feelings towards men, His yearning over them, His pity for them, flow
   into the changed heart, and so preoccupy it that resentment, hatred,
   and malice are washed out like the sour dregs in a cup which is rinsed
   in a running stream.

   There is the man who did you the wrong--very cruel and unpardonable it
   was!--but, as all personal elements are quite out of the question, you
   regard him just as if you were not the injured being. You see him only
   as God sees him; you trace all the malignant workings of his mind; you
   know how the fire of his hate is a fire which burns the heart that
   entertains it. You see clearly how tormenting those revengeful passions
   are, how the poor soul mastered by them is diseased, how the very
   action in which it is triumphing now must become one day a source of
   bitter regret and implacable self-reproach; you soon begin to regard
   the ill deed as a shocking wound inflicted on the doer of it, and the
   wells of pity are opened. As if this enemy of yours had been quite
   innocent of all ill-will, and had been overtaken by some terrible
   calamity, your one instinctive thought is to help him and relieve him.
   Out of the fulness of your heart, without any sense of being
   magnanimous, or any thought of a further end,--simply for the pity of
   it,--you come to proffer him bread in his hunger and water in his
   thirst.

   Yes, it is in the atmosphere of pity that personal resentment dies
   away, and it is only by the power of the Son of Man that the heart can
   be filled with a pity large enough to pardon all the sins of our kind.

   It is this thought--though without any definite statement of the means
   by which it is produced--that finds expression in Whittier's touching
   lines:--


   "My heart was heavy, for its trust had been

   Abused, its kindness answered with foul wrong;

   So turning gloomily from my fellow-men,

   One summer Sabbath day I strolled among

   The green mounds of the village burying-place;

   Where pondering how all human love and hate

   Find one sad level; and how, soon or late,

   Wronged and wrongdoer, each with meekened face,

   And cold hands folded over a still heart,

   Pass the green threshold of a common grave,

   Whither all footsteps tend, whence none depart,

   Awed for myself, and pitying my race,

   Our common sorrow, like a mighty wave,

   Swept all my pride away, and, trembling, I forgave."

   Yes, one who is touched by the spirit of the Son of Man finds too much
   to pity in the great sorrowing world, and in its fleeting and uncertain
   life, to cherish vengeful feelings. Himself redeemed by the untold love
   of His Father, by the undeserved and freely offered pardon in Christ
   Jesus his Lord, he can feel for his enemies nothing but forbearance and
   love; if they too are Christians, he longs to win them back to the
   peace and joy from which their evil passion must have driven them; and
   if they are not, his eyes must fill with tears as he remembers how
   brief is their apparent triumph, how unsubstantial their gleam of joy.
   The desire to save them immediately masters the transitory wish to
   punish them. The pity of men, for the sake of the Son of Man, wins the
   day.

   And now we may just glance at the effect which the Christly conduct has
   upon the offender, and the reward which God has attached to its
   exercise.

   It is one of the most beautiful traces of God's likeness in even bad
   men, a characteristic to which there is no parallel in the animal
   creation, that though passion awakes passion, wrath wrath, and
   vengeance revenge--so that savages pass their whole time in an unbroken
   series of blood feuds, the hideous retaliation bandied from tribe to
   tribe and from man to man, generation after generation--the spirit of
   meekness, proceeding not from cowardice, but from love, disarms
   passion, soothes wrath, and changes vengeance into reconciliation. The
   gleam of forgiveness in the eye of the injured is so obviously the
   light of God that the wrongdoer is cowed and softened before it. It
   kindles a fire in his spirit, his heart melts, his uplifted hand falls,
   his angry voice grows tender. When men are so dehumanised as to be
   insensible to this softening effect, when they interpret the gentleness
   as weakness, and are moved by the forgiving spirit simply to further
   injury and more shameless wrong, then we may know that they are
   possessed,--they are no longer men,--they are passing into the category
   of the lost spirits, whom the forbearance of God Himself leads not to
   repentance but only to added sin.

   But if you have ever by the sweet spirit of Christ so mastered your
   natural impulse as to return good for evil lovingly and
   whole-heartedly, and if you have seen the regenerating effect in the
   beautiful subjugation of your foe and his transformation into a friend,
   it is not necessary to say much of the reward which God has in store
   for you. Do you not already possess it?

   Yet the reward is certainly greater than you are able at once to
   apprehend. For what a secret is this which you possess, the secret of
   turning even the malignity of foes into the sweetest affection, the
   secret which lay in the heart of God as the spring and the means of
   man's redemption. [606] The highest reward that God can give to His
   creatures is to make them partakers of His nature as He has made them
   in His own image. When we share in a Divine attribute we enter so far
   into the Divine bliss; and in proportion as this attribute seems
   removed from our common human nature, our spirit must exult to find
   that it has been really appropriated. What further reward, then, can he
   who avenges not himself desire? The pulse of the Divine heart beats in
   him; the tides of the Divine life flow through him. He is like God--God
   who opposes to man's ingratitude the ocean of His pardoning love; he is
   conscious of that which is the fountain of joy in the Divine Being;
   surely a man must be satisfied when he awakes in God's likeness! And
   that satisfaction comes to every one who has heaped coals of fire on
   his enemy's head by feeding him in his hunger, and giving him water
   when athirst. Say not, "I will do so to him as he has done to me, I
   will render to the man according to his work." Love your enemies; pray
   for them which despitefully use you.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [599] Psalm cxl. 9, 10.

   [600] Jer. xviii. 23.

   [601] Prov. xvii. 5b.

   [602] Paradise Lost, ix., 171.

   [603] Burke said of Pitt after his fall, that the manner in which he
   made his own justification, without impeaching the conduct of his
   colleagues or taking any measure that might seem to arise from disgust
   or opposition, set a seal upon his character. (Lecky, "England in the
   Eighteenth Century," vol. iii., 61.)

   [604] See Rom. xii. 20.

   [605] Matt. xviii. 35.

   [606] Cf. the proverb, "When a man's ways please the Lord He maketh
   even his enemies to be at peace with him" (Prov. xvi. 7).
     __________________________________________________________________

XXV.

  THE KING.

     "It is the glory of God to conceal a thing, but the glory of kings
     is to search out a matter.

     The heaven for height and the earth for depth, and the heart of
     kings is unsearchable.

     Take away the dross from the silver, and there cometh forth a vessel
     for the finer;

     Take away the wicked from before the king, and his throne shall be
     established in righteousness.

     Put not thyself forward in the presence of the king, and stand not
     in the presence of great men:

     Far better is it that it be said unto thee, Come up hither, than
     that thou shouldest be put lower in the presence of the prince whom
     thine eyes have seen."--Prov. xxv. 2-7.

   It will be remembered that in the book of Samuel there are two accounts
   of the monarchy and its origin lying side by side,--different, and to
   all appearance irreconcilable. One set of passages seems to imply that
   the king was appointed by God's holy purpose to fulfil the objects of
   His government. But another set of passages seems to represent the
   outcry for a king as a rebellion against the sovereignty of the Lord,
   and the appointment of a king as a punishment for the people's sin. It
   is in agreement with the first idea that provision is made in the Law
   for a monarchical government; but it is in agreement with the second
   idea that the actual kings prove to be for the most part incompetent
   and faithless rulers, "who do evil in the sight of the Lord," and that
   even the best of them fall into gross sins, or are at any rate guilty
   of grave errors. Thus David stumbled into a miry pit; Jehoshaphat
   experienced defeat in his alliance with Ahab; Josiah was slain at the
   battle of Megiddo; Uzziah was smitten with leprosy; and Hezekiah
   committed an imprudence which incidentally brought the great calamity
   upon his country. So it is all through.

   Now the only satisfactory explanation that this twofold aspect of the
   kingship seems to admit of is one which goes deep down into the
   prophetic and inspired character of Israel and its history. The king in
   his ideal aspect is throughout a type and a foreshadowing of the
   Anointed One that was to come; and the actual failure of all the kings
   to realize the ideal, to govern wisely, to establish righteousness, or
   even to observe the moral law in their own persons, necessarily threw
   men's thoughts forward to Him who should sit upon the throne of David,
   and carry out in ways not yet realized or even conceived the noble and
   exalted ideas which clustered round the theocratic throne. Many hasty
   critics have been swift to see and to censure the ignoble failures of
   the men who sat upon the thrones of Judah and Israel; some critics have
   developed with sufficient clearness the noble ideal which always
   underlay the monarchy even in the moments of its deepest decline. But
   comparatively few have seen the significance of this contrast between
   the ideal and the actual; and consequently only a few have perceived
   with what a prolonged and emphatic voice the whole story of the Kings
   spoke of Christ.

   The contrast just pointed out in the historic books appears with equal
   distinctness in this book of Wisdom; the proverbial sayings about the
   king exhibit the twofold thought; and the reconciliation is only found
   when we have realized the Kingship of Christ and can bring that idea to
   explain the ancient forecast. Thus the study of the things concerning
   the king is to the thoughtful reader of the Proverbs a study of the
   things concerning Christ. The ideal elements speak of Him; the actual
   shortcomings cry out for Him.

   First we will review what is said to the glory and honour of the king.
   He comes before us as the embodiment of righteousness. [607] "It is an
   abomination to kings to commit wickedness, for the throne is
   established by righteousness. Righteous lips are the delight of kings,
   and they love him that speaketh right." [608] "A king that sitteth on
   the throne of judgment winnoweth away all evil with his eyes.... A wise
   king winnoweth the wicked and bringeth the threshing wheel over them."
   [609] As he purges the wicked, so he encourages the righteous: "He that
   loveth pureness of heart hath grace on his lips, the king shall be his
   friend." [610] There is a great severity in his government: "The wrath
   of a king is as messengers of death; and a wise man will pacify it."
   [611] "The king's wrath is as the roaring of a lion." [612] On the
   other hand, his mercy is one with his severity: "His favour is as dew
   upon the grass." [613] "In the light of the king's countenance is life,
   and his favour is as a cloud of the latter rain." [614] "Mercy and
   truth preserve the king, and his throne is upholden by mercy." [615]
   The fact is that his government is a viceroyalty. He is the human
   instrument of the Divine Will. "The king's heart is in the hand of the
   Lord; as the watercourses"--which the farmer directs and leads over his
   fields according to his purpose--"he turneth it whithersoever he will."
   [616] Thus the king expresses precisely "the Lord's favour towards a
   servant that dealeth wisely, and the Lord's wrath against him that
   causeth shame." [617] The king manifests the Lord's spirit in dealing
   with the subject, judging the cause of the poor as the Lord does. "The
   king that judgeth faithfully the poor, his throne shall be established
   for ever." [618] He is, in a word, a manifestation--a revelation--of
   God Himself. "The glory of God is to conceal a thing," i.e., to be
   unsearchable and unknowable, "and the glory of kings is to search a
   matter out;" the king, searching the deep things of God, and becoming
   the interpreter of the Divine will to men, is Himself in the place of
   God to us. "The heaven for height and the earth for depth, and the
   heart of kings there is no searching." Reflecting the righteousness,
   the mercy, the power of God, his throne is bathed in the celestial
   light. "Take away dross from the silver, and there cometh forth a
   vessel for the finer; take away evil from before the king, and his
   throne shall be fixed in justice." [619]

   In the presence of such a sovereign the subject may well abase himself,
   even the greatest and wisest may count himself small. "Glorify not
   thyself before a king, and in the place of the great do not stand. For
   better is it that it be said to thee, Come up hither, than that thou
   shouldest be put lower in the presence of a prince whom thine eyes have
   seen." [620]

   Rebellion against such a sovereign is the merest infatuation. "Against
   him there is no rising up." [621] "The terror of the king is as the
   roaring of a lion, he that provoketh him to anger sinneth against his
   own life." [622] "My son, fear thou the Lord and the king, and meddle
   not with them who are given to change; for their calamity shall rise
   suddenly; and who knoweth the destruction of them both." [623]

   It is evident that in all this we have an ideal picture. No king that
   ever sat on an earthly throne, no David or Hezekiah, no Antoninus or
   Trajan, no Charlemagne or St. Louis, no Alfred or Edward the First,
   ever in the faintest degree approached the fulfilment of the ideal. The
   divinity which hedged them was of quite a different kind from this open
   vision of God, this human mediatorship, this absolute subjection to the
   Divine will. And when we leave the select class of great and good
   kings, and look at the ordinary type of the strong and capable ruler,
   Saul or Ahab, Alexander or Csar, Constantine or Diocletian, Clovis or
   Rollo, William the Conqueror or Henry II., Louis XIV. or Frederick the
   Great, the Czar Peter or Napoleon, we see at once that we have passed
   into a region of thought and action where the description of the
   Proverbs becomes unreal and visionary.

   There is but one way of explaining the language before us. It points to
   Christ. In Him alone is it or can it be realized. He is the only
   sovereign that has any union with God which is at all like identity. He
   is the only Ruler who blends with absolute infallibility severity and
   mercy. Of what other king could it be said that "purity of heart"
   secures His friendship? What other king has made it his first and
   supreme object to judge faithfully the poor? What other government but
   His has sought its security in that essential duty and its fulfilment?
   It is Christ alone whose favour descends on the heart like dew on the
   grass, or as a cloud of the latter rain. His is the only rule against
   which rebellion is more than a political crime, and becomes an actual
   sin. Of Him alone can it be said with any breadth of meaning or
   certainty of fulfilment, "Let no falsehood from the tongue be spoken to
   the King, and no falsehood shall go out of his mouth. A sword is the
   king's tongue, and that not of flesh." [624] It is only a king
   absolutely righteous and absolutely merciful that can ever bear down
   with effective force upon lies and liars. It is only He that would see
   in lying the prime sin, the incurable disease, the unpardonable
   treason.

   The King is Christ. Before He came there was in the line of His
   foreshadowing a typical Divine right of kings. But since His coming all
   such kingships have been anachronisms. The appeal which used to be made
   to the Old Testament to support that famous political dogma was indeed
   its surest refutation and condemnation. For all that is said there of
   the indefeasible prerogative, coupled as it is with an infallibility of
   judgment, a perfect moral goodness, and an irresistible power, applied
   and could apply only to Christ. Where absolute monarchy is not
   Christship it becomes, as so many familiar passages in the Old
   Testament show, a tyranny and an oppression, a cause of national
   corruption and decay.

   Now this leads us, in the second place, to notice how the actual
   failure and consequent mischief of the kingship are reflected in the
   proverbs, and especially those later proverbs which date from the
   decline and fall of the monarchy. We have only to glance over the books
   of Samuel and Kings to see what kind of men the occupants of the throne
   were; few of them show any marked ability, most of them by their folly
   and stupidity lead their people with hurried strides towards the
   threatened catastrophe. So far from acting as vicegerents of the Lord,
   it is their special characteristic that they are the authors of the
   prevailing religious apostasy. Even the more favourable exceptions, the
   kings who in the main did what was right in the eyes of the Lord, had
   not spiritual energy enough to purify the worship and restore the
   allegiance of their people to the Lord. Now it would be some insolent
   and witless tyrant who would desolate the country and drive his
   subjects into revolt. "A raging lion, a ravening bear, a wicked ruler
   over a poor people. O prince, that lackest understanding and art a
   great oppressor, he that hateth rapine shall prolong his days." [625]
   Now it would be a headstrong prince who would scorn all counsel, and,
   refusing to be advised, would himself retire from the helm of the
   state. "Where no wise steering is, the people falleth; but in the
   multitude of counsellors there is safety." [626] Setting aside the
   maxim, "Every purpose is established by counsel, and by wise guidance
   make thou war," [627] his purposes would be disappointed. [628] Now the
   earth would be burdened and tremble with the portent of a servant as
   king, [629] one who as a servant might be excellent, but once on the
   throne would reveal all the weaknesses and vices which are essentially
   servile. [630] Now a liar would occupy the throne, and lying lips ill
   become a prince. [631] And now, owing to the weakness and folly of the
   prince, the state would fall into pieces and be torn with wildly
   contending factions: "For the transgression of a land many are the
   princes thereof, but by a man of understanding and knowledge right will
   be prolonged." [632] Under the rule of the wicked, population
   disappears. [633] And while "in the multitude of people is the king's
   glory, in the want of people is the destruction of the prince." [634]
   Under the tyrant's sway "the people sigh." [635] Their persons are
   insecure, and their property is taken from them in the form of forced
   gifts or benevolences. [636] And as the king, such are his servants;
   his readiness to hearken to falsehood renders them all wicked. [637]
   The atmosphere of the court becomes corrupt: all truth, sincerity,
   purity disappear. The courtier is afraid to speak his mind, lest
   jealous listeners should report the words to the monarch's suspicious
   ear. The very freedom of social life disappears, and the table of the
   king becomes a trap to the unwary. "When thou sittest to eat with a
   ruler, consider diligently him that is before thee, and put a knife to
   thy throat if thou be a man given to appetite; be not desirous of his
   dainties, seeing they are deceitful meat." [638]

   Here is the complete and absolute corruption of the Divine royalty. The
   description holds true age after age; suggested by the decline of the
   monarchy in Israel, it applies accurately to the Imperial government at
   Rome, and it might have been written to describe the character and the
   government of the Stuarts in England. Strong in what they supposed to
   be their Divine Right, they became liars and hearkened to falsehood;
   their servants became wicked; their government perished from its own
   inherent rottenness. The description holds too of the French monarchy
   from the time of Louis XIV. to its fall. And it would seem, as indeed
   we may confidently believe, that the slow and imperceptible decay of
   the faith in the divine right of kings has been in God's hands a long
   preparation for the reign of Him whose right it is to reign, Jesus
   Christ, the true King of men.

   But there is still one other characteristic cause of the perverted
   kingship, to which attention is drawn in xxxi. 2-8: "Give not thy
   strength unto women, nor thy ways to that which destroyeth kings. It is
   not for kings, O Lemuel, it is not for kings to drink wine, nor for
   princes to say, Where is strong drink? Lest they drink and forget the
   law, and pervert the judgment of any that is afflicted." These fleshly
   vices are peculiarly common and peculiarly ruinous to kings, preventing
   them from pleading "the cause of such as are left desolate," and from
   "ministering judgment to the poor and needy." [639] It is in realizing
   the private life of kings, and in observing how seldom they have
   practised temperance, chastity, self-control, and how readily their
   contemporaries and even posterity have dispensed them from these
   primary obligations, that we plainly recognise the broad divergence
   between the facts of earthly monarchies and the description of the
   heavenly monarchy, and thus are prepared to recognise with gratitude
   and awe the sole sovereignty of Christ. The cry of the Florentines
   under the temporary excitement created by Savonarola's preaching was,
   "Jesus is our King, only Jesus." That is the constant and ever-swelling
   cry of human hearts. The types and shadows fall away; through the forms
   the spirit becomes apparent. It is Christ that claims and wins and
   enchains our loyalty. We are His subjects, He is our absolute Lord; we
   have no king but Jesus.

   There is in every human heart a loyalty which seeks for a fitting
   object; if it finds no lawful king, it will attach itself to a
   pretender. What pathos there is in the sacrifice which men have made,
   and in the deeds which they have dared, for Pretenders who have had no
   claim upon their devotion or allegiance! "Show me my rightful
   sovereign," seems to be the implicit demand of us all. And the answer
   has been given, "Behold, your king cometh unto you," in the lowly
   person, but commanding majesty, of Jesus. Many have accepted this and
   have cried, "Blessed is the king that cometh in the name of the Lord."
   [640]

   Shall we not bring our loyalty to Him, recognising the One whom
   prophets and wise men foretold, and acknowledging in His sway the
   authority which all other governments, even the best of them, lack? Let
   no false shame or fear restrain our homage; let not the sneers of those
   over whom "other lords have dominion" keep our knees from bending, and
   our tongues from confessing, "The fear of man bringeth a snare; but
   whoso putteth his trust in the Lord shall be safe. Many seek the
   ruler's favour,"--their whole thought is to stand well with the powers
   that be, and to secure the recognition of the Pretender who happens at
   any given moment to be directing the affairs of the world,--"but a
   man's judgment cometh from the Lord," his rightful King, [641] and to
   stand right with Him is all that need concern us. How well the King of
   men understood that because He came in humility--His birthplace a
   manger, His throne a fishing-boat or a wayside well, riding not in
   chariots of state, "but on an ass, and the foal of an ass;" because His
   appeal would be, not to the eye, but to the heart; not to the outward,
   but the inward; not to the temporal, but to the eternal,--men, with
   their perverted and misapplied loyalties, would reject Him and be
   ashamed to confess Him. False kingships have dazzled our eyes, and
   hidden from us the grandeur of a Sovereign who is among us as one that
   serveth. From the touch of His humiliation we shrink.

   But if the heart recognises and owns its lawful Sovereign; if,
   captivated by His indescribable beauty and bowed before His
   indisputable authority, it seeks only in profound obeisance and
   absolute surrender, to worship and adore and serve, how royal is His
   treatment, how unstinted are His largesses. "Come up hither," He says,
   bringing the soul higher and higher, into fuller vision, into more
   buoyant life, into more effectual service. The evil ruler, we saw, made
   all his servants wicked. Christ, as King, makes all His servants holy,
   dwelling in them, and subduing their hearts to Himself in ever truer
   devotion; He through them carries out His vast designs of love in those
   portions of His dominion where rebels still rise up against Him, and
   where poor deluded hearts still fretfully cry, "We will not have this
   Man to rule over us." "In the multitude of people is the king's glory."
   May God hasten the time when all peoples and tongues shall bow down to
   and worship our King!
     __________________________________________________________________

   [607] It will be observed that, speaking generally, the early proverbs
   present the more favourable side of the kingship, and the later
   proverbs suggest a period of decline (see [6]Introduction). Possibly
   the same test may serve to distinguish the passages in Deuteronomy and
   the book of Samuel; the brighter thought that the king was originally
   intended by God may come from the early days when the kings still
   promised well, and the darker thought which crosses the optimistic
   picture may emanate from the period when their failure and decline were
   unmistakable.

   [608] Prov. xvi. 12, 13.

   [609] Prov. xx. 8, 26.

   [610] Prov. xxii. 11.

   [611] Prov. xvi. 14.

   [612] Prov. xix. 12.

   [613] Prov. xix. 12.

   [614] Prov. xvi. 15.

   [615] Prov. xx. 28.

   [616] Prov. xxi. 1.

   [617] Prov. xiv. 35.

   [618] Prov. xxix. 14.

   [619] Prov. xxv. 2-5.

   [620] Prov. xxv. 6, 7.

   [621] Prov. xxx. 31.

   [622] Prov. xx. 2.

   [623] Prov. xxiv. 21, 22.

   [624] The LXX. of xxiv. 23, which adds a passage not appropriate to
   Christ, "Whosoever is delivered up to him shall be crushed. For if his
   temper be exasperated, he consumes men, sinews and all, and crunches
   their bones, and burns them up as a flame, so that they are uneatable
   to the young of eagles."

   [625] Prov. xxviii. 15, 16.

   [626] Prov. xi. 15. The image from steering survives in our own
   governor (gubernator).

   [627] Prov. xx. 18.

   [628] Prov. xv. 22.

   [629] See 1 Kings xvi. 7.

   [630] Prov. xxx. 22.

   [631] Prov. xvii. 7.

   [632] Prov. xxviii. 2.

   [633] Prov. xxviii. 12.

   [634] Prov. xiv. 28.

   [635] Prov. xxix. 2.

   [636] Prov. xxix. 4.

   [637] Prov. xxix. 12. Cf. Ecclesiasticus x. 2: "As the judge of the
   people is himself, so are his officers; and what manner of man the
   ruler of the city is, such are they also that dwell therein."

   [638] Prov. xxiii. 1-3. Cf. the Eastern adage, "Dainties of a king burn
   the lips." It was a common occurrence at the court of Pope Alexander
   VI. to invite an obnoxious person to the Papal table and there dispose
   of him by means of poisoned food.

   [639] Prov. xxxi. 8, 9.

   [640] Luke xix. 38.

   [641] Prov. xxix. 25, 26.
     __________________________________________________________________

XXVI.

  THE FOOL.

     "As snow in summer, and as rain in harvest, so honour is not seemly
     for a fool....

     A whip for the horse, a bridle for the ass, and a rod for the back
     of fools.

     Answer not a fool according to his folly, lest thou also be like
     unto him.

     Answer a fool according to his folly, lest he be wise in his own
     conceit.

     He that sendeth a message by the hand of a fool cutteth off his own
     feet, and drinketh in damage.

     The legs of the lame hang loose: so is a parable in the mouth of
     fools.

     As a bag of gems in a heap of stones, so is he that giveth honour to
     a fool.

     As a thorn that goeth up into the hand of a drunkard, so is a
     parable in the mouth of fools.

     As an archer that woundeth all, so is he that hireth the fool and he
     that hireth them that pass by.

     As a dog that returneth to his vomit, so is a fool that repeateth
     his folly.

     Seest thou a man wise in his own conceit? there is more hope of a
     fool than of him."--Prov. xxvi. 1, 3-12.

   This passage points out certain characteristics of the fool, a term
   which occurs so frequently in the book of Proverbs that we must try to
   conceive clearly what is to be understood by it. The difficulty of
   forming a distinct conception arises from the fact that there are three
   different words, with different shades of meaning, all rendered by the
   one English expression, fool or folly. For want of carefully
   distinguishing these delicate varieties of the original, some of the
   proverbs appear in English tautological and almost meaningless. We must
   try then to separate and to understand these several terms.

   The Hebrew word which most frequently occurs in the book to designate
   fool, 'vyl, together with its derivative, which is the usual word for
   folly, 'vlt, signifies weakness. We are to think of that ignorant,
   inconsiderate, sanguine, and self-confident temper which eschews
   counsel, which will have its own way, which declines to be governed by
   reason, which forms fond expectations and baseless hopes, and which is
   always sure that everything will turn out according to its wish, though
   it takes no means to secure the desired result. Perhaps the simplest
   way of describing the habit of mind and the type of character intended
   by the Hebrew is to use the word infatuation. This would not do as a
   translation in all the passages where it occurs, but it will serve to
   point out the underlying idea.

   The word which comes next in frequency, kmyl,--the word used uniformly
   throughout the particular passage before us,--has at its root the
   notion of grossness, the dull and heavy habit of one whose heart has
   waxed fat, whose ears are slow to hear, and whose higher perceptions
   and nobler aspirations have succumbed to the sensual and earthly
   nature. We have to think of moral, as well as mental, stupidity, of
   insensibility to all that is true and good and pure. The fool in this
   sense is such a dullard that he commits wickedness without perceiving
   it, [642] and utters slanders almost unconsciously; [643] he does not
   know when to be silent; [644] whatever is in him quickly appears, [645]
   but when it is known it is very worthless; [646] nor has he the sense
   to get wisdom, even when the opportunity is in his hand; [647] his best
   advantages are quickly wasted and he is none the better. [648] Perhaps
   the English word which best fits the several suggestions of the Hebrew
   one is senseless.

   The third term, nvl, occurs only four times in the book. It is derived
   from a verb signifying to fade and wither. It describes the inward
   shrinking and shrivelling of a depraved nature, the witlessness which
   results from wickedness. It contains in itself a severer censure than
   the other two. Thus "He that begetteth a senseless man (kmyl) doeth it
   to his sorrow, but the father of the bad fool (nvl) hath no joy." [649]
   In the one case there is trouble enough, in the other there is nothing
   but trouble. Thus it is one of the four things for which the earth
   trembles when a man of this kind is filled with meat. [650] This third
   character is sketched for us in the person of Nabal, whose name, as
   Abigail says, is simply the Hebrew word for fool in its worst sense,
   which fits exactly to its bearer. But dismissing this type of folly
   which is almost synonymous with consummate wickedness, of which indeed
   it is the outcome, we may turn to the distinction we have drawn between
   infatuation and senselessness in order to explain and understand some
   of the Proverbs in which the words occur.

   First of all we may notice how difficult it is to get rid of the folly
   of infatuation: "Though thou shouldest bray a person possessed of it in
   a mortar with a pestle among bruised corn, yet will it not depart from
   him." [651] "It is bound up in the heart of a child," [652] and the
   whole object of education is to get it out; but if childhood passes
   into manhood, and the childish wilfulness, self-confidence, and
   irrationality are not expelled, the case is well-nigh hopeless.
   Correction is practically useless; "He must be a thorough fool," it has
   been said, "who can learn nothing from his own folly;" but that is
   precisely the condition of the infatuated people we are considering;
   the only correction of their infatuation is a further increase of it.
   [653] The reason is practically choked; the connection between cause
   and effect is lost: thus every ill consequence of the rash act or of
   the vicious habit is regarded as a misfortune instead of a fault. The
   wretched victim of his own folly reviles fortune, nature, men, and even
   God, and will not recognise that his worst enemy is himself. Thus,
   while the wise are always learning and growing rich from experience,
   "the infatuation of senseless men is infatuation still." [654] It is
   this which makes them so hopeless to deal with; their vexation being
   quite irrational, and always refusing to recognise the obvious facts,
   is worse than a heavy stone or the piled-up overweight of sand for
   others to bear. [655] If a wise man has a case with such a person, the
   ill-judged fury and the misplaced laughter alike make it impossible to
   arrive at any sound settlement. [656]

   The untrained, undisciplined nature, which thus declines the guidance
   of reason and is unteachable because of its obstinate self-confidence,
   is constantly falling into sin. Indeed, strictly speaking, its whole
   attitude is sinful, its every thought is sin. [657] For reason is God's
   gift, and to slight it is to slight Him. He requires of us a readiness
   to be taught, and an openness to the lessons which are forced upon us
   by Nature, by experience, by our own human hearts. This flighty,
   feather-brained, inconsequential mode of thinking and living, the
   wilful neglect of all the means by which we might grow wiser, and the
   confident assurance that, whatever happens, we are not accountable for
   it, are all an offence against God, a failure to be what we ought to
   be, a missing of the mark, a neglect of the law, which is, in a word,
   sin.

   But now let us look at the fool in the second signification, which
   occurs in this twenty-sixth chapter so frequently,--the man who has
   become spiritually gross and insensible, unaware of Divine truths and
   consequently obtuse to human duties. We may take the proverbs in the
   order in which they occur. "As snow in summer, and as rain in harvest,
   so honour is not seemly for a fool." It is a melancholy fact that the
   kind of person here referred to is too often found in positions of
   honour among men. Men rise to distinction in an artificial order of
   society, not by wisdom, but by the accident of birth and opportunity;
   and not unfrequently the ill-placed honour itself leads to that
   insensibility which is so severely censured. The crass dulness, the
   perversity of judgment, the unfeeling severity, often displayed by
   prominent and distinguished persons, are no matter of surprise, and
   will not be, until human society learns to bring its honours only to
   the wise and the good. "Delicate living is not seemly for such
   persons." [658] It is precisely the comfort, the dignity, the
   exaltation, which prove their ruin. Now it is true that we cannot
   always trace the effects of this misplaced honour, but we are reminded
   that it is out of the course of Nature's eternal laws, incongruous as
   snow in summer, hurtful as rain in harvest. Consequently the due
   penalty must inevitably come. According to one reading of ver. 2, this
   penalty which overtakes the exalted fool is thus described: [659] "As
   the sparrow in her wandering, and the swallow in her flying, so a
   gratuitous curse shall come upon him." In any case ver. 3 states
   clearly enough what will eventually happen: "A whip for the horse, a
   bridle for the ass, and a rod for the back of fools." It is not, of
   course, that this penalty can be remedial, but Nature herself prepares
   a "rod for the back of him that is void of understanding;" [660] "As
   judgments are prepared for scorners, so are stripes for the back of
   fools." [661] Nor must we only understand this of fools that attain to
   unnatural honour: there are many dullards and insensates who are not
   made such by the stupidity of misdirected admiration, but by their own
   moral delinquencies; and as surely as the sparrow after flitting about
   all day returns to her nest in the dusk, or as the swallow in the long
   summer flight arrives at her appointed place, the punishment of folly
   will find out the delinquent. It may be long delayed, but an awakening
   comes at last; the man who hardened his heart, who turned away from the
   pleadings of God and mocked at His judgments, who chose the vanishing
   things of time and scorned the large fruition of eternity, discovers
   his incredible stupidity, and the lash of remorse falls all the more
   heavily because it is left in the hand of conscience alone. [662] We
   must never lose sight of the fact that by the fool is not meant the
   simple or the short-witted; there is in this folly of the proverbs a
   moral cause and a moral responsibility which involve a moral censure;
   the senseless of whom we are speaking are they whose "heart is waxed
   gross, and their ears are dull of hearing, and their eyes they have
   closed; lest haply they should perceive with their eyes, and hear with
   their ears, and understand with their heart." [663]

   We are in the main obliged to leave the insensate to God and their
   conscience, because it is well-nigh impossible for us to deal with
   them. They are intractable and even savage as wild animals. "Let a bear
   robbed of her whelps meet a man, rather than a fool in his
   infatuation." [664] They are irritated with any suggestion of spiritual
   things, indignant with any hint of their own case and its
   responsibilities. If, on the one hand, you try to approach them on
   their own ground, to realize their motives and work upon the base ideas
   which alone influence such minds, you seem to lose all power over them
   by coming down to their level. "Answer not a fool according to his
   infatuation, lest thou also be like him." [665] If, on the other hand,
   you feel bound to convict him of his folly, and to humble him to a
   sense of his position, you are obliged to use the language which will
   be intelligible to him. "Answer a fool according to his infatuation,
   lest he be wise in his own eyes." [666] I recollect one Sunday
   afternoon passing by a large village public-house, and it chanced that
   a little group of street preachers were doing their best to make known
   the Gospel to the idlers who were sitting on the benches outside. Going
   up to interest the men in what was being said, I was confronted by the
   landlord, who was in a state of almost frenzied indignation. He
   denounced the preachers as hypocrites and scoundrels, who lived on the
   honest earnings of those whom he saw around him. Every attempt to bring
   him to reason, to show that the men in question spent their money on
   drink and not on the preachers, to secure a patient hearing for the
   gracious message, was met only with violent abuse directed against
   myself. The man was precisely what is meant in these verses by a fool,
   one in whom all spiritual vision was blinded by greed and sensuality,
   in whom the plainest dictates of common sense and human courtesy were
   silenced; to answer him in his own vein was the only way of exposing
   his folly, and yet to answer him in such a way was to come down to his
   own level. What could be done except to leave him to the judgments
   which are prepared for scorners and to the stripes which await the back
   of fools? A fool uttereth all his anger, and facing the torrent of
   angry words it is impossible to effectually carry home to him any
   wholesome truth. [667]

   We have seen how the kind of man that we are describing is in an
   utterly false position when any dignity or honour is attributed to him;
   indeed, to give such honour is much the same as binding a stone in a
   sling to be immediately slung out again, probably to some one's injury;
   [668] but he is almost equally useless in a subordinate position. If,
   for instance, he is employed as a messenger, he is too dull to rightly
   conceive or correctly report the message. He will almost certainly
   colour it with his own fancies, if he does not pervert it to his own
   ends. To receive and to deliver any message accurately requires a
   certain truthfulness in perception and in speech of which this
   unfortunate creature is entirely devoid. Thus any one who employs him
   in this capacity might as well cut off his own feet, as he drinks
   damage to himself. [669]

   It is the awful punishment which comes to us all, when we allow our
   heart to wax gross, that wisdom itself becomes folly in our lips, and
   truth herself becomes error. Thus if we know a proverb, or a text, or a
   doctrine, we are sure to give it a lame application, so that, instead
   of supporting what we wish to enforce, it hangs down helpless like a
   cripple's legs. [670] In this way the insensate corruptness of the
   Medival Church tried to justify the abuse of giving great
   ecclesiastical preferments to young children by quoting the text, "Out
   of the mouths of babes and sucklings thou hast perfected praise."
   Sometimes the result of this culpable stupidity is far more disastrous;
   it is like "a thorn which runs up into a drunkard's hand," visiting
   with terrible condemnation those who have misused and perverted the
   truth, [671] as when Torquemada and the administrators of the
   Inquisition based their diabolical conduct on the gracious words of the
   Lord, "Compel them to come in." No, the fool's heart can give no
   wholesome message; it will turn the very message of the Gospel into a
   curse and a blight, and by its dull and revolting insensibility it will
   libel God to man, suggesting that the Infinite Father, the Eternal God,
   is altogether such an one as these who profess to speak in His name.

   The offence of the fool then cannot be condoned on the ground that he
   is only an enemy to himself. It is his master that he wrongs. As the
   proverb says, "A master produces all things, but a fool's wages and
   hirer too pass away." [672] The fool loses what he earns himself: that
   is true, but he undoes his employer also. One is our Master, even
   Christ; He hires us for service in His vineyard; when we suffer our
   heart to wax dull, when we grow unspiritual, unresponsive, and
   insensate, it is not only that we lose our reward, but we crucify the
   Son of God afresh and put Him to an open shame.

   And the worst, the most mournful, feature about this fool's condition
   is that it tends to a perpetual self-repetition: "As a dog that
   returneth to his vomit, so a fool is always repeating his folly." [673]
   Every hardening of the heart prepares for a fresh hardening, every
   refusal of truth will lead to another refusal. Last Sunday you managed
   to evade the message which God sent you: that makes it much easier to
   evade the message He sends you to-day. Next Sunday you will be almost
   totally indifferent. Soon you will get out of reach altogether of His
   word, saying it does you no good. Then you will deny that it is His
   word or His message. You pass from folly to folly, from infatuation to
   infatuation, until at last you can with a grave face accept the
   monstrous self-contradiction of materialism, or wallow unresisting in
   the slime of a tormenting sensuality. "As the dog returns to his
   vomit"!

   It must be owned that the condition of the fool seems sufficiently sad,
   and the gloom is deepened by the fact that our book knows nothing of a
   way by which the fool may become wise. The Proverbs uniformly regard
   the foolish and the wise as generically distinct; between the two
   classes there is a great gulf fixed. There is the fool, trusting in his
   own heart, incurring stripes, not profiting by them, always the same
   incorrigible and hopeless creature; and there is the wise man, always
   delivered, learning from experience, becoming better and better. [674]
   The only suggestion of hope is a comparative one: "Seest thou a man
   wise in his own conceit? there is more hope of a fool than of him."
   [675] But there is no tone of confidence about this assurance, because,
   as we have repeatedly seen, the case of the proud or conceited man is
   regarded as practically desperate.

   No, for comfort and hope in this matter we have to turn away from the
   Ancient Wisdom to the revealed Wisdom, Christ Jesus. It is He and He
   alone who practically forbids us to be hopeless about any one. A noble
   Roman in the time of the Punic Wars received an honourable recognition
   from the Senate because he had not in the darkest times despaired of
   the Republic. That is the kind of debt that we owe to the Saviour. He
   has not despaired of any human being; He will not let us despair. It is
   His peculiar power, tried and proved again and again, to turn the fool
   into the wise man. Observing the threefold distinction which is hidden
   under the word we have been examining, Christ is able to arouse the
   weak, fond, infatuated soul to a sense of its need. Could there be a
   better instance than that of the woman at the well,--a foolish creature
   living in conscious sin, yet full of specious religious talk? Did He
   not awake in her the thirst for the living water, and satisfy the
   craving which He had excited? Christ is able to transform the dull and
   heavy soul, that has suffered itself to be mastered by greed and
   petrified by selfishness. Was not this what He did to Zaccheus the
   publican? And even with that worst kind of fool, whose heart is
   withered up within him by reason of sin, and who has learnt to say in
   his heart that there is no God, [676] the Lord is not helpless. We do
   not see such an one in the pages of the New Testament, because the
   folly of Atheism was not among the follies of those times. But in our
   own day it is an experience by no means uncommon; when an avowed
   infidel comes under the power of the Gospel, Christ enters into him
   with the overwhelming conviction that there is a God; Christ shows him
   how it is sin which has thus obscured the elementary conviction of the
   human spirit; and, by the direct power of Christ, his heart comes to
   him again as that of a little child, while in the rapturous joy of
   believing he lays aside the folly which made him doubt along with the
   sin which made him unwilling to believe.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [642] Prov. x. 23.

   [643] Prov. x. 18.

   [644] Prov. xii. 23.

   [645] Prov. xiv. 33.

   [646] Prov. xiv. 7.

   [647] Prov. xvii. 16.

   [648] Prov. xxi. 20.

   [649] Prov. xvii. 21.

   [650] Prov. xxx. 22.

   [651] Prov. xxvii. 22.

   [652] Prov. xxii. 15.

   [653] Prov. xvi. 22.

   [654] Prov. xiv. 24. This seems simpler than supposing that the clause
   'vlt 'vlt kmylym contains a play upon the possible double meaning of
   'vlt, which, though it yields an excellent sense,--"the power of fools
   is only folly," i.e., when they have power they turn it only to a
   foolish account (cf. xxvi. 1),--must be regarded as very obscure,
   especially seeing that we have no positive instance of 'vlt as a
   derivative of 'vl in the sense of "power."

   [655] Prov. xxvii. 3.

   [656] Prov. xxix. 9.

   [657] Prov. xxiv. 9.

   [658] Prov. xix. 10.

   [659] This is reading lv for l', a constant source of confusion and
   interchange in Hebrew MSS.

   [660] Prov. x. 13.

   [661] Prov. xix. 29.

   [662]

   "Quos divi conscia facti

   Mens habet attonitos et surdo verbere cdit,

   Occultum quatiente animo tortore flagellum."

   --Juv., Sat., xiii., 193.

   [663] Matt. xiii. 15.

   [664] Prov. xvii. 12.

   [665] Prov. xxvi. 4.

   [666] Prov. xxvi. 5.

   [667] Prov. xxix. 11.

   [668] Prov. xxvi. 8.

   [669] Prov. xxvi. 6.

   [670] Prov. xxvi. 7.

   [671] Prov. xxvi. 9.

   [672] Prov. xxvi. 10. This rendering Delitzsch obtained by altering the
   vowel points in the first skr into skr, and the sense is good, if a
   little far-fetched. On the other hand, the received reading gives a
   plain though a somewhat insipid meaning: "Much produces all,"--whoever
   has a little and uses it well quickly gets more,--"but he that hires a
   fool is as he who hires passers by," i.e. the employment of a fool is a
   barren undertaking which practically leads to nothing.

   [673] Prov. xxvi. 11.

   [674] Prov. xxviii. 26; cf. ix. 8 and xxiii. 9.

   [675] Prov. xxvi. 12.

   [676] nvl, Psalm xiv. 1.
     __________________________________________________________________

XXVII.

  LIVING DAY BY DAY.

     "Boast not thyself of to-morrow, for thou knowest not what a day
     will bring forth."--Prov. xxvii. 1.

     "The grave and destruction are never satisfied; and the eyes of men
     are never satisfied;" and LXX. adds, "An abomination to the Lord is
     he who sets his eye, and undisciplined men uncontrolled in
     tongue."--Prov. xxvii. 20.

     "Whoso keepeth the fig tree shall eat the fruit thereof, so he that
     waits on his Lord eats of the honour."--Prov. xxvii. 18.

   Here is a wholesome lesson for us. We are to trust no future, however
   pleasant; we are to dwell in no past, however honourable. Life consists
   of a present, given to us day by day; this is our whole wealth;
   squandered, it cannot be recovered; neglected, it withers as a leaf.
   Titus, the Roman Emperor, would say in the evening, when he had omitted
   his duties or failed in his purposes, Perdidi diem, "I have lost a
   day;"--yes, that lost day is lost for ever; other days may come, but
   not that one; the duties of that day may be performed afterwards or by
   other hands, but still the day is lost, because it passed away empty.
   The thief which cheats us of our days, and beggars us of our wealth, is
   the specious thought that to-morrow belongs to us. The illusion is as
   old as the world, but is to-day as fresh and powerful as ever. We have
   to shake ourselves free of a spell, and awake out of a dream, to see
   that when to-morrow comes it is already to-day.

   We only begin to live in any true and satisfactory sense when we have
   learnt to take each day by itself, and to use it as if it were our
   last, and indeed as if it were our all; dismissing the thought of
   to-morrow as a mere phantom which for ever evades our grasp. Life is a
   mosaic, a large work shaping on the wall or in the dome of some vast
   cathedral which eye hath not yet seen; and it can only be effectually
   wrought if, with minute and concentrated care, the little piece of
   coloured glass which we call To-day is duly fixed into its bedding and
   fitted exactly to its immediate neighbours. "Why do you work with such
   intensity?" the great artist was once asked; "Because I work for
   eternity," was the answer. And that is why each day is of such
   importance; that is why each day demands all our thought and care:
   eternity is made up of days, and the present day is all of eternity
   that we can ever possess.

   It is well for us then each morning to take the day fresh from God's
   hands, and at once to throw our whole soul into it, and to live it with
   a pure intensity, a sense of solemn and joyful responsibility.


   "Oh, Day, if I squander a wavelet of thee,

   A mite of my twelve-hours' treasure,

   The least of thy gazes or glances

   (Be they grants thou art bound to or gifts above measure),

   One of thy choices or one of thy chances

   (Be they tasks God imposed thee or freaks of thy pleasure),--

   My Day, if I squander such labour or leisure,

   Then shame fall on Asolo, mischief on me." [677]

   But it may be said, Is not this the life of a mere butterfly? Is it not
   the mark of a prudent man to work with his eye on the future,--"Prepare
   thy work without, and make it ready for thee in the field, and
   afterwards build thine house"? [678] Is it not just what we have to
   complain of in the foolish man that he ignores to-morrow,--"A prudent
   man seeth the evil and hideth himself, but the simple pass on and
   suffer for it"? [679]

   Here is an apparent contradiction which requires reflection. And the
   difficulty increases when we remember that most worthy works are the
   labour of years: an architect lays his plans for a great building which
   he can hardly hope to see finished in his own lifetime; an author
   spends days and months and years in the preparation of materials, and
   must depend on the uncertain future for a time to shape them into a
   book; a statesman, in proportion as he is wise, avoids what is called a
   hand-to-mouth policy, and lays his plans with his eye on distant
   possibilities, well knowing that his immediate actions are liable to
   misunderstanding, and may prove to be a complete failure unless the
   opportunity is accorded him of realizing his far-reaching schemes. And,
   in the same way, youth is spent in education which derives all its
   value from the expected years of manhood, and all the days of a good
   life are necessarily a preparation for that which is to come after: we
   must study in order that we may teach; we must train ourselves for
   duties which will come upon us, as we may reasonably suppose, in some
   distant future. Yet our to-morrow is unknown; we are not to boast
   ourselves of it; we cannot tell what a day may bring forth, and must
   therefore live only in to-day.

   Now the solution of this difficulty leads us to one of the profoundest
   of all spiritual truths. It is this: No life can be worth anything at
   all apart from the Eternal God, and faith in Him. Life cannot be really
   lived if it is merely "a measure of sliding sand" taken "from under the
   feet of the years." Our swift days cannot be effectually and wisely
   used unless we are linked with Him who embraces in Himself the past,
   the present, and the future. Our work, whatever it may be, cannot be
   rightly done unless we are, and know ourselves to be, in the great
   Taskmaster's sight. The proper use of each day can only be made if we
   are confident that our times are in His hands; only in this quiet
   assurance can we have composure and detachment of spirit enough to give
   our whole strength to the duty in hand. We must be sure that the
   Master-Artist knows the whole mosaic, and is ordering all the parts,
   before we can surrender ourselves to the task of putting to-day's piece
   into its place; we must have complete faith in the Architect who is
   designing the whole structure, before we can have our mind at leisure
   from itself to chip our block of stone or to carve our tiny gurgoyle.
   We can only live in the present, making the most of that which is
   really ours, on condition that we have God as our Future, relieving us
   of all anxious care, and assuring to us just strength for to-day.

   Thus our text has an implied contrast, which we may draw out in this
   way: "Boast not thyself of to-morrow, for thou knowest not what a day
   may bring forth;" but boast thyself in God all the day long, [680] for
   thou knowest that He will bring forth righteousness, wisdom, and love
   continually.

   Now let us follow out some of the consequences of this spiritual
   attitude. Examine the condition of these restless human hearts all
   around us without God. They are all toiling for to-morrow. Here is one
   making money, as it is called; he is looking forward to laying aside so
   many thousands this year; in a few more years he hopes to realize a
   round sum which will relieve him from the necessity of toil and of
   further money-making. His eye is set upon that goal. At last he reaches
   it. Now his desire should be satisfied, but no, "Sheol and Abaddon are
   never satisfied, and the eyes of man are never satisfied." [681] He
   does not stay a night at the desired goal; he is off before sunset; all
   the strain and the fret must be faced over again. Or look at the
   boundless ambition which possesses godless men; honours achieved only
   whet their appetite for more. We need not assume that the ambition is
   unworthy; all we have to notice is its insatiability; in politics, in
   literature, in art, in social distinction, it is like Sheol and
   Abaddon,--a maw that ever opens; a gulf that can swallow anything and
   everything, yet never be filled. The LXX. addition [682] seems to
   regard this uncontrolled desire as the mark of deficient culture; and,
   spiritually speaking, no doubt it is. Men without God are always
   uncultured; they have not found the centre of their being, they have
   not procured the key-stone to their accumulated knowledge, and it is in
   consequence, not an arch through which they can travel to any goal, but
   a confused pile which blocks the way. These desperate strivings and
   loud-tongued, undisciplined desires are an abomination to the Lord,
   because they mar His mighty plan and introduce disorder where He
   intended order, discord where He intended harmony, deformity where He
   intended beauty. They are the work of egoism instead of theism.

   It is needless to dwell upon the heart-sores and the disappointments
   which fall to the lot of the people whom we are thinking of. What
   ghastly mockery the morrows on which they counted prove to be! In some
   lonely and rocky island, girdled by the moaning of the dreary seas, and
   cut off from all the interests which gave to life its excitement,
   egotism ends its days. Or it is on some restless couch, surrounded by
   all the outward trappings of wealth and power, that the dying spirit
   cries, "My kingdom for an inch of time!" The man who by his brilliant
   genius has drawn all his generation after him passes, bearing "through
   Europe the pageant of his bleeding heart," to a hopeless grave. The
   woman who has achieved the end of her ambition, ruling the courts of
   fashion, the acknowledged queen of salons, ends her days with a sense
   of frustration, cynical in her contempt for the world which was foolish
   enough to follow and admire her.

   But, on the other hand, here is one who boasts himself in God.


   "Lord, it belongs not to my care,"

   is the language of his spirit,


   "Whether I die or live;

   To love and serve Thee is my share,

   And that Thy grace must give."

   The first thing that strikes you in him in his perfect peace. His mind
   is stayed on God. The future has no terrors for him, nor has it any
   joys. God is all in all to him, and God is his now. His treasure is in
   possession, and moth and rust do not corrupt it, nor can thieves break
   through or steal. To say that he is contented seems too mild a term for
   so positive and joyous a calm. But in contrast with the discontent
   which prevails everywhere outside of God, it is worth while to dilate
   on this passive virtue of contentment. That endless worry about little
   things has ceased: he is not annoyed because some one fails to
   recognise him; he is not affected by the malicious or scandalous things
   which are said about him; he is not anxious for human recognition, and
   is therefore never distressed because others are more courted than he
   is; he knows nothing of that malignant passion of jealousy which is
   worse than the cruelty of wrath and the flooding of anger; [683] he
   does not want wealth and he does not dread poverty. He says:--


   "Some have too much, yet still do crave;

   I little have, and seek no more:

   They are but poor though much they have,

   And I am rich with little store:

   They poor, I rich; they beg, I give;

   They lack, I leave; they pine, I live." [684]

   When we have entered into this Divine content and are made by our
   absolute trust in God free from care for the future, it is wonderful
   how quick we become to see good in apparent evils. To the world this is
   so incredible that it suspects insincerity, but there is nothing more
   sincere and more real. A poor child who was blind found the greatest
   blessing in the affliction, saying, "You see, I can give more to the
   Missionary Society than the other children, because I can knit in the
   dark, and have not to spend money on candles." You go to one of God's
   children expecting to find him broken down and rebellious under some
   great and undeserved calamity, but you find that he has discovered a
   blessing in the loss before you get there, and is actually rejoicing,
   or at any rate he is replying to all provocations, "The Lord gave and
   the Lord took away; blessed be the name of the Lord." He is afflicted,
   but you cannot think of him as afflicted, for "all the days of the
   afflicted are evil, but he that is of a cheerful spirit hath a
   continual feast." [685]

   Yes, it is that illusive and imaginary morrow that robs us of our
   peace; it is the misgiving, the anxious care, the dark foreboding. But
   when we put God our Father in place of the morrow, and know that He
   comprehends and sees all that we have need of, the peace which passes
   all understanding settles down upon our spirit, and steals into our
   eyes, and breathes on our lips, and men perceive even in us why our
   Father is called "the God of Peace."

   The second thing which strikes us in those who have learnt to make
   their boast in God rather than in the morrow is the service which they
   render to their fellows. This is not only because they are able to turn
   their undivided attention to the duty which lies nearest, and to do
   with all their heart what their hand finds to do, but the very spirit
   of serenity in which they live is a constant help and blessing to all
   who are around them. It may have been given to you to come into contact
   with such a soul; in his presence your restlessness dies away, it seems
   as if your burning brow had been touched with a soothing hand; perhaps
   "with half-open eyes you were treading the borderland dim 'twixt vice
   and virtue," and that quiet spirit seemed like a clear shaft of the
   dawn revealing where you trod; perhaps you were heart-broken with a
   great sorrow, and the restfulness and confidence of that strong soul
   gave you an indefinable consolation, hope broke into your heart, and
   even joy. In receiving that help from what the man was rather than from
   what he gave, you became aware that this was the highest service that
   any human being can render to another. It is a great thing to succour
   the physical and material sufferings of men; it is a greater to bring
   them clear truths and to give them some stimulus and guidance in the
   intellectual life; but it is greatest of all to communicate spiritual
   sustenance and power, for that means to bring souls into actual and
   conscious contact with God.

   One of the noblest examples of this service to humanity is furnished in
   the life and the writings of St. Paul. His personal presence became the
   new creation of that ancient heathen civilisation, and countless
   individual souls were, through the inner life which he presented,
   brought to a complete change and made new creatures in Christ. His
   writings have been, ever since he died, a constant source of life and
   strength to many generations of men. He has been misunderstood, "the
   ignorant and unstedfast have wrested" what he wrote, but none the less
   he has been to the Church a perpetual regenerator, and, as a great
   writer [686] of our own day has declared, "The doctrine of Paul will
   arise out of the tomb where for centuries it has lain covered; it will
   edify the Church of the future; it will have the consent of happier
   generations, the applause of less superstitious ages." Now what is the
   secret of this power? It is given in his own words, "For to me to live
   is Christ, and to die is gain." [687] He was able to fling himself with
   that passionate temerity into the present duty, he was able to preach
   the word with that victorious vigour in season and out of season, just
   because the whole burden of the unknown future was rolled away from
   him, and he, more than any man that ever lived, understood what it is
   to live just for to-day.

   Every Christian may possess the same secret; it is the open secret of
   the Sermon on the Mount; as our gracious Lord told us, we may be as the
   lilies of the field and as the birds of the air, without anxiety or
   misgiving, knowing that our Heavenly Father cares for us. It is not
   given to us all to be great philanthropists, great reformers, great
   preachers, but it is put within the reach of all to render to others
   the sweet service of abiding always in trustful and loving submission
   to God's will, and of shedding upon all the light of our peace.

   And this leads us to notice one last feature of this true spiritual
   life. It has an honour of its own, though it is not an earthly honour;
   it has a reward, though it is not a material reward. "Whoso keepeth the
   fig tree shall eat the fruit thereof, and he that waiteth on his master
   eats of the honour." [688] That is a saying which can only apply in a
   very modified degree to earthly service and human masters. How many
   loyal servants of kings have been deserted by their lords at the
   critical moment, and left to eat the fruit of disgrace and ignominy!
   But the saying applies in its fulness to our Master Christ and His
   service. Think of the Christian life under this simple figure; it is
   like the careful cultivation of the fruit tree. He is the Vine. Our
   sole concern is to keep in touch with Him, to sit at His feet, to watch
   for His fruit, to see that no other concern disturbs the quiet relation
   of perfect loyalty and devotion to Him. Our aim is not to do our own
   business or seek our own ends, but to be sure that we are always awake
   to His purposes and obedient to the demands which He makes upon us. It
   is not ours to reason why, but it is ours to do at all costs whatsoever
   He bids us do to-day. We have nothing to do with to-morrow; we have no
   responsibility for the fruit, for no fruit-bearing power lies in us.
   All we have to do is to keep the fig tree. Now when we abide in this
   concentrated and whole-hearted devotion to our Master,--when for us to
   live is Christ,--then honour comes to us unsought, but not unwelcome.
   The fruit of service is to the taste of the true servant the highest
   honour that he can imagine. We need no apocalyptic vision to assure us.
   His word is enough, confirmed as it is by a constant and growing
   experience. The servants of our Lord already stand before Him, holding
   in their hands the talents which they have gained for Him; already they
   hear His gracious "Well done," and the sound of it is more musical in
   their ears than all the acclamations of their fellow-creatures. This is
   their honour; what could they have more? they are counted one with
   Christ; they shared His travail, and now they share His satisfaction
   and His joy.

   And thus those who make their boast in God, and do not boast of the
   morrow, find that the morrow itself becomes clear to them in the light
   of His countenance; they do in a sense know what it will bring forth:
   it will bring forth what they desire, for it will bring forth their
   Father's will; it will bring forth the victory and the glory of Christ.
   "Henceforth ye shall see Him coming in the clouds of heaven." Is not
   that enough? When our hearts have learnt to hanker only after God's
   will, to desire only Christ's victory, they may boast themselves even
   of to-morrow; for to-morrow holds in its bosom an assurance of blessing
   and joy.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [677] Browning, Pippa Passes.

   [678] Prov. xxiv. 27.

   [679] Prov. xxii. 3; xxvii. 12.

   [680] Psalm xliv. 8.

   [681] Prov. xxvii. 20.

   [682] See heading of chapter.

   [683] Prov. xxvii. 4.

   [684] Sir Edward Dyer (b. 1540).

   [685] Prov. xv. 15.

   [686] Matthew Arnold.

   [687] Phil. i. 21.

   [688] Prov. xxvii. 18.
     __________________________________________________________________

XXVIII.

  AN ASPECT OF ATONEMENT.

     "He that hideth (mksh) his transgressions shall not prosper; but
     whoso confesseth and forsaketh them shall obtain mercy."--Prov.
     xxviii. 13.

     "Happy is the man that feareth alway; but he that hardeneth his
     heart shall fall into mischief."--Prov. xxviii. 14.

     "The fear of the Lord tendeth to life, and he that hath it shall
     abide satisfied. He shall not be visited with evil."--Prov. xix. 23.

     "By mercy and truth iniquity is atoned for, and by the fear of the
     Lord men depart from evil."--Prov. xvi. 6.

   The Hebrew word (kphr) which is used for the idea of atonement is one
   which originally signifies to cover. Sin is a hideous sore, a shocking
   deformity, which must be hidden from the eyes of men, and much more
   from the holy eyes of God. Thus the Old Testament speaks about a Robe
   of Righteousness which is to be thrown over the ulcerated and leprous
   body of sin. Apart from this covering, the disease is seen working out
   its sure and terrible results. "A man that is laden with the blood of
   any person shall flee unto the pit: let no man stay him," [689] and
   though blood-guiltiness appears to us the worst of sins, all sin is
   alike in its issue; every sinner may be seen by seeing eyes "fleeing
   unto the pit," and no man can stay him or deliver him. Or, to vary the
   image, the sinful man is exposed to the violence of justice, which
   beats like a storm upon all unprotected heads; he needs to be covered;
   he needs some shelter, some hiding-place, or he must be swept away.

   But the objection which immediately occurs to us is this: what is the
   use of covering sin if the sin itself remains? The disease is not cured
   because a decent garment is drawn over the suffering part; indeed, it
   is not hard to conceive a case in which the covering might aggravate
   the mischief. If the idea of covering is to be of any service, it must
   be cleared from all misconception; there is a kind of hiding which may
   be ruinous, a garment which may drive the disease inward and hasten its
   deadly operation, a covert from the storm which may crush and stifle
   the person whom it professes to protect. "He that covereth his
   transgressions," in that way, "shall not prosper." Every attempt to
   conceal from God or from man or from oneself that one is diseased with
   sin is ineffectual: every lame excuse which seeks to palliate the
   guilt; every hypocritical pretence that the thing done has not been
   done, or that it is not what men usually suppose it to be; every
   ingenious argumentation which seeks to represent sin as something other
   than sin, as a mere defect or taint in the blood, as a hereditary and
   unavoidable weakness, as an aberration of the mind for which one is not
   responsible, or as a merely conventional and artificial offence,--all
   such attempts at hiding must be failures, "covering" of that kind can
   be no atonement. Quite the reverse; this trifling with conscience, this
   deluded self-righteousness, is the worst possible aggravation of the
   sin. Hidden in that way, though it be, as it were, in the bowels of the
   earth, sin becomes a poisonous gas, more noxious for confinement, and
   liable to break out in awful and devastating explosions.

   The covering of sin [690] which is spoken of in xvi. 6 is of a very
   different and of a quite particular kind. Combining this verse with the
   others at the head of the chapter, we may observe that every effectual
   "covering" of sin in God's sight involves three elements,--confession,
   forsaking, and a changed practice.

   First, there is confession. This appears on the face of it to be a
   paradox: the only way of covering sin is to uncover it. But it is
   strictly true. We must make a clean breast of it; we must acknowledge
   its full extent and enormity; we must spare the patient ear of God no
   detail of our guilt. The foul, explosive gases must be let out into the
   open, since every attempt to confine them increases their destructive
   power. The running sore must be exposed to the Physician's eye, since
   every rag put over it to hide it becomes steeped in its defiling tides.
   It is true, confession is a painful and a weary task: it is like
   removing a heap of dust and refuse by spadefuls,--each bit as it is
   disturbed fills the atmosphere with choking particles and noisome
   smells; worse and worse is revealed the farther we go. We came to
   confess a single fault, and we found that it was but a broken sherd
   lying on the foul and pestilential heap. Confession leads to
   confession, discovery to discovery. It is terribly humiliating. "Am I
   then so bad as this?" is the horrified cry as each candid admission
   shows only more and worse that must be admitted. True confession can
   never be made into a priest's ear,--to men we can only confess the
   wrongs which we have done to men; but true confession is the awful tale
   of what we have done to God, against whom only we have sinned and done
   evil in His sight. It is sometimes urged that confession to a priest
   gives the penitent relief: possibly, but it is a false relief; since
   the eye of the priest is not omniscient, the sinner confesses only what
   he chooses, brings the broken sherd, and receives absolution for that
   in lieu of removing the whole heap of abominations that underlie. When
   we have gone as far as we can in laying ourselves bare to man, there
   remain vast untraversed tracts of our life and our mind which are
   reserved; "Private road" is written on all the approaches, and
   trespassers are invariably prosecuted. It is only to God that a real
   confession can be made, because we know that to Him all is necessarily
   evident; with Him no subterfuges avail; He traverses those untraversed
   tracts; there are no private roads from which He is excluded; He
   knoweth our thoughts afar off.

   The first step in the "covering" of sin is to realize this. If our sins
   are to be really covered they must first be laid bare; we must frankly
   own that all things are open to Him with whom we have to do; we must
   get away from the priests and into the hands of the High Priest; we
   must abjure the confessional and bring God Himself into the secret
   places of our hearts to search us and try us and see if there be any
   evil way in us. The reserve, and the veilings, which every individual
   cannot but maintain between himself and all other individuals, must be
   torn away, in full and absolute confession to God Himself.

   Secondly. There is a confession, especially that fostered by the habit
   of confessing to priests, which is unaccompanied by any forsaking of
   the evil, or any departing from iniquity in general. Many times have
   men gone to their priests to receive absolution beforehand for the sin
   which they intended to commit; or they have postponed their confession
   to their deathbeds, when there will be, as they suppose, no further
   sins to turn from. Confession of that kind is devoid of all
   significance; it covers no sins, it really only aggravates them. No
   confession is of the least avail--and indeed no real confession can be
   made to God at all--unless the heart turns away from the evil which is
   confessed, and actually departs at once, so far as it knows and is
   able, from all iniquity.

   The glib language of confession has been and is a deadly snare to
   multitudes. How easy it is to say, or even to musically chant, "We have
   done that we ought not to have done; we have left undone that which we
   ought to have done." There is no pain in such a confession if we once
   distinctly admit that it is a normal and natural state of mind for us
   to be in, and that as we say it to-day, so we shall say it to-morrow,
   and again the next day to the end. But real confession is so painful,
   and even heart-rending, because it is only of value when we begin from
   that moment onwards "to do what we ought to do, and to leave undone
   what we ought not to do." It is well for us, perhaps, to confess not so
   much sin in the abstract as our own particular transgressions. Sin is
   too shadowy a monster for us to definitely avoid and forsake; like
   death, its kinsman,--Death of whom Milton says:--


   "What seemed his head

   The likeness of a kingly crown had on,"--

   Sin is formless, vague, impalpable. But our own individual
   transgressions can be fixed and defined; bringing ourselves to the test
   of the Law, we can say particularly, "This practice of mine is
   condemned, this habit of mine is sinful, this point of my character is
   evil, this reticence, this indolence, this reluctance, in confessing
   Christ and in serving His cause, is all wrong;" and then we can
   definitely turn our back on the practice or the habit, we can
   distinctly get rid of the blot in our character, we can fly this guilty
   silence, rouse ourselves from our selfish indolence. "We live to grow
   less like what we have been;" and it is this act of the will, this
   resolute purpose, this loathing what once you loved, and turning
   towards that which once you ignored,--it is, in a word, the twin
   process of repentance and conversion, that constitutes the second act
   in this "covering" of sin. Not, of course, that in a moment the tyranny
   of old habits can be broken, or the virtue of new activities acquired;
   but "the forsaking" and "the departing from" are instantaneous
   exertions of the will. Zaccheus, directly the Lord speaks to him,
   stands forth, and breaks with his sins, renounces his extortions,
   resolving to make amends for the past, and enters on a new line of
   conduct, promising to give the half of his goods to the poor. That is
   the essential seal of every true confession: "Whoso confesseth and
   forsaketh" his transgressions.

   Thirdly. This has led us to see that the confession of sins and the
   conversion from them must issue in a positive practice of mercy and
   truth, in order to make the process of which we are speaking complete:
   "By mercy and truth iniquity is atoned for."

   It is this part of the "covering" which is so easily, so frequently,
   and so fatally overlooked. It is supposed that sins can be hidden
   without being removed, and that the covering of what is called imputed
   righteousness will serve instead of the covering of actual
   righteousness. To argue against this view theoretically is at the
   present day happily quite superfluous; but it is still necessary to
   contend against its subtle practical effects. There is no verity more
   wholesome and more needed than the one contained in this proverb. Sin
   may be summed up in two clauses: it is the Want of Mercy and it is the
   Want of Truth. All our illconduct to our fellow-men comes from the
   cruelty and hardness of our selfish nature. Lust and greed and ambition
   are the outcome of pitilessness; we injure the weak and ruin the
   helpless, and trample on our competitors, and stamp out the poor; our
   eye does not pity. Again, all our offence against God is insincerity or
   wilful lying. We are false to ourselves, we are false to one another,
   and so we become false to the unseen verities, and false to God. When a
   human spirit denies the spiritual world and the spiritual Cause which
   can alone account for it, is it not what Plato used to call "a lie in
   the soul"? It is the deep inward and vital contradiction of
   consciousness; it is equivalent to saying, "I am not I," or, "That
   which is, is not."

   Now when we have lived in sin, without mercy or without truth, or
   without both; when our life up to a certain point has been a flagrant
   selfishness of absolute indifference to our fellows, or a flagrant lie
   denying Him in whom we live and move and have our being; or when, as is
   so often the fact, the selfishness and the falseness have gone
   together, an inextricable and mutually dependent pair of evils, there
   can be no real covering of the sin, unless selfishness gives place to
   mercy and falsehood to truth. No verbal confession can possibly avail,
   no turning from the past iniquities, however genuine for the time, can
   have any permanent significance, unless the change is a reality, an
   obvious, living, and working fact. If a man supposes that he has become
   religious, but remains cruel and selfish, pitiless, unmerciful to his
   fellow-men, depend upon it that man's religion is vain; the atonement
   in which he trusts is a fiction, and avails no more than the hecatombs
   which Carthage offered to Melcarth availed to gain a victory over Rome.
   If a man counts himself saved, but remains radically untrue, false in
   his speech, insincere in his professions, careless in his thought about
   God, unjust in his opinions about men and the world, he is certainly
   under a lamentable delusion. Though he has, as he thinks, believed, he
   has not believed to the saving of his soul; though he has undergone a
   change, he has changed from one lie to another, and is in no way better
   off. It is by mercy and truth that iniquity can be covered.

   Now it will be generally admitted that we do not take the course which
   has just been described unless we have the fear of God before our eyes.
   Nothing but the thought of His holiness and the awe which it inspires,
   and in some cases even, nothing but the absolute terror of Him who can
   by no means clear the guilty, moves the heart of man to confession,
   turns him away from his sins, or inclines him to mercy and truth. When
   the fear of God is removed from men's eyes they not only continue in
   sin, but they quickly come to believe that they have no sins to
   confess; for indeed when God is put out of the question that is in a
   certain sense true. It is a mere fact of observation, confirmed now by
   many changing experiences of humanity, that it is "by the fear of the
   Lord men depart from iniquity;" and it is very significant to notice
   how many of those who have entirely put away the fear of the Lord from
   their own eyes have strongly advocated keeping it before the eyes of
   others as the most convenient and economical police resource. [691]
   Many fervent free-thinkers are thankful that their opinions are only
   held by a minority, and have no wish to see the whole of society
   committed to the cult which they would have us believe is all that
   their own religious nature requires.

   But supposing that any one of us is led into the position of confession
   and conversion and amendment which is described in these Proverbs: what
   follows? That person, says the text, "shall obtain mercy." The gracious
   Father immediately, unconditionally, and absolutely pardons. This is
   the burden of the Old Testament, and it is certainly not repealed by
   the New. "If we confess our sins, He is faithful and just to forgive us
   our sins." "Repent, and be converted," said St. Peter to the crowd at
   Pentecost, "that your sins may be blotted out." The New Testament is
   indeed on this point the louder and the clearer echo of the Old. The
   New Testament explains that saying which sounds so strange in the mouth
   of a perfectly just and Holy God, "I, even I, am He that blotteth out
   thy transgressions for Mine own sake." [692] Human theologies have
   imagined obstacles in the way, but God never admitted them for a
   moment. Clear as the truth that the soul which sins should die, was the
   promise that the soul which turned from its sin, and did that which is
   righteous in the eyes of the Lord, should live. No earthly father,
   frankly and unconditionally forgiving his penitent, sobbing child,
   could be so prompt, so eager as God. While the prodigal is yet a great
   way off the Father runs to meet him, and hides all his broken
   confessions in the rush of His embrace.

   But we hesitate to admit and rejoice in this grand truth because of an
   uneasy fear that it is ignoring what is called the Atonement of Christ.
   It is a very proper hesitation, so long as we settle it within
   ourselves that these sweet and beautiful utterances of the Old
   Testament cannot possibly be limited or reversed by that Gospel which
   came to give effect and fulfilment to them. Is not the solution of any
   difficulty that has occurred to us to be found here? The sacrifice and
   the work of Christ create in the human soul those conditions which we
   have been considering. He came to give repentance unto Israel. It is
   His patient love in bearing all our infirmities and sins, His
   mysterious self-offering on the Cross, that can effectually bring us to
   confession, conversion, and amendment. Our hearts may have been hard as
   the nether millstone, but at the Cross they are broken and melted. No
   stern denunciation of sin has ever moved our stubbornness; but as we
   realize what sin did to Him, when He became sin for us, the fear of the
   Lord falls upon us, we tremble, and cry, What shall we do to be saved?
   Then again, it is His perfect holiness, the beauty of those "stainless
   years He passed beneath the Syrian blue," which wakes in us the
   hankering desire for purity and goodness, and makes us turn with a
   genuine disgust from the sins which must seem so loathsome in His
   sight. His "neither do I condemn thee; go, and sin no more," gives us a
   more burning hatred of sin than all the self-righteous censures and
   condemnations of the Pharisees. It is in the pages of the Gospels that
   we have first understood what concrete goodness is; it has risen upon
   our night like a clear, liquid star, and the passion of it has entered
   into our souls. And then, finally, it is the Risen Lord, unto whom all
   power is given in heaven and in earth, that can really transform our
   nature, flood our heart with love, and fill our mind with truth, so
   that, in the language of the proverb, mercy and truth may atone for
   iniquity.

   Is it not because Christ by His coming, by His living, by His dying, by
   His risen power, produces in the believer repentance and confession of
   sins, conversion and departing from sin, regeneration and actual
   holiness, that we say He has covered our sins? What meaning can be
   attached to Atonement apart from its effects? And in what other way, we
   may ask, could He really give us such a covering or atonement, than by
   creating in us a clean heart and renewing a right spirit within us?
   Sometimes, by a not unnatural confusion of language, we speak of the
   sacrificial death of our Lord as if it, apart from the effects produced
   in the believing heart, were in itself the Atonement. But that is not
   the language of the New Testament, which employs the idea of
   reconciliation [693] where the Old Testament would employ the idea of
   atoning; and clearly there can be no reconciliation accomplished
   between man and God until, not only God is reconciled to man, but man
   also is reconciled to God. And it is when we come to observe more
   accurately the language of the New Testament that this statement of the
   Proverbs is seen to be no contradiction, but an anticipation, of it.
   Only the regenerate soul, that in which the graces of the Christ-life,
   mercy and truth, have been implanted by Christ, is really reconciled
   with God, i.e., effectually atoned. And though the framer of the
   proverb had but a dim conception of the way in which the Son of God
   would come to regenerate human hearts and make them in harmony with the
   Father, yet he saw clearly what Christians have too often overlooked,
   and expressed tersely what theology has too often obscured, that every
   effectual Atonement must include in itself the actual, moral
   regeneration of the sinner. And further, whoever wrote the verse which
   stands at the head of our chapter understood what many preachers of the
   Gospel have left in perplexing obscurity, that God would necessarily,
   from His very nature, provide the offering and the sacrifice on the
   ground of which every repentant soul that turns to Him could be
   immediately and freely forgiven.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [689] Prov. xxviii. 17.

   [690] It may be necessary to point out to the reader that in
   approaching the subject of atonement from the standpoint of the book of
   Proverbs, and merely in the expository treatment of the passages before
   us, the so-called objective ground of atonement in the sacrifice of
   Christ does not come into view, but its necessity becomes manifest as
   each step in the exposition reveals how impossible it would be for us,
   apart from the work of our Lord Jesus Christ, to realize those
   conditions which are here laid down as indispensable to pardon and
   acceptance with God.

   [691] Voltaire rose once from the table at Ferney, where some atheists
   were discussing their views. He said he could not let his servants hear
   this talk, for they would rob and murder him if that was true.

   [692] Isa. xliii. 25.

   [693] See Rom. v. 11. This is the only place in the New Testament where
   even in the Authorised Version the word "atonement" occurs. But the
   contention of the text is not one of words, but of facts. Whatever
   terms are used, the Gospels and the Epistles all agree in identifying
   the salvation of God with an actual and practical righteousness wrought
   out by the Holy Spirit in the lives of those who believe in Christ as
   their Saviour.
     __________________________________________________________________

XXIX.

  THE NEED OF REVELATION.

     "Where no vision is, a people casts off restraint, but he that
     keepeth the law is happy."--Prov. xxix. 18.

   The form of the proverb shows that we are not to treat the vision and
   the law as opposite, but rather as complementary terms. Visions are, it
   is true, especially the mark of the prophets, and the law is often
   confined in a special sense to the Pentateuch; but there is a much
   wider usage of the words, according to which the two together express,
   with tolerable completeness, what we mean by Revelation. The vision
   means a perception of God and His ways, and is quite as applicable to
   Moses as to Isaiah; and, on the other hand, the law covers all the
   distinct and articulate instruction which God gives to His people in
   any of His ways of self-communication. "Come ye," says Isaiah, [694]
   "and let us go up to the mountain of the Lord, to the house of the God
   of Jacob; and He will teach us of His ways, and we will walk in His
   paths: for out of Zion shall go forth the law, and the word of the Lord
   from Jerusalem;" where the whole context shows that, not the Mosaic
   Law, but rather a new and particular declaration of the Lord's will, is
   referred to.

   But while the vision and the law are not to be treated as opposites, it
   is possible to distinguish between them. The vision is the actual
   contact between God and the human spirit, which is the necessary
   condition of any direct revelation; the law is the recorded result of
   such a revelation, either passed from mouth to mouth by tradition, or
   written permanently in a book.

   We may then a little amplify the proverb for the sake of exposition:
   "Where there is no living revelation, no perceived contact between man
   and God, there the bonds which hold society together are relaxed or
   broken; but he that holds by the revelation that has been given,
   obeying the law, so far as it has been presented to him, happy is he."

   Man has need of a revelation; that is the assertion. Society, as an
   ordered and happy body of men in which each person is rightly
   subordinated to the whole, and in which law, as distinct from
   individual caprice, prevails, requires a revealed law. The light of
   nature is good, but it is not sufficient. The common sense of mankind
   is powerful, but not powerful enough. In the absence of a real and
   valid declaration of God's will times must come when the elemental
   passions of human nature will break out with unrestrained violence, the
   teachings of morality will be disputed, their authority will be denied,
   and their yoke will be broken; the links which hold the state and the
   community together will snap, and the slow growths of ages may
   disappear in a moment. It is not difficult to show the truth of this
   assertion from experience. Every people that emerges from barbarism has
   a vision and a law; a certain revelation which forms the foundation,
   the sanction, the bond of its corporate existence. When you can point
   to a tribe or a group of tribes that know nothing of God, and therefore
   have no idea of revelation, you at once assure us that the people are
   sunk in a hopeless savagery. We are, it is true, inclined to deny the
   term revelation to those systems of religion which lie outside of the
   Bible, but it is difficult to justify such a contraction of view. God
   has not left Himself anywhere without a witness. The more closely we
   examine the multitudinous religions of the earth, the more clearly does
   it appear that each of them had at its origin a definite, however
   limited, revelation. The idea of One all-powerful, good, and wise, God
   is found at the beginning of each faith that can be traced back far
   enough, and the actual condition of heathen systems always suggests a
   decline from a higher and a purer religion. We may say, then, with much
   plausibility, that no lasting and beneficial form of human society has
   ever existed apart from a vision and a law.

   But leaving the wide field of comparative religions, do we not see an
   illustration of the truth of the text in the European countries which
   are more subject to our observation? In proportion as a people loses
   its faith in revelation it falls into decay. This was made manifest in
   the experience of the French Revolution. When the Jacobins had
   emancipated themselves from the idea of God, and had come out into the
   clear light of reason, so terribly did they "cast off restraint" that
   their own leader, Robespierre, endeavoured with a feverish haste to
   restore the recognition of God, assuming himself the position of high
   pontiff to the Supreme Being. The nearest approach that the world has
   probably ever seen to a government founded on Atheism was this
   government of the French Revolution, and a more striking commentary on
   this text could hardly be desired.

   But the need of a revelation can be apprehended, apart from all appeals
   to history, by simply studying the nature of the spirit of man. Man
   must have an object of worship, and that object must be such as to
   command his worship. Auguste Comte thought to satisfy this need of the
   heart by suggesting Humanity as the Grand tre, but Humanity was and is
   nothing but an abstraction. Feeling this himself, he recommended the
   worship of woman, and he prostrated his heart before Clotilde de Vaux;
   but sacred and beautiful as a man's love of a woman may be, it is no
   substitute for worship. We must have quite another than ourselves and
   our own kind, if our hearts are to find their rest. We must have an
   Almighty, an Infinite; we must have one who is Love. Until his spirit
   is worshipping, man cannot realize himself, or attain the height of his
   intended stature.

   Again, man must have an assurance of his own immortality. While he
   believes himself to be mortal, a creature of a day, and that an
   uncertain day, it is impossible for him to rise much above the level of
   other ephemeral things. His pursuits must be limited, and his aims must
   be confined. His affections must be chilled by the shadow of death, and
   in proportion as he has nobly striven and tenderly loved, his later
   years must be plunged in hopeless gloom, because his efforts have been
   ineffectual and his beloved have gone from him. No juggling with terms;
   no half-poetic raptures about "the choir invisible," can meet the
   mighty craving of the human heart. Man must be immortal, or he is not
   man. "He thinks he was not made to die."

   But to meet these demands of the spirit what, apart from revelation,
   can avail? That metaphysics is futile practically all men are agreed.
   Only the philosopher can follow the dialectics which are to prove the
   existence of God and the immortality of the soul. And even the
   philosopher seems to grow pale and wizened in the process of his
   demonstration, and wins at last a vantage-ground of cold conviction, to
   find that there is no comfort there. But can science offer the
   assurance which philosophy was unable to give? Let us listen to the
   conclusion of a scientific writer on this subject, one who has lost his
   hold on revelation and can realize a little of what he has lost.

     "The highest and most consoling beliefs of the human mind," he says,
     "are to a great extent bound up with the Christian religion. If we
     ask ourselves frankly how much, apart from this religion, would
     remain of faith in a God, and in a future state of existence, the
     answer must be, very little. Science traces everything back to
     primeval atoms and germs, and there it leaves us. How came these
     atoms and energies there, from which this wonderful universe of
     worlds has been evolved by inevitable laws? What are they in their
     essence, and what do they mean? The only answer is, It is
     unknowable. It is "behind the veil," and may be anything. Spirit may
     be matter, matter may be spirit. We have no faculties by which we
     can even form a conception, from any discoveries of the telescope or
     microscope, from any experiments in the laboratory, or from any
     facts susceptible of real human knowledge, of what may be the first
     cause underlying all these phenomena.

     "In like manner we can already, to a great extent, and probably in a
     short time shall be able to the fullest extent to trace the whole
     development of life from the lowest to the highest; from protoplasm,
     through monera, infusoria, mollusca, vertebrata, fish, reptile and
     mammal, up to man; and the individual man from the microscopic egg,
     through the various stages of its evolution up to birth, childhood,
     maturity, decline, and death. We can trace also the development of
     the human race through enormous periods of time, from the modest
     beginnings up to its present level of civilisation, and show how
     arts, languages, morals, and religions have been evolved gradually
     by human laws from primitive elements, many of which are common in
     their ultimate form to man and the animal creation.

     "But here also science stops. Science can give no account of how
     these germs and nucleated cells, endowed with these marvellous
     capacities for evolution, came into existence, or got their
     intrinsic powers. Nor can science enable us to form the remotest
     conception of what will become of life, consciousness, and
     conscience, when the material conditions with which they are always
     associated, while within human experience, have been dissolved by
     death, and no longer exist. We know as little, in the way of
     accurate and demonstrable knowledge, of our condition after death as
     we do of our existence--if we had an existence--before birth." [695]

   Science frankly confesses that she can tell us nothing of the things
   which it most concerns us to know. On those things she is no farther
   advanced than she was in the days of Aristotle. Never do we feel how
   much men need a revelation so vividly as when we have grasped the first
   principles of such a great scientific thinker as Mr. Herbert Spencer,
   and realize how far he is able to take us and how soon he has to leave
   us. How does it meet the craving of the soul for God to show us the
   slow stages by which man became a living soul? As well might you try to
   satisfy the musician's ear by telling him how his art had grown from
   the primitive tom-tom of the savage. How can it help the life to be
   lived wisely, lovingly, and well, in the midst of the uncertainty of
   the world, and confronted by the certainty of death, to be told that
   our physical structure is united by a thousand immediate links with
   that of other mammals. Such a fact is insignificant; the supreme fact
   is that we are not like other mammals in the most important respects;
   we have hearts that long and yearn, minds which enquire and
   question--they have not; we want God, our heart and our flesh crieth
   out for the living God, and we demand an eternal life--they do not.

   How can science pretend that what she does not know is not knowledge,
   while she has to confess that she does not know precisely the things
   which it most concerns us as men to know? How can the spirit of man be
   content with the husks which she gives him to eat, when his whole
   nature craves the kernel? What probability is there that a man will
   close his eyes to the sun because another person, very clever and
   industrious, has shut himself up in a dark cellar, and tries to
   persuade him that his candle is all the light he may legitimately use,
   and what cannot be seen by his candle is not real?

   No, science may not prove revelation, but she proves our need of it.
   She does her utmost, she widens her borders, she is more earnest, more
   accurate, more informed, more efficacious than ever; but she shows that
   what man most wants she cannot give,--she bids him go elsewhere.

   But now it may be said: It is one thing to prove that man needs a
   revelation, and another to show that a revelation has been given. That
   is perfectly true, and this is not the place to adduce all the evidence
   which might prove that revelation is a reality; but what an advance we
   have made on the cold, self-satisfied deism of the eighteenth century,
   which maintained that the light of nature was enough, and revelation
   was quite superfluous, when the truest and most candid voices of
   science are declaring with such growing clearness that for the
   knowledge which revelation professes to give, revelation, and
   revelation alone, will suffice!

   We Christians believe that we have a revelation, and we find that it
   suffices. It gives us precisely those assurances about God and about
   the soul without which we falter, grow bewildered, and begin to
   despond. We have a vision and a law. Our Bible is the record of the
   ever-widening, ever-clearing vision of God. The power and authority of
   the vision seem to be the more convincing, just because we are
   permitted to see the process of its development. Here we are able to
   stand with the seer and see, not the long onian stages of creation
   which science has been painfully tracking out in these later days, but
   the supreme fact, which science professes herself unable to see, that
   God was the Author of it all. Here we are able to see the first
   imperfect conception of God which came in vision and in thought to the
   patriarch or sheikh in the earliest dawn of civilisation. Here we can
   observe the conceptions clearing, through Moses, through the Psalmists,
   through the Prophets, until at last we have a vision of God in the
   person of His Son, who is the brightness of the Father's glory, the
   express image of His countenance. We see that He, the unseen Creator,
   is Love.

   Our Bible, too, is the record of a law,--a law of human conduct, the
   will of God as applied to earthly life. At first the law is confined to
   a few primitive practices and outward observances; then it grows in
   perplexity and multiplication of details; and only after a long course
   of discipline, of effort and apparent failure, of teaching and
   deliberate disobedience, is the law laid bare to its very roots, and
   presented in the simplified and self-evidencing form of the Sermon on
   the Mount and the apostolic precepts.

   It is not necessary to start with any particular theory about the
   Bible, any more than it is necessary to know the substance of the sun
   before we can warm ourselves in his beams. It is not necessary to look
   for scientific accuracy in the histories and treatises through which
   the vision and the law are communicated to us. We know that the vessels
   are earthen, and the presupposition all through is that the light was
   only growing from the glimmer of the dawn up to the perfect day. But we
   know, we are persuaded, that here, to seeing eyes and humble hearts, is
   the revelation of God and of His will.

   Nor is it only in the Bible that God speaks to us. There have been
   times in the history of Christendom--such times as the middle of the
   eighteenth century--when though the Bible was in men's hands, it seemed
   to be almost a dead letter. "There was no vision, and the people cast
   off restraint." It is by living men and women to whom He grants visions
   and reveals truths, that God maintains the purity and power of His
   revelation to us. He came in vision to Fox and the early Friends, to
   Zinzendorf and the early Moravians, to Wesley and the early Methodists.
   Seldom does a generation pass but some seers are sent to make the Word
   of God a living influence to their age. The vision is not always
   unmixed with human error, and when it ceases to be living it may become
   obstructive, a cause of paralysis rather than of progress. But
   Augustine and Jerome, Benedict and Leo, Francis and Dominic, Luther and
   Calvin, Ignatius Loyola and Xavier, Fnlon and Madame Guyon, Jonathan
   Edwards and Channing, Robertson and Maurice, Erskine and MacLeod
   Campbell, are but examples of God's method all down the Christian ages.
   The vision comes pure and fresh as if straight from the presence of
   God. Traditionalism crumbles away. Doubt retreats like a phantom of the
   night. Mighty moral revolutions and spiritual awakenings are
   accomplished by the means of His chosen ones. And it should be our
   desire and our joy to recognise and welcome these seers of God.

   "He that keepeth the law, happy is he." It is a mournful thing to be
   without a revelation, and to grope in darkness at midday; to hold one's
   mind in melancholy suspense, uncertain about God, about His will, about
   the life eternal. But it is better to have no revelation than to have
   it and disregard it. Honest doubt is full of necessary sorrow, but to
   believe and not to obey is the road to inevitable ruin. [696] "He that
   keepeth"--yes, he that looks into revelation, not for curiosity, but
   for a law by which to live; who listens to the wise precepts, not in
   order to exclaim, "How wise they are!" but in order to act on them.

   There are many professing Christians who are constantly plunged in
   gloom. Unbelievers may point the finger at them, and say, "They believe
   in God, in salvation, and in heaven, but see what an effect it has on
   them. Do they really believe?" Oh, yes, they really believe, but they
   do not obey; and no amount of faith brings any lasting happiness apart
   from obedience. The law requires us to love God, to love men; it
   requires us to abstain from all appearance of evil, to touch not the
   unclean thing; it bids us love not the world, it tells us how
   impossible the double service of God and mammon is. Now though we
   believe it all it can give us nothing but pain unless we live up to it.
   If there is a vision and we shut our eyes to it, if there is a law and
   we turn away from it, woe unto us! But if we receive the vision, if we
   loyally and earnestly keep the law, the world cannot fathom the depth
   of our peace, nor rise to the height of our joy.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [694] Isa. ii. 3.

   [695] "Modern Science and Modern Thought" (pp. 289, 290), by S. Laing.
   Chapman & Hall: 1890.

   [696] Cf. Prov. xxviii. 4, 9:--

   "They that forsake the law praise the wicked:

   But such as keep the law contend with them.

   He that turneth away his ear from hearing the law

   Even his prayer is an abomination."
     __________________________________________________________________

XXX.

  THE WORDS OF AGUR.

     The rendering of the first verse of this chapter is very uncertain.
     Without attempting to discuss the many conjectural emendations, we
     must briefly indicate the view which is here taken. A slight
     alteration in the pointing (l'yty 'l instead of the Masoretic
     reading l'yty'l) changes the proper name Ithiel into a significant
     verb; and another slight change (v'kl for v'kl) gives us another
     verb in the place of Ucal. To remove the difficulty of the word
     "oracle," a difficulty which arises from the fact that the chapter
     which follows is not a prophetic utterance of the kind to which that
     word might be applied, it is necessary, with Grtz, to make a more
     serious change, and to read hmsl for hms'. And to explain the word
     hnvr, which occurs in a similar connection in Numb. xxiv. 3, 15, and
     2 Sam. xxiii. 1, we must suppose that some relative clause defining
     the nature of "the man" has been dropped. The great uncertainty of
     the text is witnessed by the LXX., who place this passage after
     xxiv. 23, and give a rendering which has very little resemblance to
     our present Hebrew text. It is highly probable, both from the
     subject matter and from the numerical arrangements, which are
     thoroughly Rabbinical, that this chapter and chap. xxxi. are of late
     origin, and represent the last phase of the proverbial literature of
     Israel in the days after the return from the Exile. If this be so,
     the obscurity and uncertainty are characteristic of an artificial
     period of literature, and of a decay in literary taste. Adopting,
     then, the alterations which have been mentioned, we obtain the
     following result:--

     "The words of Agur the son of Jakeh, the proverb-writer:

     The utterance of the man [who has questioned and thought]: I have
     wearied after God, I have wearied after God, and am faint, for I am
     too stupid for a man, and am without reason, and I have not learned
     wisdom, nor have I knowledge of the All Holy," etc.

   This chapter is full of curious interest. It is a collection of sayings
   which are apparently connected only by the circumstance that they were
   attributed to one person, Agur, the son of Jakeh. Whoever Agur was, he
   had a certain marked individuality; he combined meditation on lofty
   questions of theology with a sound theory of practical life. He was
   able to give valuable admonitions about conduct. But his characteristic
   delight was to group together in quatrains visible illustrations of
   selected qualities or ideas.

   It may be well for us to glance at these picturesque groups, and then
   to return to the more philosophical and religious sentiments with which
   the chapter opens.

   "Slander not a servant to his master," says Agur, "lest the servant
   curse thee, and thou be held guilty." Even underlings have their
   rights; the Lord makes their cause His own, and a curse from them falls
   with as much weight on a slanderer as the words of more influential
   people. It is one of the surest tests of a man's character to see how
   he treats servants; if he is uniformly courteous, considerate, just,
   and generous in his treatment of them, we may safely infer that he is a
   noble character; if he is haughty, domineering, revengeful, and
   malicious to them, we need not attach much importance to his pleasing
   manners and plausible services to those whom he considers his equals.

   Now follow two of these singular quatrains. There are four kinds of men
   pointed out, and held up, not to our abhorrence, that is unnecessary,
   but simply to our observation: the unfilial, the self-righteous, the
   haughty, and the rapacious who devour the poor and the needy. It is not
   necessary to say anything about these persons. Their doom is stamped on
   their brows; to name them is to condemn them; to describe them is to
   write out their sentence.

   Again, there are four things which like the bloodsucking horse-leech
   are always insatiable. The vampire has her daughters in the earth; it
   is, as Professor Cheyne says, "a quasi-mythical expression." These
   daughters are two, nay, they are three, nay, they are four; and they
   are, as it were, the representatives of all creation: [697] Sheol, the
   invisible world, which draws into itself the countless generations of
   the dead; the generative principle, which never wearies of producing
   new generations of the living; the earth, which is for ever absorbing
   the cadent waters of heaven; and the fire, which will consume all the
   fuel that is given to it.

   Now follows a further comment upon unfilial conduct: the eye is
   regarded as the instrument by which a son shows his feelings to his
   parents; he has not perhaps gone the length of uttering a curse against
   them, still less of raising his hand to ill-treat them, but his eye
   flashes derision upon his father, and by its haughty obstinacy declares
   that it will not obey his mother. The offending member shall be picked
   out by the clamorous ravens, and eaten by the young of the soaring
   eagle.

   Next we have four more quatrains. First, there are the four wonders
   which baffle Agur's understanding; wonders which are comprehensible
   only to God, as the Vedic hymn says,--


   "The path of ships across the sea,

   The soaring eagle's flight he knows."

   The wonder seems to be in the reality and power of impalpable things.
   How little of all that passes in the universe is open to observation,
   or leaves a track behind. The eagle mounts through the air as if he
   marched on a solid beaten road; the serpent, without limbs, glides over
   the smooth rock where feet would slip, and leaves no trace behind; the
   ship ploughs the deep, and over trackless waters follows her track
   which is invisible; a man and a maid meet, swift glances pass, hearts
   blend, and that is done which can never be undone; or on the evil side,
   the bad woman follows her illicit and hidden courses, while to all
   appearance she is a faithful wife and mother.

   Secondly, there are four human conditions which are intolerable to
   society, viz., an essentially servile spirit put into the place of
   authority; a fool who, instead of being corrected, is confirmed in his
   folly by prosperity; a marriage where the wife is hated; and a slave
   girl in the position which Hagar occupied with relation to Sarah her
   mistress.

   Thirdly, there are four kinds of animals which illustrate that size is
   not necessarily greatness, and that it is possible to be insignificant
   and yet wise. The tiny ants are a model of intelligent mutual
   cooperation and prudent thrift. The little jerboas seem helpless
   enough, but they are sensible in the choice of their homes, for they
   dwell securely in rocky fastnesses. The locusts seem as weak and
   inoffensive as insects can be, yet they form a mighty army, ordered in
   battle array; "they run like mighty men; they climb the wall like men
   of war; and they march every one in his ways, and they break not their
   ranks." [698] The lizard seems but a plebeian creature; you can seize
   it with your hands; it is defenceless and devoid of natural
   capabilities; and yet with its swift crawlings and tireless dartings it
   will find its way into kings' palaces, where greater and stronger
   creatures cannot enter.

   Lastly, there are four things which impress one with their stateliness
   of motion; the lion, the creature that is girt in the loins, whether a
   war-horse or a greyhound, the he-goat, and--surely with a little touch
   of satire--the king when his army is with him.

   Then the collection of Agur's sayings ends with a wise and picturesque
   word of counsel to exercise a strong restraint over our rising
   passions.

   But now we may turn back to the passage with which the chapter opens.
   Here is the cry of one who has sought to find out God. It is an old and
   a mournful cry. Many have emitted it from the beginning; many utter it
   now. But few have spoken with more pathetic humility, few have made us
   feel with so much force the solemnity and the difficulty of the
   question as this unknown Agur. We see a brow wrinkled with thought,
   eyes dimmed with long and close observation; it is not the boor or the
   sot that makes this humiliating confession; it is the earnest thinker,
   the eager enquirer. He has meditated on the wonderful facts of the
   physical world; he has watched the great trees sway under the touch of
   the invisible wind, and the waves rise up in their might, lashing the
   shores, but vainly essaying to pass their appointed boundaries; he has
   considered the vast expanse of the earth, and enquired, on what
   foundations does it rest, and where are its limits? He cannot question
   the "eternal power and divinity" which can alone account for this
   ordered universe. He has not, like many thinkers ancient and modern,
   "dropped a plummet down the broad deep universe, and cried, No God." He
   knows that there is a God; there must be an Intelligence able to
   conceive, coupled with a power able to realize, this mighty mechanism.
   But who is it? What is His name or His Son's name? Here are the
   footsteps of the Creator, but where is the Creator Himself? Here are
   the signs of His working on every hand. There is an invisible power
   that ascends and descends on the earth by staircases unseen. Who is He?
   These careering winds, before which we are powerless, obey some
   control; sometimes they are "upgathered like sleeping flowers;" who is
   it that holds them then? These great waters sway to and fro, or they
   pour in ceaseless currents from their fountains, or they gather in the
   quiet hollows of the hills; but who is it that appoints the ocean, and
   the river, and the lake? Who feeds them all, and restrains them all?
   Whose is the garment which holds them as a woman carries a pitcher
   lashed to her back in the fold of her dress? The earth is no phantom,
   no mirage, it is solid and established; but who gave to matter its
   reality, and in the ceaseless flux of the atoms fixed the abiding
   forms, and ordered the appropriate relations? Ah! what is His name? Has
   He a son? Is man, for instance, His son? Or does the idea of the
   Eternal and Invisible God imply also an Eternal Son, a Being one with
   Him, yet separable, the object of His love, the instrument of His
   working, the beginning of His creation? Who is He? That He is holy
   seems an inevitable conclusion from the fact that we know what holiness
   is, and recognise its sovereignty. For how, in thinking of the mighty
   Being who made all things, dare I give Him a lower attribute than that
   which I can give to my fellow-men? How dare I withhold from Him that
   which I know of the Highest and the Best? But though I know that He is
   holy, the All Holy One I do not know. My weak and sinful nature has
   glimpses of Him, but no steady visions. I lose Him in the confused
   welter of things. I catch the gleam of His face in the hues of the
   rainbow and in the glow of the eternal hills; but I lose it when I
   strive to follow among the angry gatherings of the stormclouds, in the
   threatening crash of the thunder, the roar of the avalanche, and the
   rent ruins of the earthquake.

   And the man, considering all things, questioning, seeking, exclaims, "I
   am weary and faint." The splendours of God haunt his imagination, the
   sanctities of God fill his conscience with awe, the thoughts of God lie
   as presuppositions behind all his thinking. But he has not
   understanding; baffled and foiled and helpless, he says that he is too
   brutish to be a man. Surely a man would know God; surely he must be but
   one of the soulless creatures, dust of the dust, for he has not the
   knowledge of the Holy One.

   To this impetuous hail of questions an answer comes. For indeed in the
   fact that the questions are put already the answer lies. In the humble
   cry that he is too stupid to be a man is already the clearest proof
   that he is raised incalculably above the brute.

   But who is it that offers the answer in vv. 5-9? It would seem as if
   Agur himself has suggested the question--a question borrowed probably
   from some noble heathen thinker; and now he proceeds to meet the wild
   and despairing outcry with the results of his own reflection. He does
   not attempt the answer on the lines of natural religion. His answer in
   effect is this: You cannot know God, you cannot by searching find Him
   unless He reveals Himself; His revelation must come as an articulate
   and intelligible word. As the Psalm says--for it seems to be a
   quotation from Psalm xviii. 30--"Every word of God is tried: He is a
   shield unto them that trust in Him." Agur appeals to a written
   revelation, a revelation which is complete and rounded, and to which no
   further addition may be made (ver. 6). It was probably the time when
   Ezra the scribe had gathered together the Law and the Psalms and the
   Prophets, and had formed the first scriptural canon. Since then a great
   deal has been added to the canon, these words of Agur among the rest,
   but the assertion remains essentially true. Our knowledge of God
   depends on His self-revelation, and the method of that revelation is to
   speak, through the lips of God-possessed men, words which are tried by
   experience and proved by the living faith of those who trust in God. "I
   am that I am" has spoken to men, and to Him, the Eternally-existent,
   have they ascribed the visible universe. "The God of Israel" has spoken
   to men, and they have learnt therefore to trace His hand in history and
   in the development of human affairs. The Holy One has in prophets and
   poets spoken to men, and they have become aware that all goodness comes
   from Him, and all evil is hateful to Him. And lastly, His Son has
   spoken to men, and has declared Him in a way that never could have been
   dreamed, has shown them the Father, has revealed that new unutterable
   Name.

   The answer to the great cry of the human heart, the wearied, fainting
   human heart, is given only in revelation, in the tried word of God, and
   completely only in the Word of God that was made flesh. The proof of
   that revelation is furnished to all those who trust in the God so
   revealed, for He becomes a shield to them; they abide under the shadow
   of His realized presence. It is not possible to add unto the words of
   God; our speculations lead us farther, but they only lead us into
   error; and by them we incur His reproof, and our fictions become
   disastrously exposed. The answer to philosophy is in revelation, and
   they who do not accept the revealed answer are left asking eternally
   the same weary and hopeless question, "What is his name, and what is
   his son's name?"

   And now, with a quaint and practical homeliness which is very
   suggestive, Agur notices two conditions, which he has evidently
   observed to be necessary if we are to find the answer which revelation
   gives to the enquiry of the human heart after God. First of all we must
   be rid of vanity and lies. How true this is! We may hold the Bible in
   our hands, but while our hearts are void of seriousness and sincerity
   we can find nothing in it, certainly no word of God. A vain person and
   an untruthful person can receive no genuine revelation; they may
   believe, or think that they believe, the current religious dogmas, and
   they may be able to give a verbal answer to the question which we have
   been considering, but they cannot have the knowledge of the Holy One.
   More than half the godlessness of men is due simply to want of
   earnestness; they are triflers on the earth, they are painted bubbles,
   which burst if any solid thing touches them; they are drifting vapours
   and exhalations, which pass away and leave not a wrack behind. But
   there are many men who are serious enough in their search for
   knowledge, and yet are vitiated through and through by a radical want
   of truthfulness. They are prepared for facts, but only facts of a
   certain sort. They want to know God, but only on condition that He
   shall not be supernatural. They want to study the truths of the
   spiritual world, but only on condition that the spiritual shall be
   material. O remove far from me vanities and lies!

   Then there is a second condition desirable for the due appreciation of
   religious truth, a social and economical condition. Agur might have
   known our modern world with its terrible extremes of wealth and
   poverty. He perceived how hard it is for the rich to enter the kingdom
   of heaven; and, on the other hand, how probable it is that hungry men
   will be seduced into stealing and betrayed into blasphemy. That there
   is much truth in this view we may easily satisfy ourselves by
   considering the wealthy classes in England, whose question, urged
   through all their pomp and ceremonial of heartless worship, is
   practically, "Who is the Lord?" and by then looking at the eight
   hundred thousand paupers of England, amongst whom religion is
   practically unknown except as a device for securing food.

   And when we have duly weighed this saying of Agur's, we may come to see
   that among all the pressing religious and spiritual problems of our
   day, this also must be entertained and solved, How to secure a more
   equable distribution of wealth, so that the extremes of wealth and
   poverty should disappear, and all should be fed with the food that is
   needful for them.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [697] Cf. the Sanscrit Hitopadesa, "Fire is never satisfied with fuel,
   nor the ocean with rivers, nor death with all creatures, nor
   bright-eyed women with men;" also the Arabic proverb, "Three things are
   of three never full, women's womb of man, wood of fire, and earth of
   rain."

   [698] Joel ii. 7.
     __________________________________________________________________

XXXI.

  A GOOD WOMAN.


   "O woman-hearts, that keep the days of old

   In living memory, can you stand back

   When Christ calls? Shall the heavenly Master lack

   The serving love, which is your life's fine gold?


   "Do you forget the hand which placed the crown

   Of happy freedom on the woman's head,

   And took her from the dying and the dead,

   Lifting the wounded soul long trodden down?


   "Do you forget who bade the morning break,

   And snapped the fetters of the iron years?

   The Saviour calls for service: from your fears

   Rise girt with faith, and work for His dear sake!


   "And He will touch the trembling lips with fire,--

   O let us hasten, lest we come too late!

   And all shall work; if some must 'stand and wait,'

   Be theirs that wrestling prayer that will not tire."

   R. O.

   The last chapter of the book of Proverbs consists of two distinct
   compositions, and the only connection between them is to be found in
   their date. The words of King Lemuel, "a saying which his mother taught
   him," [699] and the description of a good woman, [700] must both be
   referred to a very late epoch of Hebrew literature. The former contains
   several Aramaic words [701] and expressions which connect it with the
   period of the exile; and the latter is an alphabetical acrostic, i.e.,
   the verses begin with the successive letters of the alphabet; and this
   artificial mode of composition, which appears also in some of the
   Psalms, is sufficient of itself to indicate the last period of the
   literature, when the Rabbinical methods were coming into use.

   About the words of Lemuel, of whom it may be observed we know nothing
   at all, enough has been said in previous lectures. We need here only
   notice that the mother's influence in the education of her son, even
   though that son is to be a king, comes very suitably as the
   introduction to the beautiful description of the good woman with which
   the chapter closes. It is said that the mother of George III. brought
   him up with the constantly-repeated admonition, "George, be a king,"
   and that to this early training was due that exalted notion of the
   prerogative and that obstinate assertion of his will which occasioned
   the calamities of his reign. Kings have usually been more ready to
   imbibe such lessons than moral teaching from their mothers; but
   whatever may be the actual result, we all feel that a woman is never
   more nobly occupied than in warning her son against the seductions of
   pleasure, and in giving to him a high sense of duty. It is from a
   mother's lips we should all learn to espouse the cause of the helpless
   and the miserable, and to bear an open heart for the poor and needy.
   [702]

   But now before coming to examine in detail the poem of the virtuous
   woman, let us briefly recall what the book hitherto has taught us on
   the subject of womanhood. It began with solemn and oft-repeated
   warnings against the "strange woman," and echoes of that mournful theme
   have accompanied us throughout: the strange woman is a deep ditch, a
   narrow pit; he that is abhorred of the Lord shall fall therein. [703]
   And even where the woman's nature is not corrupted by impurity we are
   several times reminded how she may destroy the peace of man's life by
   certain faults of temper. If she is contentious and fretful she can
   make the house utterly unbearable; it will be better to live in a
   corner of the housetop or in a desert land, exposed to the continual
   downpour of the autumn rains, than to be assailed by her tongue. [704]
   The attempt to restrain her is like trying to grasp the wind, or to
   seize an object which is smeared with oil. [705] We are reminded too
   how incongruously sometimes great beauty of person is combined with
   inward faults. "As a jewel of gold in a swine's snout, so is a fair
   woman which is without discretion." [706]

   But we must distinctly understand that these severe strictures on woman
   corrupted and woman imperfect are only so many witnesses to her value
   and importance. The place she fills in life is so supreme that if she
   fails in her duty human life as a whole is a failure. In her hands lie
   the issues of life for mankind. "The wisdom of woman builds her house,
   and the folly of woman plucks it down with her hands." [707] What the
   homes of a nation are, the nation is; and it is woman's high and
   beautiful function to make the homes, and within her power lies the
   terrible capacity for marring them. She, much more than the king, is
   the fountain of honour. [708] The honour she gives and the honour she
   commands will decide the whole tone of society. Pure, true, and strong,
   she makes men worship purity, truth, and strength. Corrupt, false, and
   vain, she blights and blasts the ideal of man, lowers all his
   aspirations, excites his evil passions to a frenzy of iniquity,
   degrades his soul to a level below the brutes.

   The condition of woman is the touchstone of a civilised society.

   Again, there is a sense in which woman is an interpreter and revealer
   of God to the human race. She has religious intuitions and spiritual
   susceptibilities in which the other sex is usually deficient. Most
   religious systems in the world's history have overlooked her, and have
   suffered accordingly. The religion of Jesus Christ recognised her,
   claimed for her her rightful place, and to this day does much of its
   best work in the world through her gracious ministrations, through her
   unquestioning faith, through her unquenchable love. It is as a
   foreshadowing of this religious significance which Christ was to give
   to womanhood that the Proverbs recognise the beautiful direct relation
   between God and the possession of a good wife. "Whoso findeth a wife
   findeth a good thing, and obtaineth favour of the Lord." [709] Wealth,
   as it is ordinarily understood, is of the earth,--it can be derived
   from ancestors by inheritance, or it can be earned by toil of hand and
   brain,--but every wife worthy of the name is far above all wealth: she
   cannot be earned or inherited; she comes, as the mother of mankind
   came, direct from the hand of the Lord. [710] The marriage tie is a
   thought of God's heart. He Himself has arranged the exquisite blending
   of life with life and spirit with spirit; He has fitted man to woman
   and woman to man, so that the perfect man is not the man alone, the
   perfect woman is not the woman alone, but the man and woman one flesh,
   mystically united, the completeness each of the other; not two, but a
   single whole.

   We may now examine in detail this connected description of the virtuous
   woman, whose value is not to be measured by material wealth, and who
   yet, from a merely material point of view, is a source of wealth to
   those who are fortunate enough to call her theirs.

   She is a wife. The modern conception of a woman as an independent
   person, standing alone, engaged in her own business or profession, and
   complete in her isolated life, is not to be looked for in the book of
   Proverbs. It is the creation of accidental circumstances. However
   necessary it may be in a country where the women are largely in excess
   of the men, it cannot be regarded as final or satisfactory. In the
   beginning it was not so, neither will it be so in the end. If men and
   women are to abide in strength and to develop the many sides of their
   nature, they must be united. It is not good for man to be alone; nor is
   it good for woman to be alone. There are some passages in the New
   Testament which seem to invalidate this truth. The advocates of
   celibacy appeal to the example of Christ and to the express words of
   St. Paul. But the New Testament, as our Lord Himself expressly
   declares, does not abrogate the eternal law which was from the
   beginning. And if He Himself abstained from marriage, and if St. Paul
   seems to approve of such an abstention, we must seek for the
   explanation in certain exceptional and temporary circumstances; for it
   is precisely to Christ Himself in the first instance, and to His great
   Apostle in the second, that we owe our loftiest and grandest
   conceptions of marriage. There was no room for a personal marriage in
   the life of Him who was to be the Bridegroom of His Church; and St.
   Paul distinctly implies that the pressing troubles and anxieties of his
   own life, and the constant wearing labours which were required of the
   Gentile Apostle, formed the reason why it was better for him, and for
   such as he, to remain single.

   At any rate the virtuous woman of the Proverbs is a wife: and the first
   thing to observe is the part she plays in relation to her husband. She
   is his stay and confidence: "The heart of her husband trusteth in her."
   She is his natural confidante and counsellor; her advice is more
   valuable than that of much cleverer people, because it is so absolutely
   disinterested; the hearts are in such vital contact that the merely
   intellectual communications have a quality all their own. One may often
   observe in an ideal marriage, though the husband seems to be the
   stronger and the more self-reliant, the wife is really the pillar of
   strength; if death removes her, he is forlorn and bereft and helpless;
   the gradual work of the years has led him to depend on her more and
   more, to draw from her his best inspirations, and to turn instinctively
   to her for advice and direction.

   "She doeth him good, and not evil, all the days of her life." [711] It
   is not only when she comes as a young bride into his house, bright with
   youth, encircled with the glamour of early love,--then, it is true, the
   thought of her nerves his endeavours and quickens his eager steps as he
   turns homeward in the evening,--it is not only while her fresh charms
   last, and her womanly beauty acts as a spell on him, while the desire
   to retain her love disciplines and strengthens whatever is good in his
   character; but right through to the end of her life, when she has grown
   old, when the golden hair is grey, and the blooming cheeks are
   wrinkled, and the upright form is bent,--when other people see nothing
   beautiful about her except the beauty of old age and decay, he sees in
   her the sweet bride of earlier years, to him the eyes appear unchanged
   and the voice thrills him with happy memories; she ministers to him
   still and does him good; not now with the swift alacrity of foot and
   the deft movement of the hand, but with the dear, loyal heart, with the
   love which the years have mellowed and the trust which the changing
   circumstances of life have tested and confirmed.

   It is this strong, sweet core of life in the home which gives the man
   dignity and honour in public. She is a crown to her husband. [712] His
   influence in the life of his town or of his country is not always
   directly traced to its true source. But it is that woman's noble sway
   over him, it is the constant spur and chastening of her love, which
   gives him the weighty voice and the grave authority in the counsels of
   the nation. "Her husband is known in the gates, when he sitteth among
   the elders of the land." [713] He can make but a poor return to her for
   all her quiet unobtrusive and self-sacrificing help year after year and
   on to the end, but he can at least repay her with growing reverence and
   loyalty; he can tell her, as it were with the impassioned lips of a
   lover, what he owes to her; when her children rise up and call her
   blessed, he can praise her, saying, "Many daughters have done
   virtuously, but thou excellest them all." [714] Indeed it will be his
   growing conviction that of all the daughters of woman there is none
   equal to his wife. Her charms have grown upon him, her character has
   ripened before his eyes, her love has become at once stronger and more
   precious every year. It is no flattery, no idle compliment of
   courting-days, no soft word to win the coy heart of the maiden, but it
   is his own deep and sincere feeling; it is said to her who is his and
   has been his for years, and in whose assured possession he finds his
   greatest peace: "I do not question that other women are good and true,
   but I am sure that you are better than all." And so she is. Every true
   wife is the best wife.

   The next point in the virtuous woman to which our attention is drawn is
   her unflagging industry. Her husband "shall have no lack of gain."
   [715] In addition to all those treasures of mutual love and spiritual
   converse, all those invaluable services of counsel and guidance, of
   criticism and encouragement, she is a positive source of wealth to him.
   She is the house-manager. If he earns the bread in the first instance,
   it is in her hands that it seems to be miraculously multiplied. If he
   brings home the money which is enough for their wants, it is she who
   turns the silver into gold and makes the modest means appear great
   wealth. The fact is her hands are always busy. The spindle, the
   distaff, the loom, are within her reach and are constantly plied. While
   she unravels the knotted cares of her husband in the evening with her
   bright and cheery talk, while she encourages him in all his plans and
   heartens him for all his duties, her busy fingers are making clothes
   for the children, repairing, adapting, improving, or else are skilfully
   constructing ornaments and decorations for the household, turning the
   poor room into a palace, making the walls beam with beauty and the
   hearts of all within laugh for joy.

   There is something quite magical and impressive in woman's economy:
   "She is like the merchant ships; she bringeth her food from afar."
   [716] No one knows how it is done. The table is well spread, the food
   is daintily served, on infinitesimal means. She finds out by the quick
   intuitions of love how to get the things which the loved ones like, and
   by many a little sacrifice unperceived she produces effects which
   startle them all. She has a secret of doing and getting which no one
   knows but she. Early passers-by have seen a light in the house long
   before the day dawns; she has been up preparing the breakfast for the
   household, and mapping out the work for all, so that no hours may be
   wasted and no one in the family may be idle. [717] Her boundless
   economies produce astonishing results. One morning she has to announce
   to the husband and the children that she has managed to put together a
   little sum which will purchase the freehold of their house and garden.
   [718] Her husband exclaims, Why, how has it been done? Where has the
   money come from out of our little income? She smiles significantly and
   will not tell; but the tears moisten his eyes as he looks into her face
   and reads the story of self-denials, and managings, and toils, which
   have issued in this surprise. And the children look up with a sense of
   awe and wonder. They feel that there is something of the supernatural
   about mother; and perhaps they are right.

   She has all the delicacy and even weakness of a woman, but the life of
   constant activity and cheerful toil preserves her health and increases
   her strength. Idle women, who lounge their days away in constant
   murmurings over their ailments, speak contemptuously about her,--"She
   has the strength of a horse," they say, "and can bear anything." They
   do not know, they do not wish to know, that she is the author of her
   own strength. It is her own indomitable will, her own loving heart,
   which girds her loins with strength and makes strong her arms. [719]
   There are others who carp at her on different grounds; they do not
   understand how one with her husband's income can keep so comfortable a
   household or dress her children as she does. Those cushions of
   tapestry, that clothing of fine linen and purple, are an offence to her
   critics. "How she does it I am sure I don't know," says one, implying
   that there is something quite uncanny and disreputable about it. "She
   works like a slave," says another, with the tone of scorn that one
   would employ for a slave. But that is the truth: "She perceiveth that
   her merchandise is profitable: her lamp goeth not out by night." [720]
   She is indeed indefatigable. She actually makes garments which she can
   sell, girdles for the merchants, [721] in addition to looking well to
   the ways of her household. Certainly she does not eat the bread of
   idleness. [722]

   She can, however, very easily bear the contemptuous criticisms of
   others. The practical results of her life are sufficiently satisfying
   to make her a little independent. She has secured herself and her
   household against the contingencies which harass other housewives. The
   approach of winter has no alarms for her: all the children and servants
   are warmly and sufficiently clad. [723] The uncertain future has no
   terrors for her: she has made ample provision for it, and can regard
   the unknown chances with a smile of confidence. [724] And indeed,
   whatever detractors may say behind her back, it is not easy for any one
   to say anything severe in her presence. For the same loving, earnest,
   diligent ways which have made her household comfortable and secure have
   clothed her with garments better than scarlet and linen. "Strength and
   dignity are her clothing,"--robes so gracious and beautiful that
   criticism is silenced in her presence, while the hearts of all good and
   honest people are drawn out to her.

   But here is another characteristic of the virtuous woman. Economy and
   generosity go hand in hand. Frugal livers and hard workers are always
   the largest givers. This woman, whose toil late at night and early in
   the morning has enriched and blessed her own, is ready to help those
   who are less fortunate. "She spreadeth out her hand to the poor; yea,
   she reacheth forth her hands to the needy." [725] Most women are
   naturally pitiful and shrink from the sight of suffering; but while
   idle and self-indulgent women try to avoid the painful sight, and turn
   their flow of pity into the channels of vapid sentimentality, the good
   woman trains her sense of pity by coming into contact with those who
   deserve it, and only seeks to avoid the sight of suffering by trying
   everywhere and always to relieve it.

   Among all the noble and Christlike offices of woman this is the one
   which most strikingly connects her with the human life of our Lord. It
   is her function to excite and to cherish the quality of compassion in
   the human heart, and by her trained skill and intuitive tact to make
   the ministrations of the community to the poor truly charitable instead
   of dangerously demoralizing. Man is apt to relieve the poor by the laws
   of political economy, without emotion and by measure: he makes a Poor
   Law which produces the evil it pretends to relieve; he degrades the
   lovely word Charity into a badge of shame and a wanton insult to
   humanity. It is woman that "spreads out her palm and reacheth forth her
   hand" to the poor, bringing her heart into the work, giving, not doles
   of money, but the helpfulness of a sister's love, the tenderness of a
   mother's solicitude, the awakening touch of a daughter's care. And the
   hand which is thus held out to the poor is precisely the hand which has
   been laid on the distaff and the spindle; not the lazy hand or the
   useless hand, but the hand which is supple with toil, dexterous with
   acquired skill.

   There are two reflections which must have occurred to us in following
   this description of the good woman. Her portrait has risen before our
   eyes, and we ask, Is she beautiful? We have watched her activities,
   their mode and their result, and we wonder whether she is religious.
   "Favour is deceitful and beauty is vain, but a woman that feareth the
   Lord she shall be praised." [726] That this woman has a beauty of her
   own seems clear, and that she fears the Lord is a fair inference to
   make. It is idle to declaim against the charms of personal beauty; we
   may call it deceitful and vain, but it will not cease to be attractive.
   Men will not be reasoned or ridiculed out of that instinctive homage
   which they pay to a lovely face; the witchery of bright eyes and arch
   looks, the winsomeness of sweet contours and delicate hues, will last,
   we may surmise, as long as the sun and moon endure; and why should we
   dishonour God by supposing that He did not make the beauty which
   attracts and the attraction which the beauty excites? But it is not
   impossible to open men's eyes to the beauty of a less transient and
   more satisfying kind which lies in the character and conduct of women.
   If mothers accustom their sons to see those sterling attractions which
   permanently secure the affection and the devotion of a husband, the
   young men will not be content with superficial beauties and vanishing
   charms in the women whom they choose.

   And is not the beauty of woman--such beauty as we have been
   contemplating--the result of fearing the Lord? Is it possible, apart
   from a living faith in a living God, to maintain that lovely
   wifeliness, that self-sacrificing, diligent love, that overflow of pity
   to the poor and needy, which constitute grace and loveliness of
   character? Has any one succeeded in even depicting an imaginary woman
   devoid of religion and yet complete and beautiful? We have already
   noticed how suited the woman's nature is to receive religious
   impressions and to communicate religious influences; we may now notice,
   in concluding, that this very characteristic renders a woman without
   God even more imperfect and unsatisfying than a man without God. She is
   naturally inclined to cling to a person rather than to an idea, to
   follow a person rather than a theory. The only Person to whom she can
   cling with absolutely good and hallowing results is God; the only
   Person whom she can follow and minister to without detriment to her
   womanhood and with gain to her spirit is Christ. A godless woman makes
   a sore shipwreck of life, whether she becomes sensual and depraved, or
   ambitious and domineering, or bitter and cynical, or vain and
   conventional. In her ruin there is always a power as of a fallen angel,
   and she can drag others with her in her fall.

   If a man is wise then in choosing for himself a wife, the first thing
   he will demand is that she shall be one that fears the Lord, one who
   shall be able to lead him and help him in that which is his truest
   life, and to maintain for him a saving intercourse with the world of
   spiritual realities. He may be assured that in her love to God he has
   the best guarantee of her love to him, and that if she does not fear
   and love God the main sanction for their wedded happiness will be
   wanting.

   Finally, where the woman who has been described is actually found in
   real life it is for us to recognise her and to reward her. Let society
   take note of her: "Give her of the fruit of her hands, and let her
   works praise her in the gates." The great Greek historian said that
   woman's highest praise consisted in not being mentioned at all. That is
   not the teaching of Revelation. Woman's best work is often done in
   silence and without observation, but her highest praise is when the
   seeds sown in silence have grown into flowers of loveliness and fruit
   that is sweet to the taste, and the whole community is forced to yield
   her the honour which is her due, exalting, with heartfelt admiration
   and with deep gratitude to God, the Wife, the Mother, the Ministrant to
   the Poor.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [699] Prov. xxxi. 1-9.

   [700] Prov. xxxi. 10-31.

   [701] E.g., br ver. 2 and mlkyn ver. 3: cf. the strange expressions
   klbnyny and klbny hlvph in vv. 5, 8.

   [702] Prov. xxxi. 8, 9.

   [703] Prov. xxii. 14, xxiii. 27.

   [704] Prov. xix. 13, xxi. 9, xxv. 24, xxi. 19, xxvii. 15.

   [705] Prov. xxvii. 16.

   [706] Prov. xi. 22.

   [707] Prov. xiv. 1.

   [708] Prov. xi. 16.

   [709] Prov. xviii. 22.

   [710] Prov. xix. 14. In the LXX. this clause is beautifully rendered
   para de kuriou harmozetai gune andri. By the Lord's ordinance woman and
   man are dovetailed together in a complete harmony. The thought is well
   expanded in Ecclesiasticus (xxvi. 1-3): "Blessed is the man that has a
   virtuous wife, for thereby his life is doubled. A woman made for a man
   rejoices her husband, and he shall fulfil the years of his life in
   peace. A virtuous wife is a good portion, in the portion of them that
   fear the Lord shall she be given."

   [711] Prov. xxxi. 12.

   [712] Prov. xii. 4.

   [713] Prov. xxxi. 23.

   [714] Prov. xxxi. 29.

   [715] Prov. xxxi. 11.

   [716] Prov. xxxi. 14.

   [717] Prov. xxxi. 15.

   [718] Prov. xxxi. 16.

   [719] Prov. xxxi. 17.

   [720] Prov. xxxi. 18.

   [721] Prov. xxxi. 24.

   [722] Prov. xxxi. 27.

   [723] Prov. xxxi. 21.

   [724] Prov. xxxi. 25.

   [725] Prov. xxxi. 20.

   [726] Prov. xxxi. 30.
     __________________________________________________________________

INDEX OF TEXTS IN PROVERBS QUOTED OR EXPOUNDED.

   verses             page

   Chapter I.

   i.-ix.             [7]7
   7                  [8]9, [9]15, etc.
   11-14              [10]26, [11]27
   13                 [12]32
   17                 [13]34
   19                 [14]30, [15]33
   24-31              [16]35, [17]36
   25                 [18]34
   31                 [19]34, [20]37
   32                 [21]25, [22]34

   Chapter II.

   10                 [23]25
   12                 [24]24
   16                 [25]24
   19                 [26]34
   21                 [27]37
   22                 [28]33, [29]37

   Chapter III.

   1-10               [30]37
   6                  [31]46
   8                  [32]39
   12                 [33]50
   13-15              [34]48
   16                 [35]50
   18                 [36]49
   27                 [37]43
   28                 [38]43
   29                 [39]41
   31                 [40]50
   33                 [41]41
   35                 [42]51

   Chapter IV.

   1-7                [43]52
   8, 9               [44]55
   12                 [45]64
   14                 [46]56
   16, 17             [47]26, [48]63
   18                 [49]63
   19                 [50]62
   20-23              [51]57
   24                 [52]59
   25-27              [53]61

   Chapter V.

   3-20               [54]27
   8                  [55]66
   9                  [56]72
   10                 [57]72
   11                 [58]72
   12-14              [59]28, [60]72
   15-19              [61]69
   21                 [62]62, [63]72
   22                 [64]29
   23                 [65]73

   Chapter VI.

   1-5                [66]80
   6-8                [67]83
   12-15              [68]84
   16-19              [69]88
   20-23              [70]91
   24-35              [71]27
   25                 [72]68
   26                 [73]72, [74]75
   27, 28             [75]71
   32                 [76]29
   33                 [77]72
   34                 [78]72
   35                 [79]72

   Chapter VII.

   1-5                [80]93
   4                  [81]94
   5-27               [82]27, [83]95, etc.
   8                  [84]95
   9                  [85]94
   14                 [86]124
   15                 [87]68
   16, 17             [88]68
   22                 [89]99

   Chapter VIII.

   1-6                [90]107
   7-9                [91]108
   10-16              [92]109
   15-16              [93]4
   17                 [94]110
   18                 [95]109
   20                 [96]108
   22                 [97]110
   22-31              [98]112, etc.
   26                 [99]110
   29                 [100]111
   30-36              [101]120

   Chapter IX.

   1-3                [102]123-[103]4
   4                  [104]122
   5                  [105]124
   6                  [106]125
   7                  [107]125
   8                  [108]348
   9                  [109]127
   10                 [110]9, [111]127
   12                 [112]37, [113]131
   17                 [114]68

   Chapter X.

   1                  [115]306
   2                  [116]135, [117]141
   4                  [118]139
   12                 [119]209
   13                 [120]342
   14                 [121]164
   15                 [122]138, [123]290
   17                 [124]181
   18                 [125]339
   19                 [126]171
   22                 [127]142
   23                 [128]111, [129]156, [130]338
   28                 [131]150
   29                 [132]155
   30                 [133]150

   Chapter XI.

   1                  [134]215
   2                  [135]183
   3                  [136]151
   4                  [137]142
   5                  [138]150
   6                  [139]149, [140]150
   7                  [141]151
   8                  [142]152
   9                  [143]169, [144]176
   10                 [145]154
   11                 [146]154
   12                 [147]177
   13                 [148]169
   14                 [149]256
   15                 [150]80, [151]332
   16                 [152]399
   17                 [153]297
   18                 [154]150
   19                 [155]151
   20                 [156]155
   21                 [157]151
   22                 [158]398
   24                 [159]146, [160]298
   25                 [161]146
   26                 [162]294
   27                 [163]152
   28                 [164]140
   30                 [165]152
   31                 [166]154

   Chapter XII.

   1                  [167]163, [168]181
   2                  [169]155
   4                  [170]4, [171]402
   5                  [172]177, [173]198
   6                  [174]163, [175]169, [176]176
   7                  [177]150, [178]151
   8                  [179]42
   9                  [180]139
   11                 [181]152, [182]267, [183]275
   13                 [184]152, [185]163, [186]164
   14                 [187]163
   15                 [188]183, [189]256
   16                 [190]163, [191]166
   17                 [192]91, [193]163, [194]167
   18                 [195]163, [196]164, [197]167, [198]172
   19                 [199]89, [200]163, [201]168
   21                 [202]152
   22                 [203]163, [204]168
   23                 [205]163, [206]339
   24                 [207]272
   25                 [208]163, [209]173
   26                 [210]153, [211]154
   27                 [212]265, [213]273

   Chapter XIII.

   1                  [214]125, [215]179, [216]181
   2                  [217]164
   3                  [218]150, [219]171
   4                  [220]271
   5                  [221]108
   6                  [222]152
   8                  [223]138
   9                  [224]151
   10                 [225]179, [226]183, [227]184
   11                 [228]141
   12                 [229]193, [230]194
   13                 [231]179, [232]181, [233]184, [234]259
   16                 [235]171
   17                 [236]182
   18                 [237]140, [238]179
   19                 [239]192
   22                 [240]141, [241]153
   24                 [242]309
   25                 [243]152

   Chapter XIV.

   1                  [244]398
   3                  [245]165, [246]176, [247]186
   4                  [248]269
   5                  [249]91, [250]176
   6                  [251]126
   7                  [252]171, [253]339
   9                  [254]156
   10                 [255]191, et seq.
   11                 [256]150
   12                 [257]65, [258]151
   13                 [259]191, [260]195
   14                 [261]152
   15                 [262]177
   16                 [263]186
   17                 [264]205
   19                 [265]153
   20                 [266]138, [267]139
   21                 [268]294
   22                 [269]152
   23                 [270]171
   24                 [271]141, [272]340
   25                 [273]91, [274]176
   26                 [275]152
   27                 [276]15
   28                 [277]332
   29                 [278]205
   30                 [279]210
   31                 [280]143, [281]291
   32                 [282]153
   33                 [283]171, [284]339
   34                 [285]4, [286]154
   35                 [287]328

   Chapter XV.

   1                  [288]172, [289]203
   2                  [290]171
   3                  [291]197
   4                  [292]172, [293]203, [294]210
   6                  [295]141, [296]142, [297]216
   7                  [298]175
   8                  [299]156, [300]181
   9                  [301]155
   11                 [302]198
   12                 [303]126
   13                 [304]195
   15                 [305]195, [306]357
   16, 17             [307]143
   18                 [308]203
   19                 [309]264
   20                 [310]181, [311]306
   22                 [312]256, [313]332
   23                 [314]165, [315]173
   25                 [316]187, [317]291
   26                 [318]155, [319]172
   27                 [320]145
   28                 [321]151, [322]169, [323]176
   29                 [324]156
   30                 [325]196
   31                 [326]184
   32                 [327]181
   33, etc.           [328]4, [329]184, [330]215

   Chapter XVI.

   1                  [331]178
   1-7                [332]4, [333]216
   2                  [334]198
   4                  [335]201
   5                  [336]151, [337]187
   6                  [338]226, [339]362
   7                  [340]324
   8                  [341]142
   9                  [342]216
   11                 [343]215
   12                 [344]327
   13                 [345]153, [346]327
   14                 [347]328
   15                 [348]328
   16                 [349]142
   17                 [350]152
   18                 [351]180
   19                 [352]180
   20                 [353]4, [354]179, [355]183, [356]188, [357]216
   21                 [358]175
   22                 [359]340
   23                 [360]175
   24                 [361]173
   25                 [362]151
   26                 [363]265
   27                 [364]154
   28                 [365]169
   29                 [366]27
   30                 [367]85
   32                 [368]209
   33                 [369]4, [370]217

   Chapter XVII.

   1                  [371]143
   2                  [372]184
   3                  [373]198
   4                  [374]177
   5                  [375]143, [376]291, [377]314, [378]316
   6                  [379]53, [380]143
   7                  [381]332
   8                  [382]138
   9                  [383]169
   10                 [384]182
   11                 [385]259
   12                 [386]204, [387]343
   14                 [388]205, [389]208
   15                 [390]155
   16                 [391]339
   17                 [392]227
   18                 [393]80
   19                 [394]185
   20                 [395]165
   21                 [396]306, [397]339
   22                 [398]194, [399]195
   24                 [400]61
   25                 [401]306
   26                 [402]153, [403]155
   27                 [404]177, [405]205
   28                 [406]177

   Chapter XVIII.

   1                  [407]205, [408]239, etc.
   2                  [409]171
   3                  [410]154
   4                  [411]165
   5                  [412]155
   6                  [413]165
   7                  [414]165
   8                  [415]169
   9                  [416]167, [417]266
   11                 [418]138
   12                 [419]180, [420]189
   13                 [421]170
   14                 [422]194
   15                 [423]127
   16                 [424]138
   18                 [425]217
   19                 [426]234
   20                 [427]164
   21                 [428]164
   22                 [429]4, [430]399
   23                 [431]139
   24                 [432]229, [433]233

   Chapter XIX.

   1                  [434]142, [435]165
   2                  [436]256
   4                  [437]138, [438]139
   5                  [439]91, [440]167
   6                  [441]138
   7                  [442]3, [443]139, [444]166
   8                  [445]258
   9                  [446]91
   10                 [447]342
   11                 [448]205
   12                 [449]328
   13                 [450]292, [451]306, [452]398
   14                 [453]4
   15                 [454]265
   16                 [455]152, [456]258
   17                 [457]146, [458]291
   18                 [459]309
   19                 [460]206
   20                 [461]256, [462]261
   21                 [463]216, [464]257
   22                 [465]165, [466]198
   23                 [467]258, [468]362
   24                 [469]263
   25                 [470]126
   26                 [471]306
   27                 [472]258
   28                 [473]167
   29                 [474]258, [475]342

   Chapter XX.

   1                  [476]279
   2                  [477]329
   3                  [478]205
   4                  [479]262
   5                  [480]256
   7                  [481]153
   8                  [482]327
   9                  [483]198
   10                 [484]215
   11                 [485]153
   12                 [486]197
   13                 [487]204
   14                 [488]86
   15                 [489]142, [490]176
   16                 [491]80
   17                 [492]168
   18                 [493]256, [494]332
   19                 [495]169
   21                 [496]145
   22                 [497]210
   23                 [498]215
   24                 [499]198
   26                 [500]327
   27                 [501]198
   28                 [502]328
   30                 [503]310

   Chapter XXI.

   1                  [504]4, [505]328
   2                  [506]151, [507]198
   3                  [508]156
   4                  [509]188
   5                  [510]272
   6                  [511]141
   7                  [512]150
   8                  [513]151
   9                  [514]398
   10                 [515]151, [516]179
   12                 [517]155
   13                 [518]299
   14                 [519]138
   15                 [520]151, [521]152
   17                 [522]276
   18                 [523]152
   19                 [524]398
   20                 [525]140, [526]272, [527]339
   21                 [528]152
   23                 [529]165
   24                 [530]180
   25                 [531]266
   26                 [532]145
   27                 [533]156
   28                 [534]165, [535]167
   29                 [536]187
   30                 [537]259
   31                 [538]259

   Chapter XXII.

   1                  [539]143
   2                  [540]143, [541]288, [542]292
   3                  [543]352
   4                  [544]140, [545]188
   6                  [546]303
   7                  [547]139
   8                  [548]151
   9                  [549]146, [550]288, [551]300
   10                 [552]126
   11                 [553]153, [554]165, [555]327
   12                 [556]155
   13                 [557]263
   14                 [558]283, [559]398
   15                 [560]304, [561]340
   16                 [562]141, [563]288, [564]297
   17, etc.           [565]4
   18                 [566]165
   22                 [567]4, [568]288
   23                 [569]288
   24                 [570]204
   26, 27             [571]80
   29                 [572]272

   Chapter XXIII.

   1-3                [573]333
   4                  [574]145
   5                  [575]140
   9                  [576]125, [577]170, [578]348
   10                 [579]291
   11                 [580]291
   13-14              [581]303-[582]310
   15                 [583]306
   16                 [584]166, [585]306
   17                 [586]151, [587]308
   17-21              [588]313
   18                 [589]151
   21                 [590]140
   24                 [591]306
   26-28              [592]123
   27                 [593]398
   29-35              [594]4, [595]76, [596]281

   Chapter XXIV.

   1                  [597]151
   5                  [598]256
   6                  [599]256
   7                  [600]177
   9                  [601]126, [602]341
   11, 12             [603]5, [604]155, [605]197, [606]299
   15                 [607]26, [608]151
   16                 [609]151
   17                 [610]314
   18                 [611]314
   19                 [612]151
   20                 [613]151
   21                 [614]5, [615]329
   22                 [616]329
   23                 [617]330
   23-34              [618]3, [619]5
   24                 [620]154
   25                 [621]154
   26                 [622]176
   27                 [623]352
   28                 [624]314
   29                 [625]314
   30-34              [626]82, [627]270
   34                 [628]263

   Chapter XXV.

   xxv.-xxix.         [629]5
   2                  [630]169
   6, 7               [631]5
   8                  [632]208
   9                  [633]208
   11                 [634]174
   12                 [635]164, [636]175
   14                 [637]180
   17                 [638]244
   18                 [639]167
   20                 [640]174
   21, 22             [641]6, [642]314
   23                 [643]169
   24                 [644]398
   26                 [645]153
   28                 [646]206

   Chapter XXVI.

   1                  [647]340
   2                  [648]168
   3-12               [649]341-[650]349
   10                 [651]346
   12                 [652]180
   13                 [653]263
   14                 [654]263
   15                 [655]263
   16                 [656]263
   18                 [657]170
   19                 [658]170
   20                 [659]169
   21                 [660]166, [661]204
   22                 [662]169
   23-28              [663]168
   24                 [664]151
   26                 [665]151

   Chapter XXVII.

   1                  [666]350
   2                  [667]180
   3                  [668]341
   4                  [669]356
   5                  [670]182
   6                  [671]232
   8                  [672]5, [673]243
   9                  [674]232
   10                 [675]233, [676]244
   11                 [677]306
   12                 [678]352
   13                 [679]80
   14                 [680]229, [681]237
   15                 [682]398
   16                 [683]398
   17                 [684]231
   18                 [685]350, [686]360
   19                 [687]230
   20                 [688]350, [689]354
   21                 [690]182
   22                 [691]340
   23-27              [692]5, [693]140, [694]270

   Chapter XXVIII.

   xxviiii. generally [695]5
   1                  [696]155
   2                  [697]332
   3                  [698]296
   4                  [699]154, [700]385
   6                  [701]142
   8                  [702]141, [703]297
   9                  [704]156, [705]385
   11                 [706]143
   12                 [707]154, [708]332
   13                 [709]362
   14                 [710]362
   15                 [711]332
   16                 [712]332
   18                 [713]152
   19                 [714]267, [715]270
   20                 [716]145
   22                 [717]145
   23                 [718]168, [719]175, [720]182
   26                 [721]38, [722]183, [723]348
   27                 [724]146, [725]298
   28                 [726]154

   Chapter XXIX.

   1                  [727]88
   2                  [728]5, [729]154, [730]332
   3                  [731]306
   4                  [732]332
   5                  [733]168
   6                  [734]152
   7                  [735]300
   8                  [736]204
   9                  [737]341
   11                 [738]166, [739]205, [740]345
   12                 [741]333
   14                 [742]328
   15                 [743]310
   16                 [744]151
   17                 [745]310
   18                 [746]375
   20                 [747]170
   22                 [748]204
   23                 [749]180
   25                 [750]335
   26                 [751]335
   27                 [752]148

   Chapter XXX.

   xxx. generally     [753]6, [754]386
   1-4                [755]390, [756]392
   5-9                [757]393
   8                  [758]146
   9                  [759]146
   13                 [760]89
   22                 [761]332, [762]339
   25, 27             [763]83
   31                 [764]329
   32, 33             [765]167

   Chapter XXXI.

   xxxi. generally    [766]6, [767]397
   1                  [768]397
   2-8                [769]334
   3                  [770]397
   4                  [771]278
   5                  [772]278
   6                  [773]278
   7                  [774]278
   8                  [775]176
   9                  [776]176
   10-31              [777]400, [778]410
   27                 [779]273
   30                 [780]302
     __________________________________________________________________

GENERAL INDEX.

   Agassiz, [781]144.
   Agriculture, [782]140, [783]269.
   Agur, [784]386.
   Anger, [785]205.
   Ant, the, [786]83.
   Atheism, unknown to Israel, [787]11, [788]18.
   Atonement, meaning of, [789]362, [790]371.
   Bacon, [791]16, [792]230.
   Bible, its character, [793]382.
   Buddha, his teaching quoted, [794]71.
   Burns, quoted, [795]293.
   Carlyle, [796]305.
   Catholic, the Catholic Church, [797]246.
   Chastening, [798]51.
   Christ, [799]93, [800]103, [801]107, [802]117, [803]120, [804]133,
   [805]148, [806]212, [807]227, [808]247, [809]258, [810]273, [811]318,
   [812]326, [813]330, [814]335, [815]348, [816]360, [817]383.
   ---- His use of the Proverbs, [818]124, [819]126, [820]127, [821]128,
   [822]130, [823]159, [824]314.
   Church, the, [825]247.
   Coleridge, [826]16.
   Commercial life, [827]41, [828]86, [829]218, [830]226.
   Competition, [831]31.
   Confession, [832]364.
   Conscience, [833]225, [834]252, [835]343.
   Contentment, [836]356.
   Conversion, [837]104, [838]212, [839]287, [840]320.
   "Corners," [841]295.
   Covetousness, [842]30.
   Creation, the poem of, [843]112.
   Criticism, [844]181.
   Dandy, the, [845]95.
   Darwin, [846]16.
   Death, not terrible, [847]41.
   Diligence, [848]139, [849]262 et seq.
   Distribution, economic, [850]136.
   Donatello, [851]183.
   Drink, [852]275 et seq.
   Drunkard, the, [853]76, [854]277.
   Ecclesiastes, quoted, [855]10.
   Ecclesiasticus, [856]9, [857]12, [858]22, [859]81, [860]139, [861]144,
   [862]169, [863]184, [864]218, [865]250, [866]306, [867]400.
   Education, [868]52 et seq., [869]303 et seq.
   Equality, [870]294.
   Evolution, [871]113.
   Faith, the life of, [872]356.
   Fanaticism, [873]287.
   Fitness, in speech, [874]170, [875]174.
   Flattery, [876]168.
   Folly, [877]67, [878]92, [879]122, [880]131, [881]205.
   Fool, the, [882]337 et seq.
   Forgiveness, [883]314 et seq.
   ---- God's, [884]370.
   Francis, St., [885]190.
   Friendship, [886]227 et seq.
   Gambling, [887]32.
   God, His existence, [888]391.
   ---- men need Him, [889]43.
   ---- relation with human life, [890]47, [891]155, [892]197, [893]199,
   [894]217, [895]236, [896]252, [897]291, [898]353.
   Gregg, quoted, [899]73.
   Health, result of wisdom, [900]39.
   Heathenism, [901]158, [902]377.
   Heaven, [903]59, [904]162, [905]274.
   Hell, [906]59, [907]73.
   Henry II., [908]106.
   Home, [909]53.
   Honesty, [910]224.
   Hudibras, quoted, [911]266.
   Humility, [912]44, [913]127, [914]184, [915]189.
   Idleness, ruinous, [916]266.
   Immortality, [917]378.
   Impurity, [918]25, [919]27, [920]29.
   Indra, drunk, [921]279.
   Inspiration of the book of Proverbs, [922]157.
   Inwardness, [923]60.
   Jahveh, [924]15, [925]21.
   Jakeh, [926]6.
   Joy, [927]193.
   Justification, [928]161.
   King, the, [929]326 et seq.
   ---- Divine right of, [930]331.
   Land, the land question, [931]270.
   Lanfranc, anecdote of, [932]205.
   Law, [933]113.
   Lemuel, [934]6, [935]396.
   Liberality, [936]43, [937]145.
   Lies, [938]89, [939]130, [940]167, [941]330.
   Livingstone, [942]59.
   Lot, the, use of, [943]217.
   Love, [944]209, [945]235, [946]311.
   Man, [947]114.
   Marriage, [948]69, [949]401.
   Massa, Gen. xxv. 14, [950]6.
   Meekness, [951]172, [952]210.
   Milton, quoted, [953]59, [954]69, [955]111, [956]133, [957]316,
   [958]367.
   Misanthrope, the, [959]240.
   Misapplication of Scripture, [960]346.
   Morality, relation to science, [961]116.
   Mother's influence, [962]397.
   ---- neglect, [963]53.
   Murder, [964]90.
   Nabal, [965]339.
   National righteousness, [966]154.
   Neighbourliness, [967]244.
   Obedience, [968]385.
   Parents, duties of, [969]306.
   Paton, John, [970]54, [971]217.
   Paul, St., [972]359.
   Pauperism, [973]290.
   Plain speaking, [974]65, [975]102.
   Pleasure, [976]276.
   Poor, the, [977]43, [978]141, [979]143, [980]176, [981]288 et seq.
   Positivism, [982]378.
   Pride, [983]89, [984]179 et seq., [985]210.
   Proverbs, book of, its limitations, [986]22, [987]211, [988]316,
   [989]347.
   Punishment, [990]87, [991]309 et seq.
   Quarrelling, [992]166.
   Rashness, [993]170.
   Realism, [994]66, [995]92.
   Reason, [996]341.
   Remorse, [997]77.
   Repetition of Proverbs, [998]2 (note).
   Reproof, [999]175.
   Revelation, necessary, [1000]20, [1001]375 et seq., [1002]393.
   Revenge, [1003]316.
   Robespierre, [1004]377.
   Rubies, valley of, [1005]49.
   Science, depends on theology, [1006]113.
   ---- its limitations, [1007]379, [1008]380.
   Scorner, the, [1009]125, [1010]129.
   Servants, treatment of, [1011]387.
   Shakespeare, quoted, [1012]73, [1013]86, [1014]234, [1015]241.
   Sin, its nature, [1016]363, [1017]367.
   ---- its results, [1018]71, [1019]74, [1020]101.
   ---- its seductions, [1021]68.
   Sister, [1022]94.
   Sluggard, the, [1023]82, [1024]263.
   Socialism, [1025]137, [1026]147, [1027]395.
   Solomon, not the author of the whole book, [1028]2, [1029]106.
   Speech, its power, [1030]164.
   Suretiship, [1031]80.
   Sweating, [1032]31, [1033]296.
   Sympathy, [1034]196.
   Theism, necessary to knowledge, [1035]19.
   Temper, [1036]203, [1037]207.
   Temperance, [1038]280, [1039]286.
   Tennyson, quoted, [1040]67.
   Truth, injured by drink, [1041]283.
   Wealth, [1042]135 et seq.
   ---- true, [1043]356.
   Wife, the, [1044]399 et seq.
   Will, freedom of, [1045]251 et seq.
   Wisdom, meaning of, [1046]10.
   ---- person of, [1047]92, [1048]108, [1049]123.
   ---- rewards of, [1050]37, [1051]109.
   ---- the book of, [1052]9, [1053]10.
   ---- the book of, quoted, [1054]118.
   Woman, [1055]96, [1056]132, [1057]396.
   Work, its blessings, [1058]268.
   Worthless man, the, [1059]84.
   Youth, dangers of, [1060]34.
   Zacchus, [1061]367.
   Zola, [1062]67.
     __________________________________________________________________

                                    Indexes
     __________________________________________________________________

Index of Scripture Commentary

   Proverbs

   [1063]1   [1064]2   [1065]3   [1066]4   [1067]5   [1068]6   [1069]7
   [1070]8   [1071]9   [1072]10   [1073]11   [1074]12   [1075]13
   [1076]14   [1077]15   [1078]16   [1079]17   [1080]18   [1081]19
   [1082]20   [1083]21   [1084]22   [1085]23   [1086]24   [1087]25
   [1088]26   [1089]27   [1090]28   [1091]29   [1092]30   [1093]31
     __________________________________________________________________

Index of Pages of the Print Edition

   [1094]i  [1095]iii  [1096]iv  [1097]1  [1098]2  [1099]3  [1100]4
   [1101]5  [1102]6  [1103]7  [1104]8  [1105]9  [1106]10  [1107]11
   [1108]12  [1109]13  [1110]14  [1111]15  [1112]16  [1113]17  [1114]18
   [1115]19  [1116]20  [1117]21  [1118]22  [1119]23  [1120]24  [1121]25
   [1122]26  [1123]27  [1124]28  [1125]29  [1126]30  [1127]31  [1128]32
   [1129]33  [1130]34  [1131]35  [1132]36  [1133]37  [1134]38  [1135]39
   [1136]40  [1137]41  [1138]42  [1139]43  [1140]44  [1141]45  [1142]46
   [1143]47  [1144]48  [1145]49  [1146]50  [1147]51  [1148]52  [1149]53
   [1150]54  [1151]55  [1152]56  [1153]57  [1154]58  [1155]59  [1156]60
   [1157]61  [1158]62  [1159]63  [1160]64  [1161]65  [1162]66  [1163]67
   [1164]68  [1165]69  [1166]70  [1167]71  [1168]72  [1169]73  [1170]74
   [1171]75  [1172]76  [1173]77  [1174]78  [1175]79  [1176]80  [1177]81
   [1178]82  [1179]83  [1180]84  [1181]85  [1182]86  [1183]87  [1184]88
   [1185]89  [1186]90  [1187]91  [1188]92  [1189]93  [1190]94  [1191]95
   [1192]96  [1193]97  [1194]98  [1195]99  [1196]100  [1197]101
   [1198]102  [1199]103  [1200]104  [1201]105  [1202]106  [1203]107
   [1204]108  [1205]109  [1206]110  [1207]111  [1208]112  [1209]113
   [1210]114  [1211]115  [1212]116  [1213]117  [1214]118  [1215]119
   [1216]120  [1217]121  [1218]122  [1219]123  [1220]124  [1221]125
   [1222]126  [1223]127  [1224]128  [1225]129  [1226]130  [1227]131
   [1228]132  [1229]133  [1230]134  [1231]135  [1232]136  [1233]137
   [1234]138  [1235]139  [1236]140  [1237]141  [1238]142  [1239]143
   [1240]144  [1241]145  [1242]146  [1243]147  [1244]148  [1245]149
   [1246]150  [1247]151  [1248]152  [1249]153  [1250]154  [1251]155
   [1252]156  [1253]157  [1254]158  [1255]159  [1256]160  [1257]161
   [1258]162  [1259]163  [1260]164  [1261]165  [1262]166  [1263]167
   [1264]168  [1265]169  [1266]170  [1267]171  [1268]172  [1269]173
   [1270]174  [1271]175  [1272]176  [1273]177  [1274]178  [1275]179
   [1276]180  [1277]181  [1278]182  [1279]183  [1280]184  [1281]185
   [1282]186  [1283]187  [1284]188  [1285]189  [1286]190  [1287]191
   [1288]192  [1289]193  [1290]194  [1291]195  [1292]196  [1293]197
   [1294]198  [1295]199  [1296]200  [1297]201  [1298]202  [1299]203
   [1300]204  [1301]205  [1302]206  [1303]207  [1304]208  [1305]209
   [1306]210  [1307]211  [1308]212  [1309]213  [1310]214  [1311]215
   [1312]216  [1313]217  [1314]218  [1315]219  [1316]220  [1317]221
   [1318]222  [1319]223  [1320]224  [1321]225  [1322]226  [1323]227
   [1324]228  [1325]229  [1326]230  [1327]231  [1328]232  [1329]233
   [1330]234  [1331]235  [1332]236  [1333]237  [1334]238  [1335]239
   [1336]240  [1337]241  [1338]242  [1339]243  [1340]244  [1341]245
   [1342]246  [1343]247  [1344]248  [1345]249  [1346]250  [1347]251
   [1348]252  [1349]253  [1350]254  [1351]255  [1352]256  [1353]257
   [1354]258  [1355]259  [1356]260  [1357]261  [1358]262  [1359]263
   [1360]264  [1361]265  [1362]266  [1363]267  [1364]268  [1365]269
   [1366]270  [1367]271  [1368]272  [1369]273  [1370]274  [1371]275
   [1372]276  [1373]277  [1374]278  [1375]279  [1376]280  [1377]281
   [1378]282  [1379]283  [1380]284  [1381]285  [1382]286  [1383]287
   [1384]288  [1385]289  [1386]290  [1387]291  [1388]292  [1389]293
   [1390]294  [1391]295  [1392]296  [1393]297  [1394]298  [1395]299
   [1396]300  [1397]301  [1398]302  [1399]303  [1400]304  [1401]305
   [1402]306  [1403]307  [1404]308  [1405]309  [1406]310  [1407]311
   [1408]312  [1409]313  [1410]314  [1411]315  [1412]316  [1413]317
   [1414]318  [1415]319  [1416]320  [1417]321  [1418]322  [1419]323
   [1420]324  [1421]325  [1422]326  [1423]327  [1424]328  [1425]329
   [1426]330  [1427]331  [1428]332  [1429]333  [1430]334  [1431]335
   [1432]336  [1433]337  [1434]338  [1435]339  [1436]340  [1437]341
   [1438]342  [1439]343  [1440]344  [1441]345  [1442]346  [1443]347
   [1444]348  [1445]349  [1446]350  [1447]351  [1448]352  [1449]353
   [1450]354  [1451]355  [1452]356  [1453]357  [1454]358  [1455]359
   [1456]360  [1457]361  [1458]362  [1459]363  [1460]364  [1461]365
   [1462]366  [1463]367  [1464]368  [1465]369  [1466]370  [1467]371
   [1468]372  [1469]373  [1470]374  [1471]375  [1472]376  [1473]377
   [1474]378  [1475]379  [1476]380  [1477]381  [1478]382  [1479]383
   [1480]384  [1481]385  [1482]386  [1483]387  [1484]388  [1485]389
   [1486]390  [1487]391  [1488]392  [1489]393  [1490]394  [1491]395
   [1492]396  [1493]397  [1494]398  [1495]399  [1496]400  [1497]401
   [1498]402  [1499]403  [1500]404  [1501]405  [1502]406  [1503]407
   [1504]408  [1505]409  [1506]410  [1507]411  [1508]412  [1509]413
   [1510]414  [1511]415  [1512]416  [1513]417  [1514]418
     __________________________________________________________________

            This document is from the Christian Classics Ethereal
               Library at Calvin College, http://www.ccel.org,
                   generated on demand from ThML source.

References

   1. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiv-p33.3
   2. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiv-p81.2
   3. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiv-p81.2
   4. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xvi-p41.1
   5. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xvii-p14.1
   6. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#ii-p2.1
   7. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#ii-p13.1
   8. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#iii-p1.1
   9. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#iii-p21.1
  10. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#iv-p9.1
  11. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#iv-p16.1
  12. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#iv-p29.1
  13. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#iv-p35.2
  14. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#iv-p26.1
  15. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#iv-p31.2
  16. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#iv-p40.3
  17. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#iv-p42.1
  18. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#iv-p35.2
  19. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#iv-p35.2
  20. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#v-p1.1
  21. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#iv-p4.1
  22. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#iv-p35.2
  23. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#iv-p4.1
  24. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#iv-p1.1
  25. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#iv-p1.1
  26. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#iv-p35.2
  27. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#v-p1.1
  28. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#iv-p31.2
  29. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#v-p1.1
  30. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#v-p1.1
  31. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#v-p34.1
  32. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#v-p12.1
  33. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#v-p43.2
  34. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#v-p38.2
  35. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#v-p43.2
  36. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#v-p41.2
  37. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#v-p28.1
  38. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#v-p28.1
  39. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#v-p18.1
  40. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#v-p43.2
  41. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#v-p18.1
  42. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#v-p49.1
  43. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#vi-p1.1
  44. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#vi-p11.1
  45. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#vi-p44.2
  46. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#vi-p15.1
  47. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#iv-p9.1
  48. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#vi-p41.2
  49. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#vi-p41.2
  50. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#vi-p37.2
  51. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#vi-p19.1
  52. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#vi-p25.1
  53. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#vi-p32.1
  54. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#iv-p16.1
  55. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#vii-p3.2
  56. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#vii-p24.3
  57. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#vii-p24.3
  58. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#vii-p24.3
  59. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#iv-p20.1
  60. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#vii-p24.3
  61. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#vii-p14.1
  62. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#vi-p37.2
  63. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#vii-p24.3
  64. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#iv-p24.1
  65. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#vii-p33.2
  66. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#viii-p5.1
  67. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#viii-p13.2
  68. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#viii-p17.2
  69. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#viii-p28.1
  70. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#viii-p38.1
  71. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#iv-p16.1
  72. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#vii-p9.1
  73. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#vii-p24.3
  74. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#vii-p42.1
  75. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#vii-p21.1
  76. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#iv-p24.1
  77. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#vii-p24.3
  78. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#vii-p24.3
  79. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#vii-p24.3
  80. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#ix-p3.2
  81. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#ix-p6.1
  82. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#iv-p16.1
  83. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#ix-p10.2
  84. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#ix-p10.2
  85. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#ix-p6.1
  86. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xi-p8.2
  87. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#vii-p9.1
  88. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#vii-p9.1
  89. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#ix-p20.1
  90. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#x-p3.2
  91. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#x-p5.2
  92. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#x-p9.3
  93. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#ii-p8.1
  94. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#x-p12.1
  95. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#x-p9.3
  96. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#x-p5.2
  97. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#x-p12.1
  98. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#x-p22.1
  99. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#x-p12.1
 100. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#x-p17.1
 101. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#x-p38.1
 102. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xi-p4.1
 103. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xi-p8.2
 104. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xi-p1.1
 105. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xi-p8.2
 106. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xi-p13.1
 107. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xi-p13.1
 108. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxviii-p57.1
 109. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xi-p25.2
 110. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#iii-p1.1
 111. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xi-p25.2
 112. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#v-p1.1
 113. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xi-p34.2
 114. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#vii-p9.1
 115. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxv-p10.1
 116. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xii-p1.1
 117. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xii-p35.1
 118. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xii-p15.2
 119. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xvii-p29.2
 120. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxviii-p35.1
 121. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiv-p12.2
 122. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xii-p8.1
 123. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxiv-p6.3
 124. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xv-p19.1
 125. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxviii-p16.2
 126. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiv-p73.2
 127. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xii-p44.1
 128. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#x-p17.1
 129. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiii-p75.2
 130. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxviii-p13.2
 131. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiii-p4.2
 132. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiii-p64.1
 133. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiii-p4.2
 134. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xviii-p1.1
 135. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xv-p32.2
 136. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiii-p12.4
 137. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xii-p44.1
 138. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiii-p4.2
 139. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiii-p1.1
 140. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiii-p4.2
 141. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiii-p12.4
 142. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiii-p27.2
 143. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiv-p58.1
 144. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiv-p102.2
 145. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiii-p49.3
 146. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiii-p49.3
 147. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiv-p113.1
 148. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiv-p58.1
 149. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxi-p13.2
 150. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#viii-p5.1
 151. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxvii-p37.1
 152. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxxiii-p14.2
 153. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxiv-p28.1
 154. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiii-p4.2
 155. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiii-p12.4
 156. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiii-p64.1
 157. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiii-p12.4
 158. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxxiii-p8.1
 159. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xii-p72.2
 160. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxiv-p31.1
 161. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xii-p72.2
 162. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxiv-p19.1
 163. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiii-p27.2
 164. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xii-p25.1
 165. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiii-p27.2
 166. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiii-p49.3
 167. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiv-p1.1
 168. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xv-p19.1
 169. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiii-p64.1
 170. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#ii-p8.1
 171. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxxiii-p22.1
 172. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiv-p113.1
 173. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xvi-p29.2
 174. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiv-p1.1
 175. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiv-p58.1
 176. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiv-p102.2
 177. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiii-p4.2
 178. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiii-p12.4
 179. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#v-p24.1
 180. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xii-p15.2
 181. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiii-p27.2
 182. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxii-p23.1
 183. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxiii-p1.1
 184. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiii-p27.2
 185. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiv-p1.1
 186. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiv-p12.2
 187. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiv-p1.1
 188. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xv-p32.2
 189. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxi-p13.2
 190. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiv-p1.1
 191. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiv-p33.3
 192. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#viii-p38.1
 193. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiv-p1.1
 194. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiv-p40.2
 195. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiv-p1.1
 196. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiv-p12.2
 197. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiv-p40.2
 198. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiv-p81.2
 199. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#viii-p30.2
 200. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiv-p1.1
 201. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiv-p48.2
 202. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiii-p27.2
 203. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiv-p1.1
 204. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiv-p48.2
 205. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiv-p1.1
 206. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxviii-p16.2
 207. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxii-p37.2
 208. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiv-p1.1
 209. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiv-p87.2
 210. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiii-p39.2
 211. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiii-p49.3
 212. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxii-p15.2
 213. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxii-p43.1
 214. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xi-p13.1
 215. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xv-p1.1
 216. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xv-p19.1
 217. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiv-p12.2
 218. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiii-p4.2
 219. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiv-p73.2
 220. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxii-p34.1
 221. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#x-p5.2
 222. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiii-p27.2
 223. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xii-p8.1
 224. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiii-p12.4
 225. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xv-p1.1
 226. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xv-p32.2
 227. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xv-p38.2
 228. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xii-p35.1
 229. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xvi-p7.2
 230. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xvi-p9.2
 231. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xv-p1.1
 232. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xv-p19.1
 233. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xv-p38.2
 234. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxi-p29.1
 235. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiv-p73.2
 236. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xv-p27.2
 237. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xii-p25.1
 238. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xv-p1.1
 239. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xvi-p4.2
 240. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xii-p35.1
 241. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiii-p39.2
 242. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxv-p21.1
 243. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiii-p27.2
 244. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxxiii-p8.1
 245. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiv-p21.1
 246. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiv-p102.2
 247. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xv-p46.1
 248. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxii-p27.2
 249. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#viii-p38.1
 250. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiv-p102.2
 251. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xi-p17.2
 252. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiv-p73.2
 253. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxviii-p16.2
 254. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiii-p75.2
 255. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xvi-p1.1
 256. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiii-p4.2
 257. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#vii-p1.1
 258. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiii-p12.4
 259. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xvi-p1.1
 260. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xvi-p14.1
 261. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiii-p27.2
 262. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiv-p113.1
 263. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xv-p46.1
 264. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xvii-p14.1
 265. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiii-p39.2
 266. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xii-p8.1
 267. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xii-p15.2
 268. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxiv-p19.1
 269. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiii-p27.2
 270. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiv-p73.2
 271. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xii-p35.1
 272. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxviii-p26.1
 273. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#viii-p38.1
 274. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiv-p102.2
 275. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiii-p27.2
 276. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#iii-p21.1
 277. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxvii-p37.1
 278. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xvii-p14.1
 279. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xvii-p36.1
 280. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xii-p53.1
 281. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxiv-p7.2
 282. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiii-p39.2
 283. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiv-p73.2
 284. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxviii-p16.2
 285. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#ii-p8.1
 286. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiii-p49.3
 287. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxvii-p16.2
 288. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiv-p81.2
 289. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xvii-p1.1
 290. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiv-p73.2
 291. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xvi-p24.2
 292. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiv-p81.2
 293. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xvii-p1.1
 294. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xvii-p36.1
 295. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xii-p35.1
 296. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xii-p44.1
 297. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xviii-p9.2
 298. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiv-p95.1
 299. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiii-p75.2
 300. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xv-p19.1
 301. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiii-p64.1
 302. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xvi-p29.2
 303. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xi-p17.2
 304. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xvi-p14.1
 305. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xvi-p14.1
 306. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxix-p27.1
 307. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xii-p53.1
 308. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xvii-p1.1
 309. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxii-p11.2
 310. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xv-p19.1
 311. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxv-p10.1
 312. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxi-p13.2
 313. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxvii-p37.1
 314. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiv-p21.1
 315. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiv-p87.2
 316. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xv-p49.1
 317. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxiv-p7.2
 318. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiii-p64.1
 319. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiv-p81.2
 320. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xii-p65.1
 321. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiii-p12.4
 322. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiv-p58.1
 323. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiv-p102.2
 324. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiii-p75.2
 325. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xvi-p22.1
 326. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xv-p38.2
 327. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xv-p19.1
 328. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#ii-p8.1
 329. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xv-p38.2
 330. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xviii-p1.1
 331. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiv-p121.1
 332. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#ii-p8.1
 333. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xviii-p9.2
 334. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xvi-p29.2
 335. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xvi-p41.1
 336. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiii-p12.4
 337. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xv-p49.1
 338. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xviii-p38.1
 339. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxx-p1.1
 340. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxvi-p31.1
 341. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xii-p44.1
 342. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xviii-p9.2
 343. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xviii-p1.1
 344. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxvii-p10.1
 345. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiii-p39.2
 346. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxvii-p10.1
 347. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxvii-p16.2
 348. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxvii-p16.2
 349. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xii-p44.1
 350. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiii-p27.2
 351. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xv-p8.2
 352. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xv-p8.2
 353. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#ii-p8.1
 354. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xv-p1.1
 355. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xv-p32.2
 356. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xv-p54.2
 357. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xviii-p9.2
 358. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiv-p95.1
 359. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxviii-p26.1
 360. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiv-p95.1
 361. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiv-p87.2
 362. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiii-p12.4
 363. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxii-p15.2
 364. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiii-p49.3
 365. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiv-p58.1
 366. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#iv-p16.1
 367. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#viii-p19.2
 368. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xvii-p29.2
 369. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#ii-p8.1
 370. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xviii-p17.2
 371. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xii-p53.1
 372. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xv-p38.2
 373. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xvi-p29.2
 374. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiv-p113.1
 375. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xii-p53.1
 376. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxiv-p7.2
 377. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxvi-p1.1
 378. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxvi-p10.1
 379. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#vi-p5.1
 380. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xii-p53.1
 381. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxvii-p37.1
 382. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xii-p8.1
 383. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiv-p58.1
 384. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xv-p27.2
 385. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxi-p29.1
 386. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xvii-p6.1
 387. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxviii-p39.2
 388. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xvii-p14.1
 389. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xvii-p25.1
 390. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiii-p64.1
 391. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxviii-p16.2
 392. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xix-p1.1
 393. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#viii-p5.1
 394. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xv-p44.2
 395. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiv-p21.1
 396. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxv-p10.1
 397. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxviii-p16.2
 398. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xvi-p9.2
 399. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xvi-p14.1
 400. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#vi-p32.1
 401. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxv-p10.1
 402. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiii-p39.2
 403. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiii-p64.1
 404. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiv-p113.1
 405. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xvii-p14.1
 406. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiv-p113.1
 407. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xvii-p14.1
 408. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xx-p1.1
 409. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiv-p73.2
 410. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiii-p49.3
 411. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiv-p21.1
 412. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiii-p64.1
 413. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiv-p21.1
 414. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiv-p21.1
 415. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiv-p58.1
 416. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiv-p40.2
 417. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxii-p19.2
 418. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xii-p8.1
 419. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xv-p8.2
 420. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xv-p59.1
 421. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiv-p68.2
 422. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xvi-p9.2
 423. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xi-p25.2
 424. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xii-p8.1
 425. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xviii-p17.2
 426. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xix-p20.1
 427. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiv-p12.2
 428. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiv-p12.2
 429. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#ii-p8.1
 430. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxxiii-p14.2
 431. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xii-p15.2
 432. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xix-p4.1
 433. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xix-p17.2
 434. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xii-p44.1
 435. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiv-p21.1
 436. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxi-p13.2
 437. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xii-p8.1
 438. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xii-p15.2
 439. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#viii-p38.1
 440. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiv-p40.2
 441. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xii-p8.1
 442. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#ii-p6.1
 443. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xii-p15.2
 444. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiv-p33.3
 445. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxi-p24.2
 446. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#viii-p38.1
 447. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxviii-p35.1
 448. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xvii-p14.1
 449. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxvii-p16.2
 450. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxiv-p14.1
 451. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxv-p10.1
 452. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxxiii-p8.1
 453. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#ii-p8.1
 454. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxii-p15.2
 455. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiii-p27.2
 456. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxi-p24.2
 457. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xii-p72.2
 458. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxiv-p7.2
 459. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxv-p21.1
 460. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xvii-p20.2
 461. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxi-p13.2
 462. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxi-p38.1
 463. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xviii-p9.2
 464. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxi-p21.1
 465. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiv-p21.1
 466. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xvi-p29.2
 467. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxi-p24.2
 468. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxx-p1.1
 469. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxii-p3.2
 470. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xi-p17.2
 471. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxv-p10.1
 472. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxi-p24.2
 473. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiv-p40.2
 474. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxi-p24.2
 475. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxviii-p35.1
 476. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxiii-p9.1
 477. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxvii-p24.2
 478. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xvii-p14.1
 479. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxii-p1.1
 480. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxi-p13.2
 481. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiii-p39.2
 482. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxvii-p10.1
 483. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xvi-p29.2
 484. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xviii-p1.1
 485. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiii-p39.2
 486. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xvi-p24.2
 487. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xvii-p6.1
 488. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#viii-p21.1
 489. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xii-p44.1
 490. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiv-p102.2
 491. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#viii-p5.1
 492. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiv-p48.2
 493. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxi-p13.2
 494. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxvii-p37.1
 495. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiv-p58.1
 496. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xii-p65.1
 497. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xvii-p36.1
 498. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xviii-p1.1
 499. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xvi-p29.2
 500. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxvii-p10.1
 501. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xvi-p29.2
 502. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxvii-p16.2
 503. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxv-p24.2
 504. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#ii-p8.1
 505. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxvii-p16.2
 506. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiii-p12.4
 507. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xvi-p29.2
 508. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiii-p75.2
 509. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xv-p54.2
 510. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxii-p37.2
 511. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xii-p35.1
 512. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiii-p4.2
 513. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiii-p12.4
 514. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxxiii-p8.1
 515. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiii-p12.4
 516. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xv-p1.1
 517. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiii-p64.1
 518. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxiv-p35.1
 519. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xii-p8.1
 520. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiii-p12.4
 521. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiii-p27.2
 522. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxiii-p2.2
 523. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiii-p27.2
 524. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxxiii-p8.1
 525. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xii-p25.1
 526. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxii-p37.2
 527. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxviii-p16.2
 528. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiii-p27.2
 529. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiv-p21.1
 530. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xv-p8.2
 531. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxii-p19.2
 532. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xii-p65.1
 533. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiii-p75.2
 534. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiv-p21.1
 535. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiv-p40.2
 536. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xv-p49.1
 537. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxi-p29.1
 538. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxi-p29.1
 539. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xii-p53.1
 540. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xii-p53.1
 541. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxiv-p1.1
 542. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxiv-p14.1
 543. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxix-p9.1
 544. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xii-p25.1
 545. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xv-p54.2
 546. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxv-p1.1
 547. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xii-p15.2
 548. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiii-p12.4
 549. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xii-p72.2
 550. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxiv-p1.1
 551. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxiv-p36.2
 552. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xi-p17.2
 553. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiii-p39.2
 554. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiv-p21.1
 555. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxvii-p10.1
 556. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiii-p64.1
 557. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxii-p3.2
 558. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxiii-p19.1
 559. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxxiii-p8.1
 560. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxv-p5.1
 561. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxviii-p26.1
 562. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xii-p35.1
 563. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxiv-p1.1
 564. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxiv-p28.1
 565. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#ii-p8.1
 566. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiv-p21.1
 567. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#ii-p8.1
 568. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxiv-p1.1
 569. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxiv-p1.1
 570. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xvii-p6.1
 571. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#viii-p5.1
 572. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxii-p37.2
 573. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxvii-p49.2
 574. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xii-p65.1
 575. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xii-p25.1
 576. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xi-p13.1
 577. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiv-p68.2
 578. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxviii-p57.1
 579. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxiv-p7.2
 580. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxiv-p7.2
 581. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxv-p1.1
 582. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxv-p24.2
 583. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxv-p10.1
 584. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiv-p33.3
 585. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxv-p10.1
 586. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiii-p12.4
 587. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxv-p17.1
 588. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxv-p34.1
 589. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiii-p12.4
 590. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xii-p25.1
 591. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxv-p10.1
 592. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xi-p4.1
 593. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxxiii-p8.1
 594. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#ii-p8.1
 595. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#vii-p45.1
 596. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxiii-p15.1
 597. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiii-p12.4
 598. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxi-p13.2
 599. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxi-p13.2
 600. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiv-p113.1
 601. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xi-p17.2
 602. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxviii-p30.2
 603. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#ii-p9.1
 604. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiii-p64.1
 605. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xvi-p24.2
 606. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxiv-p35.1
 607. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#iv-p9.1
 608. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiii-p12.4
 609. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiii-p12.4
 610. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxvi-p1.1
 611. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxvi-p1.1
 612. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiii-p12.4
 613. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiii-p12.4
 614. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#ii-p9.1
 615. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxvii-p24.2
 616. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxvii-p24.2
 617. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxvii-p32.1
 618. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#ii-p6.1
 619. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#ii-p9.1
 620. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiii-p49.3
 621. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiii-p49.3
 622. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiv-p102.2
 623. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxix-p9.1
 624. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxvi-p1.1
 625. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxvi-p1.1
 626. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#viii-p11.1
 627. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxii-p30.1
 628. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxii-p3.2
 629. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#ii-p9.1
 630. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiv-p58.1
 631. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#ii-p9.1
 632. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xvii-p25.1
 633. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xvii-p25.1
 634. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiv-p90.2
 635. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiv-p12.2
 636. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiv-p95.1
 637. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xv-p8.2
 638. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xx-p16.2
 639. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiv-p40.2
 640. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiv-p90.2
 641. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#ii-p11.1
 642. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxvi-p1.1
 643. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiv-p58.1
 644. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxxiii-p8.1
 645. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiii-p39.2
 646. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xvii-p20.2
 647. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxviii-p26.1
 648. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiv-p48.2
 649. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxviii-p30.2
 650. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxviii-p60.1
 651. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxviii-p51.2
 652. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xv-p8.2
 653. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxii-p3.2
 654. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxii-p3.2
 655. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxii-p3.2
 656. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxii-p3.2
 657. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiv-p68.2
 658. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiv-p68.2
 659. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiv-p58.1
 660. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiv-p33.3
 661. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xvii-p6.1
 662. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiv-p58.1
 663. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiv-p48.2
 664. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiii-p12.4
 665. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiii-p12.4
 666. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxix-p1.1
 667. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xv-p8.2
 668. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxviii-p30.2
 669. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxix-p23.1
 670. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xv-p27.2
 671. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xix-p12.2
 672. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#ii-p9.1
 673. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xx-p13.1
 674. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xix-p12.2
 675. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xix-p17.2
 676. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xx-p16.2
 677. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxv-p10.1
 678. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxix-p9.1
 679. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#viii-p5.1
 680. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xix-p4.1
 681. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xix-p30.1
 682. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxxiii-p8.1
 683. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxxiii-p8.1
 684. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xix-p11.2
 685. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxix-p1.1
 686. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxix-p35.1
 687. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xix-p8.2
 688. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxix-p1.1
 689. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxix-p15.1
 690. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xv-p27.2
 691. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxviii-p26.1
 692. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#ii-p9.1
 693. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xii-p25.1
 694. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxii-p30.1
 695. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#ii-p9.1
 696. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiii-p64.1
 697. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxvii-p37.1
 698. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxiv-p24.1
 699. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiii-p49.3
 700. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxxi-p28.8
 701. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xii-p44.1
 702. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xii-p35.1
 703. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxiv-p28.1
 704. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiii-p75.2
 705. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxxi-p28.8
 706. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xii-p53.1
 707. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiii-p49.3
 708. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxvii-p37.1
 709. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxx-p1.1
 710. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxx-p1.1
 711. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxvii-p37.1
 712. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxvii-p37.1
 713. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiii-p27.2
 714. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxii-p23.1
 715. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxii-p30.1
 716. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xii-p65.1
 717. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xii-p65.1
 718. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiv-p48.2
 719. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiv-p95.1
 720. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xv-p27.2
 721. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#v-p7.1
 722. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xv-p32.2
 723. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxviii-p57.1
 724. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xii-p72.2
 725. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxiv-p31.1
 726. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiii-p49.3
 727. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#viii-p28.1
 728. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#ii-p9.1
 729. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiii-p49.3
 730. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxvii-p37.1
 731. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxv-p10.1
 732. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxvii-p37.1
 733. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiv-p48.2
 734. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiii-p27.2
 735. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxiv-p36.2
 736. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xvii-p6.1
 737. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxviii-p30.2
 738. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiv-p33.3
 739. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xvii-p14.1
 740. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxviii-p45.2
 741. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxvii-p49.2
 742. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxvii-p16.2
 743. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxv-p24.2
 744. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiii-p12.4
 745. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxv-p24.2
 746. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxxi-p1.1
 747. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiv-p68.2
 748. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xvii-p6.1
 749. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xv-p8.2
 750. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxvii-p55.1
 751. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxvii-p55.1
 752. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xii-p80.1
 753. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#ii-p11.1
 754. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxxii-p1.1
 755. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxxii-p18.2
 756. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxxii-p21.2
 757. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxxii-p24.1
 758. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xii-p72.2
 759. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xii-p72.2
 760. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#viii-p30.2
 761. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxvii-p37.1
 762. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxviii-p16.2
 763. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#viii-p13.2
 764. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxvii-p24.2
 765. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiv-p40.2
 766. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#ii-p11.1
 767. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxxiii-p4.2
 768. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxxiii-p4.2
 769. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxvii-p52.1
 770. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxxiii-p4.2
 771. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxiii-p5.1
 772. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxiii-p5.1
 773. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxiii-p5.1
 774. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxiii-p5.1
 775. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiv-p102.2
 776. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiv-p102.2
 777. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxxiii-p18.2
 778. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxxiii-p50.1
 779. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxii-p43.1
 780. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxiv-p43.1
 781. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xii-p60.1
 782. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xii-p25.1
 783. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxii-p27.2
 784. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxxii-p1.1
 785. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xvii-p14.1
 786. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#viii-p13.2
 787. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#iii-p11.1
 788. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#iii-p28.1
 789. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxx-p1.1
 790. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxx-p22.1
 791. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#iii-p26.2
 792. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xix-p8.2
 793. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxxi-p21.1
 794. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#vii-p21.1
 795. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxiv-p17.1
 796. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxv-p8.1
 797. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xx-p22.1
 798. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#v-p49.1
 799. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#ix-p3.2
 800. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#ix-p29.1
 801. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#x-p3.2
 802. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#x-p29.1
 803. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#x-p38.1
 804. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xi-p36.1
 805. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xii-p80.1
 806. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xvii-p44.1
 807. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xix-p1.1
 808. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xx-p24.1
 809. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxi-p24.2
 810. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxii-p43.1
 811. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxvi-p17.2
 812. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxvii-p8.2
 813. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxvii-p32.1
 814. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxvii-p55.1
 815. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxviii-p57.1
 816. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxix-p35.1
 817. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxxi-p23.1
 818. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xi-p8.2
 819. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xi-p17.2
 820. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xi-p25.2
 821. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xi-p29.1
 822. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xi-p32.1
 823. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiii-p89.1
 824. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxvi-p1.1
 825. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xx-p24.1
 826. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#iii-p26.2
 827. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#v-p18.1
 828. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#viii-p21.1
 829. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xviii-p21.2
 830. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xviii-p38.1
 831. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#iv-p27.2
 832. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxx-p8.1
 833. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xviii-p37.1
 834. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxi-p6.1
 835. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxviii-p39.2
 836. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxix-p23.1
 837. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#ix-p31.1
 838. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xvii-p44.1
 839. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxiii-p28.2
 840. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxvi-p21.1
 841. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxiv-p23.2
 842. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#iv-p26.1
 843. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#x-p22.1
 844. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xv-p19.1
 845. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#ix-p10.2
 846. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#iii-p26.2
 847. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#v-p18.1
 848. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xii-p15.2
 849. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxii-p1.1
 850. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xii-p2.2
 851. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xv-p32.2
 852. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxiii-p1.1
 853. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#vii-p45.1
 854. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxiii-p4.1
 855. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#iii-p5.1
 856. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#iii-p1.1
 857. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#iii-p13.1
 858. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#iii-p41.1
 859. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#viii-p9.1
 860. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xii-p15.2
 861. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xii-p60.1
 862. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiv-p58.1
 863. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xv-p38.2
 864. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xviii-p21.2
 865. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxi-p1.1
 866. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxv-p10.1
 867. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxxiii-p18.2
 868. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#vi-p1.1
 869. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxv-p1.1
 870. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxiv-p19.1
 871. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#x-p25.1
 872. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxix-p23.1
 873. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxiii-p28.2
 874. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiv-p68.2
 875. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiv-p90.2
 876. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiv-p48.2
 877. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#vii-p5.1
 878. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#ix-p1.1
 879. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xi-p1.1
 880. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xi-p34.2
 881. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xvii-p14.1
 882. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxviii-p1.1
 883. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxvi-p1.1
 884. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxx-p20.1
 885. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xv-p62.1
 886. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xix-p1.1
 887. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#iv-p29.1
 888. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxxii-p21.1
 889. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#v-p28.1
 890. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#v-p35.2
 891. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiii-p64.1
 892. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xvi-p24.2
 893. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xvi-p38.1
 894. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xviii-p17.2
 895. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xix-p28.2
 896. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxi-p6.1
 897. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxiv-p7.2
 898. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxix-p13.1
 899. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#vii-p33.2
 900. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#v-p12.1
 901. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiii-p86.1
 902. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxxi-p8.1
 903. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#vi-p25.1
 904. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiii-p95.1
 905. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxii-p46.1
 906. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#vi-p25.1
 907. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#vii-p33.2
 908. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#x-p1.1
 909. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#vi-p5.1
 910. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xviii-p35.1
 911. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxii-p19.2
 912. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#v-p31.1
 913. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xi-p25.2
 914. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xv-p38.2
 915. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xv-p59.1
 916. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxii-p19.2
 917. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxxi-p9.1
 918. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#iv-p4.1
 919. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#iv-p16.1
 920. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#iv-p24.1
 921. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxiii-p9.1
 922. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiii-p83.1
 923. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#vi-p30.1
 924. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#iii-p21.1
 925. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#iii-p38.1
 926. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#ii-p11.1
 927. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xvi-p7.2
 928. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiii-p93.2
 929. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxvii-p8.2
 930. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxvii-p35.1
 931. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxii-p30.1
 932. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xvii-p14.1
 933. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#x-p25.1
 934. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#ii-p11.1
 935. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxxiii-p1.1
 936. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#v-p28.1
 937. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xii-p65.1
 938. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#viii-p30.2
 939. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xi-p32.1
 940. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiv-p40.2
 941. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxvii-p32.1
 942. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#vi-p25.1
 943. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xviii-p17.2
 944. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xvii-p29.2
 945. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xix-p24.1
 946. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxv-p31.1
 947. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#x-p26.1
 948. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#vii-p14.1
 949. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxxiii-p21.1
 950. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#ii-p11.1
 951. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiv-p81.2
 952. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xvii-p36.1
 953. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#vi-p25.1
 954. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#vii-p14.1
 955. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#x-p17.1
 956. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xi-p36.1
 957. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxvi-p10.1
 958. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxx-p14.1
 959. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xx-p3.3
 960. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxviii-p51.2
 961. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#x-p28.1
 962. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxxiii-p4.2
 963. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#vi-p5.1
 964. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#viii-p34.2
 965. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxviii-p16.2
 966. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiii-p49.3
 967. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xx-p16.2
 968. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxxi-p28.8
 969. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxv-p10.1
 970. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#vi-p8.1
 971. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xviii-p17.2
 972. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxix-p31.1
 973. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxiv-p6.3
 974. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#vii-p1.1
 975. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#ix-p26.1
 976. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxiii-p2.2
 977. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#v-p28.1
 978. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xii-p35.1
 979. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xii-p53.1
 980. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiv-p102.2
 981. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxiv-p1.1
 982. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxxi-p9.1
 983. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#viii-p30.2
 984. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xv-p1.1
 985. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xvii-p36.1
 986. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#iii-p41.1
 987. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xvii-p42.1
 988. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxvi-p10.1
 989. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxviii-p54.2
 990. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#viii-p24.1
 991. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxv-p21.1
 992. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiv-p33.3
 993. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiv-p68.2
 994. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#vii-p3.2
 995. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#ix-p1.1
 996. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxviii-p30.2
 997. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#vii-p47.3
 998. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#ii-p4.1
 999. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiv-p95.1
1000. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#iii-p34.1
1001. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxxi-p1.1
1002. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxxii-p24.1
1003. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxvi-p10.1
1004. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxxi-p8.1
1005. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#v-p41.2
1006. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#x-p25.1
1007. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxxi-p12.1
1008. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxxi-p15.1
1009. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xi-p13.1
1010. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xi-p30.1
1011. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxxii-p5.1
1012. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#vii-p33.2
1013. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#viii-p21.1
1014. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xix-p20.1
1015. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xx-p5.1
1016. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxx-p7.2
1017. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxx-p14.1
1018. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#vii-p21.1
1019. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#vii-p40.1
1020. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#ix-p24.1
1021. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#vii-p9.1
1022. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#ix-p6.1
1023. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#viii-p11.1
1024. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxii-p3.2
1025. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xii-p6.1
1026. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xii-p78.3
1027. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxxii-p26.1
1028. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#ii-p4.1
1029. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#x-p1.1
1030. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiv-p12.2
1031. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#viii-p5.1
1032. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#iv-p27.2
1033. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxiv-p24.1
1034. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xvi-p22.1
1035. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#iii-p31.1
1036. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xvii-p1.1
1037. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xvii-p24.1
1038. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxiii-p13.2
1039. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxiii-p25.1
1040. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#vii-p5.1
1041. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxiii-p19.1
1042. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xii-p1.1
1043. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxix-p23.1
1044. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxxiii-p14.2
1045. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxi-p4.1
1046. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#iii-p5.1
1047. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#ix-p1.1
1048. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#x-p5.2
1049. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xi-p4.1
1050. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#v-p1.1
1051. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#x-p9.3
1052. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#iii-p1.1
1053. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#iii-p5.1
1054. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#x-p30.1
1055. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#ix-p12.1
1056. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xi-p35.1
1057. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxxiii-p1.1
1058. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxii-p27.1
1059. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#viii-p17.2
1060. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#iv-p35.2
1061. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxx-p14.1
1062. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#vii-p5.1
1063. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=1&scrV=0#iii-p4.1
1064. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=2&scrV=0#iv-p2.1
1065. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=3&scrV=0#v-p3.1
1066. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=4&scrV=0#vi-p3.1
1067. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=5&scrV=0#vii-p2.1
1068. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=6&scrV=0#viii-p3.1
1069. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=7&scrV=0#ix-p3.1
1070. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=8&scrV=0#x-p3.1
1071. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=9&scrV=0#xi-p3.1
1072. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=10&scrV=0#xii-p2.1
1073. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=11&scrV=0#xiii-p4.1
1074. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=12&scrV=0#xiv-p12.1
1075. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=13&scrV=0#xv-p7.1
1076. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=14&scrV=0#xvi-p4.1
1077. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=15&scrV=0#xvii-p5.1
1078. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=16&scrV=0#xviii-p6.1
1079. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=17&scrV=0#xix-p3.1
1080. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=18&scrV=0#xx-p3.1
1081. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=19&scrV=0#xxi-p2.1
1082. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=20&scrV=0#xxii-p3.1
1083. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=21&scrV=0#xxiii-p2.1
1084. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=22&scrV=0#xxiv-p6.1
1085. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=23&scrV=0#xxv-p4.1
1086. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=24&scrV=0#xxvi-p6.1
1087. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=25&scrV=0#xxvii-p8.1
1088. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=26&scrV=0#xxviii-p13.1
1089. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=27&scrV=0#xxix-p5.1
1090. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=28&scrV=0#xxx-p6.1
1091. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=29&scrV=0#xxxi-p3.1
1092. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=30&scrV=0#xxxii-p2.1
1093. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=31&scrV=0#xxxiii-p2.1
1094. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#i-Page_i
1095. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#i-Page_iii
1096. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#ii-Page_iv
1097. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#ii-Page_1
1098. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#ii-Page_2
1099. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#ii-Page_3
1100. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#ii-Page_4
1101. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#ii-Page_5
1102. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#ii-Page_6
1103. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#ii-Page_7
1104. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#ii-Page_8
1105. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#iii-Page_9
1106. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#iii-Page_10
1107. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#iii-Page_11
1108. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#iii-Page_12
1109. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#iii-Page_13
1110. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#iii-Page_14
1111. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#iii-Page_15
1112. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#iii-Page_16
1113. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#iii-Page_17
1114. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#iii-Page_18
1115. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#iii-Page_19
1116. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#iii-Page_20
1117. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#iii-Page_21
1118. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#iii-Page_22
1119. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#iii-Page_23
1120. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#iv-Page_24
1121. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#iv-Page_25
1122. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#iv-Page_26
1123. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#iv-Page_27
1124. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#iv-Page_28
1125. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#iv-Page_29
1126. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#iv-Page_30
1127. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#iv-Page_31
1128. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#iv-Page_32
1129. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#iv-Page_33
1130. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#iv-Page_34
1131. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#iv-Page_35
1132. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#iv-Page_36
1133. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#v-Page_37
1134. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#v-Page_38
1135. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#v-Page_39
1136. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#v-Page_40
1137. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#v-Page_41
1138. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#v-Page_42
1139. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#v-Page_43
1140. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#v-Page_44
1141. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#v-Page_45
1142. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#v-Page_46
1143. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#v-Page_47
1144. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#v-Page_48
1145. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#v-Page_49
1146. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#v-Page_50
1147. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#v-Page_51
1148. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#vi-Page_52
1149. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#vi-Page_53
1150. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#vi-Page_54
1151. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#vi-Page_55
1152. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#vi-Page_56
1153. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#vi-Page_57
1154. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#vi-Page_58
1155. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#vi-Page_59
1156. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#vi-Page_60
1157. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#vi-Page_61
1158. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#vi-Page_62
1159. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#vi-Page_63
1160. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#vi-Page_64
1161. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#vii-Page_65
1162. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#vii-Page_66
1163. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#vii-Page_67
1164. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#vii-Page_68
1165. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#vii-Page_69
1166. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#vii-Page_70
1167. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#vii-Page_71
1168. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#vii-Page_72
1169. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#vii-Page_73
1170. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#vii-Page_74
1171. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#vii-Page_75
1172. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#vii-Page_76
1173. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#vii-Page_77
1174. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#vii-Page_78
1175. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#viii-Page_79
1176. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#viii-Page_80
1177. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#viii-Page_81
1178. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#viii-Page_82
1179. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#viii-Page_83
1180. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#viii-Page_84
1181. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#viii-Page_85
1182. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#viii-Page_86
1183. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#viii-Page_87
1184. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#viii-Page_88
1185. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#viii-Page_89
1186. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#viii-Page_90
1187. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#viii-Page_91
1188. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#ix-Page_92
1189. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#ix-Page_93
1190. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#ix-Page_94
1191. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#ix-Page_95
1192. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#ix-Page_96
1193. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#ix-Page_97
1194. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#ix-Page_98
1195. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#ix-Page_99
1196. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#ix-Page_100
1197. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#ix-Page_101
1198. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#ix-Page_102
1199. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#ix-Page_103
1200. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#ix-Page_104
1201. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#ix-Page_105
1202. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#x-Page_106
1203. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#x-Page_107
1204. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#x-Page_108
1205. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#x-Page_109
1206. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#x-Page_110
1207. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#x-Page_111
1208. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#x-Page_112
1209. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#x-Page_113
1210. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#x-Page_114
1211. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#x-Page_115
1212. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#x-Page_116
1213. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#x-Page_117
1214. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#x-Page_118
1215. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#x-Page_119
1216. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#x-Page_120
1217. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#x-Page_121
1218. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xi-Page_122
1219. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xi-Page_123
1220. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xi-Page_124
1221. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xi-Page_125
1222. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xi-Page_126
1223. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xi-Page_127
1224. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xi-Page_128
1225. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xi-Page_129
1226. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xi-Page_130
1227. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xi-Page_131
1228. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xi-Page_132
1229. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xi-Page_133
1230. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xi-Page_134
1231. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xii-Page_135
1232. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xii-Page_136
1233. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xii-Page_137
1234. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xii-Page_138
1235. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xii-Page_139
1236. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xii-Page_140
1237. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xii-Page_141
1238. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xii-Page_142
1239. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xii-Page_143
1240. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xii-Page_144
1241. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xii-Page_145
1242. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xii-Page_146
1243. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xii-Page_147
1244. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xii-Page_148
1245. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiii-Page_149
1246. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiii-Page_150
1247. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiii-Page_151
1248. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiii-Page_152
1249. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiii-Page_153
1250. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiii-Page_154
1251. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiii-Page_155
1252. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiii-Page_156
1253. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiii-Page_157
1254. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiii-Page_158
1255. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiii-Page_159
1256. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiii-Page_160
1257. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiii-Page_161
1258. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiii-Page_162
1259. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiv-Page_163
1260. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiv-Page_164
1261. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiv-Page_165
1262. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiv-Page_166
1263. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiv-Page_167
1264. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiv-Page_168
1265. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiv-Page_169
1266. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiv-Page_170
1267. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiv-Page_171
1268. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiv-Page_172
1269. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiv-Page_173
1270. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiv-Page_174
1271. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiv-Page_175
1272. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiv-Page_176
1273. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiv-Page_177
1274. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xiv-Page_178
1275. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xv-Page_179
1276. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xv-Page_180
1277. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xv-Page_181
1278. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xv-Page_182
1279. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xv-Page_183
1280. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xv-Page_184
1281. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xv-Page_185
1282. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xv-Page_186
1283. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xv-Page_187
1284. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xv-Page_188
1285. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xv-Page_189
1286. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xv-Page_190
1287. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xvi-Page_191
1288. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xvi-Page_192
1289. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xvi-Page_193
1290. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xvi-Page_194
1291. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xvi-Page_195
1292. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xvi-Page_196
1293. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xvi-Page_197
1294. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xvi-Page_198
1295. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xvi-Page_199
1296. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xvi-Page_200
1297. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xvi-Page_201
1298. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xvi-Page_202
1299. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xvii-Page_203
1300. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xvii-Page_204
1301. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xvii-Page_205
1302. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xvii-Page_206
1303. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xvii-Page_207
1304. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xvii-Page_208
1305. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xvii-Page_209
1306. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xvii-Page_210
1307. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xvii-Page_211
1308. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xvii-Page_212
1309. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xvii-Page_213
1310. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xvii-Page_214
1311. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xviii-Page_215
1312. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xviii-Page_216
1313. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xviii-Page_217
1314. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xviii-Page_218
1315. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xviii-Page_219
1316. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xviii-Page_220
1317. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xviii-Page_221
1318. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xviii-Page_222
1319. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xviii-Page_223
1320. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xviii-Page_224
1321. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xviii-Page_225
1322. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xviii-Page_226
1323. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xix-Page_227
1324. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xix-Page_228
1325. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xix-Page_229
1326. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xix-Page_230
1327. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xix-Page_231
1328. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xix-Page_232
1329. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xix-Page_233
1330. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xix-Page_234
1331. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xix-Page_235
1332. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xix-Page_236
1333. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xix-Page_237
1334. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xix-Page_238
1335. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xx-Page_239
1336. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xx-Page_240
1337. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xx-Page_241
1338. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xx-Page_242
1339. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xx-Page_243
1340. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xx-Page_244
1341. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xx-Page_245
1342. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xx-Page_246
1343. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xx-Page_247
1344. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xx-Page_248
1345. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xx-Page_249
1346. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxi-Page_250
1347. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxi-Page_251
1348. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxi-Page_252
1349. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxi-Page_253
1350. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxi-Page_254
1351. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxi-Page_255
1352. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxi-Page_256
1353. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxi-Page_257
1354. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxi-Page_258
1355. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxi-Page_259
1356. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxi-Page_260
1357. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxi-Page_261
1358. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxii-Page_262
1359. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxii-Page_263
1360. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxii-Page_264
1361. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxii-Page_265
1362. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxii-Page_266
1363. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxii-Page_267
1364. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxii-Page_268
1365. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxii-Page_269
1366. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxii-Page_270
1367. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxii-Page_271
1368. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxii-Page_272
1369. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxii-Page_273
1370. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxii-Page_274
1371. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxiii-Page_275
1372. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxiii-Page_276
1373. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxiii-Page_277
1374. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxiii-Page_278
1375. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxiii-Page_279
1376. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxiii-Page_280
1377. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxiii-Page_281
1378. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxiii-Page_282
1379. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxiii-Page_283
1380. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxiii-Page_284
1381. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxiii-Page_285
1382. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxiii-Page_286
1383. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxiii-Page_287
1384. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxiv-Page_288
1385. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxiv-Page_289
1386. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxiv-Page_290
1387. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxiv-Page_291
1388. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxiv-Page_292
1389. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxiv-Page_293
1390. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxiv-Page_294
1391. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxiv-Page_295
1392. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxiv-Page_296
1393. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxiv-Page_297
1394. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxiv-Page_298
1395. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxiv-Page_299
1396. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxiv-Page_300
1397. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxiv-Page_301
1398. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxiv-Page_302
1399. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxv-Page_303
1400. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxv-Page_304
1401. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxv-Page_305
1402. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxv-Page_306
1403. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxv-Page_307
1404. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxv-Page_308
1405. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxv-Page_309
1406. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxv-Page_310
1407. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxv-Page_311
1408. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxv-Page_312
1409. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxv-Page_313
1410. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxvi-Page_314
1411. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxvi-Page_315
1412. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxvi-Page_316
1413. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxvi-Page_317
1414. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxvi-Page_318
1415. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxvi-Page_319
1416. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxvi-Page_320
1417. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxvi-Page_321
1418. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxvi-Page_322
1419. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxvi-Page_323
1420. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxvi-Page_324
1421. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxvii-Page_325
1422. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxvii-Page_326
1423. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxvii-Page_327
1424. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxvii-Page_328
1425. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxvii-Page_329
1426. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxvii-Page_330
1427. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxvii-Page_331
1428. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxvii-Page_332
1429. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxvii-Page_333
1430. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxvii-Page_334
1431. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxvii-Page_335
1432. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxvii-Page_336
1433. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxviii-Page_337
1434. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxviii-Page_338
1435. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxviii-Page_339
1436. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxviii-Page_340
1437. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxviii-Page_341
1438. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxviii-Page_342
1439. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxviii-Page_343
1440. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxviii-Page_344
1441. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxviii-Page_345
1442. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxviii-Page_346
1443. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxviii-Page_347
1444. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxviii-Page_348
1445. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxviii-Page_349
1446. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxix-Page_350
1447. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxix-Page_351
1448. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxix-Page_352
1449. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxix-Page_353
1450. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxix-Page_354
1451. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxix-Page_355
1452. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxix-Page_356
1453. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxix-Page_357
1454. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxix-Page_358
1455. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxix-Page_359
1456. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxix-Page_360
1457. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxix-Page_361
1458. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxx-Page_362
1459. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxx-Page_363
1460. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxx-Page_364
1461. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxx-Page_365
1462. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxx-Page_366
1463. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxx-Page_367
1464. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxx-Page_368
1465. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxx-Page_369
1466. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxx-Page_370
1467. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxx-Page_371
1468. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxx-Page_372
1469. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxx-Page_373
1470. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxx-Page_374
1471. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxxi-Page_375
1472. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxxi-Page_376
1473. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxxi-Page_377
1474. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxxi-Page_378
1475. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxxi-Page_379
1476. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxxi-Page_380
1477. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxxi-Page_381
1478. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxxi-Page_382
1479. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxxi-Page_383
1480. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxxi-Page_384
1481. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxxi-Page_385
1482. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxxii-Page_386
1483. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxxii-Page_387
1484. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxxii-Page_388
1485. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxxii-Page_389
1486. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxxii-Page_390
1487. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxxii-Page_391
1488. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxxii-Page_392
1489. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxxii-Page_393
1490. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxxii-Page_394
1491. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxxii-Page_395
1492. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxxiii-Page_396
1493. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxxiii-Page_397
1494. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxxiii-Page_398
1495. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxxiii-Page_399
1496. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxxiii-Page_400
1497. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxxiii-Page_401
1498. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxxiii-Page_402
1499. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxxiii-Page_403
1500. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxxiii-Page_404
1501. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxxiii-Page_405
1502. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxxiii-Page_406
1503. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxxiii-Page_407
1504. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxxiii-Page_408
1505. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxxiii-Page_409
1506. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxxiii-Page_410
1507. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxxiv-Page_411
1508. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxxiv-Page_412
1509. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxxiv-Page_413
1510. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxxiv-Page_414
1511. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxxiv-Page_415
1512. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxxv-Page_416
1513. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxxv-Page_417
1514. file:///ccel/h/horton/expositorprov/cache/expositorprov.html3#xxxv-Page_418
