     __________________________________________________________________

           Title: The Golden Legend, vol. 5
      Creator(s): Voragine, Jacobus de (1230-1298)
     Print Basis: T. & A. Constable, Ltd. 1900
          Rights: Copyright claimed by Paul Halsell, Sept. 2000, prohibiting
                  commercial use
   CCEL Subjects: All;
      LC Call no: BX4654.J334 V.5
     LC Subjects:

                  Christian Denominations

                  Roman Catholic Church

                  Biography and portraits

                  Collective

                  Saints and martyrs
     __________________________________________________________________

  The GOLDEN LEGEND or LIVES of the SAINTS

  Compiled by Jacobus de Voragine, Archbishop of Genoa, 1275

  First Edition Published 1470

  ENGLISHED by WILLIAM CAXTON, First Edition 1483

  VOLUME FIVE

  From the Temple Classics Edited by F.S. ELLIS

  First issue of this Edition, 1900

  Reprinted 1922, 1931
     __________________________________________________________________

                      Here followeth the Life of S. Rocke

   S. Rocke was born in Montpelier, which is a town of great name upon the
   border of France, and was born of noble progeny. His father was lord of
   Montpelier, and was named John, and was come of the noble house of
   France. And though he was noble of birth, and rich of lordship, he was
   also virtuous in all humanity. He had a wife of noble kindred and fair
   of visage named Libera, which both devoutly served our Lord Jesu
   Christ, and lived in divine love and holy works. And how well that they
   thus had lived long, yet had they no child ne heir, wherefore they oft
   made their prayers, and vowed pilgrimages. And on a day most specially,
   the wife made her prayers to our Blessed Lady, praying devoutly for to
   have a child, and was in very contemplation, in which she heard the
   voice of an angel saying: O Libera, God hath heard thy prayer, and thou
   shalt receive of him grace of thy petition. And anon she went to her
   husband and told him as she had heard of the angel. And then they,
   hereof joyful, accomplished the act of matrimony, and she conceived,
   and at time was delivered of a son, which in his baptism was named
   Rochus or Rocke. And this Rocke had impressed in the shoulder on his
   left side a cross, which was a token that he should be acceptable and
   beloved of God, which thing when his father and mother saw they blessed
   God, and his mother herself nourished and gave suck to the child, and
   fed it and committed and did gladly the other business of a nurse.
   Which devout mother fasted twice in the week, and the blessed child
   Rocke abstained him twice also, when his mother fasted in the week, and
   would suck his mother but once that day, which was to all a great
   wonder, and that day he was gladder, merrier, and sweeter than the
   other. And after, when he came to five years of age, he disposed him to
   the works of penance, and was much obedient to father and mother. And
   in the twelfth year of his age he fasted many and divers fastings for
   Christ's love. And the more his members grew, the more the cross, that
   tofore was spoken of, appeared larger and more apparent.

   In that time the father of S. Rocke was sick and saw his last end
   approach, and called to him his son Rocke, and said: O mine only son
   Rocke, thou seest well that I shall shortly finish my life; alway the
   will of God be fulfilled, and four things, with my lordship and
   heritage, I leave to thee, and command thee to accomplish. First, like
   as thou hast begun that thou serve busily God. Secondly, that thou
   remember poor people, widows and orphans. Thirdly, I constitute and
   ordain thee governor and dispenser of all my treasures, that thou
   dispend them in charitable and meek works. And fourthly that, with all
   diligence thou haunt and frequent the hospitals of sick and poor men.
   These foresaid things Rocke promised to his father to fulfil them to
   his power. And anon after his father died, whom Rocke buried
   honourably, and laid in a sepulture, and in the twentieth year of his
   age he buried also his devout mother. And in few days he executed the
   testament of his father effectually, and visited religious places of
   poor people; wretches oppressed, and sick men, he cured by counsel and
   works; widows and orphans he comforted; and poor maidens to marry he
   relieved. And in these good offices and works he dispended his father's
   goods. And when he had finished his father's commandments he decreed to
   leave the country of Montpelier and to make and seek other divers
   pilgrimages, and clad him with the habit of a pilgrim, and covered his
   head with a bonnet, a scrip on his shoulder, and a pilgrim's staff in
   his right hand, and so departed.

   And after many desert places he came to Rome, but tofore he came into a
   town called in Latin Aquapendens, where as was a common and hard
   pestilence, which, when Rocke knew of many by the way, he desirously
   went unto the hospital of that town, called Water-hanging, and gat with
   great prayers and labour of one Vincent, which had the rule of the
   hospital, that he might there, day and night, serve the sick people.
   Vincent was afeard and dreaded lest Rocke, which was a young flowering
   man should be smitten with pestilence. But after that he came, them
   that were sick he blessed in the name of Christ, and as soon he had
   touched the sick men they were all whole. And they said and confessed
   as soon as and this holy man Rocke was come in. All they that were
   vexed and sick, and the fire of pestilence had infected, he extincted
   it and delivered all the hospital of that sickness. And after he went
   through the town, and each house that was vexed with pestilence he
   entered, and with the sign of the cross and mind of the passion of Jesu
   Christ he delivered them all from the pestilence. For whomsoever
   Rocketouched, anon the pestilence left him. And when the town of
   Water-falling was delivered from the contagion of the pestilence, Rocke
   went to the city of Cesena which is a great city of Italy, which no
   less pestilence vexed, and he in a short space delivered it from the
   pestilence. And from thence he came to Rome, which was then so full of
   pestilence that unnethe in all the town could not be found one house
   void thereof. In those days there was at Rome a cardinal of the title
   of Angleria, which is a province of Lombardy, and the blessed Rocke
   came into this cardinal's place. And as he stood tofore him a little,
   suddenly a marvellous comfort and hope entered into the courage of the
   cardinal. He understood the young man Rocke to be right dear with God,
   for his cheer, his manners, and his attemperance showed it, wherefore
   he commended him to Rocke that he should deliver him from the
   pestilence and conserve him. And then Rocke did sign in the cardinal's
   forehead and made with his finger a cross. And anon an apparent sign
   and a very cross was seen impressed in his forehead, and so the
   cardinal was preserved from the pestilence. Nevertheless, for the
   novelty of the thing, he prayed S. Rocke that the token of the cross
   should be taken away, lest thereby it should be to the people a new
   spectacle. Then Rocke exhorted the cardinal that he should bear the
   sign of the cross of our Redeemer, in memory of his passion, in his
   forehead perpetually, and worship it reverently, by which sign he was
   delivered from the hard pestilence. The cardinal then brought S. Rocke
   to the pope, which anon saw that is godly, a bright ray and heavenly,
   shining out of the forehead of Rocke. And after, when his divine virtue
   was known to the pope, Rocke obtained of him full remission of sin.
   Then the cardinal began to inquire of Rocke of his lineage and of his
   country, but Rocke affecting no mortal glory, hid his lineage and
   received again of the pope his blessing and departed from him. And
   abode at Rome with the same cardinal three years continually, and
   laboured in visiting and helping the poor people and them that were
   sick of the pestilence. And after three years the cardinal, being old,
   died, and Rocke forsook Rome and came to the town of Armine, a noble
   city of Italy, which also he delivered from the said pestilence. And
   when that town was delivered, he went to the city of Manasem in
   Lombardy, which was also sore oppressed with sick men of the
   pestilence, whom with all his heart he served diligently, and by the
   help of God made that town quit of the pestilence. And from thence went
   to Piacenza, for he understood that there was great pestilence. Rocke
   was ever of great study how he might, in the name of Jesu and of his
   passion, deliver mortal men from the hurt of pestilence. And so an
   whole year he visited the houses of poor men, and they that had most
   need, to them he did most help, and was always in the hospital. And
   when he had been long in the hospital of Piacenza, and had helped
   almost all the sick men therein, about midnight he heard in his sleep
   an angel thus saying:

   O Rocke, most devout to Christ, awake and know that thou art smitten
   with the pestilence, study now how thou mayst be cured. And anon he
   felt him sore taken with the pestilence under his both arms, and he
   thereof gave than kings to our Lord. And he was so sore vexed with the
   pain, that they that were in the hospital were deprived of their sleep
   and rest of the night, wherefore S. Rocke arose from his bed and went
   to the utterest place of the hospital, and lay down there abiding the
   light of the day. And when it was day the people going by saw him, and
   accused the master of the hospital of offence, that he suffered the
   pilgrim to lie without the hospital, but he purged him of that default,
   saying that: The pilgrim was smitten with the pestilence as ye see, and
   unwitting to us he went out. Then the citizens incontinent put out S.
   Rocke from the city and suburbs, lest by him the city might be the more
   infected. Then S. Rocke, sore oppressed with fervent pain of the
   pestilence, suffered patiently himself to be ejected out of Piacenza,
   and went into a certain wood, a desert valley not far from Piacenza,
   always blessing God. And there as he might he made him a lodge of
   boughs and leaves, always giving thankings to our Lord, saying: O Jesu,
   my Saviour, I thank thee that thou puttest me to affliction like to
   thine other servants, by this odious ardour of pestilence, and most
   meek Lord, I beseech thee to this desert place, give the refrigery and
   comfort of thy grace.And his prayer finished, anon there came a cloud
   from heaven by the lodge that S. Rocke had made within boughs, whereas
   sprang a fair and bright well, which is there yet unto this day. Whose
   water S. Rocke drank, being sore athirst, and thereof had great
   refreshing of the great heat that he suffered of the pestilence fever.

   There was nigh unto that wood a little village in which some noblemen
   dwelled; among whom there was one well beloved to God named Gotard,
   which had great husbandry, and had a great family and household. This
   Gotard held many hounds for hunting, among whom he had one much
   familiar, which boldly would take bread from the board. And when Rocke
   lacked bread, that hound, by the purveyance of God, brought from the
   lord's board bread unto Rocke. Which thing when Gotard had advertised
   oft that he bare so away the bread, but he wist not to whom ne whither,
   whereof he marvelled, and so did all his household. And the next dinner
   he set a delicate loaf on the board, which anon the hound by his new
   manner took away and bare it to Rocke. And Gotard followed after and
   came to the lodge of S. Rocke, and there beheld how familiarly the
   hound delivered the bread to S. Rocke. Then Gotard reverently saluted
   the holy man and approached to him, but S. Rocke, dreading lest the
   contagious air of the pestilence might infect him, said to him: Friend,
   go from me in good peace, for the most violent pestilence holdeth me.
   Then Gotard went his way and left him, and returned home, where, by
   God's grace, he said thus to himself all still: This poor man whom I
   have left in the wood and desert, certainly is the man of God, sith
   this hound without reason bringeth to him bread. I therefore, that have
   seen him do it, so ought sooner to do it, which am a Christian man. By
   this holy meditation Gotard returned to Rocke and said: Holy pilgrim, I
   desire to do to thee that thou needest, and am advised never to leave
   thee. Then Rocke thanked God which had sent to him Gotard, and he
   informed Gotard busily in the law of Christ. And when they had been
   awhile together the hound brought no more bread. Gotard asked counsel
   how he might have bread, for more and more he hungered and asked remedy
   of S. Rocke. S. Rocke exhorted him after the text, saying: In the sweat
   of thy visage thou shalt eat thy bread, and that he should return to
   the town, and leave all his goods to his heirs, and follow the way of
   Christ and demand bread in the name of Jesu. Then Gotard was ashamed to
   do so where he was known, but at the last by the busy admonition of S.
   Rocke, Gotard went to Piacenza, whereas he had great knowledge, and
   begged bread and alms at the door of one of his gossips. That same
   gossip threatened sharply Gotard, and said he shamed his lineage and
   friends by this foul and indecent begging, and put him away, being
   wroth and scorning him. For which cause Gotard was constrained to beg
   busily at the doors of other men of the city. And the same day the
   gossip that so had said to Gotard was taken sore with the pestilence,
   and many others that denied alms to Gotard. And then anon the city of
   Piacenza was infect with contagious pestilence, and Gotard returned to
   the wood and told to S. Rocke all that was happed.

   And S. Rocke told to Gotard tofore, that his gossip should hastily die,
   which was done indeed. And S. Rocke, moved with pity and mercy, being
   full sick, went into Piacenza, being full of pestilence, and left
   Gotard in the wood. And though S. Rocke were sore vexed with the
   pestilence, yet he with great labour went to Piacenza and with touching
   and blessing he helped and healed them all, and also cured the hospital
   of the same city. And he being sore sick and almost lame returned again
   to Gotard into the wood. And many that heard that he and Gotard were in
   the place of the desert valley, came to them whom they found all with
   Rocke, and tofore them all he did these miracles. The wild beasts which
   wandered in the wood, what hurt, sickness or swelling they had, they
   ran anon to S. Rocke, and when they were healed they would incline
   their heads reverently and go their way. And a little while after
   Gotard, and his fellows, for certain necessities and errands, returned
   into Piacenza and left that time S. Rocke alone in the valley. And S.
   Rocke made his prayers to Almighty God that he might be delivered from
   the wounds of pestilence, and in this prayer he fell asleep. And in the
   meanwhile returned Gotard from the city, and when he came and joined
   him to Rocke sleeping, he heard the voice of an angel saying: O Rocke,
   friend of God, our Lord hath heard thy prayers, lo, thou art delivered
   from the pestilence, and art made all whole, and our Lord commandeth
   that thou take the way toward thy country. With this sudden voice
   Gotard was astonished which never tofore knew the name of Rocke. And
   anon Rocke awoke, and felt himself all whole by the grace of God like
   as the angel said. And Gotard told unto Rocke how he had heard the
   angel and what he had said. Then S. Rocke prayed Gotard that he should
   keep his name secret and to tell it to no man, for he desired no
   worldly glory. Then after a few days S. Rocke with Gotard and his
   fellows abode in the desert, and informed them all in godly works, and
   they then began to wax holy, wherein he exhorted them and confirmed,
   and left them in that desert valley. And S. Rocke, as a pilgrim doing
   penance, entended, burning in the love of God, toward his country and
   came to a province of Lombardy called Angleria, and applied him toward
   Almaine, where the lord of his province made war with his enemy, whose
   knights took S. Rocke as a spy, and delivered him to their lord as a
   traitor. This blessed saint, always confessing Jesu Christ, was deputed
   unto a hard and strait prison, and the blessed Rocke patiently went
   into prison and suffered it gladly. Where day and night remembering the
   name of Jesu, he commended him to God, praying that the prison should
   not disprofit him, but that he might have it for wilderness and
   penance. And there he abode five years in prayers.

   In the end of the fifth year, when God would that his soul should be
   brought into the fellowship of his saints, and be always in the sight
   of God, he that bare meat to S. Rocke into the prison, as he was
   accustomed every day, he saw a great light and shining in the prison,
   and S. Rocke kneeling on his knees praying, which all these things he
   told to his lord. And the fame hereof ran all about the city, so that
   many of the citizens ran to the prison because of the novelty of this
   thing. And there saw and beheld it and gave laud thereof to Almighty
   God, and accused the lord of cruelty and woodness. Then at the last,
   when S. Rocke knew by the will of God that he should finish his mortal
   life, he called to him the keeper of the prison, and prayed him that he
   would go to his lord, and to exhort him in the name of God and of the
   glorious Virgin Mary, that he would send to him a priest, of whom ere
   he died he would be confessed, which thing was anon done. And when he
   had confessed him to the priest and devoutly taken his blessing, he
   prayed him that he might abide alone three days next following for to
   be in his contemplation, by which he might the better have mind of the
   most holy passion of our Lord. For Rocke felt well then that the
   citizens prayed the lord for his deliverance, which things the priest
   told to the lord. And so it was granted to S. Rocke to abide there
   alone three days. And in the end of the third day the angel of God came
   to S. Rocke, saying thus: O Rocke, God sendeth me for thy soul, of whom
   in this last part of thy life that what thou now desirest thou
   shouldest now ask and demand. Then S. Rocke prayed unto Almighty God
   with his most devout prayer, that all good christian men which
   reverently prayed in the name of Jesu to the blessed Rocke might be
   delivered surely from the stroke of pestilence. And this prayer so
   made, he expired and gave up the ghost.

   Anon an angel brought from heaven a table divinely written with letters
   of gold into the prison, which he laid under the head of S. Rocke. And
   in that table was written that God had granted to him his prayer, that
   is to wit, that who that calleth meekly to S. Rocke he shall not be
   hurt with any hurt of pestilence. And then after the third day the lord
   of the city sent to the prison that S. Rocke should be delivered out of
   it. And they that came to the prison found S. Rocke departed from this
   life, and saw through all the prison a marvellous light, in such wise
   that without doubt they believed him to be the friend of God. And there
   was at his head a great taper burning, and another at his feet, by
   which tapers all his body was light. Furthermore, they found under his
   head the foresaid table, by which they knew the name of the blessed
   Rocke by authority, which name known, the mother of the lord of that
   city knew many years tofore S. Rocke to be the son of the lord John of
   Montpelier, which was brother germain to this lord of whom we have
   said, which thing, and all that was done, was because they knew not his
   name. Then they knew him to be nephew to the lord, and also by the sign
   of the cross which S. Rocke bare, as tofore is said that he had it when
   he was born out of his mother's belly. Then they being thereof
   penitent, and in great wailing and sorrow, at the last with all the
   people of the city they buried S. Rocke solemnly and religiously, which
   soon after the holy saint was canonised by the pope gloriously. And in
   his glorious name and honour they builded a great and large church.
   Then let us reverently with devotion pray unto this glorious saint S.
   Rocke, that by his intercession and prayer we may be delivered from the
   hard death of pestilence and epidemic, and that we may so live in this
   life and be penitent for our sins, that after this short life we may
   come unto everlasting life in heaven. Amen. The feast of S. Rocke is
   always holden on the morn after the day of the Assumption of our Lady,
   which life is translated out of Latin into English by me, William
   Caxton.
     __________________________________________________________________

Here followeth the Life of S. Bernard, the mellifluous doctor, and first of the
                          interpretation of his name.

   Bernard is said of ber, that is, a pit or well, and nardus, which, as
   the gloss saith upon Cantica, is an humble herb and of hot nature and
   well smelling. He was hot inburning love, humble in conversation, a
   well in flowing doctrine, a pit in deepness of science, and well
   smelling in sweetness of fame. His life hath written Abbot William of
   S. Theodoric, and the fellow of S. Bernard, and Hernaldus the abbot of
   Bonevalle. S. Bernard was born in Burgundy in the castle of Fontaine of
   noble lineage and much religious. Whose father hight Celestin, and was
   a noble knight in the world and much religious to God. And his mother
   was named Aleth. She had seven children, six males and one female. The
   men children she nourished all for to be monks, and the daughter for to
   be a nun. And anon, as she had a child she offered it to God with her
   own hands. She would refuse strange breasts, for like as she fed them
   with her motherly milk, so fed she them with nature of goodness. And as
   long as they grew and were under her hand she nourished them more for
   desert than for the court. For she fed them with more common and
   grosser meats, like as she would have sent them right forth into
   desert. And as she bare the third son, which was Bernard, in her belly,
   she saw in her sleep a dream which was a demonstrance of things to
   come. Her seemed that she had in her belly a whelp, all white and red
   upon the back, barking in her belly. And when she had told her dream to
   a holy man, he answered to her, prophesying: Thou art mother of a right
   noble whelp, which shall be a warden of the house of God, and shall
   give great barkings against the enemies. For he shall be a noble
   preacher, and shall guerish much people by the grace of his tongue.

   And as Bernard was yet a little child he was sick of the headache, and
   there came a woman to him for to charm him, and thereby to assuage the
   grievous ache of his head, but he put her from him, crying by right
   great indignation, and the mercy of God failed not to his infancy in
   good love, for he arose and felt that he was delivered hereof. In the
   blessed night of the nativity of our Lord, when the child Bernard abode
   in the church the office of matins, and coveted to know what hour Jesu
   Christ was born, the child Jesus appeared to him as he had been born
   again out of his mother's belly, wherefore, as long as he lived, he
   supposed that hour to be the hour of the nativity of our Lord. And ever
   after as long as he lived was given to him in that hour more perfect
   wit, and speech more abundant in such things as appertain to the
   sacrament. And after that he made a noble work, among all his other
   works, of the laud and praising of God and his blessed mother. In the
   which work he expounded the lesson evangelic, how the angel Gabriel was
   sent to the Virgin Mary. And when the ancient enemy saw the purpose of
   the child full of health he bent against him many gins of temptation.
   And on a time when he had holden his eyes and fixed them upon a woman,
   he had anon shame in himself and was a cruel venger of himself. For he
   leapt anon into a pond full of water, and frozen, and was therein so
   long that almost he was frozen. And by the grace of God he was cooled
   from the heat of carnal concupiscence.

   About that time, by the instigation of the devil, a maid laid her in
   his bed by him all naked there where he slept, and when he felt her, he
   let her lie in that side of the bed she had taken, and turned him to
   that other side and slept. And she tarried a space of time, and felt
   him and kittled him, and would have drawn him to her intent. And at the
   last, when she felt him immoveable, though she were unshamefaced, yet
   she was ashamed, and all confused, arose and went her way. Another time
   as he was harboured in the house of a lady, she considered the beauty
   of this young man and was greatly achauffed and strongly desired his
   company. And then she ordained a bed out from the others. And in the
   night she arose without shame and came secretly to him. And when he
   felt her he cried: Thieves! thieves! And she fled, and lighted a candle
   herself and sought the thief, and none was found, and then each man
   went to his bed again. But this unhappy woman rested not, but arose
   again and went to the bed of Bernard, as she did tofore, and he cried:
   Thieves! thieves! And the thief was sought but was not found, ne
   published of him that knew her well. And yet was she chased the third
   time, and then with great pain she ceased what for dread and despair.
   And on the morn as they went by the way, his fellows reproved him of
   that he had so dreamed of thieves, and enquired of him what it was. And
   he answered: Verily, I have suffered this night the assailings of a
   thief, for mine hostess enforced to take away from me treasure not
   recoverable. And then he bethought himself that it was not sure thing
   to dwell with the serpent, and thought for to flee it. And then he
   ordained him to enter into the order of Cistercians. And when his
   brethren knew it they would have taken him from that purpose, and our
   Lord gave to him so great grace that they might not turn him from his
   conversion, but he brought all his brethren and many others to
   religion.

   Nevertheless, Gerard, his brother, a noble knight, supposed always that
   they were vain words and refused always his monestements and
   treachings. And then bernard, burning in the faith and in the spirit of
   brotherly love of charity, said: My brother, I know well that one sharp
   travail shall give understanding to thine ears. And after that he put
   his finger on his side, and said to him: One day shall come, and that
   soon, that a spear shall pierce thy side, and shall make way to thine
   heart, for to take the counsel that thou now refusest. And a short time
   after Gerard was taken of his enemies, and was hurt on the side in the
   place where his brother had set his finger, and was put in prison fast
   bounden. And then came to him Bernard, and they would not suffer him to
   speak to him. And he cried on high: Gerard, brother, know thou that we
   shall go shortly and enter into the monastery. And that same night the
   bonds of Gerard brake and fell off, and the door opened by himself, and
   he fled out, and said to his brother that he had changed his purpose
   and would be a monk. And this was in the year of the incarnation of our
   Lord eleven hundred and twelve, in the fifteenth year of the order of
   Citeaux. The servant of God, Bernard, at the age of twenty-two years
   entered into the order of Citeaux with more than thirty fellows. And as
   Bernard issued with his brethren out of his father's house, Guy, that
   was the eldest, saw Nivard, his younger brother, which was a little
   child and played with the children, and said to him: Nivard, brother,
   all the possession of our heritage shall appertain to thee. And the
   child answered not as a child, and said: Ye shall then have heaven, and
   leave to me only the earth, this part is not evenly ne righteously
   divided. And after, the child abode a little while with his father, but
   afterward he followed his brethren.

   When the servant of God, Bernard, was entered in to the order, he was
   so esprised and in all things occupied in God that he used no bodily
   wits. He had been a year in the cell of novices, and yet he wist not
   whether there were any windows in the house or no, and oft-times he had
   entered and gone out of the church whereas in the head were three
   windows, and he supposed there had been but one. And the abbot of
   Citeaux sent of his brethren for to edify the house of Clerevaux, and
   made Bernard there abbot, which was there long in great poverty, which
   oft made his pottage with leaves of holm. And the servant of God waked
   over man's power, and said that he lost no time but when he slept, and
   said that the comparison of sleep and of death were like semblable, so
   they that sleep be like as death were with men, and like as dead men be
   seen sleeping to God. He was unnethe drawn to any meat for delight of
   appetite, but only for dread of failing, and he went to take his meat
   like as he should have gone to a torment. And he was always accustomed,
   when he had eaten, to weet if he had eaten too much or more than he was
   accustomed, and if he had so done he would punish himself so that he
   refrained his mouth, that he lost a great part of the savour and
   tasting of his meat. For sometimes he drank oil when it was given him
   by error instead of drink. He said that the water was good alone and
   refreshed him well, and he perceived not that he drank oil, but when
   his lips were anointed some told him thereof. And some time and other
   while he ate the fat of raw flesh instead of butter. He said that all
   that he had learned of holy scripture he had learned it in woods, in
   fields, most by meditation and praying, and confessed that he had none
   other masters but oaks and holm-trees, this confessed he among his
   friends. At the last he confessed that sometime, when he was in
   meditation or praying, him thought that all holy scriptures appeared to
   him expounded. On a time, as he rehearseth in Canticis, that he would
   put among the words such as the Holy Ghost counselled him, and whiles
   he made that treatise he would think, of good courage, what he should
   do when that were made. And then a voice came to him, saying: Till thou
   hast accomplished this work thou shalt do none other. He had never
   pleasure in clothing; he said that filths were in demonstrance of
   negligence, and outrageous clothing was folly, a man but glorifying
   himself in respect of outward vain glory. He had in his heart always
   this proverb, and oft said it: Who doth that no other man cloth, all
   men wonder on him. He ware many years the hair, and as long as he might
   hide it he ware it. And when he saw that it was known, he left it anon
   and took him to common vesture. He laughed never but if he made greater
   force to laugh than to refrain him. He was wont to say that the manner
   of patience was in three manners, of injuries of words, of damage of
   things, and of misdoing of the body. On a time he wrote a letter to a
   bishop, friendly, and admonished him amiably, and he was much wroth,
   and wrote to him a letter saying thus at the beginning: Greeting to
   thee that hast the spirit of blasphemy. To whom he answered: I suppose
   not to have the spirit of blasphemy, ne have said evil to any man, but
   only to the prince the devil. An abbot sent to him six hundred marks of
   silver for to make a convent, but all the money was robbed by thieves
   by the way. And when S. Bernard heard thereof he said none other thing
   but: Blessed be God that hath spared me from this charge. A canon
   regular came to him and prayed him much that he Bernard would receive
   him to be a monk, and he would not accord it to him, but counselled him
   to return to his church. He said to him: Why hast thou so much in thy
   books praised perfection if thou wilt not show it, and deliver it to
   him that coveteth it? If I had thy books I would all torend them. And
   Bernard said to him: Thou hast not read in any of them but that thou
   mightest be perfect in thy cloister; I praise in all my books the
   correction of manners and not the mutation of places. And the canon
   being all araged leapt to him and smote him on the cheek, that it was
   red and swollen. And they that were by arose against this cursed man
   for to have smitten this cursed man, but Bernard came between, crying
   and conjuring by the name of Jesu Christ that they should not touch
   him, ne do him none harm. He had a custom to say to the novices that
   would enter into religion: Leave there without your body, ye that will
   enter into religion, leave the body without that ye have taken from the
   world, and join you to them that be here within, let the spirit enter
   only, for the flesh profiteth no thing.

   S. Bernard's father went into the monastery and dwelled there a certain
   time, and after died in good age. The sister was married in to the
   world, and on a time she arrayed and apparelled her in riches and
   delights of the world, and went into the monastery for to visit her
   brethren in a proud estate and great apparel. And he dreaded her as she
   had been the devil, or his net for to take souls, ne would not go out
   for to see her. And when she saw that none of her brethren came against
   her, one of her brethren, that was porter, said to her that she was a
   foul ordure stinking, wraped in gay array. And then she melted all in
   tears, and said: If I be a sinner, God died for sinners, and because I
   am a sinful woman I come to ask counsel of them that be good. If my
   brother despise my flesh, he that is servant of God ought not to
   despise my soul; let my brother come, and what he shall command me I
   shall do. And she held that promise. And he came with his brethren, and
   because she might not depart from her husband, he taught her to despise
   the glory of the world, and showed to her how she should ensiew the
   steps of her mother. And then when she came home again she was so sore
   changed, that in the middle of the world she led the life of a hermit,
   and all estranged from the world. In the end she vanquished her husband
   by prayers, and was assoilled by the bishop of her vow and entered into
   a monastery.

   On a time S. Bernard was sore sick, so that him seemed he should give
   up his spirit, and was at his end as him seemed in a trance, and him
   thought that he was tofore God in judgment and there was the devil on
   that other side, which put on him many accusations and reproaches, and
   when he had all said, Bernard said without fear, dread, or wrath: I
   confess me that I am not worthy to have the kingdom of heaven by mine
   own merits, but our Lord which holdeth me by double right as his
   heritage and by the merits of his passion. By that one he is content,
   and that other he giveth to me, by which gift I ought not to be
   confounded, but it appertaineth to me by right. And thus he was
   confused and the vision failed, and the man of God came to himself and
   destrained his body by so great travail of fastings and wakings, that
   he languished in continual malady, that he might not follow the convent
   but with pain.

   On a time he was so grievously sick that all the brethren prayed for
   him, so that he felt him a little alleged and eased of his pain. Then
   he did do assemble all his brethren, and said: Wherefore hold ye so
   wretched a man? Ye be stronger and have vanquished, I pray you, spare
   me and let me go. This holy man was elect of many cities for to be a
   bishop, specially of the city of Milan, and refused it not follily, ne
   granted thereto, but said to them that required that he was not his
   own, but deputed to other. And by the counsel of this holy man, the
   brethren so provided by the authority of the pope, that none might take
   him from them which was their joy to have him.

   On a time when he visited the order of Charterhouse, and when the
   brethren were well edified by him, one thing there was that moved a
   little the prior of the place, and that was, the saddle that S. Bernard
   rode on was over precious and showed little poverty of the brethren,
   and the prior told it to one of the brethren. And the brother said it
   to S. Bernard, and he marvelled and asked what saddle it was, and sent
   for it. For he wist not what saddle it was, how well he had ridden upon
   it from Clerevaux to the Charterhouse. He went all a long day by the
   lake of Lausanne and saw not the lake ne took heed of it, and at even
   as his fellows spake of that lake, he demanded where was that lake. And
   when they heard that, they marvelled strongly, for certainly the
   humbleness of his heart vanquished in him the height of name. For the
   world could never enhance him so high, but be alone humbled himself the
   more; he was reputed sovereign of all, and he accounted himself Ieast
   and most low. And at the last he confessed that when he was among his
   sovereign honours and favours ot the people, him seemed that there was
   another man changed in him, or as he had been in a dream. And there
   where he was among the most simple brethren he used most amiable
   humility, there he joyed, there found he himself, and that he was
   returned in to his own person. He was always found tofore the hours, or
   reading, or writing, or in meditation, or in edifying his brethren by
   word. On a time as he preached to the people, and that they all
   understood devoutly his words, such a temptation arose in his heart:
   Verily, now preachest thou well, now art thou well heard of the people,
   and art reputed wise of them all. And the holy man feeling him to be
   put in this temptation, rested and tarried a while, and thought whether
   he might say more or make an end. And anon he was comforted by divine
   aid, and answered softly to him that tempted him: I neither began by
   thee, ne shall I end by thee; and so performed surely all his sermon.

   A monk that had been a ribald in the world and a player, tempted by a
   wicked spirit, would return again to the world. And as S. Bernard
   retained him, he demanded him whereof he should live. And he answered
   to him that he could well play at the dice, and should well live
   thereby. And S. Bernard said to him: If I deliver to thee any good,
   wilt thou come again every year that I may part half gain with thee ?
   And he had great joy thereof, and promised him so to do. And then S.
   Bernard said that there should be delivered to him twenty shillings,
   and he went withal. And this holy man did this for to draw him again to
   the religion, as he did after. And he went forth, and lost all, and
   came again all confused tofore the gate. And when S. Bernard knew him
   there, he went to him joyously and opened his lap for to part the gain.
   And he said: Father, I have won nothing, but have lost your chattel;
   receive me, if it please you, to be your chattel. And S. Bernard
   answered to him sweetly: If it be so, it is better that I receive thee,
   than lose both thee and that other.

   On a time S. Bernard rode upon an horse by the way, and met a villein
   by the way, which said to him that he had not his heart firm and stable
   in praying. And the villein or uplandish man had great despite thereof,
   and said that he had his heart firm and stable in all his prayers. And
   S. Bernard, which would vanquish him and shew his folly, said to him:
   Depart a little from me, and begin thy paternoster in the best entent
   thou canst. And if thou canst finish it without thinking on any other
   thing, without doubt I shall give to thee the horse that I am on. And
   thou shalt promise to me by thy faith that if thou think on any other
   thing thou shalt not hide it from me. And the man was glad and reputed
   the horse his, and granted it him, and went apart and began his
   paternoster. And he had not said the half when he remembered if he
   should have the saddle withal. And therewith he returned to S. Bernard
   and said that he had thought in praying, and after that he had no more
   will to advance him.

   There was monk of his named brother Robert, nigh to himself as to the
   world, had been deceived in his childhood by the enticement of some
   persons, and was sent to the abbey of Cluny, and the honourable man
   left him awhile there. And he would call him again by letters; and as
   he indited the letter by clear day, and another monk wrote it, a rain
   came suddenly upon them. And he that wrote would have hid the parchment
   from the rain, and S. Bernard said: This work is the work of God, write
   on hardily and doubt thee nothing. And then he wrote the letter in the
   midst of the rain without being wet, and yet it rained all about them;
   for the virtue of charity took away the moisture of the rain from them.

   A great multitude of flies had taken a church that he had do make, so
   that they did much harm to all them that came thither. And he said: I
   curse and excommunicate them, and on the morn they were found all dead.
   He was on a time sent from the pope to Milan for to reconcile the
   church, and when he had so done and was returned, a man of Milan
   brought to him his wife which was demoniac. And anon the devil began to
   missay him through the mouth of the wretched woman, and said: Thou
   eater of porret, ween thou to take me out of mine house? Nay, thou
   shalt not! And the holy man, S. Bernard, sent him to S. Syrus in his
   church, and the said S. Syrus gave the honour to his host and healed
   her not, and thus was she brought again to S. Bernard. And then the
   devil began to cry, and said: Neither Syrus ne Bernard shall put me
   out. And S. Bernard said: Syrus ne Bernard shall not put thee out, but
   our Lord shall put thee out. And as soon as he made his prayer the
   wicked spirit said: Ha! ha! how gladly would I issue from hence, for I
   am here tormented grievously. But I may not, for the great Lord wills
   it not. And the holy man said: Who is that Lord? and he said, Jesus of
   Nazareth. And S. Bernard said: Sawest thou him ever? And he answered:
   Yea. S. Bernard said: Where sawest thou him? And he said: In his glory.
   And S. Bernard asked him: And wert thou in glory? And he said: Yea. How
   wentest thou from thence? And he said: With Lucifer many of us fell.
   All these he said by the mouth of the woman, that every man heard. Then
   said to him the holy man: Wouldst not thou go again into that glory?
   And he said, mowing marvellously: It is too late. Then the holy man
   prayed, and the wicked spirit issued out of that woman, but when the
   man of God was departed thence, the wicked spirit entered again. And
   her husband came after the holy man and told him what was happed. And
   he made to bind a writing about her neck containing these words: I
   command thee in the name of our Lord Jesu Christ that thou be not so
   hardy to touch more this woman, and he durst never after touch her.

   There was a piteous woman in Guienne, which was vexed with a devil that
   dwelled in her and vexed her marvellously six years during, in using
   her to his lechery. And the holy man, S. Bernard, came in to the parts.
   And the devil menaced her, if she went to him that it should not profit
   her. And if she went, he that was her love should be to her a cruel
   persecutor. But she went surely to the holy man, and told to him,
   weeping strongly, what she suffered. And he said: Take this staff which
   is mine, and lay it in thy bed, and if he may do anything let him do
   it, and she did so and laid it in her bed. And he came anon, but he
   durst not go to his work accustomed, ne presumed to approach her bed,
   but he threatened her right eagerly that, when he was gone, he would
   avenge

   him right cruelly on her. And when she had said this to Bernard, he
   assembled the people that every each should hold a candle burning in
   his hand, and came to this devil, and with all them that were there he
   cursed him and excommunicated him, and defended that never after he
   should so do to her ne to none other. And thus was she all delivered of
   that illusion. And when on a time as this holy man went as a legate in
   to that province for to reconcile the duke of Guienne to the church,
   and he refused to be reconciled in all manners, the holy man went to
   the altar for to sing mass, and the duke abode without the church as
   excommunicate. And when he had said Pax domini, he laid the body of our
   Lord upon the paten, and bare it without the church, and went out with
   a face flaming and burning, and assailed the duke by fearful words,
   saying: We have prayed thee and thou hast despised us, lo! here is the
   son of the Virgin which is come to thee, which is Lord of the church
   whom thou persecutest. This is thy judge, in the name of whom all knees
   bow, in the hands of whom thy soul shall come, despise him not as thou
   hast his servants, resist him if thou mayst. Then anon the duke waxed
   all stiff and was impotent in all his members, and then he fell down at
   his feet. And the holy man put his foot at him, and commanded him to
   arise and to hear the sentence of God. He then trembling arose, and
   accomplished anon that the holy man commanded.

   On a time as this holy S. Bernard entered into Almaine for to appease a
   great discord, there was an archbishop that sent an honorable clerk
   against him. And when the clerk said to him that he had been sent from
   his master against him, the holy man answered to him and said: Another
   lord hath sent thee. And he marvelled and said that he was sent of none
   other, but of his lord the archbishop. And S. Bernard said: Son, thou
   art deceived, our Lord Jesu Christ, which hath sent thee, is a greater
   master. And when the clerk understood him he said: Sire, weenest thou
   that I will be a monk? Nay, I thought it never, ne it came never in my
   heart, yet after in the same voyage he forsook the world and received
   the habit of this holy man, S. Bernard.

   He took also on a time into the order a noble knight, and when he had
   followed S. Bernard a little time he began to be grievously tempted,
   and when a brother saw him so heavy, he inquired the cause of his
   heaviness. And he answered him: I wot well that I shall never be glad.
   And the brother told it to S. Bernard, and he prayed to God much
   ententively for him, and anon that brother that was so pensive and so
   heavy, seemed more joyous than the other, and more glad than he had
   been tofore heavy. And the brother blamed him because he had said that
   he should never be joyous. And he answered and said: I wot well I said
   I should never be glad, but I say now that I never shall be sorrowful.

   When S. Malachi, bishop of Ireland, of whom he wrote the life, full of
   virtues, passed out of this world out of his monastery blessedly to our
   Lord Jesu Christ, and S. Bernard offered to God for him sacrifice of
   health, he saw the glory of him by revelation of our Lord, and by the
   inspiration of God he changed the form of prayer after the communion,
   saying thus with joyous voice: God, that hast accompanied S. Malachi by
   his merits with thy saints, we pray thee to give to us that we that
   make the feast of his precious death, may follow the examples of his
   life. And when the chanter heard him, he said to him, and showed that
   he erred. And he said: I err not, but I know well what I say, and then
   went to the body and kissed his feet. And in a time that the Lent
   approached he was visited of divers knights. And he prayed them that at
   the least in these holy days they should abstain them from their
   vanities, their jollities, and doing outrages, and they in no wise
   would agree thereto. And then he bade make ready wine, and said to
   them: Drink ye the health of your souls, and when they had drunk the
   wine they were suddenly changed and went to their houses, and they that
   had denied to do a little time, they gave to God after, all the time of
   their life, and led a right holy life. At the last the holy S. Bernard,
   approaching to the death, said blessedly to his brethren: I require and
   command you to keep three things, the which I remember to have kept to
   my power as long as I have been in this present life. I have not willed
   to slander any person, and if any have fallen I have hid it as much as
   I might. I have ever trusted less mine own wit than any others. If I
   were hurt, I never required vengeance of the hurter. I leave to you
   charity, humility, and patience. And after that he had done many
   miracles, and had made one hundred and seventy-one monasteries, and had
   ordained many books and treatises, he accomplished the days of his life
   the sixty-third year of his age, in the year of our Lord eleven hundred
   and fifty six. He slept in our Lord among the hands of his sons, and
   his glory showed his departing hence to much people.

   He appeared to an abbot in a monastery and admonished him that he
   should follow him, and he so did. And then S. Bernard said: We be come
   to the mount of Lebanon, thou shalt abide here, and I shall ascend up
   on high. And he asked him wherefore he would go up, and he said: For to
   learn, I will go up. And he being greatly admarvelled, said: What wilt
   thou learn, father, of whom we believe that there is none to thee like,
   ne holden so wise in science as thou art? And he said: Here is no
   science, ne here is no knowledge of truth, but there above is plenty of
   science, and on high is the very knowledge of truth. And with that word
   he vanished away. And then that abbot marked that day, and found that
   S. Bernard was then passed to our Lord, which showed for him many
   miracles and innumerable. To whom be given laud and praising
   everlasting. Amen.
     __________________________________________________________________

                 Of S. Timothy, and interpretation of his name.

   Timothy is as much to say as holding dread. Or of timor, that is dread,
   and theos, a word of Greek, which is deus in Latin and God in English,
   as the dread of God.

Of S. Timothy.

   S. Timothy was taken under Nero of the provost of Rome, and was
   grievously beaten, and had quicklime put in his throat and upon his
   wounds. And he rendered thankings to God with all his heart. And then
   two angels came to him, saying: Lift up thine head to heaven. And then
   he beheld and saw the heaven open, and Jesu Christ, which held a double
   crown, and said to him: Thou shalt receive this of my hand. And a man
   named Apollinarius saw this thing and did him to be baptized. And
   therefore the provost commanded that they twain together, persevering
   in the confession of our Lord, should be beheaded about the year of our
   Lord fifty-six.
     __________________________________________________________________

                        Here followeth of S. Symphorien.

   Symphorien was born in the city of Augustidinense. And he being a young
   child shone in so great abundance of virtues, that he surmounted the
   life of the ancients. And as the paynims hallowed the feast of Venus,
   Symphorien was there and would not worship the image tofore Heraclius
   the provost. And then he was long beaten, and after set in prison. And
   they would have constrained him to do sacrifice, and promised to him
   many gifts. He answered and said: Our Lord can well reward the merits,
   and also he can well punish the sins. Then the life that we owe to God
   of debt, let us pay with goodwill. Slow penance is to understand,
   sinners enhardened be anointed with the sweetness of honey which
   engendereth venom and thoughts evil believing. Your covetise tofore all
   things possesseth nothing, for it is bounden to the arts of the devil,
   and shall be withholden in the bounds of the cursed and evil winning.
   And your joys, when they begin to shine, shall be broken like glass.
   And then the judge, fulfilled with wrath, gave sentence, and commanded
   that Symphorien should be slain. And as he was led to the place of his
   martyrdom, his mother cried from the wall of her house, and said: Son!
   son! remember thee of the life perdurable, look upward and behold him
   that reigneth in heaven. The life shall not be taken away from thee,
   but it shall be changed into a better. And then he was anon beheaded,
   and his body taken of christian men and was honourably buried. And so
   many miracles were showed at his tomb that it was held in great honour
   of the paynims. Gregory of Tours rehearseth of the place where his
   blood was shed: A christian man bare away three stones which were
   besprent with his blood, and put them in a case of silver, and tables
   of tree enclosed about it, and bare them into a castle, which castle
   was all burnt with fire. And that case was found whole and safe in the
   middle of the fire. And he suffered death about the year of our Lord
   two hundred and seventy.
     __________________________________________________________________

Here beginneth the Life of S. Bartholomew the Apostle, and first the exposition
                                  of his name.

   Bartholomew is expounded the son of abovehanging the waters, or son of
   overhanging the sea. He is said of bar, that is as much to say as son,
   and tholos, which is as much to say as sovereignty, and of moys, that
   is to say water. And hereof is said Bartholomew, as a son hanging over
   the waters. That is of God, which enhanceth the minds of doctors on
   high, for to shed and bespring beneath the waters of doctrine. And it
   is a name of Syriac and not of Hebrew. And the first three suspendings
   that he had, ought to be noted: He was suspended or taken up from the
   love of the world, and he was suspended, that is to say ententive, in
   heavenly love, and he was suspended, that is to say wrapped, in the
   grace and in the aid of God. Not by his merits his life shone, but by
   the aid of God. Of the second came the deepness of his wisdom, of which
   deepness of wisdom Denis saith, in his mystical theology: The divine
   Bartholomew, of whom is much divinity and right little, and that the
   gospel is broad and great, and also it is short. And after the entent
   of S. Denis, Bartholomew will show that all things may be affirmed and
   showed of God under one consideration, and by another consideration may
   be more properly denied.

   Of S. Bartholomew the Apostle.

   S. Bartholomew, the apostle, went into India, which is in the end of
   the world. And therein he entered into a temple where an idol was which
   was named Astaroth, and he, as a pilgrim, abode there. In that idol
   dwelt a fiend that said that he could heal all manner sicknesses, but
   he lied, for he could not make them whole, but might better them but
   for a while. And the temple was full of sick people, and could have no
   answer of that idol, wherefore they went in to another city whereas
   another idol was worshipped named Berith, and they demanded him
   wherefore Astaroth gave to them no answer. And Berith said: Your god is
   bound with chains of fire that he neither dare draw breath ne speak
   after that Bartholomew, the apostle of God, entered into the temple.
   And they said to him: Who is that Bartholomew? And the devil said: He
   is the friend of God Almighty, and he is come into this province for to
   avoid all the gods of India. And then they said: Tell us some tokens
   and signs that we may know him and find him. And the devil said to
   them: He hath his hairs black and crisp, his skin white, eyes great,
   his nostrils even and straight, his beard long and hoar a little, and
   of a straight and seemly stature. He is clad in a white coat, and a
   white mantle, which in every corner hath gems of purple and precious
   stones therein. And it is sith twenty-six years that his clothes never
   waxed old ne foul. He prayeth and worshippeth God on his knees a
   hundred times a day, and a hundred times by night. The angels go with
   him, which never suffer him to be weary ne to be an hungered, he is
   always of like semblant, glad and joyous. He seeth all things tofore,
   he knoweth all things, he speaketh all manner languages, and
   understandeth them, and he knoweth well what I say to you. And when ye
   seek him, if he will he may show himself to you, and if him list not,
   not shall ye find him. And I pray you, when ye find him, that ye pray
   him that he come not hither, that his angels do not to me as they have
   done to my fellow. Then they went and sought him diligently and busily
   two days, and found him not.

   On a day, one that was beset with a devil cried, and said: Apostle of
   God, Bartholomew, thy prayers burn me. And the apostle said: Hold thou
   thy peace and come thence. And anon he was delivered. And when
   Polemius, king of that region, heard this thing, which had a daughter
   lunatic, he sent to the apostle, praying that he would come to him and
   heal his daughter. And when the apostle was come to him and saw that
   she was bound with chains, and bit all them that went to her, he
   commanded to unbind her. And the ministers durst not go to her. And he
   said: I hold the devil fast bound that was in her, and therefore be not
   afeard; and then anon she was unbound and delivered. And then would
   have presented to the apostle camels charged with gold and silver and
   precious stones, but he could not be found in no manner. And on the
   morrow following, the apostle appeared to the king, alone in his
   chamber, and said to him: Wherefore soughtest thou me yesterday with
   gold and silver and precious stones? Those things be necessary to them
   that covet things worldly, but I desire no things terrien ne carnal.
   Then S. Bartholomew began to say many things, and inform the king of
   our redemption, and among other things how Jesu Christ vanquished the
   devil by marvellous and convenable puissance, justice, and wisdom. For
   it was convenable that he that overcame the son made of the earth, that
   was Adam, while he was yet a virgin, should be overcome of the son of
   the virgin. He overcame him then mightily, when he threw him puissantly
   out of his lordship which had thrown out by force our forefather. And
   thus, as he that overcometh some tyrant, sendeth his fellows tofore for
   to set up his sign over all, and to cast out tyrants, in like wise Jesu
   Christ sent his messengers over all for to take away the honour and the
   worshipping of the devil righteously. For it is right that he that
   vanquished man by eating, and held him, that he should be overcome by a
   man fasting, and hold man no longer. For it is rightful that he which
   by the art of the devil was despised, that by the art of Jesu Christ he
   should be vanquished. And like as the falcon taketh the bird, right so
   took he Jesu Christ in desert because he fasted, and would assay if he
   had hunger; and if he had hunger, that he might have deceived him by
   meat, and if he had no hunger, then knew he well without doubt that he
   was God. But he might not know him, for he had hunger, and consented
   nothing to him ne to his temptations.

   And when he had preached the sacraments of the faith, he said to the
   king that, if he would receive baptism, he would show him his god
   bounden with chains. And the day following, when the bishops sacrificed
   within the palace of the king, the devils began to cry and say: Cease,
   ye cursed wretches, to do sacrifice to us, lest ye suffer worse than I
   that am bounden with chains of fire by the angels of Jesu Christ, whom
   the Jews crucified and supposed to have brought to death. Which death,
   that is our queen, he hath imprisoned, and hath bound our prince in
   chains of fire. And anon then they set cords on the image for to pull
   down and overthrow the idol, but they might not. The apostle then
   commanded the devil that he should issue and go out and break the idol
   all to pieces, and he issued out and destroyed and brake all the idols
   of the temple. And anon the apostle made his prayer, saying: O God of
   Abraham, God of Isaac, and God of Jacob, which hast given to us such
   power that we enlumine the blind, and cleanse the lepers, I desire and
   require that this multitude might be healed, and they all answered,
   Amen. And forthwith all the sick people were cured and healed. And then
   the apostle did do hallow and dedicate that temple, and commanded the
   devil to go in to the desert. Then the angel of our Lord appeared
   there, and flew round about the temple, and ensigned and graved with
   his finger the sign of the cross in four corners of the temple, saying:
   Our Lord saith this: Like as I have you cured and made you clean of all
   your sickness, so let this temple be made clean of all filth and
   ordure. but I shall show him of all filth and ordure. But I shall show
   him to you that dwelleth therein tofore, to whom the apostle hath
   commanded to go in to desert. And doubt ye not to see him, but make in
   your forehead such a sign as I have graven in these stones. And then he
   showed to them an Ethiopian more black than thunder, the face sharp,
   the beard long, his hairs hanging unto his feet, his eyes flaming as
   hot fire, and cast out sparkles of fire, and casting out of his mouth
   flames of sulphur, and his hands bound with chains of fire behind his
   back. And then the angel said to him: Because that thou hast heard that
   the apostle hath commanded, and hast broken all the idols of the
   temple, I shall unbind thee; go in to such a place whereas dwelleth no
   man, and be thou there unto the day of judgment. And when he was
   unbound he went his way with a great braying and howling, and the angel
   of our Lord mounted up to heaven in the sight of them all. And then was
   the king baptized, with his wife and his children and all his people,
   and left his realm and was made disciple of the apostle.

   Then all the bishops of the idols assembled them together and went to
   Astrages the king, and brother to Polemius, and complained of the loss
   of their gods and of the destruction of their temples, and of the
   conversion of his brother made by art magic. Astrages was wroth and
   sent a thousand men armed to take the apostle, and when he was brought
   tofore him, the king said to him: Art thou not he that hast perverted
   my brother? And the apostle answered to him: I have not perverted him,
   but I have converted him; and the king said to him: Like as thou hast
   made my brother forsake his god and believe in thy God, so shall I make
   thee forsake thy God, and thou shalt sacrifice to my god. And the
   apostle said: I have bound the god that thy brother adored, and showed
   him bound, and constrained him to break his false image, and if thou
   mayst do so to my God, thou mayst well draw me to thine idol, and if
   not, I shall all to-break thy gods, and then believe thou in my God.
   And as he said these words, it was told the king that his god Baldach
   was overthrown and all to-broken, and when the king heard that, he
   brake and all to-rent his purple in which he was clad, and commanded
   that the apostle should be beaten with staves, and that he should be
   flayed quick, and so it was done. Then the christians took away the
   body and buried it honourably. Then the king Astrages and the bishops
   of the temples were ravished with fiends and died, and the king
   Polemius was ordained bishop, and accomplished the oflfice of a bishop
   twenty-two years much louably, and after that rested in peace full of
   virtues.

   There be divers opinions of the manner of his passion. For the blessed
   Dorotheus saith that he was crucified, and saith also: Bartholomew
   preached to men of India, and delivered to them the gospel after
   Matthew in their proper tongue. He died in Alban, a city of great
   Armenia, crucified the head downward. S. Theoderus saith that he was
   flayed, and it is read in many books that he was beheaded only. And
   this contrariety may be assoiled in this manner, that some say that he
   was crucified and was taken down ere he died, and for to have greater
   torment he was flayed and at the last beheaded.

   In the year of our Lord three hundred and thirty-one, Saracens assailed
   Sicily, and destroyed the isle of Lipari whereas the body of S.
   Bartholomew lieth, and brake up the sepulchre and threw the bones
   hither and thither. And it is said that his body came in such wise from
   India thither into that isle. When the paynims saw that this body and
   his sepulchre were greatly honoured for the miracles that befell, they
   had thereof great despite, and laid them in a tomb of lead, and threw
   them into the sea, and by the will of God they came into this isle. And
   when the Saracens had departed and thrown the bones here and there, and
   were departed thence, the apostle appeared to a monk and said to him:
   Arise up, and go and gather together my bones that be departed. And he
   said to him: By what reason shall I gather together thy bones, and what
   honour ought we to do to them, when thou sufferest us to be destroyed?
   And the apostle said to him: Our Lord hath spared this people here a
   long while by my merits, but for their sins that they have sinned,
   which cry vengeance unto heaven, I have not con get pardon ne
   forgiveness for them. And then the monk said: How shall I among so many
   bones find thine? And the apostle said to him: Thou shalt gather them
   by night, and them that thou shalt find shining thou shalt take up. And
   the monk went, and found them all as he had said, and took them up, and
   brought them with him in to a ship, and sailed with them to Benevento,
   which is chief city of Apulia, and thus were they transported thither.
   And it is said now that they be at Rome, howbeit they of Benevento say
   they have the body.

   There was a woman that brought a vessel full of oil for to put in the
   lamp of S. Bartholomew, and how well she inclined the vessel for to
   pour out the oil, there would none issue out, how well she touched with
   her finger the oil clear. And then one cried and said: I trow this oil
   be not agreeable to the apostle that it should be in his lamp,
   wherefore they put it in another lamp and it issued anon.

   When that the emperor Frederick destroyed Benevento, and he had
   commanded that all the churches that there should be destroyed, and
   enforced them to bear away the goods from that city into another place,
   there was a man which found men all white shining, and him seemed that
   they spake together of some secret thing, and he marvelled strongly who
   they were and demanded them, and then one of them answered and said:
   This is Bartholomew, the apostle, with the other saints which had
   churches in this city, that speak and ordain together in what manner
   and by what pain this emperor should be justified, that hath cast them
   out of their tabernacles. And they have now confirmed among them by
   firm sentence that he, without tarrying, shall go to the judgment of
   God for to answer thereupon. And anon the emperor died an evil death.

   It is in a book read of the miracles of saints that, a certain master
   hallowed solemnly the feast of S. Bartholomew, and the devil in the
   form of a maid appeared to this master that preached. And when he saw
   her, he bade her to come and dine with him, and when they were set at
   the table she enforced her much for to draw him to her love. And then
   S. Bartholomew came to the gate and prayed that he might come in for
   the love of S. Bartholomew, and she would not, but sent him bread, and
   he would none take, but prayed the master by his message that he should
   say what thing that he supposed was most proper in a man. And he
   answered: To laugh. And the maid said: Nay, it is sin in which a man is
   conceived, born and liveth in sin. And S. Bartholomew answered that he
   had well said, but she had more profoundly answered. And the pilgrim
   demanded after at the master, where the place was contaimng the space
   of a foot where had God made greatest miracle. And he said, the sign of
   the cross, in which God had made many miracles. And she said: Nay, it
   is the head of a man, in which the little world is. And the apostle
   allowed the sentence of that one and of that other, and then he
   demanded the third time: How far it was from the sovereign siege or
   seat in heaven unto the lowest and deepest place of hell. And the
   master said that he wist not; and she said: I know it well, for I fell
   down from that one to that other, and it behoveth that I show it to
   thee. And the devil fell down into hell with a great bruit and howling,
   and then they sent for the pilgrim, and he was vanished and gone and
   away and they could not find him. And in like wise nigh according to
   this is read of S. Andrew.

   The blessed Ambrose saith thus in the preface that he made of this
   apostle in abridging his legend: Jesu Christ, thou hast vouchsafed to
   show to thy disciples, preaching, many things of thy divine Trinity in
   marvellous manner, and thy majesty, among whom thou hast sent the
   blessed Bartholomew honour by right great prerogative in to a far
   country. And how be it that he was all far from human conversation,
   nevertheless he deserved by the increasing of his predications to mark
   and think in thy sign the beginning of that people. Ah! by what louings
   is the marvellous apostle to be honoured. And when the hearts of the
   people of his neighbours sufficed not to him to receive his seed, he
   through-pierced like in fleeing in to the last countries of the lands
   of India, and entered in to the temple where there was great company of
   sick people without number, and made the devil so mute that he gat no
   remembrance to them that adored him, and the maid that was lunatic by
   torment of the devil he did unbind and delivered her all whole to her
   father. Oh, how great was this miracle of holiness, when he made the
   fiend, enemy to the lineage human, to break and destroy his own idol,
   and to bring it to nought. Oh, how worthy is he to be numbered to the
   heavenly company to whom the angel appeared, to praise the faith of him
   by his miracles, and came from the sovereign hall and showed to all the
   people the devil chained, and right foul, and the sign of the cross
   impressed in the stone bearing health. And the king and the queen were
   baptized, with the people of their cities. And at the last the tyrant
   brother of Polemius, new in faith by the relation of the bishops of the
   temple, made the blessed apostle, constant in the faith, to be beaten,
   flayed, and receive right foul death. And as he denounced the mischief
   of death, he had and bare with him, in to the glory of heaven, victory
   of his glorious strife.

   And the blessed Theodore, abbot and noble doctor, saith of this apostle
   in this manner among other things. The blessed apostle Bartholomew
   preached first in Licaonia, and after in India, and at the last in
   Alban, a city of great Armenia, and there he was first flayed and
   afterward his head smitten off, and there he was buried. And when he
   was sent of our Lord to preach, as I suppose, he heard how our Lord
   said to him: Go, my disciple, to preach, void out of this country, and
   go fight and be capax of perils. I have first accomplished and finished
   the works of my father, and am first witness, fill thou the vessel that
   is necessary and follow thy master, love thy lord, give thy blood for
   his blood, and thy flesh for his flesh, and suffer that which he had
   suffered, let thine armour be debonairty in thy sweatings, and suffer
   sweetly among wicked people and be patient among them that perish thee.
   And the apostle recoiled not, but as a true servant and obeissant to
   his master went forth joying, and as a light of God illumining in
   darkness the work of holy church, like as the blessed S. Austin
   witnesseth in his book, that, like a tiller of Jesu Christ, he
   profiteth in spiritual tilling. S. Peter the apostle taught the
   nations, but S. Bartholomew did great miracles. Peter was crucified the
   head downward, and Bartholomew was flayed quick, and had his head
   smitten off. And they twain increased greatly the church by the gifts
   of the Holy Ghost. And right as a harp giveth a right sweet sound of
   many strings, in like wise all the apostles gave sweet melody of the
   unity divine, and were established by the king of kings. And they
   departed among them all the world, and the place of Armenia was the
   place of Bartholomew, that is from Ejulath unto Gabaoth. There thou
   mayst see him, with the plough of his tongue, ear the fields
   unreasonable, sowing in the deepness of the heart the word of the
   faith, and in planting the vines of our Lord and trees of paradise. And
   to every each setting medicinally the remedies of the passions, rooting
   out pernicious thorns, cutting down trees of felony, and setting about
   hedges of doctrine. But what reward yielded the tyrants to their
   curate? They gave to him dishonour for honour, cursing for benediction,
   pains for gifts, tribulation for rest, and right bitter death for
   restful life. And sith that he had suffered many torments, he was of
   them discoriate and flayed quick, and died not, and yet for all that he
   had them not in despite that slew him, but admonished them by miracles,
   and taught them by demonstrances, that did him harm. But there was
   nothing that might refrain their bestial thoughts, ne withdraw them
   from harm. What did they afterwards? They enforced them against the
   holy body, and the malades and sick men refused their mediciner and
   healer, the city refused him that enlumined their blindness, governed
   them that were in peril, and gave life to them that were dead. And how
   cast they him out? Certainly, they threw the body into the sea in a
   chest of lead, and that chest came from the region of Armenia with the
   chests of four other martyrs, for they did also miracles and were
   thrown with him into the sea. And the four went before a great space of
   the sea, and did service to the apostles like as servants in a manner,
   so far that they came into the parts of Sicily in an isle that is named
   Lipari, like as it was showed to a bishop of Ostia which then was
   present. And these right rich treasures came to a right poor woman. And
   these right precious margarets came to one not noble, the bright
   shining light came to one right heavy. And then the other four came in
   to other lands, and left the holy apostle in that isle, and he left the
   other behind him. And that one which was named Papian went into a city
   of Sicily, and he sent another, named Lucian, into the city of Messina.
   And the other twain were sent into the land of Calabria, S. Gregory
   into the city of Columna, and Achate into a city named Chale, where yet
   at this day they shine by their merits. And then was the body of the
   apostle received with hymns, louings, and candles honourably, and there
   was made and builded a fair church in the honour of him. And the
   mountain of Vulcan is nigh to that isle, and was to it much grievous
   because it received fire, the which mountain was withdrawn by the
   merits of this holy saint from that isle seven miles, without to be
   seen of any body, and was suspended toward the sea. And yet appeareth
   it at this day to them that see it, as it were a figure of fire fleeing
   away. Now then, therefore, I salute thee, Bartholomew, blessed of
   blessed saints, which art the shining light of holy church, fisher of
   fishes reasonable, hurter of the devil which hurted the world by his
   theft. Enjoy thee, sun of the world, enlumining all earthly things,
   mouth of God, fiery tongue pronouncing wisdom, fountain springing
   goodly, full of health, which hallowest the sea by thy goings and ways
   not removable, which makest the earth red with thy blood, which
   repairest in heaviness, shining in the middle of the divine company
   clear in the resplendishour of glory. And enjoy thee in the gladness of
   joy insatiable. Amen. And this is that Theodore saith of him.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Here followeth the Life of S. Austin, or Augustine, Doctor, and first the
                            exposition of his name.

   Austin, this name was sorted to him for the excellence of his dignity,
   or for the fervent love that he had, or for the exposition of his name.
   For the excellence of his dignity; for like as the emperor Augustus
   precelled all other kings, right so he excelled all other doctors,
   after that Remigius saith: The other doctors be compared to stars and
   this to the sun. As it appeareth in the epistle that is sung of him: He
   shineth in the temple of God like to the sun shining. Secondly, for the
   fervent love, for like as the month of August is hot by heat, so is he
   enchauffed of the fire of the divine love, wherefore he saith himself
   in the book of Confessions: Thou hast throughpierced my heart with thy
   charity. Also in the same: Thou hast brought me in to a desirous
   affection withinforth which cannot be assuaged. And I wot not to what
   sweetness it is made in me; I wot not to what it shall be, I wot well
   it shall not be in this life. Thirdly, for the exposition of the name.
   Augus is as much to say as growing, and stin is a city, and ana is as
   much to say as sovereign, and then Augustin is as much to say as,
   increasing the city sovereign. And it is sung of him: This is he that
   may well increase the city of God. Or it is said in the glossary:
   Austin is said great, blessed, and clear; he was great in his life,
   clear in his doctrine, and blessed in glory. Possidonius, bishop of
   Calamente, compiled his life, as Cassiodore saith in the book of noble
   men.

                        Of S. Austin, Doctor and Bishop.

   S. Austin the noble doctor was born in Africa in the city of Carthage,
   and was come of noble kindred. And his father was named Patrick and his
   mother Monica. He was sufficiently instructed in the arts liberal, so
   that he was reputed for a sufficient philosopher and a right noble
   doctor, for he learned all by himself, without master, in reading the
   books of Aristotle and all other that he might find of arts liberal.
   And he understood them, as he himself witnesseth in the book of
   Confessions, saying: All the books that be called of the arts liberal,
   then, I, most wretched servant of all covetises, read them all by
   myself alone, and understood all them that I might read, and all them
   of the craft of speaking and of devising, all them of divisions of
   figures, of music and of numbers. I read and understood them without
   great difficulty, and without teaching of any man, this knowest thou,
   my Lord God. For the hastiness of mine understanding and the gift of
   learning is of thee only, and cometh of thy name, but I have not
   sacrificed to thee therefore, and therefore science without charity
   edifieth not, but swelleth in the error of Manicheans, which affirm
   that Jesu Christ was fantastic, and reny the resurrection of the flesh.
   And in the same error Austin fell, and abode therein nine years, whiles
   he was an adolescent, and was brought to believe the truffes and japes
   tnat say that the fig tree weepeth when his figs or leaves be taken
   away. And when he was nineteen years of age, he began to read in the
   book of philosophy, in which he was taught to despise the vanities of
   the world. And because that book pleased him well, he began to be sorry
   that the name of Jesu Christ, which he had learned of his mother, was
   not therein. And his mother wept oft, and enforced her much to bring
   him to the verity of the faith.

   And as it is read in the book of Confessions, she was in a place much
   heavy, and her thought that a fair young man was tofore her, that
   enquired of her the cause of her heaviness, and she said: I weep here
   the loss of my son Austin, and he answered: Be thou sure, for where
   thou art he is. And she saw her son beside her, and when she had told
   this to Austin, he said to his mother: Thou art deceived mother, it was
   not said so but: Where that I am thou art; and she said contrary: Son,
   it was not said so to me, but where I am thou art. And then the mother
   ententively prayed and required a bishop instantly that he would pray
   for her son Augustin. And he, being overcome, said to her by the voice
   of a prophet: Go thy way surely, for a son of so many tears may not by
   possibility perish.

   And when he had certain years taught rhetoric in Carthage he came to
   Rome secretly, without the knowledge of his mother, and assembled there
   many disciples. And his mother had followed him unto the gate to make
   him abide, or else that she should go with him, and he abode that
   night, but he departed secretly on the morn. And when she apperceived
   it, she replenished the ears of our Lord with clamour, and went in the
   morning and at even to the church, and prayed God for her son.

   In that time, they of Milan required a doctor of rhetoric of Symmachus
   the prefect of Rome, that he might read rhetoric at Milan. And that
   time Ambrose, servant of God, was bishop of that city, and Augustin was
   sent at the prayer of them of Milan. And his mother might not rest, but
   did much pain to come to him, and found him that he neither was very
   Manichean, ne very catholic. And then it happed that Augustin began to
   haunt with S. Ambrose, and oft heard his predications, and was much
   ententive to hear if anything were said against the Manicheans or other
   heresies.

   On a time it happed that S. Ambrose disputed long against the error
   Manichean, and condemned it by open and evident reasons and by
   authorities, so that this error was all put out of the heart of
   Augustin. And what befell to him afterward he rehearseth in the book of
   his Confessions, and saith When I knew thee first thou beatedst away
   the infirmity of my sight, shining in me forcibly. And I trembled for
   dread of good love, and I found myself right far from thee in a region
   of unlikelihood, like as I heard thy voice from heaven on high, saying:
   I am meat of greatness increased and thou shalt eat me, thou shalt not
   change me in thee as meat of thy flesh, but thou shalt be changed in
   me. And as he rehearseth there, the life of Jesu Christ pleased him
   much well, but he doubted yet to go in such distresses, but our Lord
   anon put in his mind that he should go to Simplician, in whom all
   divine grace shone, for to refrain his desires, and for to say to him
   what manner was convenable to live, for to go in the way of God in
   which that other went. For all that was done displeased him save the
   sweetness of God and the beauty of the house of God, which he loved.
   And Simplician began to exhort him, and S. Augustin exhorted himself
   and said: How many children and maidens serve in the church of God to
   our Lord: and mayst not thou do that they do in themselves and not in
   their God? Wherefore tarryest thou? Cast thyself on him and he shall
   receive thee and reward thee. And among these words Victorin came to
   his mind. Then Simplician was much glad, and told to him how Victorin
   was yet a paynim, and deserved to have a great image to his likeness in
   the market of Rome, and how he ofttimes said that he was a christian
   man. To whom Simplician said: I shall not believe it but if I see thee
   in the church. And he answered merrily: The walls make not a man
   christian. At the last, when he came into the church, he brought to him
   secretly a book wherein the credo of the mass was, and bade him read.
   And he ascended upon high, and with voice on high propounced it,
   whereof Rome marvelled, and the church was joyful, and all cried
   suddenly: Victorin! Victorin! And anon they held their peace for joy.
   And after that there came from Africa a friend of Augustin which was
   named Poncian, and recounted to him the life and miracles of the great
   Anthony, that had died lately under Constantine the emperor. And by the
   ensamples Austin enforced him strongly, so that he assailed his fellow
   Alipius as well with cheer as mind, and cried strongly: What suffer we?
   what hear we? Untaught people and foolish, ravish and take heaven, and
   we with our conning and doctrines plunge and sink into hell, and
   because they go tofore we be ashamed to follow them. And then he ran
   into a garden, and, as he saith himself, he cast himself down under a
   fig-tree and wept right bitterly, and gave out weeping voice because he
   had tarried so long from day to day, and from time to time. And was
   greatly tormented, so that he had no manner in himself for sorrow of
   his long tarrying, like as he writeth in the book of his Confessions
   and said: Alas! Lord, how thou art high in high things and deep in
   deepness, and departest not ne goest out of the way, and unnethe we
   come to thee. Ah! Lord, he said, call me, move me, change me, and
   enlumine me, ravish me and make sweet and soft all mine empeshments and
   lettings, as it appertaineth, for I dread them sore, I have loved thee
   over late, thou beauty so old and so new, I over late have loved thee.
   Thou wert within and I was without, and there I sought thee and in the
   beauty and fairness that thou hast made I fell all deformed and foul.
   Thou wert with me, but I was not with thee. Thou hast called and cried
   and hast broken my deafness. Thou hast enlumined, cleared, and hast put
   away my blindness. Thou hast replenished me with fragrant odours and I
   haste me to come to thee. I have tasted thee, and am hungry and desire
   thee. Thou hast touched me, and I am burnt in the voice of louing thy
   peace.

   And as he wept thus bitterly, he heard a voice saying: Take and read,
   and anon he opened the book of the apostle, and cast his eyes on the
   first chapter and read: Clothe ye you in our Lord Jesu Christ. And anon
   all the doubts of darkness were extinct in him. And in the meantime he
   began to be so greatly tormented with toothache, that almost, he saith,
   he was brought to believe the opinion of Cornelius the philosopher,
   which putteth that the sovereign weal of the soul is in wisdom, and the
   sovereign weal of the body is in suffering no pain ne sorrow. And his
   pain was so great and vehement that he had lost his speech, wherefore
   as he writeth in the book of his Confessions, he wrote in tables of wax
   that all men should pray for him that our Lord should assuage his pain,
   and he himself kneeled down with the other, and suddenly he felt
   himself whole. And then he signified by letters to the holy man, S.
   Ambrose, that he would send to him word, which of the books of holy
   writ appertaineth best to read in, for to be made most convenable to
   the christian faith. And he sent to him answer: Isaiah the prophet,
   because that he was seen to be the shower and pronouncer of the gospel
   and of calling of men. And when Augustin understood not all the
   beginning, and supposed all the remnant to be otherwise than it was to
   read, he deferred to read them till he were more conning in holy writ.

   And when the day of Easter came and Austin was thirty years old, he and
   his son which was named Adeodatus, a child of noble wit and
   understanding, whom he had gotten in his youth when he was a paynim and
   a philosopher, with Alipius his friend, by the merits of his mother,
   and by the preaching of S. Ambrose received baptism of S. Ambrose. And
   then, as it is read, S. Ambrose said: Te deum laudamus, and S. Austin
   answered: Te dominum confitemur, and so they two together ordained and
   made this hymn and sung it unto the end. And so witnesseth it Honorius
   in his book which is named, The Mirror of the Church. And in some other
   old books, the title of this hymn or psalm is entitled: The canticle of
   Ambrose and of Augustin. And anon he was marvellously confirmed in the
   faith catholic, and forsook all the hope that he had in the world, and
   renounced the schools that he ruled. And he showeth in his book of
   Confessions how he was from thenceforth achauffed in the love of God,
   saying: Lord, thou hast throughpierced my heart with thy charity, and I
   have borne thy words fixed in mine entrails, and the ensamples of thy
   manners which thou hast made of black, white and shining, and of dead,
   living, and of corrupt thoughts thou makest fair and high understanding
   in heavenly things. I mounted up into the hill of weeping, and thou
   gavest to me, singing the canticle of grees, sharp arrows and coals
   wasting, ne I was not in the days fulfilled in thy marvellous
   sweetness, for to consider the height of the divine counsel upon the
   health of the lineage human. How much have I wept in thy hymns and
   canticles sweetly sounding, and by the voice of thy church I have been
   moved eagerly. The voices have run in mine ears, and thy truth hath
   dropped in mine heart, and then tears have run down and I was well
   eased with them. Then these hymns were established to be sung in the
   church of Milan. And I cried with an high cry of mine heart: O in pace,
   O in id ipsum, O thou that sayst I shall sleep in that same and take
   rest, thou art the same, for thou art not changed, and in thee is rest,
   forgetting all labours. I read all that psalm, and I burned, which
   sometime had been a barker bitter and blind, against the letters honied
   with the sweetness of heaven and enlumined with thy light. And upon
   such scriptures I held my peace and spake not. O Jesu Christ my helper,
   how sweet is it suddenly made to me to lack the sweetnesses of truffes
   and japes, which were far from me to leave and forsake, and now to
   leave and forsake them is to me great joy. Thou hast cast them out from
   me, and thou which art sovereign sweetness hast entered into me for
   them, which art sweeter than any sweetness or delices, more clear than
   any light, and more secret than any secret counsels, and more high than
   all honour, and there is none more high than thou. And after this he
   took Nebridius and Evodius, and his mother, and returned again into
   Africa.

   But when they came to Tiberina, his sweet mother died, and after her
   death Austin returned unto his proper heritage, and there entended with
   them that bode with him in fastings and in prayers. He wrote books, and
   taught them that were not wise, and the fame and renown of him spread
   over all. And in all his books and works he was holden marvellous. He
   refused to come to any city whereas was no bishop lest he should be let
   by that office.

   And in that time was in Hippo a man full of great virtues, which sent
   to Augustin, that if he would come to him that he might hear the good
   of his mouth, he would renounce the world. And when S. Augustin knew it
   he went hastily thither. And when Valerian, bishop of Hippo, heard his
   renomee and fame, he ordained him a priest in his church, howbeit that
   he refused it much and wept. And some reputed his tears to be made by
   pride, and said to him, in comforting him, that it was time that he
   were a priest, though he were worthy to a greater office, nevertheless
   he approached to the bishopric. And anon he established a monastery of
   clerks, and began to live under the rule of the apostles, out of which
   monastery were ten chosen to be bishops. And because the said bishop
   was a Greek and but little lettered in Latin tongue and taught, he gave
   power to Augustin for to preach against the manner of the church
   oriental. And therefore many bishops despised him, but he raught not if
   he did it to be done by the said Augustin, that which he could not do
   himself. In that time he con-vanquished Fortunatus the priest, a
   Manichean, which was a heretic, and many other heretics, which namely
   were rebaptized Donatists and Manicheans; all these he confounded and
   overcame. Then the blessed Valerian doubted lest Augustin should be
   taken away from him, for to be made and required to be a bishop in
   another city. And he would have gladly offered to him his bishopric,
   but he supposed that he would have fled into some secret place, thereas
   he should not have been found. And then he impetred of the archbishop
   of Carthage that he might cease and leave his bishopric, and that he
   would promise Augustin to be bishop of the church of Hippo, but when
   Augustin heard that, he refused it utterly in all manners. Nevertheless
   he was constrained and so co-acted that he took at the last the cure of
   the bishopric, which thing, he said, that he ought not to be ordained,
   the bishop living, and said, and wrote, for the inhibition of the
   general council, the which he learned after, that it was ordained in
   the council of the bishops, that all the statutes of the fathers ought
   to be said to ordain of them that ordained them. And it is read that he
   said after of himself: I ne feel our Lord so angry with me in no thing
   as that I am not worthy to be set in the dignity of the governance of
   the church.

   His clothing, and hosing, and shoeing, and all his other adornments and
   array, were not over foul ne over fair, but they were of sufficient,
   moderate, and competent habit. And he said of himself: I am ashamed of
   precious clothing, and therefore, when any is given to me I sell it,
   for clothing may not be common, the price is common. He used always his
   table sparing; he used always pottage and wortes for sick folk, and
   oftimes he had flesh for guests and sick people, and he loved better at
   his table lessons and disputations than meat, and had these verses
   written at his table:

   Quisquis amat dictis absentum rodere vitam,

   Hanc mensam indignam noverit esse sibi:

   that is to say: Whosoever loves to missay any creature that is absent,
   it may be said that this table is denied to him at all. For, on a time.
   as a man had loosed his tongue to missay of a bishop familiar with him,
   he rebuked him cruelly, and said that, he should leave off or raze away
   these verses, or go from the table.

   On a time when he had bidden to dinner some of his friends, one of them
   entered into the kitchen, and found yet all the meat cold that they
   should have at dinner; and anon he returned to Austin and said: What
   have ye for our dinner? And Austin answered to him: I noot ne can no
   skill of such meats; and then he said: I shall not then dine with you.
   And then Augustin said that three things he had learned of S. Ambrose:
   the first is that, he should never demand wife for another man, the
   second that, he should never not lend his horse to him that would ride,
   and the third, that he should go to no feast. The cause of the first,
   lest they accord not and be not of one will, and curse him that brought
   them together. The cause of the second, lest the rider take harm in his
   riding and blame him that lent him the horse. The cause of the third,
   lest at the feast he lose the manner of temperance.

   He was of so great purity and humility, that the right little sins
   which we repute for none he confessed them to God, as it appeareth in
   the book of his Confessions, and accused himself meekly to our Lord.
   For he accused himself there, that when he was a child, how he played
   at the ball when he should go to school. Also of that he would not
   learn of his father and mother and of his masters, but by constraint.
   Also, when he was a child, of that he read gladly the fables of neas
   and complained Dido which died for love. Also of that he had stolen
   meat from the table out of the celyer of his father and mother that he
   had given to children that played with him, and of that, that the plays
   and games he had victory by fraud. Also he confessed him of stealing of
   pears off a pear tree standing nigh his vineyard when he was sixteen
   years old. In the same book he accused him of that little delectation
   which sometime he felt in eating, and said: Thou hast taught me that I
   should take nourishing of meat like a medicine, but when I go to rest
   with full belly, then I go in the way in which the snare of
   concupiscence assaileth me. And how well that the cause of eating and
   drinking be cause of health, she adjoineth with her a perilous
   chamberer, that is joyousty, which enforceth her oft to perish, so that
   by the cause it is oft cause of that I would do for health. Drunkenness
   is far from me; I beseech thee, Lord, have mercy on me, that it
   approach not me. And, Lord, who is he, but sometime he is ravished out
   of his meats? Who that it be that is not, certainly is much perfect, it
   am not I, for I am a sinful man. Also he held himself suspect of
   smelling, saying: Of unlawful smelling I intermit me not overmuch, but
   when they be present, I require them not, and if I have them I refuse
   them not, nor I covet them not as me seemeth, when I lack them I shall
   not be deceived. No man, saith he, ought to be sure in this life, for
   it is called all temptation, that is to wit, that he may be made of the
   worse the better, and not of the better the worse. And he confessed him
   also of hearing, saying: The delights and voluptuosities of mine ears
   have bowed and subdued me, but thou hast unbound and delivered me, for
   when it happed me that the song more moved me than the thing sung, I
   confess me sore to have sinned, and then I would that I had not heard
   him that so sang. And then he accused him of seeing; of that he saw
   sometime gladly the hound running, and when he went sometime by
   adventure by the fields, he beheld gladly hunting, and when he was at
   home he beheld oftimes the spincoppes or spiders taking flies by the
   nets of their cobwebs. Hereof he confessed him to our Lord, for
   sometime they took from him good thoughts, and letted him of some good
   works. And he accused him of the appetite of praising and of the moving
   of vain glory, saying that he would be praised of men. And thou blamest
   him, he shall not be defended of men when thou judgest him, nor be
   withdrawn when thou shalt damn him. For man is praised for some gift
   that thou hast given to him; nevertheless he enjoyeth more of that he
   is praised, than he doth of the gift that thou hast given. We be
   tempted every day with these temptations without ceasing, for quotidian
   furnace is our tongue human. Nevertheless I would well that the name of
   every good deed should increase by the help of a strange mouth. But the
   tongue increaseth it not, but blame minisheth it. I am sorry sometime
   of my praisings, when they be praised in me in which they displease me,
   for so some manners be esteemed better than they be.

   This holy man confounded right valiantly the heretics, insomuch that
   they preached openly that it were no sin to slay Augustin, and said
   that he ought to be slain like a wolf, and they affirmed that God
   pardoned all the sins to them that slew him, and he was oftimes awaited
   of them, and when he went in to any places, they set spies, but, by the
   grace of God, they were deceived of their voyage and might not find
   him.

   He remembered always the poor people, and succoured them freely of that
   he might have, and sometimes he commanded to break the vessels of the
   church for to give to the poor people, and dispend it among the needy.
   He would never buy house, nor field, nor town, and refused many
   heritages that were fallen to him, wherefore, he said, that they
   appertained to the children of the dead people, and to them that were
   next of their. kin, and it sufficed him enough that which fell to him
   by the church. And yet he was not ententive for the love of such goods,
   but day and night he thought in divine scriptures. He had never study
   in new fabrics nor buildings, but eschewed to set thereon his courage,
   which ever he would have free from all bodily griefs, so that he might
   more freely entende, and more continually, to the lesson. Nevertheless
   he would not forbid them that would edify, if that he saw them not do
   it disattemperately.

   He praised them strongly that had desire to die, and remembered much
   oft thereupon the ensamples of three bishops. For when Ambrose was at
   his end, he was prayed that he should get longer space of his life by
   his prayers. He answered: I have not lived so that I am ashamed to live
   among you, and I am not afraid to die, for I have a good Lord; which
   answer Augustin praised marvellously, and also he said of another
   bishop, that it was said to him that he was yet much necessary to the
   church, and that he should pray to God for the deliverance of his
   sickness. And he said: If I did never well but seldom, wherefore should
   he deliver me now? And of another bishop, that he said that Cyprian
   told when he was in grievous sickness and prayed that God would send
   him health, a youngling appeared to him, and looked sternly on him, and
   said to him by disdain: Thou doubtest to suffer, thou wiliest not to
   die, what shall I do to thee?

   He would never have that any woman should dwell with him, neither his
   own sisters, nor the daughters of his brother, which served God
   together. For he said, though of his sister nor of his nieces might
   none evil suspicion grow; nevertheless because that such persons might
   not be without other that served them, and also other might come to
   them, and of such might the thoughts be moved to temptations, or might
   be defamed by evil suspicion of men. He would never speak alone with
   any women but if some one were present in secret. He gave never no
   goods to his kin, nor to his cousins, nor he recked whether they
   abounded or were needy. He would never, or seldom, pray for any,
   neither by letters nor by words, remembering a certain philosopher to
   whom his friends had not given much to in the time of his fame; and oft
   he said: Oft the puissant that is required giveth verily. When he spake
   for his friend he attempered so the manner of his duty, that he was not
   overhasting himself, but the courtesy of the sayer deserved to be
   heard. He would gladlier hear causes of unknown men than of his
   friends, for between them he might freely know the default, and of them
   to make one his friend for whom by right he might give sentence, and of
   his friends he was sure to lose one, that was, him against whom he gave
   the sentence. He was desired to preach the word of God in many
   churches, and there he preached and converted many from errors. When he
   preached he had a custom sometime to depart him from his purpose, and
   then he said that God had ordained that for the profit of some person;
   as it appeared to a Manichean, which in a sermon of Augustin whereas he
   departed from his matter and preached against the same error, and
   thereby he was converted to the faith.

   In that time that the Goths had taken Rome, and that the idolaters and
   false christian men enjoyed them thereof, then made S. Augustin
   therefore the book of the City of God, in which he showed first that
   righteous men were destroyed in this life, and the evil men flourished.
   And the treatise of the two cities is Jerusalem and Babylon and of the
   kings of them. For the king of Jerusalem is Jesu Christ, and he of
   Babylon is the devil, the which two cities make two loves in them. For
   the city of the devil maketh a love to himself, growing the same unto
   despite of God. And the city of God made a love growing unto the
   despite of him.

   In that time the Vandals about the year of our Lord four hundred and
   forty took all the province of Africa, and wasted all, and spared
   neither man nor woman nor for order nor for age, and after came to the
   city of Hippo and assieged it with great power. And under that
   tribulation, Augustin before all other led a bitter and right holy
   life, for the tears of his eyes were to him bread day and night, when
   he saw some slain, others chased away, the churches without priests,
   and the city wasted with the inhabitants. And among these many evils,
   by the sentence of a certain wise man he comforted himself, saying:
   Thou shalt not be great in weening great things because that the woods
   and stones fall, and they that be mortal die. He called them his
   brethren, and said: I have prayed our Lord that either he take away
   from us these perils or send to us patience, or take me out of this
   life that I be no more constrained to have so many cursednesses or
   ill-haps. And the third thing that he required he had. For in the third
   month of the siege he travailed in the fevers, and lay down on his bed.
   And when he understood his departing he did do write the seven psalms
   of penance in a place against the wall, and read them Iying in his bed
   and wept abundantly. And because he should entend to God the more
   diligently, and that his entent should not be letted by nobody, ten
   days tofore his death he suffered nobody to enter in to him but if it
   were his physician, or else when his refection was brought him.

   A certain sick man came because he should lay his hand on him and
   thereby to heal him of his infirmity: and S. Augustin answered to him:
   Son, that which thou requirest of me weenest thou that I may do such
   thing that I ne never did? If I might do it, I would then heal myself.
   And the man required of him always, affirming that he was so commanded
   in a vision to come to him. And then he prayed for him, and he received
   health. He healed many sick people and did many other miracles. He
   counted in the book of the City of God another miracle of twain fools,
   of which that one said: I have seen a virgin of Hippo which anointeth
   her with oil, and anon the devil ravished and vexed her, and a priest
   prayed for her weeping, and she was anon made all whole and the fiend
   issued from her, and of that other miracle he saith in the same book: I
   know well that a bishop on a time prayed for a child that he had never
   seen, and he was anon delivered of the devil. And it is no doubt but
   that he said it of himself but he would not name himself because of
   humility. He saith in the same book that a man should have been cut of
   the stone and men doubted that he should die, and then the sick man
   prayed God weeping, and Austin prayed for him, and he was healed
   without cutting or incision.

   Then, when his departing approached, he enseigned his brethren that
   they should retain in mind that no man, of what excellence that he
   were, ought not to die without confession, ne without to receive his
   Saviour. And when he came to the last hour he felt him whole in all his
   members, of good entendment, clear seeing and hearing, and in the year
   of his age three score and six, and of his bishopric forty, he put
   himself in prayers with his brethren, which praying he departed out of
   this life and went unto our Lord. And he made no testament, for he was
   poor in Jesu Christ and had not whereof. And he flourished about the
   year of our Lord four hundred. And thus S. Augustin right clear by
   light of wisdom, fighting in defence of truth, of faith and of garrison
   of the church, surmounted all the other doctors of the church, as well
   by engine, as by conning, flourishing without comparison as well by
   example of virtues as by abundance of doctrine. Of whom the blessed
   Remigius in recording of Jerome and other doctors saith thus: S.
   Augustin concluded all the others by engine and by science. For howbeit
   that the blessed Jerome saith that he had seen six thousand volumes of
   Origen, this same wrote so many that no man by day nor night might not
   write his books ne yet read them. Volusian, to whom S. Augustin wrote,
   saith of him, thus: It lacketh in the law of God all that Augustin knew
   not. S. Jerome saith thus in an epistle that he wrote to the glorious
   S. Augustin: I have no conning to answer to thy two great books,
   shining by all clearness of fair speaking, and certainly this that I
   have said and have learned by engine and conning, and drawn out of the
   fountain of scripture, is by thee declared and set forth, but I pray
   thy reverence thou suffer me a little to praise thy engine. The blessed
   Isidore wrote thus of him in the book of twelve doctors: The glorious
   S. Augustin, bishop, flying by the high mountains as an eagle, hath
   pronounced by clear words many of the spaces of heaven, the bounds of
   the lands, and the circle of the waters. And after it appeareth what
   reverence and love S. Jerome had to him in the epistles that he sent to
   the holy father S. Augustin: I, Jerome, honour alway thy blessedness by
   such honour as it appertaineth to love our Lord Jesu Christ dwelling in
   thee. But and if it may be, let us now gather of thy praisings
   something. The blessed S. Gregory saith thus of his books in an epistle
   that he sent unto Innocent, provost of Africa: Because it hath liked to
   thee to send to us for the exposition of holy Job, we rejoice us in thy
   study. But if thou wilt be made fat in science, read the sweet epistles
   of thy patron and head S. Augustin our fellow, but think not that our
   wheat may be compared to his rye. And the blessed Prosper saith of him:
   S. Augustin was quick in engine, sweet in speech, wise in letters, and
   a noble worker in the labours of the church; clear in daily
   disputations, in all his doings well ordered, sharp in assoiling
   questions, right appert in confounding heretics, and right catholic in
   expounding of our faith, and subtle in expounding the canon of
   scripture.

   And after that the strange people had occupied that country long, and
   had corrupted the holy places, the good christian men took the body of
   S. Augustin and brought it into Sardinia. And after that, two hundred
   and eighty years, one Liprand, a devout king of the Lombards, sent
   solemn messengers thither for to bring the relics of S. Augustin to
   Pavia, which gave great good for it, and brought the body unto Genoa.
   And when the devout king heard thereof he had great joy, and went for
   to meet with it at the said city, and received it honourably. And on
   the morn when they would have led the body away, they might not remove
   it in no manner till that the king had avowed that, if he would let him
   be borne thence, he would make there a church in the honour of him; and
   when he had done so, anon without any difficulty it was led and taken
   from thence.

   And on that day following there fell a miracle in a town named Cassel,
   in the bishopric of Tyrdone, in the same wise; and there he builded
   another church in the honour of him. And the same town with all the
   appurtenances he gave to them that served in the same church, to
   possess for evermore. And because the king would please the saint, and
   doubted that he would be in some other place than the king would have,
   wherever the king harboured by night with the body, he made there a
   church in the honour of him, and thus was brought to Pavia with great
   joy; and was laid honourably in the church of S. Peter which is called
   Cieldore, or heaven of gold in English. S. Bernard, on a night as he
   was at matins, he slumbered a little, and the lessons of S. Augustin
   were read. And then he saw a right fair young man standing before him,
   and so great abundance of water coming out of his mouth that him seemed
   all the church was full thereof. And then he awoke, and wist well that
   it was S. Augustin, which had fulfilled that church with his doctine.

   There was a man, which had great devotion to S. Augustin, gave great
   good to a monk that kept the body of S. Augustin for to have a finger
   of the glorious saint. And this monk took this money and delivered to
   him the finger of another dead man, wrapped in silk, and feigned that
   it was the finger of the glorious S. Austin. And the good man received
   it much honourably and in great reverence, and honoured it every day
   devoutly and touched withal his eyes and his mouth, and oft embraced it
   against his breast. And God by his mercy, that beholdeth all things,
   and the faith of this man, gave to him for that finger the very proper
   finger of S. Augustin, and when he came into his country, there were
   many miracles showed thereby. The renown and fame thereof came to Pavia
   of this finger, and the monk aforesaid affirmed always that it was the
   finger of another dead man. The sepulchre was opened for to know the
   truth, and it was found that there lacked one of the fingers of the
   glorious saint. And when the abbot had knowledge of this thing, he put
   out the monk of that office, and tormented and punished him sore. Many
   other miracles hath God showed by his life, and also after his death,
   which were overlong to write in this book, for they would, I suppose,
   contain a book as much as all this and more, but among other
   corrections, I will set herein one miracle, which I have seen painted
   on an altar of S. Austin at the black frirs at Antwerp, howbeit I find
   it not in the legend, mine exemplar, neither in English, French, ne in
   Latin. It was so that this glorious doctor made and compiled many
   volumes, as afore is said, among whom he made a book of the Trinity, in
   which he studied and mused sore in his mind, so far forth that on a
   time as he went by tbe sea-side in Africa, studying on theTrinity, he
   found by the sea-side a little child which had made a little pit in the
   sand, and in his hand a little spoon. And with the spoon he took out
   water of the large sea and poured it into the pit. And when S. Augustin
   beheld him he marvelled, and demanded him what he did. And he answered
   and said: I will lade out and bring all this water of the sea into this
   pit. What? said he, it is impossible, how may it be done, sith the sea
   is so great and large, and thy pit and spoon so little? Yes, forsooth,
   said he, I shall lightlier and sooner draw all the water of the sea and
   bring it into this pit than thou shalt bring the mystery of the Trinity
   and his divinity into thy little understanding as to the regard
   thereof; for the mystery of the Trinity is greater and larger to the
   comparison of thy wit and brain than is this great sea unto this little
   pit. And therewith the child vanished away. Then here may every man
   take ensample that no man, and especially simple lettered men, ne
   unlearned, presume to intermit ne to muse on high things of the
   godhead, farther than we be informed by our faith, for our only faith
   shall suffice us. Then herewith I make an end of the life of this
   glorious doctor S. Austin, to whom let us devoutly pray that he be a
   mediator and advocate unto the blessed Trinity, that we may amend our
   sinful life in this transitory world, that when we shall depart we may
   come to everlasting bliss in heaven. Amen.
     __________________________________________________________________

               Here followeth the Decollation of S. John Baptist.

   It is read that the decollation of S. John Baptist was established for
   four causes, like as it is found in the Book of Office. First, for his
   decollation; secondly, for the burning and gathering together of his
   bones; thirdly, for the invention and finding of his head; and
   fourthly, for the translation of his finger and dedication of the
   Church. And after some people this feast is named diversely, that is to
   say, decollation, collection, invention, and dedication. First, this
   feast is hallowed for his decollation which was made in this manner.
   For, as it is had in Historia Scholastica, Herod Antipas, son of the
   great Herod, went to Rome and passed by the house of Philip his
   brother, and began to love the wife of his brother, which was named
   Herodias, wife of the same Philip, his brother. After that Josephus
   saith, she was sister of Herod Agrippa. And when he returned, he
   refused and repudiated his own wife, and secretly wedded her to his
   wife, the which thing his wife knew well, that he had wedded his
   brother's wife. And this first wife of Herod was daughter of Areth,
   king of Damascus, and therefore she abode not the coming home of her
   husband, but went to her father as soon as she might. And when Herod
   returned, he took away the wife of Philip his brother, and wedded her,
   and left his own. And there moved against him therefore Herod Agrippa,
   and the king Areth and Philip became his enemies. And S. John said to
   him that he had not done well to do so, because after the law it
   appertained not to him to have and hold the wife of his brother living.
   And Herod saw that John reproved him of this thing so cruelly, as
   Josephus saith, because he reproved him of blame. He assembled great
   people for to please his wife, and did do bind and put S. John in
   prison, but he would not slay him for doubt of the people, which much
   loved John, and followed him for his predication. And Herod and
   Herodias, coveting occasion against S. John how they might make him
   die, ordained between them secretly that, when Herod should make the
   feast of his nativity the daughter of Herodias should demand a gift of
   Herod for dancing and springing at the feast tofore the principal
   princes of his realm, and he should swear to her by his oath that he
   shall grant it her. And she should ask the head of S. John, and he
   would give it to her for keeping of his oath, but he should feign as he
   were angry because of making of the oath. And it is read in the History
   Scholastic that he had this treachery and great fantasy in him where it
   is said thus: It is to be believed that Herod treated first secretly
   with his wife of the death of S. John. And under this occasion saith
   Jerome in the gloss: And therefore he sware for to find occasion to
   slay him, for if she had required the death of his father or mother, he
   had not given it to her ne consented it. And when the feast was
   assembled, the maid was there springing and dancing tofore them all, in
   such wise that it pleased much to all. And then sware the king that he
   would give to her whatsomever she required, though she demanded half
   his kingdom. And then she, warned by her mother, demanded the head of
   S. John Baptist. Nevertheless, Herod by evil courage feigned that he
   was angry because of his oath, and as Rabanus saith: That he had sworn
   follily, that he must needs do. But he made no sign of sorrow save in
   the visage, for he was joyous in his heart; he excused the felony of
   his oath, showing that he did it under the occasion of pity. Then the
   hangman came and smote off his head and delivered it to the maid, the
   which she laid in a platter and presented it at the dinner to her
   mischievous mother. And then Herod was much abashed when he saw it. And
   S. Austin rehearseth in a sermon that he made on the occasion of the
   decollation, by way of example, that there was an innocent man and a
   true which had lent certain money to another man which denied it him
   when he asked it. And the good man was moved, and constrained him by
   his oath to swear whether he owed him or no, and he sware that he owed
   him nought, and so the creditor lost that he had lent. And then he
   saith that, in the next day following the creditor was ravished and
   brought tofore the judgment, and it was asked him: Why calledst thou
   that man for to be believed by his oath? And he said: Because he denied
   my debt. And the judge said: It had been better to thee to lose thy
   debt than he should lose his soul by making of a false oath as he did.
   And then this man was taken and grievously beaten, so that when he
   awoke the tokens of his wounds appeared on his back, but he was
   pardoned and forgiven. And after this Austin saith that S. John was not
   beheaded on this day when the feast of his decollation is hallowed, but
   the year tofore, about the feast of Easter, and because of the passion
   of Jesu Christ and of the sacrament of our Lord it is deferred unto
   this day, for the less ought to give place to the more and greater. And
   of that, S. John Chrysostom saith: John the Baptist beheaded is become
   master of the school of virtues and of life, the form of holiness, the
   rule of justice, the mirror of virginity, the ensample of chastity, the
   way of penance, pardon of sin, and discipline of faith. John is greater
   than man, peer unto the angels, sovereign holiness of the law of the
   gospel, the voice of the apostles, the silence of the prophets, the
   lantern of the world, the foregoer of the Judge, and moyen of all the
   Trinity. And this so great a man was put to martyrdom, and gave his
   head to the adulterer, and was delivered to the springing maid.

   Herod then went not away all unpunished, but he was damned into exile.
   For as it is contained in the History Scholastic, Herod Agrippa was a
   noble man but he was poor, and for his overmuch poverty he was in
   despair, and entered into a certain tower for to suffer death there by
   famine and hunger. But when Herodias, his sister, heard thereof, she
   prayed Herod Tetrarch that he would bring him thence and minister to
   him. And when he had done so they dined together, and Herod Tetrarch
   began to chauffe him by the wine which he had drunk, and began to
   reprove Herod Agrippa of the benefits that he had done to him. And that
   other sorrowed sore, and went to Rome and was received into the grace
   of Gaius the emperor, and he gave to him two lordships, that is to say
   of Lisania and Abilina, and crowned him, and sent him king into the
   Jewry. And when Herodias saw her brother have the name of a king, she
   prayed her husband with great weepings that he should go to Rome and
   buy him the name of a king. He abounded greatly in riches, and entended
   not to her desire, for he had liefer be idle in rest than to have
   honour laborious. But at the last he was overcome by her busy prayers,
   Baptist and went to Rome with her. And when Herod Agrippa knew it, he
   sent letters to the Csar, that Herod Antipas, or the Tetrarch, had
   made friendship with the king of Persia and alliance, and that he would
   rebel against the empire of Rome. And in token of this thing he
   signified to him that he had in his garrisons armours enough for to
   garnish with seven thousand men. And when the emperor had read these
   letters he was much glad, and began to speak of other things first,
   afar from his purpose, and among other things he demanded him if he had
   in his cities great abundance of armours as he heard say, and he denied
   it not to him. Then the emperor believed well that which Herod had sent
   him in writing, and was angry toward him, and sent him into exile. And
   because his wife was sister to Herod Agrippa, whom he much loved, he
   gave to her leave to return to her country, but she would go with her
   husband into exile, and said that he that had been in great prosperity,
   she should not leave him in his adversity. And then were they brought
   to Lyons, and there ended their lives miserably. This is in the History
   Scholastic.

   Secondly, this feast was established and hallowed for the burning of
   his bones and gathering together on this day, like as some say they
   were burnt, and were gathered up of good christian men. And then
   suffered he the second martyrdom when his bones were burnt, and
   therefore the church halloweth this feast also as his second martyrdom,
   as it is read in the History Scholastic. For when his disciples had
   borne his body in to the city Sebasten of Palestine, they buried it
   between Elisum and Abdias, and at his tomb many miracles were showed.
   Then Julian the apostate commanded that his bones should be burnt, and
   they ceased not to do their woodness then; they took them and burnt
   them into powder and winnowed them in the fields. And Bede saith in his
   Chronicles that when they had gathered his bones they drew them afar
   that one from that other, and by this wise he suffered the second
   martyrdom. But they say that know it not, that the day of his nativity
   his bones were gathered all about and were burnt. And whiles they were
   ingathering, as it is said in Scholastica Historia, there came monks
   from Jerusalem which covertly put them among the gatherers, and took a
   great part of them and bare them to Philip, bishop of Jerusalem. And he
   sent them afterwards to Athanasius, bishop of Alexandria, and long time
   after Theophilus, bishop of the same city, laid them in the temple of
   Serapis, when he had hallowed and purged it from filth, and sacred it a
   church in the honour of S. John Baptist, and this is that the History
   Scholastic saith. But now they be worshipped devoutly at Genoa, like as
   Alexander the third, and Innocent the fourth, witnesseth for truth, and
   approve it by their privileges. And like as Herod which beheaded him
   was punished for his trespass, so Julian the apostate was smitten with
   divine vengeance of God, whose persecution is contained in the history
   of S. Julian tofore rehearsed after the Conversion of S. Paul. Of this
   Julian the apostate, of his nativity, of his empire, of his cruelty and
   of his death, is said plainly in Historia Tripartita.

   Thirdly, this feast is hallowed for the invention of his head or
   finding thereof. For, as some say, his head was found on this day. And,
   as it is read in the History Scholastic: John was bound and imprisoned,
   and had his head smitten off within the castle of Arabia that is named
   Macheronta. And Herodias did do bear the head in to Jerusalem, and did
   do bury it secretly thereby whereas Herod dwelled, for she doubted that
   the prophet should rise again if his head were buried with the body.
   And as it is had in the History Scholastic: In the time of Marcian the
   prince, which was the year of our Lord three hundred and fifty-three,
   John showed his head to two monks that were come to Jerusalem. And then
   they went to the palace which was longing to Herod and found the head
   of S. John wrapped in an hair, and as I suppose, they were of the
   vestments that he ware in desert. And then they went with the head
   toward their proper places. And as they went on their way a poor man
   which was of the city of Emissene came and fellowshipped with them, and
   they delivered him the bag in which was the holy head. Then this man
   was warned in the night that he should go his way and flee from them
   with the head, and so he went with the head, and brought it into the
   city of Emissene. And there as long as he lived he worshipped the head
   in a cave, and had always good prosperity. And when he should die he
   told and showed it to his sister, charging her to tell it to nobody by
   her faith, and she kept it all her life, as he had done tofore long
   time. After that, long time, the blessed John Baptist made revelation
   of his head to S. Marcellus, monk, that dwelled in that cave, in this
   manner. Him seemed, in his sleeping, that many companies singing went
   thither, and said: Lo! here is S. John Baptist. Whom one led on the
   right side and another on the left side, and blessed all them that went
   with him. To whom when Marcellus came, he raised him up and took him by
   the chin, and kissed him. And Marcellus demanded him and said: My lord,
   from whence art thou come to us? And he said: I am come from Sebasten.
   And then when Marcell was awaked, he marvelled much of this vision. And
   the night following, as he slept, there came a man to him which awoke
   him, and when he was awaked he saw a right fair star which shone amidst
   of the cell through the house. And he arose and would have touched it,
   and it turned suddenly on that other side. And he began to run after it
   till that the star abode in the place where the head of S. John was,
   and there he dalf and found a pot, and the holy head therein. And a
   monk that would not believe that it was the head of S. John, laid his
   hand upon the pot, and forthwith his hand burned and cleaved so to the
   pot, that he could not withdraw it there from in no manner, and his
   fellows prayed for him. And then he drew off his hand, but it was not
   whole. And S. John appeared to him and said: When my head shall be set
   in the church, touch thou then the pot and thou shalt be whole, and so
   he did and received his health, and was whole as it was before. Then
   Marcellus showed this to Julian, bishop of the same city, and they bare
   it reverently into the city and showed it honourably. And from that
   time forth the feast of his decollation was there hallowed, for it was
   found the same day. And after this it was transported into the city of
   Constantinople. And as it is said in the History Tripartita, that
   Valens the emperor commended that it should be laid in a chariot for to
   be brought to Constantinople. And when it came to Chalcedon, the
   chariot would go no farther, how well that they set in more beasts to
   draw it, wherefore they must leave it there. But afterwards Theodosius
   would bring it thence, and found a noble woman set for to keep it, and
   he prayed her that she would suffer him to bear away the head. And she
   consented because that she supposed that like as Valens might not have
   it thence, that in like wise he should not conne have it thence. Then
   the emperor took it and embraced in his arms much sweetly the holy
   head, and laid it within his purple, and bare it in to the city of
   Constantinople and edified there a right fair church and set it
   therein. This saith the History Tripartita.

   After this, in the time that king Pepin reigned, it was transported in
   France in Poictou, and there by his merits many dead men were raised to
   life. And in like wise as Herod was punished that beheaded S. John, and
   Julian the apostate that burnt his bones, so was Herodias which
   counselled her daughter to demand the head of S. John. And the maid
   that required it died right ungraciously and evil, and some say that
   Herodias was condemned in exile, but she was not, ne she died not
   there, but when she held the head between her hands she was much
   joyful, but by the will of God the head blew in her visage, and she
   died forthwith. This is said of some, but that which is said tofore,
   that she was sent in exile with Herod, and miserably ended her life,
   thus say saints in their chronicles and it is to be holden. And as her
   daughter went upon the water she was drowned anon, and it is said in
   another chronicle that the earth swallowed her in, all quick, and may
   be understood as of the Egyptians that were drowned in the Red Sea, so
   the earth devoured her.

   Fourthly, this feast was hallowed for the translation of his finger and
   the dedication of his church. For his finger with which he showed our
   Lord, as it is said, might not be burnt. And this said finger was found
   of the said monks, which afterwards as it is had in Historia
   Scholastica, S. Thecla brought it over the mountains, and set it in the
   church of S. Martin, and this witnesseth Master John Beleth, saying
   that the said S. Thecla brought the same finger from beyond the sea
   into Normandy and there builded a church in the honour of S. John,
   which church, as it is said, was dedicated and hallowed this same day,
   wherefore it was stablished of our holy father the pope, that this day
   should be hallowed through the world. And Gobert saith that a much
   devout lady towards S. John was in France, which much prayed to our
   Lord that he should give to her some relics of the said S. John, and
   when she saw that it profited not in praying to God, she began to take
   affiance in God, and avowed that she would fast and never eat meat till
   she had of him some relic. And when she had fasted certain days she saw
   upon the table tofore her a finger of marvellous whiteness, and she
   received with great joy that gift of God. Then after, came thither
   three bishops, and each of them would have part of the finger. Then by
   the grace of God the finger dropped three drops of blood upon a cloth
   by which they knew that each of them had deserved to have a drop. And
   then Theodolina, queen of the Lombards, founded at Modena, beside
   Milan, a noble church in the honour of S. John Baptist.

   And like as Paul witnesseth in the history of Lombards: And the time
   passed unto Constance the emperor which would have taken Italy from the
   Lombards, and he demanded of a holy man which had a spirit of prophecy,
   how he should do with the battle which he had enterprised. And that man
   was all night in prayer and came to the emperor and answered to him and
   said: The queen hath do made a church of S. John Baptist and prayeth
   continually for the Lombards, and therefore thou mayst not surmount
   them, but the time shall come that that place shall be despised, and
   then they shall be overcome. Which was accomplished in the time of
   Charlemagne.

   On a time came a man of great virtue, as S. Gregory saith in his
   dialogue, whose name was Sanctilus and had received in his keeping a
   deacon that was taken of the Lombards by such a condition that if he
   fled he should have his head smitten off. The said Sanctilus
   constrained the deacon to flee, and delivered him, and when the deacon
   was gone they took the same Sanctilus and led him forth to be beheaded.
   And they chose a strong tyrant to do it, and he had no doubt to smite
   off his head at one stroke. And then the said Sanctilus stretched forth
   his neck, and the strong butcher lifted up his arm with the sword, and
   Sanctilus cried: S. John receive my soul, and then anon the arm of the
   butcher was so stiff that he could not bring it down again, ne bow it
   in no manner. And then that butcher made his oath that he would never
   after in his life smite no christian man. And the good man Sanctilus
   prayed for him and anon the arm came down and was all whole. Then let
   us pray unto this holy saint John Baptist, to be a moyen between God
   and us, that we may so live virtuously in this life that when we shall
   depart, we may come to everlasting life in heaven. Amen.
     __________________________________________________________________

               Here followeth of S. Felix, and first of his name.

   Felix is said of fero, fers, that is to say as to bear, and of this
   word lis, litis, which is as much to say as strife. For he bare strife
   for the faith of our Lord Jesu Christ against all the miscreants and
   the idols, and destroyed them all by his blowing.

Of S. Felix.

   S. Felix was a priest and so was his brother, and was named also Felix.
   And they were presented to Maximian and to Diocletian, which were
   emperors, for to sacrifice unto the gods, of whom the oldest of them,
   as soon as he was brought into the temple of Serapis for to do
   sacrifice unto the idols, he blew in his visage, and as soon as he had
   done so the idol fell to the earth and all tobrake. And then he was led
   to the idol of Mercury, on which he blew also, and it fell down then to
   the earth. And after he was led to the third image, which was of Diana,
   and did like as he had to that other. And then he was tormented with
   the great torment of eculeus, that is a torment which is made like a
   cross. Then he was brought, after, to the tree of sacrifice, for to
   sacrifice there. And the holy man kneeled down and prayed, and blew
   against the tree, and in continent the tree turned the root upward and
   fell down, and in the falling destroyed the simulachre with the altar
   and temple. And when the provost heard that, he commanded that he
   should there be beheaded, and that the body should be left to hounds
   and beasts. And there sprang a man in the middle among them confessing
   him freely to be a christian man, and both of them kissing other were
   there beheaded together. The christian men not knowing his name called
   him Adauctum, because he went so hardily to S. Felix, and said he was a
   christian man, when he suffered martyrdom. And there were they beheaded
   both twain together. Then christian men took the bodies and buried them
   in the pit where the tree fell. And after, the paynims would have taken
   them out, and anon they were taken of the devil. And they suffered
   death about the year of our Lord two hundred and eighty-seven.
     __________________________________________________________________

              Here followeth of S. Savien, and first of his name.

   Savien may be said of sale, which is as much to say as bitter, for he
   was bitter toward God, for he was a paynim. And sith he was peaceable
   to him when he was converted to him by the peace of christian faith,
   and was bitter to himself. For he had liefer have died than not to
   understand the letter, for he might not understand paynim speech. And
   he was right bitter to his father for he would never obey him ne adore
   his gods.

Of S. Savien.

   S. Savien and Savina his sister were children of Savininus, a right
   noble paynim. and was twice married. He had Savien of his first wife,
   and of the second he had Savina, his daughter, and gave to them both
   that name. On a time Savien read this verse: Asperges me, domine, and
   anon he demanded what it was to say, but he might not understand what
   it was to say, and he entered into his chamber and ware the hair, and
   kneeled within his chamber, and said to himself that he had liefer die
   than that he should not understand the sense of that verse. Then the
   angel appeared and said to him: Torment thee not, for thou hast found
   grace anenst our Lord Jesu Christ. And to the end that thou be more
   white, make thee clean, it behoveth thee to be baptized, and then thou
   shalt understand and know that which thou requirest to know now. And
   then he was joyous and glad by the word of the grace of God. And then
   he had in despite the idols and would not adore them. Then he was
   reproved and strongly chidden of his father, who said him oft: Why
   honourest thou not our gods? It is better that thou die alone than we
   all be wrapped in the death. And then Savien fled secretly away, and
   went unto the city of Trecassina, and as he went over the river of
   Secana he prayed our Lord that he might be baptized there, and so he
   was, and then our Lord said to him: Thou hast found now that which thou
   hast sought so long with great labour.

   And anon he pight his staflf in the earth and made his prayer to God;
   and his staff flourished and brought forth leaves tofore them all that
   were there, in so much that a thousand one hundred and eight men
   believed in our Lord God. And when Aurelian the emperor heard hereof he
   sent many knights to take him, whom they found praying, and dreaded for
   to approach him. And when the emperor saw that they returned not, he
   sent more after than he did before, and when they came they found the
   others praying with him. And when he arose from prayer they said to
   him: The emperor desireth to see thee, and sendeth for thee by us that
   thou shouldest come to him. And this holy good man went much humbly to
   him, and when he was tofore the emperor he required of him if he were
   christian or not. And he said: Yes. Then the emperor, being full of
   woodness, bade him to sacrifice to his gods, or else he would make him
   to die an evil death. Savien refused it. And anon he commanded to bind
   him by the hands and by the feet, and to beat him with staves of iron.
   And then Savien said to him: Increase the torments if thou mayst
   hardily, for I doubt not, ne fear not thee, ne the torments that thou
   dost to me. And then the emperor being all wroth commanded that he
   should be brought into the middle of the city, and there be bounden
   upon a bench, and make a great fire thereunder, and cast oil therein,
   that he might be burnt and broiled. And he being within the flame, the
   emperor beheld him, and saw that he was joyous therein as he had been
   in a bain, whereof he was much abashed, and said to him: Evil beast,
   sufficeth it not enough to thee the souls that thou hast deceived,
   though thou not essay to deceive by thy art magic? To whom Savien said:
   There be many souls yet, and also thyself, which shall by me believe in
   our Lord Jesu Christ. And then the emperor blamed the name of Jesu
   Christ, and commanded that he should be bound on the morn at a stake
   and be shot at with arrows. The arrows abode hanging in the air on the
   right side and on the left, and none of them hurt him. And when the
   emperor knew that he had none harm, he weened to have been enraged, and
   commanded that the next day following he should be brought to him, and
   after, he demanded him: Where is thy God? Now let him come hither and
   deliver thee from these arrows. And as soon as he had said so, one of
   the arrows sprang into the eye of the emperor, and smote out his eye,
   and the emperor was angry, and commanded to put him in prison, and that
   on the next morning early he should be beheaded. And then Savien prayed
   our Lord that he might be brought into the place whereas he was
   baptized, and then the chains with which he was bound all to-brake and
   the doors of the prison were opened. And he went out of the prison and
   went tofore all the knights that kept him, and they in no manner
   apperceived him, and went into the same place. And when the emperor
   heard say that he was escaped, he commanded that he should be pursued
   and that his head should be smitten off. And when S. Savien apperceived
   that the knights followed, and that he approached the water, he made
   the sign of the cross and went upon the water like as he should have
   gone upon the earth dry, and went unto the place whereas he was
   baptized. Then the knights followed him, and were much abashed of that
   they had seen him go on the water. And when they were nigh him, they
   doubted much to smite at him, and he said to them: Smite me when ye
   will all surely, and bear of my blood to your emperor, and let him rub
   his eye therewith, and he shall be whole, to the end that he know the
   virtue of God. And after this they smote his head off, and he rose up
   and bare it thence nine-and-forty paces, and there was buried. And
   after that the knights bare of his blood to the emperor, wherewith he
   anointed his eyes, and anon he had his sight and was all whole, and
   then he said: His God is good and mighty. And there was by, a woman
   that heard what the emperor said which woman had been blind by the
   space of forty years. And then she made her to be borne thither, and as
   soon as she had touched his sepulchre and made her prayer, anon she
   received health and her sight again. And he suffered death about the
   year of our Lord two hundred and seventy, in the calends of February,
   and the history of his sister is here set in because that the feast of
   her is on the same day.

   And Savina, his sister, wept every day for her brother and sacrificed
   for him to the idols. And in the end the angel appeared to her in her
   sleep and said: Savina, weep no more, but leave all that thou hast, and
   thou shalt find thy brother in great honour. Then she awoke and said to
   her fellow: My sweet love, hast thou heard nothing? and she said: Yes,
   lady, for I have seen a man that spake to thee, but I wot not what he
   said. And then she said to her: Wilt thou not accuse me? And she said:
   No, lady, but do what thou wilt so that thou slay not thyself. And thus
   they both went away that morning and when her father wist it that she
   was gone, he was much sorrowful, and did do seek her long. And then he
   lift up his eyes to heaven, and said If thou art very God of heaven, I
   pray thee destroy mine idols which may not save me ne my children. And
   anon our Lord made it for to thunder and break all the idols, and much
   people saw it, which believed in our Lord. Then the blessed Savina went
   to Rome, and there she was baptized of the blessed Eusebius the pope,
   and dwelled there five years and healed two lame men and two blind men.
   And then the angel appeared to her in her sleep and said to her: What
   is this that thou dost, that hast left thy riches and livest here in
   delices? Arise and dine, and after go into the city of Trecane that
   thou mayst find there thy brother. And then she said to her chamberer:
   It behoveth us no longer to abide here; and she said: Lady, whither
   will ye go? All the people here love you well, and will ye go die in a
   place whereas the people know you not? And she said: God shall purvey
   for us; and then she took a loaf of barley bread and went unto the city
   of Ravenna, and entered into the house of a rich man whose daughter was
   bewailed as dead. And she required the maid of the house that she might
   be lodged there, and she said: How mayst thou be lodged here when the
   daughter of herein is dead, and all be sorrowful? And she said to her:
   For me she shall not die; and then she entered in, and took the hand of
   the maid and raised her up all whole. And the mother would have
   retained her there, but she in no wise would agree thereto, but
   departed. And the daughter lived, and arose on the morn. And when
   Savina with her chamberer arrived a mile nigh unto Trecane, she said to
   her chamberer that she would there rest a little. And there came a
   noble man from the city named Licerius, and demanded them, saying: Of
   whence be ye? To whom Savina said: I am of this city. And he said: Why
   liest thou when thy speech sheweth thee to be a pilgrim? And she said:
   Verily I am a pilgrim, and seek Savien my brother whom I have long
   lost. And he said to her: That man for whom thou demandest was but late
   slain for the name of Jesu Christ, and is buried in such a place. And
   then she put her in praying, and said: Lord, which hast always kept me
   in chastity, suffer me then no more to travail by these hard and weary
   journeys, ne my body to be removed out of this place, and, Lord, I
   recommend to thee my chamberer, which hath suffered so much pain for
   me. And for my brother whom I may not here see, I beseech thee to make
   me worthy to see him in thy reign. And when she had finished her prayer
   she passed out of this world, and went to our Lord. When her chamberer
   saw that her mistress was dead, she began to weep because she had
   nothing necessary to bury her with. The said man then sent a crier
   through the city, that all, great and small, should come to see the
   strange woman that was there dead; and incontinent all the people ran,
   and she was buried honourably. And this same day is the feast of S.
   Savina that was wife of S. Valentine, knight, which was beheaded under
   Adrian the Emperor, because he would not sacrifice to the idols.
     __________________________________________________________________

Here followeth the Life of S. Lowe, and first of the interpretation of his name.

   Lowe or lupe is some sickness in the leg, which behoveth a medicine,
   for it is a malady that rogneth and useth the flesh. And also it is
   said a manner of fish that is on the water and on the land, and it may
   not drown by no force of water. And thus may be expounded S. Lowe, for
   he used and strained his proper flesh by penance. For he was like the
   lupe of the water and of the earth, for he dwelled in the waters of
   delices, of riches, and of temptations, and might not drown among these
   waters in no wise.

Of S. Lupe or Lowe.

   S. Lupe or Lowe was born at Orleans, and was of the royal lineage, and
   by the splendour of his great and many miracles and virtues, he was
   made Archbishop of Sens. And he gave all that he had to poor people,
   and on a day when all was given, it happed that he had bidden many men
   to dine with him. And then his ministers said that there was not wine
   half enough for the dinner. And he answered to them: He that feedeth
   the birds of heaven shall perform his charity of wine. And anon after
   came a messenger to the gate, that said to them, that there were
   arrived tofore the gate an hundred mues of wine.

   On a time, they of the court said evil of him, because that he had with
   him a virgin of our Lord, which was daughter of his predecessor. And as
   they said, he loved paramours, and spake much despitously and over
   disattemperately. And when he had heard these things, he took the
   virgin, and kissed her tofore all the detractors and evil sayers, and
   said that, ne strange ne evil words annoy ne hurt no man when his own
   conscience defileth him not. And because he knew well that she loved
   well Jesu Christ, and purely, therefore this holy man loved her with a
   right pure thought.

   On a time when the King Clothair was King of France, and entered in to
   Burgundy, he sent his steward against them of Sens for to assiege the
   city. Then Lupe entered in to the church and began to ring the clock,
   and when the enemies heard it, they had so great dread that they
   supposed never to have escaped from thence, but that they should have
   died all, but if they fled, and at the last the steward of Burgundy was
   taken. And when he was taken, there was another steward sent in to
   Burgundy, and came to Sens. And because S. Lupe had given to him no
   gifts he had great despite, and defamed him to the king, so that the
   king sent him into exile, and there he shone by miracles and virtues.
   And in the meanwhile, they of Sens slew a bishop which had taken the
   place of S. Lupe, and after, they impetred of the king that S. Lupe
   returned from exile. And when the king saw that he was wrongly done to,
   he was changed by the grace of God that, he kneeled tofore the saint
   and required pardon, and re-established him again in his church, and
   gave to him many fair gifts.

   On a time as he came to Paris, a great company of prisoners came
   against him, their bonds broken and all the doors of the prison open.
   On a Sunday as he sang mass, a precious stone fell down from heaven
   into his chalice, the which he gave to the king, which he held for a
   noble relic.

   On a time the King Clothair heard say that the clocks of S. Stephen of
   Sens had a marvellous sweetness in their sound, and sent for them and
   took them from thence, and did do bring them to Paris, because he would
   hear the sound of them. But it displeased much to S. Lupe, and as soon
   as they were out of the city they lost all the sweetness of their
   sound, and when the king heard that, he commanded that they should be
   brought again into their place. And as soon as they were seven miles
   nigh unto the town, they began to reprise the sound like as they had
   tofore. And S. Lupe went against them and received them with great joy
   and honour, for he had lost them with great sorrow tofore.

   On a night as he prayed, he had over great thirst by the false movings
   of the devil. And he demanded cold water for to drink, and he knew well
   the treachery of the enemy, and when he held the vessel in which he
   should drink, he set a platter upon it and shut the devil fast therein,
   and he began all the night to howl and bray. And in the morning the
   holy man conjured him that, he that was comen by night to tempt him, by
   day he let him go all confused.

   On a time, as he by night visited the churches, as he was accustomed,
   as he returned home he heard his clerks brawling and chiding because
   they would do fornication with women, which anon entered into the
   church and prayed for them, and anon all the pricking of temptation
   went from them, and they came tofore him and demanded pardon and
   forgiveness. At the last, he being ennobled in many virtues, slept in
   peace in our Lord. He flourished about the year of our Lord six hundred
   and ten.
     __________________________________________________________________

Here beginneth the Life of S. Mammertin, and first of the interpretation of his
                                     name.

   Mammertin is said of mamma, which is as much to say as a pap, and of
   tine, that is to say taste, for like as taste that falleth from the pap
   into the mouth of the child, and is first nature of blood, and after it
   is converted into the sweetness of milk, in like wise was he nourished,
   first in blood, that is to say in sin, and after, he converted himself
   anon into the pap of his heart in the sweetness of God.

                                Of S. Mammertin.

   Mammertin was first a paynim and worshipped idols, and it happed on a
   time he lost his one eye and his hand was dried up. And he supposed
   that he had angered his gods, and went towards the temple for to adore
   the idols; and there met him on the way a religious man named Savien,
   which demanded of him how this infirmity happed to come to him, and he
   said: I have angered my gods, and therefore I go adore them, to the end
   that if they be angry they may become debonair to me. To whom he
   answered: Brother, thou errest, for thou weenest that the devils be
   gods, but go unto S. Germain, bishop of Auxerre, and if thou wilt
   believe his counsel thou shalt be whole anon. Then anon he took his way
   to go thither, and went to the sepulture of S. Amadour, bishop, and of
   moo other saints; and because of the great rain that fell that night,
   he went into the cell which was set on the tomb of S. Concord. And as
   he slept he saw a marvellous vision. Him thought there came a man to
   the door of the cell and called S. Concord, and said that he should
   come to the feast that S. Amadour and S. Peregrine and other saints
   made, and he answered again out of the tomb that he might not now come,
   for his guest whom he must keep, for the serpents that were there would
   else slay him. And he went and told to the others what he had said, and
   anon he returned again, and said: Holy S. Concord, arise and come, and
   bring with thee Vivian the deacon and Vivian the sub-deacon for to do
   their office, and Alexander shall keep thy guest. Then it seemed to
   Mammertin that S. Concord took him by the hand and led him with him.
   And when S. Amadour saw him he demanded of him: Who is this that is
   come with thee? And he said: It is my guest. And he said: Put him out,
   for he is all foul and may not be here with us. And when he should be
   put out, he kneeled tofore them, and gat grace of S. Amadour, which
   commanded him to go to S. Germain. Then he awoke and came to S.
   Germain, and kneeled tofore him and required pardon, and told to him
   all that was happed. And they went then together to the tomb of S.
   Concord, and lifted up the stone and saw many serpents, which were ten
   foot long, and would have flown away, but S. Germain commanded that
   they should go into such a place there as they should neither grieve ne
   hurt man. And then Mammertin was baptized, and was made all whole, and
   was made a monk in the monastery of the blessed S. Germain, and was
   abbot after S. Elodien.

   And in his time S. Marine was there, a monk whose obedience S.
   Mammertin would prove, and committed him to keep the foulest office of
   the monastery, and made him herdman of the oxen and kine in an isle
   that was there, but he was of so great holiness that wild birds came to
   him and were nourished of his hands, and he delivered a wild boar from
   the hounds and let him go his way. There came thieves and robbed him,
   on a time, of all that he had, and took away all his clothes save a
   mantle. And when they were gone he called them again and said: Return
   and come again for I have founden here a penny in my mantle,
   peradventure it is necessary to you, which anon returned and took away
   the mantle with the penny and left him naked. And then as they went
   hastily towards their withdraught and secret places, they went all that
   night, and in the morning they found them at his cell, whom he saluted
   and received them benignly, and washed their feet, and ministered to
   them such as he had; then they were astonished and repented them, and
   each of them was converted to the faith.

   On a time young monks that dwelled with S.Mammertin had set snares for
   to take a bear which was accustomed to eat their sheep. And the bear
   fell in the snare and was taken, which S. Mammertin lying in his bed
   knew, and arose out of his bed, and finding him in the snare, said:
   What dost thou here, thou wretch? flee hence lest thou be taken, and
   loosed him and let him go.

   And when this holy man was dead and his body was borne to Angiers, as
   they came by a town, they might not remove him thence in no manner,
   unto the time that a man that was there in prison came out suddenly and
   brake his two bonds, and ran freely to the corpse and helped to bear it
   into the city, where it is buried honourably in the church of S.
   Germain in much great reverence.
     __________________________________________________________________

 Here followeth the Life of S. Giles, and first the interpretation of his name.

   Giles in English, and Egidius in Latin. And it is said of E, that is
   without, and geos, that is the earth, and dya, that is clear or godly.
   He was without earth, by despising of earthly things, clear by
   enlumining of science, divine or godly by love, which assembleth the
   lover to him that is loved.

Of S. Giles.

   S. Giles was born in Athens, and was of noble lineage and royal
   kindred. And in his childhood he was informed in holy lettrure. And on
   a day as he went to the church, he found a sick man which lay all sick
   in the way and demanded alms of S. Giles, which gave him his coat. And
   as soon as he clad him withal he received full and entire health. And
   after that, anon his father and his mother died, and rested in our
   Lord, and then S. Giles made Jesu Christ heir of his heritage. On a
   time as he went to the church a man was smitten with a serpent and
   died, and Giles came against this serpent, and made his orison, and
   chased out of him all the venom. There was a man which was demoniac in
   the monastery with other people, and troubled them that heard the
   service of God. Then Giles conjured the devil that was in his body, and
   anon he issued out, and anon he was all whole.

   Then Giles doubted the peril of the world, and went secretly to the
   rivage of the sea, and saw there mariners in great peril and like to
   perish in the sea. And he made his prayer, and anon the tempest ceased,
   and anon the mariners came to land and thanked God. And he understood
   by them that they went to Rome, and he desired to go with them, whom
   they received into their ship gladly, and said they would bring him
   thither without any freight or hire. And then he came to Arles, and
   abode there two years with S. Cezarien, bishop of that city, and there
   he healed a man that had been sick of the fevers three years. And
   after, he desired to go into desert, and departed covertly, and dwelled
   there long with a hermit that was a holy man. And there by his merits
   he chased away the sterility and barrenness that was in that country,
   and caused great plenty of goods. And when he had done this miracle he
   doubted the peril of the glory human, and left that place, and entered
   farther into desert and there found a pit, and a little well, and a
   fair hind, which without doubt was purveyed of God for to nourish him,
   and at certain hours ministered her milk to him.

   And on a time servants of the king rode on hunting, and much people and
   many hounds with them. It happed that they espied this hind, and they
   thought that she was so fair that they followed her with hounds, and
   when she was sore constrained she fled for succour to the feet of S.
   Giles, whom she nourished, and then he was much abashed when he saw her
   so chauffed, and more than she was wont to be. And then he sprang up
   and espied the hunters. Then he prayed to our Lord Jesu Christ that
   like as he sent her to him, to be nourished by her, that he would save
   her. Then the hounds durst not approach her by the space of a stone
   cast, but they howled together, and returned to the hunters, and then
   the night came, and they returned home again and took nothing. And when
   the king heard say of this thing he had suspicion what it might be, and
   went and warned the bishop, and both went thither with great multitude
   of hunters, and when the hounds were on the place whereas the hind was,
   they durst not go forth as they did before, but then they all environed
   the bush for to see what there was, but that bush was so thick that no
   man ne beast might enter therein for the brambles and thorns that were
   there. And then one of the knights drew up an arrow follily for to make
   it afeard and spring out, but he wounded and hurt the holy man, which
   ceased not to pray for the fair hind. And after this the hunters made
   way with their swords and went into the pit, and saw there this ancient
   man, which was clothed in the habit of a monk, of a right honourable
   figure and parure, and the hind Iying by him. And the king and the
   bishop went alone to him, and demanded him from whence he was, and what
   he was, and why he had taken so great a thickness of desert, and of
   whom he was so hurt; and he answered right honestly to every demand;
   and when they had heard him speak they thought that he was a holy man,
   and required him humbly pardon. And they sent to him masters and
   surgeons to heal his wound, and offered him many gifts, but he would
   never lay medicine to his wound, ne receive their gifts, but refused
   them. And he prayed our Lord that he might never be whole thereof in
   his life, for he knew well that virtue should profit to him in
   infirmity. And the king visited him oft, and received of him the
   pasture of health. And the king offered to him many great riches, but
   he refused all. And after, he admonished the king that he should do
   make a monastery, whereas the discipline of the order of monks should
   be, and when he had do make it, Giles refused many times to take the
   charge and the crosier. And at the last he was vanquished by prayers of
   the king and took it.

   And then king Charles heard speak of the renown of him, and impetred
   that he might see him, and he received him much honourably, and he
   prayed him to pray for him; among other things because he had done a
   sin so foul and villainous that he durst not be shriven thereof to him
   ne to none other. And on the Sunday after, as S. Giles said mass and
   prayed for the king, the angel of our Lord appeared to him, and laid a
   schedule upon the altar where the sin of the king was written in by
   order, and that was pardoned him by the prayers of S. Giles, so that he
   were thereof repentant and abstained him from doing it any more, and it
   was adjoined to the end that, who that required S. Giles for any sin
   that he had done, if he left it that it should be pardoned to him. And
   after the holy man delivered the schedule to the king, and he confessed
   his sin and required pardon humbly.

   Then S. Giles returned thence with honour, and when he came to the city
   of Nemausense, he raised the son of a prince that was dead. And a
   little while after he denounced that his monastery should be destroyed
   of enemies of the faith. And after he went to Rome and gat privileges
   of the pope to his church, and two doors of cypress, in which were the
   images of SS. Peter and Paul, and he threw them into the Tiber at Rome,
   and recommended them to God for to govern. And when he returned to his
   monastery he made a lame man to go, and found the two doors of cypress
   at the gate of his monastery, whereof he thanked God that had kept them
   without breaking in so many adventures as they had been, and sith he
   set them at the gates of the church for the beauty of them, and for the
   grace that the church of Rome had done thereto. And at the last our
   Lord showed to him his departing out of this world, and he said it to
   his brethren, and admonished them to pray for him, and so he slept and
   died goodly in our Lord. And many witness that they heard the company
   of angels bearing the soul of him into heaven. And he flourished about
   the year of our Lord seven hundred.
     __________________________________________________________________

                Here followeth the Nativity of our Blessed Lady.

   The nativity of the blessed and glorious Virgin Mary, of the lineage of
   Judah and of the royal kindred of David took her original beginning.
   Matthew and Luke describe not the generation of Mary but of Joseph,
   which was far from the conception of Christ. But the custom of writing
   was of such ordinance that the generation of women is not showed but of
   the men. And verily the blessed Virgin descended of the lineage of
   David, and it is certain that Jesu Christ was born of this only Virgin.
   It is certain that he came of the lineage of David and of Nathan, for
   David had two sons, Nathan and Solomon among all his other sons. And as
   John Damascene witnesseth that of Nathan descended Levy, and Levy
   engendered Melchion and Panthar, Panthar engendered Barpanthar,
   Barpanthar engendered Joachim, Joachim engendered the Virgin Mary,
   which was of the lineage of Solomon. For Nathan had a wife, of whom he
   engendered Jacob, and when Nathan was dead Melchion, which was son of
   Levy and brother of Panthar, wedded the wife of Nathan, mother of
   Jacob, and on her he engendered Eli, and so Jacob and Eli were brethren
   of one mother but not of one father. For Jacob was of the line of
   Solomon and Eli of the line of Nathan, and then Eli of the line of
   Nathan died without children, and Jacob his brother, which was of the
   line of Solomon, took a wife and engendered and raised the seed of his
   brother and engendered Joseph.

   Joseph then by nature is son of Jacob by descent of Solomon. That is to
   wit, Joseph is the son of Jacob, and after the law he is son of Eli
   which descended of Nathan. for the son that was born, was by nature his
   that engendered him, and by the law he was son of him that was dead,
   like as it is said in the History Scholastic. And Bede witnesseth in
   his chronicle that, when all the generations of the Hebrews and other
   strangers were kept in the most secret chests of the temple, Herod
   commanded them to be burnt, weening thereby to make himself noble among
   the others. If the proofs of the lineages were failed, he should make
   them believe that his lineage appertained to them of Israel. And there
   were some that were called dominics, for because they were so nigh to
   Jesu Christ and were of Nazareth, and they had learned the order of
   generation of our Lord, a part of their grandsires' fathers, and a part
   by some books that they had in their houses and taught them forth as
   much as they might. Joachim spoused Anne, which had a sister named
   Hismeria, and Hismeria had two daughters, named Elizabeth, and Elind.
   Elizabeth was mother to John Baptist, and Eliud engendered Eminen. And
   of Eminen came S. Servatius, whose body lieth in Maestricht, upon the
   river of the Meuse, in the bishopric of Lige. And Anne had three
   husbands, Joachim, Cleophas, and Salome; and of the first she had a
   daughter named Mary, the Mother of God, the which was given to Joseph
   in marriage, and she childed our Lord Jesu Christ. And when Joachim was
   dead, she took Cleophas, the brother of Joseph, and had by him another
   daughter named Mary also, and she was married to Alpheus. And Alpheus
   her husband had by her four sons, that was James the Less, Joseph the
   Just, otherwise named Barsabee, Simon, and Jude. Then the second
   husband being dead, Anne married the third named Salome, and had by him
   another daughter which yet also was called Mary, and she was married to
   Zebedee. And this Mary had of Zebedee two sons, that is to wit, James
   the More, and John the Evangelist. And hereof be made these verses:

   Anna soles dici tres concepisse Marias,
   Quas genuere viri Joachim, Cleophas Salomeque.
   Has duxere viri Joseph, Alpheus, Zebedeus.
   Prima parit Christum, Jacobum secunda minorem,
   Et Joseph justum peperit cum Simone Judam,
   Tertia majorem Jacobum volucremque Johannem.

   But it is marvellous for to see how the blessed Virgin Mary might be
   cousin of Elizabeth as it is tofore said. It is certain that Elizabeth
   was Zachary's wife, which was of the lineage of Levi, and after the law
   each ought to wed a wife of his own lineage. And she was of the
   daughters of Aaron, as S. Luke witnesseth, and Anne was of Bethlehem,
   as S. Jerome saith, and was of the tribe of Judah. And then they of the
   line of Levi wedded wives of the line of Judah, so that the line royal
   and the line of the priests were always joined together by cousinage.
   So that as Bede saith: This cousinage might be made sith the first
   time, and thus to be nourished from lineage to lineage, and thus should
   it be certain that the blessed Virgin Mary descended of the Ioyal line,
   and had cousinage of the priests. And our blessed Lady was of both
   lineages, and so our Lord would that these two lineages should
   entresemble together for great mystery. For it appertaineth that he
   should be born and offered for us, very God, and very king, and very
   priest, and should govern his true christian men fighting in chivalry
   of this life, and to crown them after their victory, the which thing
   appeareth of the name of Christ, for Christ is as much to say as
   anointed. For in the old law there was none anointed but priests and
   kings, and we be said christian men of Christ, and be called the
   lineage chosen of kings and priests. But because it is said that the
   men took wives of their lineage only, that was because the distribution
   of the sorts should not be confounded. For the tribe of Levy had not
   his sort with the other, and therefore might they well marry them with
   the women of that tribe or where they would, like as S. Jerome
   rehearseth in his prologue. When he was a child he had a little book of
   the history of the nativity of the Virgin Mary, but as he remembered a
   long time after, he translated it by the prayer of some persons, and
   found that Joachim, which was of Galilee of the city of Nazareth,
   espoused S. Anne of Bethlehem, and they were both just and without
   reproach or reprehension in the commandments of our Lord, and divided
   all their substance in three parts: that one part was for the temple,
   that other they gave to the poor and pilgrims, and the third was for
   themselves and their meiny to live with, and thus lived twenty years in
   marriage without having any lineage. And then they avowed to our Lord
   that if he sent to them any lineage they should give it to him, for to
   serve him. For which thing they went every year into Jerusalem in three
   principal feasts, so that in the feast of Encenia, that was the
   dedication of the temple, then Joachim went unto Jerusalem with his
   kindred, and came to the altar with the others and would have offered
   his offering. And when the priest saw him, he put him apart by great
   despite, and reproved him because he came to the altar of God, and said
   to him that it was convenable that a man cursed in the faith should not
   offer to our Lord, ne he that was barren should be among them that had
   fruit, as he that had none to the increase of the people of God. And
   then Joachim, all confused for this thing, durst not go home for shame,
   because they of his lineage and his neighbours which had heard it
   should not reprove him. And then he went to his herdmen, and was there
   long, and then the angel appeared to him only, and comforted him with
   great clearness, and said to him that he should not doubt ne be afraid
   of his vision, and said: I am the angel of our Lord sent to thee for to
   denounce to thee that thy prayers have availed thee and been heard, and
   thy alms be mounted tofore our Lord. I have seen thy shame and heard
   the reproach. That thou art barren is to thee no reproach by right, and
   God is venger of sin and not of nature. And when he closeth the belly
   or womb, he worketh so that he openeth it after, more marvellously. And
   the fruit that shall be born shall not be seen to come forth by
   lechery, but that it be known that it is of the gift of God. The first
   mother of your people was Sara, and she was barren unto the ninetieth
   year, and had only Isaac, to whom the benediction of all people was
   promised. And was not Rachel long barren? And yet had she not after
   Joseph, that held all the seigniory of Egypt? which was more strong
   than Samson, and more holy than Samuel? And yet were their mothers
   barren. Thus mayst thou believe by reason and by ensample that the
   childings long abiden be wont to be more marvellous. And therefore Anne
   thy wife shall have a daughter, and thou shalt call her Mary, and she,
   as ye have avowed, shall be from her infancy sacred unto our Lord, and
   shall be full of the Holy Ghost sith the time that she shall depart
   from the womb of her mother, and she shall dwell in the temple of our
   Lord, and not without, among the other people, because that none evil
   thing shall be had in suspicion of her, and right as she shall be born
   of a barren mother, so shall be born of her marvellously the son of a
   right high Lord. Of whom the name shall be Jesus, and by him shall
   health be given to all the people. And I give to thee the sign, that
   when thou shalt come to the golden gate at Jerusalem, thou shalt meet
   there Anne thy wife, which is much amoved of thy long tarrying, and
   shall have joy of thy coming. And then the angel, when he had said
   this, he departed from him. And as when Anne wept bitterly and wist not
   whither her husband was gone, the same angel appeared to her, and said
   all that he had said to her husband, and gave to her for a sign that
   she should go into Jerusalem, to the golden gate, and there she should
   meet with her husband which was returned. And thus by the commandment
   of the angel they met, and were firm of the lineage promised, and glad
   for to see each other, and honoured our Lord and returned home, abiding
   joyously the promise divine. And Anne conceived and brought forth a
   daughter, and named her Mary.

   And then when she had accomplished the time of three years, and had
   left sucking, they brough her to the temple with offerings. And there
   was about the temple, after the fifteen psalms of degrees, fifteen
   steps or grees to ascend up to the temple, because the temple was high
   set. And no body might go to the altar of sacrifices that was without,
   but by the degrees. And then our Lady was set on the lowest step, and
   mounted up without any help as she had been of perfect age, and when
   they had performed their offering, they left their daughter in the
   temple with the other virgins, and they returned into their place. And
   the Virgin Mary profited every day in all holiness, and was visited
   daily of angels, and had every day divine visions.

   Jerome saith in an epistle to Chromatius and to Heliodorus that the
   blessed Virgin Mary had ordained this custom to herself that, from the
   morning unto the hour of tierce, she was in orison and prayer, and from
   tierce unto nones she entended to her work, and from nones she ceased
   not to pray, till that the angel came and gave to her meat. And in the
   fourteenth year of her age, the bishop commanded in common that the
   virgins that were instituted in the temple, and had accomplished the
   time of age, should return to their houses and should after the law be
   married. All the others obeyed his commandment, but Mary answered that
   she might not do so because her father and mother had given her all to
   the service of our Lord. And then the bishop was much angry because he
   durst not make her to break her avow against the scripture, that saith:
   Avow ye vows and yield them to God. And he durst not break the custom
   of the people. And then came a feast of the Jews, and he called all the
   ancient Jews to council, and showed to them this thing. And this was
   all their sentence: That in a thing so doubtable, that counsel shall be
   asked of our Lord. And then went they all to prayer, and the bishop,
   that was gone to ask counsel of our Lord. Anon came a voice out of the
   oracle and said that, all they that were of the house of David that
   were convenable to be married and had no wife, that each of them should
   bring a rod to the altar, and his rod that flourished, and, after the
   saying of Isaiah, the Holy Ghost sit in the form of a dove on it, he
   should be the man that should be desponsate and married to the Virgin
   Mary. And Joseph, of the house of David, was there among the others,
   and him seemed to be a thing unconvenable, a man of so old age as he
   was to have so tender a maid, and whereas others brought forth their
   rods he hid his. And when nothing appeared according to the voice of
   God, the bishop ordained for to ask counsel again of our Lord. And he
   answered that, he only that should espouse the virgin had not brought
   forth his rod. And then Joseph by the commandment of the bishop brought
   forth his rod, and anon it flowered, and a dove descended from heaven
   thereupon, so that it was clearly the advice of every man that he
   should have the virgin. And then he espoused the Virgin Mary, and
   returned into his city of Bethlehem for to ordain his meiny and his
   house, and for to fetch such things as were necessary. And the Virgin
   Mary returned unto the house of her father with seven virgins, her
   fellows of her age, which had seen the demonstrance of the miracle.

   And in those days the angel of our Lord appeared to the Virgin praying,
   and showed to her how the Son of God should be born of her. And the day
   of the nativity was not known in long time of good christian men, and
   as master John Beleth saith that, it happed that a man of good
   contemplation every year in the sixth ides of September was in prayer,
   and he heard a company of angels that made great solemnity. And then he
   required devoutly that he might have knowledge wherefore every year
   only on that day he heard such solemnity and not on other days. And
   then he had a divine answer that, on that day the blessed Virgin Mary
   was born into this world, and that he should do it to be known to the
   men of holy church, so that they should be concordable to the heavenly
   court in hallowing this solemnity. And when he had told this to the
   sovereign bishop the pope, and to the others, and had been in fastings,
   in prayers, and sought in scriptures and witnesses of old writings,
   they established this day of the nativity of the glorious Virgin to be
   hallowed generally of all christian men, but the utas sometime was not
   hallowed ne kept. But Innocent the fourth, of the nation of Genoa,
   ordained and instituted the said utas to be observed. And the cause was
   this:

   After the death of Pope Gregory, anon the citizens of Rome enclosed all
   the cardinals in the conclave because they should purvey lightly for
   the church, but they might not accord in many days, but suffered of the
   Romans much sorrow. Then avowed they to the Queen of Heaven that if
   they might go quiet from thence they should establish to hallow the
   octaves of the nativity which they had long negligently left. And they
   then by one accord chose Celestin, and were delivered, and accomplished
   then their avow by Innocent, for Celestin lived but a little time, and
   therefore it might not be accomplished by him. And it is to wit that
   the church halloweth three nativities, the nativity of our Lord, the
   nativity of the blessed Virgin Mary, and the nativity of S. John
   Baptist. And these three signify three nativities spiritual, for we be
   born again with S. John Baptist in the water of baptism, and with Mary
   in penance, and with our Lord Jesu Christ in glory. And it behoveth
   that nativity of baptism go tofore contrition, and that of joy also.
   For the two by reason have vigils, but because that penance is
   accounted for vigil, therefore that of our Lady behoveth no vigil, but
   they have all utas, for all haste them unto the eighth resurrection.

   There was a knight much noble and devout unto our Lady which went to a
   tourneying, and he found a monastery in his way which was of the Virgin
   Mary, and entered into it for to hear mass, and there were masses one
   after another, and for the honour of our Lady he would leave none but
   that he heard them all. And when he issued out of the monastery he
   hasted him appertly. And they that returned from the tourney met him,
   and said to him that he had ridden right nobly. And they that hated him
   affirmed the same, and all they together cried that he had right nobly
   tourneyed, and some went to him and said that he had taken them. Then
   he, that was wise, avised him

   that the courteous Virgin and Queen had so courteously honoured him,
   and recounted all that was happened, and then returned he to the
   monastery, and ever after abode in the service of our Lord, the son of
   the blessed Virgin.

   There was a bishop which had the blessed Virgin Mary in sovereign
   honour and devotion, and there he saw the virgin of all virgins, which
   came to meet him, and began to lead him by sovereign honour to the
   church that he went to, and two maidens of the company went tofore
   singing and saying these verses:

   Cantemus domino, soci, cantemus honorem,
   Dulcis amor Christi resonet ore pio.

   That is to say: Sing we fellows to our Lord, sing we honour. Sing we
   with a voice debonair that sweet love which ought to please him. And
   that other company of virgins sang and rehearsed again the same. Then
   the two first singers began to sing this that followeth:

   Primus ad ima ruit magna de luce superbus,
   Sic homo cum tumult, primus ad ima ruit.

   That is to say: The first pride fell low from great light. So the first
   man, for his eating of the apple, fell low also. And so brought they to
   the church with procession the said bishop, and the two tofore began
   alway, and the others followed.

   There was a widow whose husband was dead, and had a son whom she loved
   tenderly, and that son was taken with enemies and put in prison fast
   bound. And when she heard thereof, she wept without comfort, and prayed
   unto our blessed Lady with right devout prayers that she would deliver
   her son, and at the last she saw that her prayers availed her not, and
   entered then into the church whereas the image of our Lady was carved,
   and stood tofore the image and areasoned it in this manner, saying: O
   blessed Virgin, I have prayed oft thee for my son that thou shouldst
   deliver him, and thou hast not helped me his wretched mother, and I
   pray also thy son to help me and yet I feel no fruit. And therefore
   like as my son is taken from me so shall I take away thine, and set him
   in prison in hostage for mine. And in this saying she approached near
   and took away from the image the child that she held in her lap, and
   wrapped it in clean clothes and shut it in her chest, and locked it
   fast right diligently, and was right joyful that she had so good
   hostage for her son, and kept it much diligently. And the night
   following, the blessed Virgin Mary came to the son of the same widow,
   and opened to him the door of the prison, and commanded him to go
   thence, and said to him: Son, say to thy mother that she yield to me
   again my son sith I have delivered her son. And he issued and came to
   his mother, and told to her how our blessed Lady had delivered him, and
   she was joyful, and took the child and came to the church and delivered
   him to our Lady, saying: Lady I thank you, for ye have delivered to me
   my son, and here I deliver to you yours again, for I confess that I
   have mine.

   There was a thief that often stole, but he had always great devotion to
   the Virgin Mary, and saluted her oft. It was so that on a time he was
   taken and judged to be hanged. And when he was hanged the blessed
   Virgin sustained and hanged him up with her hands three days that he
   died not ne had no hurt, and they that hanged him passed by adventure
   thereby, and found him living and of glad cheer. And then they supposed
   that the cord had not been well strained, and would have slain him with
   a sword, and have cut his throat, but our blessed Lady set on her hand
   tofore the strokes so that they might not slay him ne grieve him, and
   then knew they by that he told to them that the blessed Mother of God
   helped him, and then they marvelled, and took him off and let him go,
   in the honour of the Virgin Mary, and then he went and entered into a
   monastery, and was in the service of the Mother of God as long as he
   lived.

   There was a clerk that loved much the blessed Nativity Virgin, and said
   his hours every day ententively. And when his father and mother were
   dead, they had none other heir so that he had all the heritage, and
   then he was constrained of his friends that he should take a wife and
   govern his own heritage. And on a day it happed that they entended to
   hold the feast of his marriage, and as he was going to the wedding he
   came to a church, and he remembered of the service of our blessed Lady,
   and entered in and began to say his hours. And the blessed Virgin Mary
   appeared to him and spake to him a little cruelly: O fool and unhappy,
   why hast thou left me that am thy spouse and thy friend, and lovest
   another woman tofore me? Then he, being moved, returned to his fellows
   and feigned all, and left to accomplish the sacrament of marriage. And
   when midnight came he left all and fled out of the house, and entered
   into a monastery and there served the Mother of God.

   There was a priest of a parish, which was of honest and good life, and
   could say no mass but mass of our Lady, the which he sang devoutly in
   the honour of her, wherefore he was accused tofore the bishop, and was
   anon called tofore him. And the priest confessed that he could say none
   other mass, wherefore the bishop reproved him sore as unconning and an
   idiot, and suspended him of his mass, that he should no more sing none
   from then forthon. And then our blessed Lady appeared to the bishop and
   blamed him much because he had so entreated her chaplain, and said to
   him that he should die within thirty days if he re-established him not
   again to his office accustomed. Then the bishop was afeard, and sent
   for the priest and prayed him of forgiveness, and bade him that he
   should not sing but of our Lady.

   There was a clerk which was vain and riotous, but always he loved much
   our Lady, the Mother of God, and said every day his hours. And he saw
   on a night a vision that, he was in judgment tofore our Lord, and our
   Lord said to them that were there: What judgment shall we do of this
   clerk? devise ye it for I have long suffered him, and see no sign yet
   of amendment. Then our Lord gave upon him sentence of damnation, and
   all they approved it. Then arose the blessed Virgin and said to her
   son: I pray thee, debonair son, of thy mercy for this man, so that thou
   assuage upon him the sentence of damnation, and that he may live yet,
   by the grace of me, which is condemned to death by his merits. And our
   Lord said to her: I deliver him at thy request for to know if I shall
   see his correction. Then our Lady turned her toward him and said: Go,
   and sin no more lest it happen worse to thee. Then he awoke, and
   changed his life, and entered into religion, and finished his life in
   good works.

   In the year of our Lord five hundred and thirty-seven, there was a man
   named Theophilus which was vicar of a bishop, as Fulbert saith, that
   was bishop of Chartres. And this Theophilus dispended all wisely the
   goods of the church under the bishop; and when the bishop was dead, all
   the people said that this vicar should be bishop. But he said the
   office of vicar sufficed him, and had liefer that than to be made
   bishop, so there was there another bishop made, and Theophilus was
   against his will put out of his office. Then he fell in despair, in
   such wise that he counselled with a Jew how he should have his oflice
   again, which Jew was a magician, and called the devil, and he came
   anon. Then Theophilus, by commandment of the devil, renied God and his
   Mother, and renounced his christian profession, and wrote an obligation
   with his blood and sealed it with his ring, and delivered it to the
   devil, and thus he was brought into his office again. And on the morn
   Theophilus was received into the grace of the bishop by the procuration
   of the devil, and was re-established in the dignity of his office. And
   afterwards, when he advised himself, he repented and sorrowed sore of
   this that he had done, and ran with great devotion unto the Virgin
   Mary, with all devotion of his thought, praying her to be his aid and
   help. And then on a time our blessed Lady appeared to him in vision,
   and rebuked him of his felony, and commanded him to forsake the devil,
   and made him to confess Jesu Christ to be son of God, and to knowledge
   himself to be in purpose to be a christian man, and thus he recovered
   the grace of her and of her son. And in sign of pardon that she had
   gotten him, she delivered to him again his obligation that he had given
   to the devil, and laid it upon his breast so that he should never doubt
   to be servant of the devil, but he enjoyed that he was so delivered by
   our blessed Lady. And when Theophilus had heard all this he was much
   joyful, and told it to the bishop and tofore all the people that was
   befallen him, and all marvelled greatly, and gave laud and praising
   unto the glorious Virgin, our Lady, S. Mary. And three days after he
   rested in peace. There be many other miracles which our blessed Lady
   hath showed for them that call upon her, which were over long to write
   here, but as touching her nativity this sufficeth. Then let us
   continually give laud and praising to her as much as we may, and let us
   say with S. Jerome this response: Sancta et immaculate virginitas. And
   how this holy response was made, I purpose, under correction, to write
   here. It is so that I was at Cologne, and heard rehearsed there by a
   noble doctor that, the holy and devout S. Jerome had a custom to visit
   the churches at Rome. And so he came into a church where an image of
   our blessed Lady stood in a chapel by tbe door as he entered, and
   passed forthby without any salutation to our Lady, and went forth to
   every altar and made his prayers to all the saints in the church, each
   after other, and returned again by the same image without any saluting
   to her. Then our blessed Lady called him and spake to him by the said
   image, and demanded of him the cause why he made no salutation to her,
   seeing that he had done honour and worship to all the other saints of
   whom the images were in that church. And then S. Jerome kneeled down
   and said thus: Sancta et immaculate virginitas, quibus te laudibus
   referam nescio. Quia quem celi capere non poterant, tuo gremio
   contulisti. Which is to say: Holy and undefiled virginity, I wot never
   what laud and praisings I shall give to thee. For him that all the
   heavens might not take ne contain, thou hast borne in thy womb. So sith
   this holy man thought himself insufficient to give to her laud, then
   what shall we sinful wretches do but put us wholly in her mercy,
   acknowIedging us insufficient to give to her due laud and praising? But
   let us meekly beseech her to accept our good intent and will, and that
   by her merits we may attain after this life to come to her in
   everlasting life in heaven. Amen.
     __________________________________________________________________

                  Of S. Adrian, Martyr, and first of his name.

   Adrian is said of A, which is as much to say as without, and of ydros,
   that is water. For after that he confessed to be christian, he was
   without water of sin. Or he may be said of andor, that is to say light,
   and dian, that is to say God. For he was illumined with light divine by
   passion of martyrdom.

Of S. Adrian, Martyr.

   Adrian suffered death under Maximian, emperor. For when the said
   Maximian was in the city of Nicodemia, whereas he sacrificed to the
   idols, and by his commandment they sought all christian men, some
   sought them for dread, and some for love, and some for promise of
   sllver, so that neighbour brought his neighbour to martyrdom, and
   cousin his cousin. Among whom three and thirty were taken of them that
   they sought, and brought tofore the king. And the king said to them:
   Have ye not heard what pain is ordained against the christian men? And
   they said to him: We have heard the commandment of thy folly. Then the
   king was angry and commanded that they should be beaten with raw
   sinews, and their mouths beaten with stones, and that each of their
   tongues should be pierced with iron, and that they should be bound and
   closed in prison. And then Adrian, which was first in the office of
   knighthood, said to them: I conjure you by your God that ye tell to me
   the reward that ye entend to have for these torments. And the holy man
   said that never eye saw, nor ear heard, ne heart of man might think,
   those things that our Lord maketh ready for them that love him
   perfectly. And Adrian leapt in the middle among them and said: Account
   ye me with them here, for I am a christian man. And when the emperor
   heard that, and that he would do no sacrifice, he did do bind him and
   threw him in prison. And when Natalie his wife knew that her husband
   was in prison for the faith of Jesu Christ she was glad, and ran to the
   prison, and kissed the chains that her husband was bound with, and also
   of the others, for she was christian secretly, but she durst not
   publish it for dread of the persecution. And she said to her husband:
   Blessed art thou, my lord Adrian, for thou hast found the riches which
   thy father and mother never left to thee, which have need of them that
   possess many things, and shall have thereof great need when they shall
   have no time to borrow ne to take; when that one shall not deliver that
   other from pain, ne the father the son, ne the mother the daughter, ne
   the servant the master, ne one friend another friend, ne riches them
   that own them. And when she had admonished him that he should despise
   all worldly glory and friends and kindred, and that always he should
   have his heart unto celestial things, Adrian said to her: Go now, my
   sister, the time of our passion hasteth, of which thou shalt see our
   end. Then she recommended her husband unto the other saints that they
   should comfort him, and then she returned unto her house. And after,
   Adrian hearing when the day of his passion should be, gave gifts to the
   keepers of the prison, and delivered to them the other saints in
   pledge, and went to his house for to call Natalie, like as he had
   promised by oath that she should be present at their passion. And a man
   that saw him come, ran tofore him, and said to Natalie: Adrian is
   delivered, see, lo! where he cometh. And when she heard it she believed
   it not, and said: And who may deliver him from his bonds? God forbid
   that he be loosed of his bonds, and departed from the saints. And as
   she said these words, a child of the meiny came, that said: Certes, my
   Lord is let go. And she supposed that he had fled from his martyrdom,
   and wept bitterly, and when she saw him she shut hastily the door
   against him. Let him be far from me, said she, that is fallen away from
   God, and God forbid that I speak to the mouth of him that renied his
   Lord. And then she turned to him and said: O thou wretch without God,
   who constrained thee to emprise and take which thou mayst not perform?
   Who hath taken thee from the saints, or who hath deceived thee for to
   depart from them? Say to me, wherefore art thou fled tofore thou sawest
   the battles? How art thou hurt? Certain it is of none arrow that was
   shot to thee. Certes, I should have marvelled if any of the people of
   the felons, and without God, had been offered to God, and how unhappy
   and how caitiff am I ! What shall I do that am joined to him that is of
   the lineage of felons? It is not granted to me to be the wife of a
   martyr but for a time, but now I shall be called the wife of a renegade
   and transgressor, my joy certainly hath little endured, and it shall be
   to me a reproach long time. And in hearing this thing the blessed
   Adrian enjoyed him strongly, and marvelled much of his wife that was so
   young and right fair, noble, and married but fourteen months without
   more, how she might say this, and therefore he was the more ardent to
   martyrdom, and heard gladly these words. But when he saw her overmuch
   tormented, he said to her: Open the door to me, Natalie, my love and
   lady, for I have not fled the martyrdom as thou weenest, but I am come
   to call thee, as I promised to thee. And she believed it not, but said
   to him: See how this traitor renegade deceiveth me, why liest thou?
   that other Judas! Flee, thou unhappy, from me or I shall slay myself;
   and then thou shalt be full sorry. And while she tarried to open the
   door, he said: Open anon, for I must go, and then thou shalt see me no
   more, and then shalt thou weep that thou hast not seen me tofore my
   death. I have laid to pledge for me the holy martyrs, and if the
   ministers seek me and they find me not, they shall cause the saints to
   suffer their martyrdom and mine also. And when she heard that, she
   opened the door, and they then embraced and kissed each other, and went
   together to the prison, and there Natalie cleansed, seven days during,
   the wounds of the saints with precious cloths. And then the emperor
   commanded them to be brought to him, and they were so broken with the
   pains that they might not go, but were borne as beasts. And Adrian
   certainly was bound, his hands behind him, and spake to Natalie, and
   was borne upon the torment of eculee and presented to Csar. And
   Natalie joined her to him, and said to him: My lord, beware that thou
   tremble not for none adventure when thou shalt see the torments, thou
   shalt not suffer here but a little, but thou shalt be anon enhanced
   with the angels. And then Adrian would not sacrifice, and was beaten
   right grievously. And then Natalie ran to the saints that were in the
   prison, and said: My lord hath begun his martyrdom. And the king warned
   him that he should not blame his gods; and he answered: If I be thus
   tormented that blame them that be no gods, how shalt thou be tormented
   that blasphemest him that is very God! And the king said to him: These
   other traitors have taught thee these words. To whom Adrian said: Why
   callest thou them traitors, which be doctors and enseign the life
   perdurable? And Natalie ran to the others with great joy, and told the
   words that her husband had said. And then the king did him to be beaten
   with four strong men. And Natalie anon reported to the other martyrs
   that were in the prison all the martyrdom, the answers, and the pains
   of her husband, and he was so sore beaten that his entrails sprang out
   of his belly, and then he was bound with iron, and put in prison with
   the other. And Adrian was a young man, lusty and much fair, of
   eight-and-twenty years of age. And when Natalie saw her husband lie
   grovelling upon the earth, and all to-broken, she laid her hand on his
   head in comforting him, and said: Thou art blessed, my lord, for thou
   art made worthy to be of the number of saints; thou art blessed, my
   light, when thou sufferest for him that suffered death for thee: go
   then forth, my sweet love, that thou mayst see his glory. And when the
   emperor heard that many women ministered to the saints in prison, he
   commanded that they should no more be suffered to enter. And when
   Natalie heard that, she shaved her head and took the habit of man, and
   served the saints in the prison and made the other women do so by the
   ensample of her. And she prayed her husband when he should be in glory
   that he would pray for her, that she might keep her undefiled in this
   world, or rather to be taken out thereof. And when the king heard what
   the women had done, he commended to bring forth an anvil or a stithie,
   so that the holy martyrs should have their legs and arms all
   to-frusshed and broken thereon, and die the sooner. And then Natalie
   doubted that her husband should be afeard for the torments of the
   others, and prayed the ministers that they would begin with him. Then
   they hewed off his legs and thighs, and Natalie prayed them that they
   would smite off his hands, and that he should be like to the other
   saints that had suffered more than he, and when they had hewn them off
   he gave up his spirit to God. The other saints held forth their feet
   with their free will, and passed to our Lord. And the king commanded
   that the bodies should be burnt. And Natalie hid in her bosom the hand
   of S. Adrian. And when the bodies of the saints were thrown into the
   fire, Natalie would have with them sprung into the fire and be burnt,
   and suddenly anon there came a great rain and quenched the fire, so
   that the bodies of the saints had none harm. And the christian men took
   counsel together, and did do bear the bodies to Constantinople till
   that the peace was given to the church, that they were fetched again
   with honour. And they suffered death about the year of our Lord two
   hundred and four score.

   Natalie then abode and dwelled in her house, and retained the hand of
   S. Adrian, and for to have comfort thereof she kept it always at her
   bed's head. And after the judge saw Natalie so fair, so rich, and so
   noble, by leave of the emperor he sent women to her because she should
   consent to him by marriage. To whom Natalie answered: Who is he that
   may do me so much honour that I may be joined to him by marriage? but I
   require you that I may have term of three days to array and make me
   ready. And this she said to the end that she might flee away. Then
   began she to pray our Lord that he would keep her from touching of man.
   And then suddenly she fell asleep, and one of the martyrs appeared to
   her and comforted her sweetly, and commanded her that she should go to
   the place where the holy bodies were. And when she awoke she took the
   hand of Adrian only with her, and entered into a ship with many
   christian men, and when the judge heard it he followed after with many
   knights, and then the wind came contrary to them, and drowned many, and
   constrained the others to return. And then in the night the devil
   appeared to them in guise of a mariner in a ship of phantasm, and said
   to them: From whence come ye, and whither go ye? And the christian men
   said: We come from Nicomedia and go unto Constantinople. And he said:
   Ye err, go towards the left side and ye shall sail more right. And he
   said so because he would have drowned them in the sea. And as they
   followed the stars, anon suddenly Adrian appeared to them in a boat,
   and bade them sail as they did before, and told to them that it was a
   wicked spirit that had spoken to them, and then he went tofore them and
   showed them the way; and when Natalie saw him go tofore them she was
   replenished with joy, so that tofore day they came to Constantinople.
   And when Natalie entered into the house where the martyrs were, she put
   the hand of Adrian to the body. And when she had made her prayers she
   slept. And S. Adrian appeared to her and saluted her, and commanded her
   that she should come with him to joy perdurable. And when she awoke she
   told to them that were there her vision, and took her leave, and after
   gave up her spirit to Almighty God. And then the good christian men
   took her body and laid it with the bodies of the martyrs.
     __________________________________________________________________

                     Here followeth the Life of S. Gorgone.

   SS. Gorgone and Dorothy were in Nicomedia, chief in the palace of
   Diocletian, and renounced their chivalry for to follow their
   everlasting king. And confessed with a high voice that they were
   christian; and when the emperor heard that, he was strongly angry, and
   it did him much displeasure and grievance for to lose such men, which
   he had nourished in his palace, and were noble of manner and of
   lineage. And when he saw that he might not turn them by menaces ne by
   fair words, he did do strain and pain them in the torment of eculee and
   did all to-rend and break them with scourges and hooks of iron, and to
   cast in their wounds salt and vinegar, which entered in to their
   entrails. And they suffered it joyously. Then he made them to be
   roasted upon a gridiron, and they lay thereupon as they had lain upon a
   bed full of flowers and suffered none harm. And after this the emperor
   commanded that they should be hanged with cords, and their bodies to be
   given to hounds and wolves to be devoured. And so they yielded up their
   spirits to Almighty God, but their bodies abode untouched, and were
   taken up and buried by good christian men. And they suffered death the
   year of our Lord two hundred and eighty. Then many years after, the
   body of S. Gorgone was transported to Rome, and the year of our Lord
   seven hundred and seventy four the bishop of Metz, nephew of king
   Pepin, transported the same body to France and laid it honourably in
   the monastery of Gorgociense.
     __________________________________________________________________

  Here begin the Lives of SS. Prothus and Jacinctus and Eugenia, and first of
                                  their names.

   Prothus is said of prothos, that is to say first, and of panthos, which
   is as much to say as presentation. For he was of the first of his
   lineage presented to God by good works, and by martyrdom. Jacinctus is
   as much to say as lying within, or a precious stone named Jacincte; for
   he played in the torments and therefore he is in joy above, as a
   precious Jacincte. Eugenia is said of eu, which is as much to say as
   good, and gigno gignis, that is to engender, and so Eugenia is as much
   to say as well engendering. For she engendered to Jesu Christ good
   lineage, that was father and mother, and many others, which by her were
   engendered to the christian faith.

Of SS. Prothus and Jacinctus.

   Prothus and Jacinctus were gentlemen of noble lineage and were fellows
   in the study of philosophy with Eugenia, daughter of Philip, of the
   most noble lineage of the Romans. Which Philip had taken of the senate
   the provostry of Alexandria, and had led with him Claudia his wife, his
   sons Avitus and Sergius, and his daughter Eugenia. And Eugenia was
   perfect in all the liberal arts and letters. Prothus and Jacinctus had
   studied with her, and were come to perfection of those sciences. And
   Eugenia, in the fifteenth year of her age, was required to be married
   of one Aquilinus, son of the consul Aquilinus, and she answered that
   her behoved to be married and choose a husband full of good manners and
   not of high lineage. And then came to her hand the doctrine of S. Paul,
   and she began in her courage to be made christian by good manners. And
   then at that time the christian men were well suffered to dwell beside
   the city of Alexandria. And as she went playing and walking by the
   town, she heard christian men sing a verse of the psalter which saith:
   All the gods of the miscreants be devils, our Lord certainly made the
   heavens. Then said she to Prothus and Jacinctus, that had studied with
   her in the arts liberal: We have overpassed the arguments and
   syllogisms of the philosophers by study corruptible, the arguments of
   Aristotle, and ideas of Plato, and the enseignments of Socrates, and
   shortly all that the poet sang and made, or the philosopher thought, it
   is all closed by his sentence; let us then be brethren and follow we
   our Lord Jesu Christ. And this counsel pleased them. And then she took
   the habit of a man, and came to the monastery where Helenus was abbot,
   which would in no wise suffer that any woman should come to him. And
   this Helenus had on a time disputed against a heresy, and when that he
   saw that he might not sustain the force of the arguments, he did do
   burn a great fire for to prove his faith, and said: We shall see now
   which is the right faith, and he himself entered first into the fire
   and came out again without hurt or grief, but the heretic would not
   enter into the fire, and was confused and put away. And when Eugenia
   was gone to him, and had said that she was a man, he said to her: Thou
   sayest truly and well that thou art a man, for thou workest virtuously.
   And the condition of her was showed to him then of God, and she
   received the habit with Prothus and Jacinctus, and did her to be called
   of all brother Eugene. And when her father and mother saw her chair
   come home empty and void, then they did do seek their daughter over all
   but she might not be found, and then went they to diviners and
   soothsayers and demanded them where their daughter was become. And they
   answered that she was ravished of the gods among the stars, and
   therefore her father made an image of his daughter and commanded that
   all the people should worship her. And she dwelled among the company of
   brethren in the dread of God; and when the provost of the church was
   dead, she was made provost. And then in Alexandria was a lady noble and
   rich which was named Melancia, whom S. Eugenia anointed with oil and
   delivered her of a quartan, in the name of God, and she sent to her
   many gifts which she would not receive. And the said lady supposed that
   Eugenia had been a man, and visited her oft and beheld the greatness
   and beauty of her body, in such wise that she was strongly esprised and
   chauffed in her love, and was greatly troubled how she might do to make
   Eugene to have to do with her. And then she feigned her to be sick and
   sent for this brother Eugene to come and have pity on her, and when she
   was come she told to her in what manner she was taken in his love, and
   how she burned in desiring him, and prayed her that she would lie thy
   her and have to do carnally, and embraced her and kissed her and
   exhorted her to do sin. And Eugenia had great horror and abomination of
   her, and said: Thou art by right called Melancia, for it is an evil
   name and fulfilled of treason, thou art said black and dark, daughter
   of darkness, friend of the devil, light of pollution, nourishing of
   lechery, anguishing daughter of sempiternal death. And when she saw her
   deceived of that she coveted, she doubted that Eugenia should discover
   her felony, and began first to cry that Eugenia would there have
   enforced her, and then she went to the provost Philip and complained,
   saying that a young man, a false christian, was come to me because of
   medicine, and took me and would have enforced me by strength for to
   have sinned with him, if I had not been holpen and delivered by a
   chamberer which was in my chamber. And when the provost heard this he
   was greatly moved, and sent for a multitude of people, and made Eugenia
   to be brought with the other servants of Jesu Christ bound in iron, and
   established a day when they all should be delivered to beasts for to be
   devoured, and then were they called tofore the provost, which said to
   Eugenia: Say to me, thou right cursed wretch, if your God hath taught
   you to do such works as for to corrupt and defile the women forcibly
   against their will? And then Eugenia, which had the head inclined
   because she would not be known, said that our Lord had taught and
   enseigned chastity entirely, and promised to them that kept it the life
   perdurable. And we may well show that Melancia is false and lieth, but
   it is better to us to suffer than she should be vanquished and
   punished, and that the fruit of our patience perish not. But
   notwithstanding, let her chamberer be brought forth here, she is the
   witness of our felony, so that the leasings of her may be reproved. And
   when she was come, she being learned of her lady, opposed against
   Eugenia, and said that he would have taken her by force, and also all
   the other of the meiny, corrupted by the lady, witnessed that it was
   so. And Eugenia said: The time is passed of silence, and the time to
   speak is now. I will no longer suffer that this shameless creature put
   more blame guiltless on the servant of Jesu Christ, ne that she glorify
   not in her malice ne in her falsity. And because that truth surmounteth
   her leasing, and that wisdom surmounteth her malice, I shall show the
   truth for none advantage, but for the glory of our Lord. And then she
   took her coat and rent it unto her girdle above, and said that she was
   a woman, as it appeared, and also said to the provost: Thou art my
   father and Claudia is my mother, and the twain that sit with thee,
   Avitus and Sergius, be my brethren, and I am Eugenia, thy daughter, and
   these twain be Prothus and Jacinctus. And when the father heard that,
   he knew well his daughter, and then he and her mother embraced her and
   wept tenderly for joy. And then they clothed Eugenia with clothes of
   gold and enhanced her on high. And after this came a fire from heaven
   and burnt Melancia and all her meiny. Then Eugenia converted to the
   faith her father, mother, brethren, and all the meiny, and therefore
   left the father the provostry, and was ordained bishop of the christian
   people. And as he was in prayer and orison he was slain of the
   miscreants and paynims. Then Claudia, with her sons and Eugenia,
   returned to Rome, and there converted much people unto the faith of
   Jesu Christ. Then by the commandment of the emperor there was a great
   stone bound to the neck of Eugenia, and she was thrown into Tiber, but
   the stone brake and she went without harm upon the water. Then she was
   thrown into a burning furnace, but the furnace was quenched by miracle
   and became cold. And then she was put into a dark prison, but a great
   shining light made it all clear and light. And when she had been there
   ten days without meat, our Lord Jesu Christ appeared to her, and
   brought to her a right white loaf and said to her: Take this meat of my
   hand, I am thy saviour whom thou hast loved with all thy thought. And
   on that day that I descend into the earth I shall receive thee. Then on
   the day of the nativity of our Lord, the tormentor was sent to her and
   he smote off her head.

   And after that she appeared to her mother, and said to her that she
   should follow her on the Sunday after. And when the Sunday came Claudia
   put herself to prayer and gave her spirit to God, and then Prothus and
   Jacinctus were drawn to the temple for to do sacrifice, and they by
   their prayers all to-brake the idol; and when they would in no wise do
   sacrifice, they accomplished their martyrdom in suffering their heads
   to be smitten off. And suffered death under Valerianus and Gallus about
   the year of our Lord two hundred and fifty-seven, by whose merits let
   us pray Almighty God to have mercy on us and bring us to his bliss.
   Amen.
     __________________________________________________________________

                Here followeth the Exaltation of the Holy Cross.

   The exaltation of the Holy Cross is said, because that on this day the
   Holy Cross and faith were greatly enhanced. And it is to be understood
   that, tofore the passion of our Lord Jesu Christ, the tree of the cross
   was a tree of filth, for the crosses were made of vile trees and of
   trees without fruit, for all that was planted on the mount of Calvary
   bare no fruit. It was a foul place, for it was the place of the torment
   of thieves, it was dark, for it was in a dark place and without any
   beauty. It was the tree of death, for men were put there to death, It
   was also the tree of stench, for it was planted among the carrions. And
   after the passion the cross was much enhanced, for the vilety was
   transported into preciousness. Of the which the blessed S. Andrew
   saith: O precious Holy Cross, God saw thee. His barrenness was turned
   into fruit, as it is said in the Canticles: I shall ascend up into palm
   tree, et cetera. His ignobility or unworthiness was turned into
   sublimity and height. The cross, that was torment of thieves, is now
   borne in front of the emperors, his darkness is turned into light and
   clearness; whereof Chrysostom saith: The cross and the wounds shall be
   more shining than the rays of the sun at the judgment. His death is
   converted into perdurability of life, whereof it is said in the preface
   that, from whence that the death grew, from thence the life resourded,
   and the stench is turned into sweetness, Canticorum I.

   This exaltation of the Holy Cross is solemnised and hallowed solemnly
   of the church, for the faith is in it much enhanced. For the year of
   our Lord six hundred and fifteen, our Lord suffered his people much to
   be tormented by the cruelty of the paynims. And Cosdroe, king of the
   Persians, subdued to his empire all the realms of the world; and he
   came into Jerusalem and was afeard and adrad of the sepulchre of our
   Lord, and returned, but he bare with him the part of the Holy Cross
   that S. Helena had left there. And then he would be worshipped of all
   the people as a god, and did do make a tower of gold and of silver,
   wherein precious stones shone, and made therein the images of the sun
   and of the moon and of the stars, and made that by subtle conduits
   water to be hid, and to come down in manner of rain. And in the last
   stage he made horses to draw chariots round about, like as they had
   moved the tower, and made it to seem as it had thundered. And thus this
   cursed man abode in this temple, and delivered his realm to his son,
   and did do set the cross of our Lord by him, and commanded that he
   should be called god, of all the people. And as it is read in libro de
   mitrali officio: The said Cosdroe, resident in his throne as a father,
   set the tree of the cross on his right side instead of the sun, and a
   cock on the left side instead of the Holy Ghost, and commanded that he
   should be called father. And then Eraclius the emperor assembled a
   great host and came for to fight with the son of Cosdroe by the river
   of Danube; and then it pleased to either prince that each of them
   should fight one against that other upon the bridge, and he that should
   vanquish and overcome his adversary should be prince of the empire
   without hurting either of both hosts, and so it was ordained and sworn,
   and that whosomever should help his prince should have forthwith his
   legs and arms cut off and to be plunged and cast into the river. And
   then Eraclius commended him all to God and to the Holy Cross with all
   the devotion that he might, and then they fought long. And at the last
   our Lord gave the victory to Eraclius and subdued to him his empire.
   The host that was contrary, and all the people of Cosdroe, obeyed them
   to the christian faith, and received the holy baptism. And Cosdroe knew
   not the end of the battle, for he was adored and worshipped of all the
   people as a god, so that no man durst say nay to him. And then Eraclius
   came to him, and found him sitting in his siege of gold, and said to
   him: For as much as after the manner thou hast honoured the tree of the
   cross, if thou wilt receive baptism and the faith of Jesu Christ, I
   shall get it to thee, and yet shalt thou hold thy crown and realm with
   little hostages, and I shall let thee have thy life. And if thou wilt
   not, I shall slay thee with my sword, and shall smite off thy head. And
   when he would not accord thereto, he did anon do smite off his head,
   and commanded that he should be buried because he had been a king. And
   he found with him one, his son, of the age of ten years, whom he did do
   baptize, and lifted him from the font, and left to him the realm of his
   father; and then did do break that tower, and gave the silver to them
   of his host, and gave the gold and precious stones for to repair the
   churches that the tyrant had destroyed, and took the Holy Cross and
   brought it again to Jerusalem. And as he descended from the Mount of
   Olives and would have entered by the gate by which our Saviour went to
   his passion, on horseback, adorned as a king, suddenly the stones of
   the gates descended and joined them together in the gate like a wall,
   and all the people was abashed. And then the angel of our Lord appeared
   upon the gate, holding the sign of the cross in his hand, and said:
   When the king of heaven went to his passion by this gate, he was not
   arrayed like a king, ne on horseback, but came humbly upon an ass, in
   showing the example of humility, which he left to them that honour him.
   And when this was said, he departed and vanished away. Then the emperor
   took off his hosen and shoes himself, in weeping, and despoiled him of
   all his clothes in to his shirt, and took the cross of our Lord and
   bare it much humbly unto the gate. And anon the hardness of the stones
   felt the celestial commandment and removed anon, and opened and gave
   entry unto them that entered. Then the sweet odour that was felt that
   day when the Holy Cross was taken from the tower of Cosdroe and was
   brought again to Jerusalem from so far country and so great space of
   land, returned in to Jerusalem in that moment and replenished it with
   all sweetness. Then the right devout king began to say the praisings of
   the cross in this wise: O crux splendidior, et cetera. O cross more
   shining than all the stars, honoured of the world, right holy and much
   amiable to all men, which only wert worthy to bear the ransom of the
   world, sweet tree, sweet nails, sweet iron, sweet spear, bearing the
   sweet burdens, save thou this present company that is this day
   assembled in thy laud and praisings. And thus was the precious tree of
   the cross re-established in his place, and the ancient miracles
   renewed. For a dead man was raised to life, and four men taken with the
   palsy were cured and healed, ten lepers were made clean, and fifteen
   blind received their sight again. Devils were put out of men, and much
   people and many were delivered of divers sickness and maladies. Then
   the emperor did do repair the churches, and gave to them great gifts,
   and after returned home to his empire. And it is said in the Chronicles
   that this was done otherwise. For they say that when Cosdroe had taken
   many realms, he took Jerusalem and Zacharias the patriarch, and bare
   away the tree of the cross. And as Eraclius would make peace with him,
   the king Cosdroe sware a great oath that he would never make peace with
   christian men and Romans if they renied not him that was crucified, and
   adored the sun. And then Eraclius, which was armed with faith, brought
   his host against him, and destroyed and wasted the Persians with many
   battles that he made to them, and made Cosdroe to flee unto the city of
   Ctesiphont. And at the last Cosdroe had the flux in his belly, and
   would therefore crown his son king, which was named Medasan, and when
   Syrois, his oldest son, heard hereof he made alliance with Eraclius,
   and pursued his father with his noble people, and set him in bonds, and
   sustained him with bread of tribulation and with water of anguish, and
   at last he made to shoot arrows at him because he would not believe in
   God, and so died. And after this thing he sent to Eraclius, the
   patriarch, the tree of the cross, and all the prisoners. And Eraclius
   bare into Jerusalem the precious tree of the cross, and thus it is read
   in many chronicles; also Siby saith thus of the tree of the cross: That
   the blessed tree of the cross was three times with the paynims, as it
   is said in the History Tripartite: O thrice blessed tree on which God
   was stretched. This peradventure is said for the life of nature, of
   grace, and of glory, which came of the cross.

   At Constantinople a Jew entered into the church of S. Sophia and
   considered that he was there alone, and saw an image of Jesu Christ,
   and took his sword and smote the image in the throat, and anon the
   blood gushed out and sprang in the face and on the head of the Jew. And
   he then was afeard, and took the image and cast it into a pit, and anon
   fled away. And it happed that a christian man met him and saw him all
   bloody, and said to him: From whence comest thou? Thou hast slain some
   man. And he said: I have not. The christian man said: Verily, thou hast
   committed some homicide, for thou art all besprongen with the blood.
   And the Jew said: Verily, the God of christian men is great, and the
   faith of him is firm and approved in all things; I have smitten no man,
   but I have smitten the image of Jesu Christ, and anon issued blood of
   his throat; and then the Jew brought the christian man to the pit and
   there they drew out that holy image. And yet is seen on this day the
   wound in the throat of the image; and the Jew anon became a good
   christian man and was baptized.

   In Syria, in the city of Beirout, there was a christian man which had
   hired an house for a year and he had set the image of the crucifix by
   his bed, to which he made daily his prayers, and said his devotions,
   and at the year's end he removed and took an other house, and forgat
   and left the image behind him. And it happed that a Jew hired that same
   house, and on a day he bade another Jew, one of his neighbours, to
   dinner, and as they were at meat, it happed to him that was bidden, in
   looking on the wall, to espy this image which was fixed to the wall,
   and began to grin at it for despite, and against him that bade him, and
   also threatened and menaced him because he durst keep in his house the
   image of Jesus of Nazareth; and that other Jew sware as much as he
   might that he had never seen it, ne knew not that it was there, and
   then the Jew feigned as he had been appeased, and after, went straight
   to the prince of the Jews and accused that Jew of that which he had
   seen in his house. Then the Jews assembled and came to the house of him
   and saw the image of Jesu Christ, and they took that Jew and beat him
   and did to him many injuries, and cast him out half dead of their
   synagogue; and anon they defiled the image with their feet, and renewed
   in it all the torments of the passion of our Lord, and when they
   pierced his side with the spear, blood and water issued abundantly,
   insomuch that they filled a vessel which they set thereunder. And then
   the Jews were abashed and bare this blood into their synagogue, and all
   the sick men and malades that were guerished and made whole. And then
   the Jews told and recounted things by order to the bishop of the
   country, and all they with one will received baptism in the faith of
   Jesu Christ. And the bishop put this blood in ampuls of crystal and of
   glass for to be kept, and then he called the christian man that had
   left it in the house, and enquired of him who had so fair an image. And
   he said that Nicodemus had made it, and when he died he left it to
   Gamaliel, and Gamaliel to Zaccheus, and Zaccheus to James, and James to
   Simon, and had been thus in Jerusalem unto the destruction of the city.
   And from thence it was borne into the realm of Agrippa, of christian
   men, and from thence it was brought again into my country, and it was
   left to me by my parents by rightful heritage. And this was done in the
   year of our Lord seven hundred and fifty. And then all the Jews
   hallowed their synagogues into churches, and thereof cometh the custom
   that churches be hallowed, for tofore that time the altars were but
   hallowed only. And for this miracle the church hath ordained that the
   fifth kalends of December, or as it is read in another place the fifth
   ides of November, should be the memory of the passion of our Lord,
   wherefore at Rome the church is hallowed in the honour of our Saviour,
   whereas is kept an ampul with the same blood. And there a solemn feast
   is kept and done, and there is proved the right great virtue of the
   cross, unto the paynims, and to the misbehaved men in all things. And
   S. Gregory recordeth in the third book of his dialogues that when
   Andrew, bishop of the city of Fundana, suffered a holy nun to dwell
   with him, the fiend the enemy began to imprint in his heart the beauty
   of her in such wise that he thought in his bed wicked and cursed
   things. And on a day a Jew came to Rome, and when he saw that the day
   failed and he might find lo lodging, he went that night and abode in
   the temple of Apollo. And because he doubted of he sacrilege of the
   place, howbeit that he had no faith in the cross, yet he marked and
   garnished him with the sign of the cross. Then at midnight when he
   awoke, he saw a company of evil spirits, which went tofore one like as
   he had some authority of puissance above the others by subjection, and
   then he saw him sit in the midst among the others, and began to enquire
   the causes and deeds of every each of these evil spirits which obeyed
   him, and he would know what evil every each had done.

   But Gregory passeth the manner of this vision because of shortness, but
   we find semblably in the lives of Fathers that. as a man entered in a
   temple of the idols, he saw the devil sitting and all his meiny about
   him. And one of these wicked spirits came and adored him, and he
   demanded of him: From whence comest thou? And he said: I have been in
   such a province, and have moved great wars, and made many tribulations,
   and have shed much blood, and am come to tell it to thee. And Satan
   said to him: In what time hast thou done this? And he said: In thirty
   days. And Satan said: Why hast thou been so long thereabout? and said
   to them that stood by him: Go ye and beat him all to-lash him. Then
   came the second and worshipped him, and said: Sire, I have been in the
   sea, and have moved great winds and torments, and drowned many ships
   and slain many men. And Satan said: How long hast thou been about this?
   And he said: Twenty-two days. And Satan said: How! hast thou done no
   more in this time? And he commanded that he should be beaten. And the
   third came and said: I have been in a city, and have moved strifes and
   debates in a wedding, and have shed much blood, and have slain the
   husband, and am come to tell thee. And Satan asked: In what time hast
   thou done this? And he said: In ten days. And he said: Hast thou done
   no more in that time? And commanded them that were about him to beat
   him also. Then came the fourth and said: I have been in the wilderness
   forty years, and have laboured about a monk, and unnethe at the last I
   have thriven, and made him fall in the sin of the flesh. And when Satan
   heard that, he arose from his seat and kissed him, and took his crown
   off his head and set it on his head, and made him to sit with him, and
   said: Thou hast done a great thing, and hast laboured more than all the
   others. And this may be the manner of the vision that S. Gregory
   leaveth. When each had said, one started up in the middle of them all,
   and said he had moved Andrew against the nun, and had moved the fourth
   part of his flesh against her in temptation, and thereto that yesterday
   he drew so much his mind on her that, in the hour of evensong he gave
   to her in japing a buff, and said plainly, that she might hear it, that
   he would sin with her. Then the master commanded him that he should
   perform that he had begun, and for to make him to sin he should have a
   singular victory and reward among all the others. And then commanded he
   that they should go look who that was that lay in the temple; and they
   went and looked, and anon they were ware that he was marked with the
   sign of the cross. And they being afeard, cried and said: Verily, this
   is an empty vessel, alas ! alas! he is marked. And with this voice all
   the company of the wicked spirits vanished away. And then the Jew, all
   amoved, came to the bishop and told to him all by order what was
   happened. And when the bishop heard this he wept strongly, and made to
   void all the women out of his house. And then he baptized the Jew.

   S. Gregory rehearseth in his dialogues that a nun entered into a garden
   and saw a lettuce, and coveted that, and forgat to make the sign of the
   cross, and bit it gluttonously, and anon fell down and was ravished of
   a devil. And there came to her S. Equicius, and the devil began to cry
   and to say: What have I done? I sat upon a lettuce and she came and bit
   me. And anon the devil issued out by the commandment of the holy man of
   God.

   It is read in the History Scholastic that the paynims had painted on a
   wall the arms of Serapis, and Theodosius did do put them out, and made
   to be painted in the same place the sign of the cross. And when the
   paynims and priests of the idols saw that, anon they did them to be
   baptized, saying that it was given them to understand of their elders
   that, those arms should endure till that such a sign were made there in
   which were life. And they have a letter of which they use that they
   call holy, and had a form that they said it exposed, and signified life
   perdurable.
     __________________________________________________________________

                 Here followeth the Life of S. John Chrysostom.

   John Chrysostom was of Antioch, and was born of noble kindred, of whom
   the life, the lineage, the conversation, and the persecution, is more
   plainly contained in the History Tripartite. When he had been in the
   study of philosophy, he left it and gave himself to the service of God,
   and was made a priest. And for the love of chastity he was reputed old,
   for he entended more to the burning love of God than to the outerward
   debonairty, and for the righteousness of his life he entended most to
   the things to come, and was deemed proud of them that knew him not. He
   was noble in teaching, he was wise in expounding, and right good in
   refraining of vain manners. Arcadius and Honorius reigned then in the
   empire, and Damasus sat then in the see of Rome. And when Chrysostom
   was made bishop of Constantinople, he began to correct hastily the life
   of clerks, and therefore all they were moved and stirred to hate him,
   and eschewed him as he had been a madman, and spake evil of him. And
   because he would not bid them to dine and eat with him, ne would not
   eat with them, they said that he did it because he ate his meat so
   foul, and the other said that he did it for the excellence and noblesse
   of his meats. And the truth was because that his stomach was oft sore
   and grieved, wherefore he eschewed the great dinners and the feasts.
   And the people loved him much for the good sermons that he made to
   them, and set little by that his enemies said. Then Chrysostom began to
   reprove some of the barons, and therefore the envy was the more against
   him. And yet he did other things that moved yet more. For Eutropius,
   provost of the empire, which had the dignity of consul, would have
   avenged him on some that fled to the church for succour, and studied
   that a law should be ordained by the emperor that none should flee to
   the church, and that they that had been therein tofore should be drawn
   out. And a little while after, Eutropius had trespassed to the emperor,
   and fled anon to the church, and when the bishop heard thereof, he came
   to him, which was hid under the altar, and made a homily against him,
   in the which he reproved him right sharply. And therefore many were
   wroth, because he would do no mercy to that cursed man, and yet he did
   nothing but chide. And when the emperor saw his will, he made Eutropius
   to be borne out of the church, and did do smite off his head. And he
   reproved sharply many men for divers causes, and therefore he was
   hateful to many. And Theophilus, bishop of Alexandria, would have
   deposed John Chrysostom, and would have set in his see Isidore the
   priest, and therefore he sought diligently cause to depose him. And the
   people, that were fed marvellously with the doctrine of S. John,
   defended him strongly. And John Chrysostom constrained the priests to
   live after the holy ordinances of Holy Church, and said that they
   should not use the honour of priesthood, for they despised the life of
   a priest and would not follow it. And John governed not only the
   bishopric of Constantinople, but he ordained to the other provinces by
   authority of the emperor such laws were much profitable. And then when
   he knew that yet the people sacrificed about the other provinces to the
   devils, he sent thither monks and clerks, and made them destroy all the
   temples of the idols.

   In that same time was a man which was made master of the chivalry, and
   was named Gaimas, of the lineage of Celtic barbarians, which strongly
   was lifted up, and by study of tyranny was corrupt of the heresy Arian.
   And that same Gaimas prayed the emperor that he would give to him a
   church within the city for him and his to make in their prayers. And
   when the emperor had granted him, he came to John Chrysostom for to
   have a church as was granted to him by the emperor, but John, which was
   strong in virtue and all embraced in the love of God, said to the
   emperor: Promise not, ne give no such thing, ne holy thing unto dogs.
   And dread thee nothing of this barbarian, but command that we both two
   be called tofore thee, and take heed what shall be said between us both
   softly, for I shall so refrain him that he shall no more dare demand
   such thing. And when the emperor heard this he was glad, and the next
   day he did do call that one and that other. And as an orator required
   for him, John said: The house of God is open in every place to thee,
   whereas no man is warned to adore and pray. And he said: I am of
   another law, and make request that I may have a temple for myself; for
   I have emprised many travails for the common profit of Rome, and
   therefore I ought not to be warned of my petition. And John said to
   him: Thou hast received many rewards which amount to more than thy
   pains, and hast been made master of the knights, and clad with the
   adornments of consul, and it behoveth thee to consider what thou wert
   late and what thou art now, and thy rather poverty, and thy riches now,
   and what clothing thou usedest tofore, and what array thou wearest now.
   And because that a little labour hath given to thee so great rewards,
   be not now disagreeable to him that hath so much honoured thee. And by
   such manner words he stopped his mouth and constrained him to be still.
   And as S. John governed nobly the city of Constantinople, this same
   Gaimas coveted the empire, and because he might do nothing by day he
   sent by night his barbarians for to burn the palace. And then it was
   well showed how S. John kept the city, for a great company of angels,
   which had great bodies and were armed, appeared to the barbarians and
   chased them away anon. And when they had told to their lord that which
   was happed, he marvelled strongly, for he knew well that the host of
   the other knights were spread in other cities. And then he sent them
   the second time, and they were rechased again by the vision of the
   angels. And at the last he issued himself with them and saw the miracle
   and fled, and supposed they had been knights that had by day-time been
   within, and had watched by night. And then he went to Tarsus with great
   strength, and wasted and destroyed all the country, so that all the
   people dreaded the cruelty of the barbarians. And then the emperor
   committed to S. John the charge of his legation, and he, not
   remembering the enmity between them, went forth joyously. And Gaimas,
   which knew the truth of him, came to meet him on the way, for he knew
   well that he came for pity, and took him by the hand, and kissed his
   mouth and his eyes, and commanded his sons that they should kiss his
   holy knees. And he was of such virtue and so holy that he constrained
   the most cruel men to dread him.

   In this time when these things were done S. John flourished in
   Constantinople by doctrine, and was holden marvellous of all them of
   the sect of the Arians, which then increased greatly. And they had a
   church without the city, and on the Saturday and Sunday they would sing
   within the gates, by night, hymns and anthems, and on the morn they
   would go through the city singing anthems, and issued by the gates and
   entered into their church, and ceased not to do thus in despite of
   christian men, and sung oft this song: Where be they that say one only
   to be three things by his virtue? And then John doubted that by this
   song simple men might be deceived, and ordained that the good christian
   people should go by night with tapers, torches, and lanterns, singing
   glorious hymns of the church that, the evil works of the others might
   be destroyed, and the faith of the good men might be aflirmed. And did
   do make crosses of gold and of silver which were borne, with tapers
   burning. And then the sect of the Arians, embraced with envy rebelled
   unto the death, so that Brison, on a night, which was chamberlain of
   the emperor, was smitten with a stone, who was ordained by S. John
   Chrysostom for to go with the hymns, and of the people were many slain
   on that one party and on that other. Then the emperor moved by these
   things, defended that the Arians should sing no more hymns in common.
   And after, this holy man suffered great persecution for righteousness
   and true doctrine, and was exiled and after repealed again. And yet
   after, for envy he was exiled again. And so, after many a great labour
   and noble doctrine he ended his life, being in exile, the fourteenth
   day of September. And when he was passed, a strong hail fell in
   Constantinople upon the city and upon the suburbs, which did much harm,
   and then all the people said it was done by wrath of God for the
   wrongful exiling and condemning of the holy man S. John Chrysostom, and
   that was showed well by the death of the empress, his greatest enemy,
   which died the fourth day after the hail. And when this noble doctor of
   the church was passed out of this world, the bishops of the west would
   in no wise commune ne have to do with the bishops of the east till
   that, the name of that holy man S. John was set among the bishops his
   predecessors. And then Theodosius, a right good christian man, son of
   the said emperor, which held the name and party of his grandsire, did
   do bring the holy relics of this doctor in to the royal city with
   tapers and lights. Then Theodosius did do put and bury the said body of
   S. John Chrysostom in the church of S. Sophia in the month of January.
   And all the people went to meet with it, and accompanied it with
   torches and lights. And then Theodosius worshipped devoutly the holy
   relics, and visited oft his sepulchre, praying to the holy saint to
   pardon Arcadius his father, and Eudoxia his mother, and to forgive them
   that they had done ignorantly against him. And they were dead long
   tofore. This emperor was of so great debonairty that he judged no man
   to death that had offended him, and said that his will was to call the
   dead to life again if he might. It seemed that his court was a
   monastery, for therein were said continually matins and lauds, and he
   read the books divine. And his wife was called Eudoxia, he had also a
   daughter named Eudoxia whom he gare to wife to Valentinian, whom he
   made emperor. And all these things be written more plainly in the
   History Tripartite. And this holy holy man S. John Chrysostom passed
   about the year of our Lord three hundred and ninety.
     __________________________________________________________________

Here followeth of S. Cornelius the Pope and Martyr, and first the exposition of
                          his name. And of S. Cyprian.

   Cornelius is expounded, and is as much to say as, entending in prayer,
   and the gard, in abiding things outrageous. Or Cornelius is said of
   cornu, which is as much to say as strong, and of leos, that is people,
   that is the strength of people. Cyprian is said of cypress, that
   tincture, and ana, that is high. Then Cyprian is as much to say as
   tincture of height, for he had tincture of the grace, sovereign, and of
   virtues. Or Cyprian is said of cypress, that is to say heaviness or
   heritage, for he had heaviness of his sins and heritage of the heavenly
   joys.

Of S. Cornelius and S. Cyprian.

   S. Cornelius succeeded to Fabian in the papacy, and was sent in exile
   of Decius Csar, and his clerks with him. And there received letters of
   comfort from Cyprian, bishop of Carthage. And at the last he was
   brought again from exile and presented to Decius. And when he saw him
   fast in the faith, he commanded that he should be beaten with plummets
   of lead, and that he should be brought to the temple of Mars for to do
   sacrifice, or else to have his head smitten off. And as he was led, a
   knight prayed him that he would return to his house because of
   Sallustia his wife, which had lain sick five years of the palsy. And
   she was healed by his prayers, and one and twenty knights with her
   believed in God, and were all brought to the temple of Mars by the
   commandment of Decius. And all they spit against it and were all
   martyred with Cornelius. And they suffered death about the year of our
   Lord two hundred and fifty-three. And Cyprian, bishop of Carthage, was
   present in the same city and was brought tofore Patronus the consul,
   and when he could not turn him in no wise from the faith of Christ, he
   sent him in exile. And from thence he was called again of Angliricus
   proconsul, which came after Patronus, and received martyrdom by smiting
   off his head. And when the sentence was given on him, he said: Graces
   and thankings be given to God. And when he came to the place of his
   martyrdom he commanded his servants to give to him that should smite
   off his head twenty-five pieces of gold. And then he took a linen cloth
   and bound his eyes with his own hands, and thus he received the crown
   of martyrdom, the year of our Lord two hundred and fifty-six.
     __________________________________________________________________

 Here followeth the Life of S. Eufemia, and first of the interpretation of her
                                     name.

   Eufemia is said of eu, that is good, and of femme that is a woman, that
   is to wit a profitable, honest and delectable, for in this treble
   manner she is said good. She was profitable to others by conversation,
   honest by ordinance of manners, and delectable to God. Or Eufemia is
   said of euphoria as sweetness of sound. Sweet sound is made in three
   manners, that is to wit, by voice, as in singing, by touching, as in a
   harp, and by blowing as in pipes and organs. Thus was the blessed sweet
   sound to God in voice of predication, in touching of good works, and in
   blowing of devotion.

Of S. Eufemia.

   Eufemia was daughter of a senator, and saw christian men in the time of
   Diocletian so sore tormented and all to-rent by divers torments, that
   she came to the judge and confessed her to be christian. And she
   comforted by example the courages of other men, and by her constancy.
   And when the judge slew the christian men, the one tofore another, and
   made others to be present because they should be afeard of that they
   saw the others so cruelly tormented and broken, and that they should
   sacrifice for dread and fear, and when Eufemia saw even thus tofore her
   the holy saints, she was the more constant by the steadfastness of the
   martyrs, and spoke to the judge, and said that she suffered wrong of
   him. Then the judge was glad, weening that she would have consented to
   do sacrifice, and when he demanded of her what wrong he had done to
   her, she said to him: For sith I am of noble lineage, why puttest thou
   tofore me the strangers and unknown, and makest them go to Christ
   tofore me? For it were my pleasure to go thither by martyrdom tofore
   them. And the judge said to her: I had supposed thou wouldst have
   returned in thy thought, and I was glad that thou haddest remembered
   thy noblesse. And then she was inclosed in the prison, and the day
   following, without bonds, was brought tofore the judge. And then she
   complained right grievously why against the laws of the emperors she
   was alone spared for to be out of bonds. And then she was long beaten
   with fists, and after, sent again to prison, and the judge followed
   her, and would have taken her by force for to have accomplished his
   foul lust, but she defended her forcibly, and the virtue divine made
   the hands of the Judge to be lame. And then the judge weened to have
   been enchanted, and sent to her the provost of his house for to promise
   to her many things for to make her consent to him, but he might never
   open the prison which was shut, neither with key ne with axes, till he
   was ravished with a devil, crying and treating himself, that unnethe he
   escaped. And then she was drawn out and set upon a wheel full of
   burning coals. And the artillour, that was master of the torment, had
   given a token to them to turn it, that when he should make a sound,
   that they all should turn it, and the fire should spring out and all
   to-break and rend the body of the virgin; but by the ordinance of God
   the iron that the artillour and master had in his hand, fell to the
   earth, and made the sound. And they turned hastily so that the wheel
   burnt the master of the work and kept Enfemia without hurt, sitting
   upon the wheel. And the parents of the artillour wept and put the fire
   under the wheel and would have burnt Eufemia with the wheel, but the
   wheel was burnt, and Eufemia was unbounden by the angel of God, and was
   seen to stand all whole, unhurt, in a high place. And then Apulius said
   to the judge: The virtue of christian people may not be overcome but by
   iron, therefore I counsel thee to do smite off her head. Then they set
   up ladders, and as one would have set hand on her, he was anon smitten
   with a palsy, and was borne thence half dead. And another named
   Sosthenes went up on high, but anon he was changed in his courage and
   repented him and required her humbly pardon, and when he had his sword
   drawn he cried to the judge that he had liefer slay himself than touch
   her whom the angels defended. At the last, when she was taken thence,
   the judge said to his chancellor that he should send to her all the
   young men that were jolly, for to enforce and to make her do their will
   till she should fail and die. And then he entered in and saw with her
   many fair virgins praying with her, and she made him to be christened
   with her admonishments. And then the provost did do take the virgin by
   the hair and hung her thereby, and she ever abode constant and
   immovable. And then he did do shut her in prison without meat seven
   days, and pressed her there between four great stones as who should
   press olives, but she was every day fed with an angel. And when she was
   between those two hard stones she made her prayers, and the stones were
   converted into right soft ashes. Then the provost was ashamed for to be
   vanquished of a maid; and then he made her to be thrown into a pit
   whereas cruel beasts were, which devoured every man that came therein
   and swallowed them in. And anon they ran to this holy virgin in fawning
   her, and joined their tails together, and made of them a chair for her
   to sit on. And when the judge saw that, he was much confounded, so that
   almost he died for anguish and sorrow. Then the butcher came for to
   avenge the injury of his lord and smote his sword into her side, and
   all to-hewed her and made her there the martyr of Jesu Christ our Lord.
   And the judge clad him with clothes of silk, and hung on him ouches and
   brooches of gold, but when he should have issued out of the pit, he was
   ravished of the beasts, and all devoured anon. And then his people
   sought him long, and unnethe found they a little of his bones with his
   clothes of silk and his ouches of gold. And then the judge ate himself
   for madness, and so was found dead wretchedly. And Eusemia was buried
   in Chalcedonia, and by her merits all the Jews and paynims of
   Chalcedonia believed in Jesu Christ. And she suffered death about the
   year of our Lord two hundred and eighty. And S. Ambrose saith of this
   virgin thus: The holy virgin, triumphant in virginity, retaining the
   mitre, deserved to be clad with the crown, by whose merits the wicked
   enemy is vanquished, and Priscus, her adversary and judge, is overcome.
   The virgin is saved from the furnace of fire, hard stones be converted
   into powder, wild beasts be made meek and tame, and incline down their
   necks, and all manner of pains and torments by her orations and prayers
   be overcome. And at the last, smitten with a sword, she left the
   cloister of her flesh, and is joined to the celestial company, glad and
   joyous. And, blessed Lord, this blessed virgin commendeth to thee thy
   church, and, good Lord, let her pray to thee for us sinners, and this
   virgin, without corruption flourishing, get unto us that our desires
   may be granted of thee.
     __________________________________________________________________

 Here beginneth the Life of S. Lambert, and first of the interpretation of his
                                     name.

   Lambertus is said of lampos in Greek, which is as much to say as
   burning, and of thus, that is incense. That is to say incense burning
   to God. Or he may be said of lampas, a lamp, which giveth light in the
   church. He was incense burning to God by distress of conscience, and
   for to keep obedience. And he was light in the church by noble
   predication, and by ensample of good operation.

Of S. Lambert.

   Lambert was of a noble lineage, but he was more noble by holiness, and
   was informed in lettrure in his first age. So, for his holiness, he was
   loved of all the people in such wise that after his master Theodardus,
   he deserved to be promoted to be bishop of Utrecht. Whom Childeric,
   king of France, loved much and had him always dear before other
   bishops. But when the malice of the Jews grew, the felons put him out
   of his honour without cause, and set Ferramund in his chair. And L
   ambert entered into a monastery, and was there and conversed seven
   years goodly. On a night when he arose from prayer, he let wind go
   behind by ignorance, and when the abbot heard it he said: He that hath
   done that, let him go out to the cross barefoot. And anon Lambert went
   out to the cross barefoot in his hair, and was there and went in the
   snow and in the frost when the brethren chauffed them after matins. And
   the abbot demanded where Lambert was, and a brother said that he was
   gone to the cross by his commandment. He did do call him, and then the
   abbot and his monks required him to pardon them, but he not only
   pardoned them, but also preached to them the virtue of patience. And
   after seven years Ferramund was put out, and S. Lambert was brought
   again by the commandment of Pepin to his first see, and there he shone
   by word and by ensample in all virtue. Then two wicked men addressed
   them against him and began to rebuke and blame him strongly, and the
   friends of the same bishop slew them.

   In that time Lambert began to blame strongly Pepin, for a common woman
   that he held. And Dodo, a cousin of them that had been slain, and
   brother of the same common woman, and officer of the king's hall,
   assembled a great fellowship and assieged all about the bishop's place,
   and would avenge the death of his cousins on S. Lambert. And when a
   child came to S. Lambert, which was in his prayers, and told him
   thereof, he, trusting well in our Lord, thought he should well vanquish
   them, and took a sword. And when he had remembered himself he threw
   away his sword, and judged himself better to vanquish in suffering of
   death, than to leye his holy hands in the blood of the felons. And this
   holy man warned his people that they should confess their sins, and
   suffer patiently death. And anon the felons came upon them, and slew
   forthwith S. Lambert whom they found in orison and prayer. And when
   they were gone, some of his men that escaped, bare the body to the
   cathedral church secretly by water in a boat, and buried it with great
   heaviness of them of the city, in the year of our Lord four hundred and
   ten.
     __________________________________________________________________

 Here beginneth the Life of S. Matthew, and, first of the interpretation of his
                                     name.

   Matthew was named by twain names, that was Matthew and Levy. Matthew is
   expounded a hasty gift, or a giver of counsel, or it is said Matthew of
   magnus, and theos, that is God, as it were a great God. Or of manus,
   that is a hand, and theos, that is God, as it were the hand of God. He
   was a gift of hastiness by hasty conversion, a giver of counsel by
   wholesome predication, great to God by perfection of life, and the hand
   of God by writing of the gospel of God. Levy is interpreted assumyt, or
   applied, or put to, or set. He was assumpt and taken away from
   gathering of tolls, he was applied to the number of the apostles, he
   was put to the company of the evangelists, and set to the catalogue of
   martyrs.

Of S. Matthew.

   Matthew the apostle, preaching in Ethiopia, in the city that is said
   Nadaber, found there two enchanters named Zaroes and Arphaxat, which
   enchanted the men by their art, so that whom that they would, should
   seem that thy were prived of the health and office of their members.
   Which were so elevated in pride that they made them to be honoured as
   gods. Then Matthew the apostle entered into that city and was lodged
   with the eunuch of Candace, the queen, whom Philip baptized. Then he
   discovered the faits and deeds of the enchanters in this manner, that
   all that they did to men into hurt, that turned Matthew into health.
   Then this eunuch demanded of S. Matthew how he spake and understood so
   many tongues. And then Matthew told him how the Holy Ghost descended
   and had given to the apostles all science of tongues. That like as they
   had emprised by their pride to make the tower unto heaven which ceased
   by confusion of tongues that were changed, all in like wise the
   apostles made a tower of sciences of tongues, and nothing of stones but
   of virtues, by the which all that believe shall mount up into heaven.

   Then came before them a man that said that the enchanters were come
   with two dragons, which cast fire and sulphur by their mouths and
   nostrils, and slew all the men. Then the apostle garnished him with the
   sign of the cross and went out surely to them, and anon as these
   dragons saw him, anon they came and slept at his feet. Then said
   Matthew to the enchanters: Where is your craft? Awake ye them if ye
   may; and if I would pray our Lord, that which ye would have committed
   in me, I should soon execute on you. And when the people were
   assembled, he commanded the dragons that they should depart without
   hurting of any, and they went anon.

   And the apostle there made a great sermon of the glory of paradise
   terrestrial, saying that it appeared above all the mountains and was
   nigh unto heaven, and that there were neither thorns ne rocks, and that
   the lilies and roses flourished always and waxed never old; but the
   people were there always young, and the sound of angels sounded there
   always, and the birds came anon as they were called. And said that out
   of this paradise was a man cast, but he was called to the paradise of
   heaven by the nativity of our Lord. And as he said these words to the
   people, anon a great noise arose, and a great weeping was made for the
   son of the king which was dead, and when these enchanters might not
   raise him, they made the king believe that he was ravished into the
   company of the gods, and that he should make to him a temple and an
   image. And then the foresaid eunuch, keeper of the queen Candace, made
   the enchanters to be kept, and sent for the apostle. And when the
   apostle was come he made his prayer and raised the king's son anon. And
   then the king, which was named Egippus, sent for all the men in his
   provinces saying to them: Come and see ye God in the likeness of a man.
   And then the people came with crowns of gold and divers manner of
   sacrifices, and would have sacrificed to him, and then S. Matthew
   beheld them and said: What do ye men? I am not God, but I am servant of
   our Lord. And by the commandment of him they made a great church of the
   gold and silver that they had brought, which in thirty days space was
   edified and achieved. In which church the apostle sat three and thirty
   years, and converted all Ethiopia to the faith of Christ. And then the
   king Egippus, with his wife and his daughter, and all the people, were
   baptized. And then the apostle hallowed to God Ephigenia the king's
   daughter, and made her mistress and governess of more than two hundred
   virgins.

   And after this, Hirtacus succeeded to the king, and coveted the said
   virgin Ephigenia, and promised to the apostle half his realm if he
   would make her consent to be his wife; and the apostle said to him that
   after the custom of his predecessor he should come on the Sunday to the
   church, and Ephigenia being present with the other virgins, he should
   hear what he should say of the goodness of lawful marriage. And then he
   departed with great joy, and supposed that he would have stirred
   Ephigenia to his marriage. And when the virgins and all the people were
   assembled, he spake long of good and lawful matrimony, and was much
   allowed of the king, which supposed that he had said for to have joined
   the virgin to him for to consent the marriage. Then when silence was
   made, he made rehearsal of his sermon saying that marriage is good if
   it be truly held by good alliance. But ye that be here, know ye well
   that if any servant would take the wife of a king wedded he should not
   only run to the offence of the king, but above that he should deserve
   death, and not for to wed her, but for that he in so taking the spouse
   of his lord should corrupt the marriage joined. And thou the king that
   knew that Ephigenia is made the spouse of the king perdurable, and is
   sacred with the holy veil, how mayst thou take the wife of a more
   puissant king and couple her to thee by marriage? And when the king
   heard this he began to enrage and departed all wood and frantic. And
   the apostle without dread confirmed all the others to patience. And
   Ephigenia, Iying tofore him for dread, he blessed, and all the other
   virgins also. And after the solemnities of the mass, the king sent a
   tormentor which slew Matthew with a sword behind him, which was
   standing by the altar holding up his hands into heaven, and so was
   consecrate a martyr. And then all the people would have gone into the
   palace for to have slain the king, and with great pain were they holden
   of the priests and deacons, and hallowed with great joy the martyrdom
   of the apostle. And the king then sent to Ephigenia matrons and
   enchantresses, but for all them, when he saw that he might not turn her
   courage ne draw her to him in no manner, he environed and beset the
   house of her with a right great fire, for to burn her and all the other
   virgins. And then the holy apostle appeared at the fire and put out the
   fire about the house, and it took the palace of the king, so that it
   burnt and consumed all that was therein, that none escaped save the
   king and his son only. And the son was ravished of the devil and began
   to cry and confess his father's sins, and went to the sepulchre of the
   apostle. And the father was made a foul mesel, and when he saw that he
   might not be cured, he slew himself with his own hand with a sword. And
   the people then established for to be king, the brother of Ephigenia
   whom the apostle had baptized, and reigned seventy years, and
   established his son for to be king after him, and increased much the
   honour of christian men, and replenished all Ethiopia with noble
   churches of our Lord. And then Zaroes and Arphaxat fled into Persia
   from the day that the apostle raised the son of the king, but S. Simon
   and S. Jude vanquished them there. And know ye that four things be
   principally considered in the blessed S. Matthew. The first is the
   hastiness of obedience, for as soon as our Lord called him, he left all
   and doubted nothing of the Lord, and left the reckonings of his
   receipts imperfect, and joined him perfectly to our Lord Jesu Christ.
   And for this hasty obedience some took occasion of error in themselves,
   like as S. Jerome recordeth in the original upon the foresaid place,
   saying in that place: Porphyry and Julian Augustus reproveth in the
   same place the folly of the story Iying, saying that as the story
   saith, like as they followed suddenly the Saviour, that they would as
   hastily follow another man that had called them. For there were showed
   so many virtues and so many tokens tofore, that the apostles of our
   Lord believed verily without doubt. And certainly this replenisher of
   the privy majesty shone in his blessed face at the first to them that
   saw him, and he might by that sight and will draw them to him. If such
   virtue, as men say, is in a precious stone which is named magnet, which
   draweth to him festues and straws, how much more the creator of all
   things may draw to him whom he will. This said Jerome. The second is
   his largess or his liberality. For anon he made to him a great feast in
   his house, the which was not great by apparel of meats, but it was much
   great only by reason of great desire, for he received with right great
   will and right great desire. And also it was great by reason of
   service, for this feast was demonstrance of great mystery, which
   mystery the gloss expoundeth upon S. Luke saying: He that receiveth our
   Lord Jesu Christ in his house was fed withinforth plenteously of
   greater things than the other, that is to wit of delectations, of good
   manners, and of good delights. And after he was great by reason of his
   enseignments, for he showed great teachings and doctrines. And this was
   of great mercy by desire, and not by sacrifice, as he said:
   Misericordiam volo et non sacrificium, etcetera. And also they that be
   whole need no leech, and so it was great, for there was Jesu Christ and
   his disciples. The third is humility which appeared to him in two
   things, first he showed him a publican. The other evangelists, as saith
   the gloss, because of shame, and for the honour of the evangelist, they
   set not their common name, but as it is written: The just is first
   accuser of himself. And Matthew named himself publican, first because
   that he showed that none converted ought not mistrust of health, like
   as he was made of a publican, an apostle and evangelist. Secondly,
   because he was patient in his injuries. For when the pharisees murmured
   that Jesu Christ was descended to a man, sinner, Matthew might have
   answered: Ye be more wicked and more sinful that ween ye be just and
   refuse the leech, for I may no more be said sinner that am gone to the
   leech of health and hide not my sin ne wound. The fourth is the great
   solemnity of him in the church of his gospels. His gospels be offer and
   more used in the church than the other evangelists, like as the psalms
   of David and the epistles of Paul be rehearsed before other scriptures,
   which be more offer recited in the church. And this is the reason that
   James witnesseth that there be three manner of sins, that is to wit:
   the sin of pride, of lechery, and of avarice. In the sin of pride
   sinned Saul, for Saul by the sin of pride persecuted the church over
   proudly. David sinned in the sin of lechery, for he made adultery, and
   for the adultery he slew Uriah, his true knight. And Matthew sinned in
   the sin of avarice, for for covetousness he meddled him of villainous
   gain. For he was in a port of the sea where he received the toll and
   custom of ships and merchandise. And howbeit that they were sinners,
   yet always our Lord took their penance in gree and was pleased
   therewith, so that he pardoned them not only their sins, but multiplied
   in them his gifts of grace. For him that was a right cruel persecutor,
   he made a right true preacher, and him that had been adulterer and
   homicide, he made a prophet, and him that coveted so villainous gain,
   he made apostle and evangelist. And therefore these foresaid three be
   oft recited that no man that would be converted should have despair of
   pardon when such that were in so great sin, he beholdeth to have been
   in so great grace. And it is to be considered that, after S. Ambrose,
   some things ought to be noted in the conversion of S. Matthew, that is
   to wit somewhat of the party of the leech, and some of the party of the
   sick to be healed. In the leech were three things, that is to wit,
   wisdom by which he knew the root of the malady, and the bounty by which
   he ministered the medicine, and the power by which he healed him so
   soon. Of these three saith S. Ambrose in the person of the said
   Matthew: This master may take away the sorrow from my heart, and the
   dread of the soul which knoweth the things hid and privy. And this is
   as touching to the first. And as to the second: I have found a leech
   that dwelleth in heaven and sheddeth in earth his medicine. And as to
   the third he said: He may well heal my wounds that knoweth not his own.
   In this blessed sick man that was healed, that is to say S. Matthew,
   three things be to be considered, after S. Ambrose. He took away first
   his malady, he was always agreeable to his leech, and he was always
   clean and whole after he had received his health. Then he said:
   Matthew, follow now thy leech merrily and gladly, and he joying said:
   Now I am no publican, ne am not Levi, I have put away Levi sith I have
   received Christ and follow him, and this is to the first. And as to the
   second, I hate my lineage and flee my life and follow only the Lord.
   And as to the third he said: Who shall depart me from the charity of
   our Lord God which is in me? Tribulation or anguish or hunger? As who
   saith: Nothing. And the manner of healing, as Ambrose saith, was
   treble. First, Jesu Christ bound him with bonds; secondly, he impressed
   in him charity; and thirdly, he cleansed him from all rottenness. And
   Ambrose saith in the person of Matthew: I am bounden with the nails of
   faith, and good life of charity. Secondly, I shall keep thy commandment
   as imprinted in me by charity. And as to the third: Good Lord, come
   soon and open my wounds lest any noieful humour corrupt ne rot the hid
   passions, and wash them that be foul and cleanse them. His gospel that
   he had written with his own hand, was found with the bones of S.
   Barnabas, the which gospel Barnabas bare with him, and laid them upon
   them that were sick, and anon they were healed by the merits of the
   martyr, and were founden in the year of our Lord five hundred.
     __________________________________________________________________

         Here followeth the Life of S. Maurice, and first of his name.

   Maurice is said of amarus, that is bitter, and cis, that is to say,
   vomiting odour, or hard, or of us, that is to say, counsellor or hasty.
   Or it is said of mauron, which, after Isidore, in Greek is said black.
   He had bitterness for his evil idolatry and dilation of his country; he
   was vomiting by covetise of things superfluous; hard and firm to suffer
   torments; counsellor by the admonishment of knights his fellows; hasty
   by ardour and multiplying of good works; black by despising himself.
   And the blessed Eucherius wrote and ordained his passion when he was
   Archbishop of Lyons.

Of S. Maurice or Moris.

   Moris or Maurice was duke of the right holy legion of Thebans. They
   were named Thebans, of Thebes their city. And that region is in the
   parts of the East beyond the parts of Arabia, and it is full of
   richesses, plenteous of fruit, delectable of trees. The indwellers of
   that region be of great bodies and noble in arms, strong in battle,
   subtle in engine, and right abundant in wisdom. And this city had a
   hundred gates, of which is said this verse: Ecce vetus Thebea centum
   jacet obruta portis; that is to say: The town of Thebes with a hundred
   gates right strong is now overthrown. To them James the brother of our
   Lord preached the gospel of our Lord. In that time Diocletian and
   Maximian, emperors, would have utterly destroyed the faith of our Lord
   Jesu Christ, and sent such epistles unto all the provinces where
   christian men dwelt. If anything behoved to be determined or to be
   known, and all the world were assembled on that one party, and Rome
   alone were of that one party, all the world should be as vanquished and
   overcome, and Rome only should abide in the highness of science. And
   wherefore then, ye that be not but a little people, and contrary to the
   commandment of her, refuse ye so follily the establishments of the city
   of Rome? Wherefore receive ye the faith of the gods immortal, or else
   sentence irrevocable of damnation shall be pronounced against you. And
   then the christian people received these letters, and sent again their
   messengers all void without answer. And then Diocletian and Maximian,
   moved by great ire and wrath, sent unto all the provinces and commanded
   that they should come to Rome ready in arms of battle for to discomfit
   all the rebels of the empire of Rome. Then the letters of the emperors
   were sent and directed to the Thebans, which people after the
   commandment of God, they rendered to God that was due to him, and to
   the Csar that was longing to him. Then assembled this chosen legion of
   knights, that is to wit six thousand six hundred and sixty-six knights,
   and were sent to the emperor for to help in their just and lawful
   battles, and not to bear arms against christian men, but rather to
   defend them. And the noble man, Maurice, was duke of this holy legion;
   and they that governed under him, which bare the banners, were named S.
   Candidus, S. Innocent, S. Exsuperius, S. Victor, and S. Constantine,
   all these were captains. Diocletian then sent against the Frenchmen,
   Maximian, which he had made fellow with him in the empire, and
   delivered to him great strength without number, and adjoined to him the
   legion of Thebans. And they had been exhorted of Marcel, the pope, that
   they should rather suffer death than to corrupt the faith of Jesu
   Christ. And when this great host without number had passed the
   mountains and came beneath, the emperor commanded that all they that
   were with him should sacrifice to the idols, and on them that would
   not, they should swear to run upon them as rebels, to be destroyed, and
   specially on christian men. And when the holy knights heard that, they
   departed from the host eight miles farther, and took there a certain
   place delectable, by the river of Rhone, which was named Aganum. And
   when Maximian knew it, he sent knights to them, and commanded that they
   should come hastily unto the sacrifices of the gods with the other; and
   they answered that they might not so do because they held the faith of
   Jesu Christ. And then the emperor, embraised with ire, said: The injury
   celestial is meddled with my despite, and the religion Roman is
   despised with me. Now shall each contumacious knight feel not only for
   me, but to avenge my gods. Then Csar commended his knights that they
   should go and constrain them to do sacrifice to the gods, or else they
   should slay always the tenth man. Then the holy saints stretched their
   heads with joy, and hasted that one tofore that other to come to the
   death. And after, S. Maurice arose up and said to his fellows among
   other things: Enjoy ye with us, and I thank you, for we be all ready
   for to die for the faith of Jesu Christ. We have suffered our fellow
   knights to be slain, and I have suffered your fellows to suffer death
   for Jesu Christ, and I have kept the commandment of God which said to
   Peter: Put thy sword into the sheath. But now, because that we be
   enclosed with the bodies of the knights our fellows, and have our
   clothes red of their blood, let us then follow them by martyrdom. And
   if it please you, let us send this answer unto Csar: We be thy
   knights, sir emperor, and have taken arms to the defence of the common
   weal; in us is no treason ne dread, but in no wise we will forsake the
   law ne faith of Jesu Christ. And when the emperor heard that, he
   commanded to behead yet the tenth man of them. And when that was done,
   one of the bannerers, named Exsuperius, took the banner and stood among
   them and said: Our glorious duke Maurice hath spoken of the glory of
   our fellow knights; ne think not that I take arms for to resist such
   things, but let our right hands cast away such fleshly arms, and let us
   arm us with virtues. And if it please you, let us remand unto the
   emperor such words: We be knights of thine empire, but we confess us to
   be servants of Jesu Christ; we owe unto thee chivalry, and unto him
   innocence, and of thee we attend the reward of our labour, and of him
   we have the beginning of life. And we be ready to receive for him all
   torments, and we shall not depart from his faith. Then Csar commanded
   that his host should environ all that legion of knights, so that none
   should escape. Then were environed the knights of Jesu Christ with
   knights of the devil, that one of them should not escape, and were all
   to-hewn, and smitten off heads and hands, and trodden under the feet of
   the horses, and were sacred martyrs of Christ. And they suffered death
   in the year of our Lord two hundred and eighty. Nevertheless there
   escaped some by the will of our Lord, and came into other regions, and
   preached the name of Jesu Christ, and had in other places victory of
   martyrdom. And it is said that Solutor and Adventor and Octavius went
   unto Turin, and Alexander to Pergamos, Secundus unto Ventimiglia, and
   Victor, Constantine, and Ursin and others escaped. And when the
   butchers divided the prey amongst them, and ate together, they saw an
   old man named Victor pass forth by, and they bade him come and eat with
   them, and he began to demand them how they might eat with joy among so
   many men slain and dead. And when he had heard that they were christian
   men, sighing he wailed greatly, and said he had been well blessed if he
   had been slain with them. And when they apperceived that he was a
   christian man, they anon ran upon him and slew him.

   After this, Maximian at Milan and Diocletian at Nicomedia in one day
   forsook their purple clothing and laid it down for to lead a more
   simple life, and they that were younger, as Constantine, Maximian, and
   Galerian, whom they had ordained Csarians, should govern the empire.
   And as Maximian would again reign and command as a tyrant, he was
   pursued of Constantius, his step-son, and finished his life by hanging.
   And after this the holy body of Innocent, one of that legion which had
   been cast in the river of Rhone, was found, and by Domitian of
   Genanence and Gratus of Autun and Prothase, of the same bishops, in
   their church is honourably buried.

   And there was a paynim, a workman that wrought to make the church with
   others, but he wrought not but on the Sundays in the time when men sang
   and made solemnity of masses in the said church; and there came to him
   a company of saints which ravished him, and beat him, and also reproved
   him, because he wrought in masonry when others did the divine service
   and office in the church, and then, he so corrected, ran to the church,
   to the bishop, and required to be christened. And Ambrose saith thus of
   these martyrs in his preface: The company of these true christian men
   enlumined with divine light, coming from the farther ends of the world,
   which were armed with spiritual arms, and hied to their martyrdom with
   stable faith and diligent constancy, whom the cruel tyrant for to fear
   them tithed two times by the slaughter of the sword, and after, he
   seeing them constant in the faith, commanded them all to have their
   heads smitten off. But they burned in so great charity that they cast
   and threw away their arms and harness, and kneeling on their knees
   received sufferably with a joyous heart the swords of them that
   martyred them, among whom Maurice, embraced in the love and faith of
   Jesu Christ, received the crown of martyrdom. Hc Ambrosius.

   There was a woman which delivered her son, to learn, unto the abbot of
   the church in which the holy saints lie in. And the son died in short
   time after, wherefore the mother wept without remedy. Then S. Maurice
   appeared to her and inquired why she wept so for her son. And she
   answered that as long as she should live she should weep for him. And
   he said to her: Weep no more for him as he were dead, for know thou for
   certain he is with us, and if thou wilt prove it, arise tomorn and
   every day of thy life, and come to matins, and thou shalt hear his
   voice among the monks singing. And ever after, during her life, she
   came every day, and heard the voice of her son singing among the monks.

   When the king Gaturanicus had given all that he had to poor men and to
   churches, he sent a priest for to fetch to him of the relics of this
   holy company. And as he returned with the relics, the tempest arose in
   the lake of Lausanne in such wise that the ship was in peril; he set
   the chasse with the relics against the waves of water, and anon the
   tempest ceased and the waves of the water were appeased.

   It happed in the year of our Lord nine hundred and sixty-three, that
   some monks, by the accord of Charles, had impetred and gotten of
   Nicholas the pope, the body of S. Urban, pope, and of S. Tiburtius,
   martyr. And returning, they visited the church of the holy martyrs, and
   impetred and gat of the abbot and monks that they transported the body
   of S. Maurice and the head of S. Innocent unto Auxerre, into the church
   that S. Germain had dedicated in the name of these martyrs, and brought
   it thither. Peter of Amiens rehearseth that in Burgundy was a proud
   clerk and ambitious which had gotten a church of S. Maurice, and
   usurped it by force against a mighty knight which was contrary and
   against him. And on a time was sung a mass in the end of the gospel,
   that they that enhance them shall be meeked, and they that meek them
   shall be enhanced. This said malerous and cursed clerk laughed and
   said: That is false, for if I had humbled and meeked myself I had not
   had this day so much riches as I have in the church. And as soon as he
   had said that, anon came thunder and lightning from heaven in manner of
   a sword, and entered into his mouth out of which issued the
   blasphemies, and anon he was extinct and died suddenly. Then let us
   devoutly beseech Almighty God that by the merits of this holy martyr S.
   Maurice and his holy fellowship the legion, which is six thousand six
   hundred and sixty-six, that suffered martyrdom, as heretofore is
   rehearsed, we may after this transitory life come unto the everlasting
   bliss in heaven, where he reigneth, world without end. Amen.
     __________________________________________________________________

         Here followeth the Life of S. Justina, and first of her name.

   Justina is said of justice, for by justice she rendered to every each
   that was his: that is to wit, to God obedience; unto her superior
   prelate, reverence; to her like and semblable, concord; to them that
   were beneath and inferior, discipline; to her enemies, patience; unto
   wretches and to them in distress, compassion and works of pity; and to
   herself, holiness.

Of S. Justina.

   Justina the virgin was of the city of Antioch, daughter of a priest of
   the idols. And every day she sat at a window by a priest which read the
   gospel, of whom at the last she was converted. And when the mother of
   her had told it unto her father in his bed, Jesu Christ appeared to
   them with his angels, saying: Come to me, I shall give to you the
   kingdom of heaven. And when he awoke, anon they did them to be baptized
   with their daughter. And this virgin was strongly grieved and vexed of
   Cyprian, and at the last she converted him to the faith of Jesu Christ.
   And Cyprian from his childhood had been an enchanter, for from the time
   that he was seven years old he was consecrated by his parents to the
   devil. And he used the craft of necromancy, and made women to turn into
   juments and beasts as them seemed, and many other things semblable. And
   he was covetous of the love of Justina, and burnt in the concupiscence
   of her, and resorted to his art magic that he might have her for
   himself, or for a man named Acladius, which also burnt in her love.
   Then he called a devil to him, to the end that he might by him have
   Justina, and when the devil came he said to him: Why hast thou called
   me? And Cyprian said to him: I love a virgin, canst thou not so much
   that I may have my pleasure of her? And the devil answered: I that
   might cast man out of Paradise, and procured that Cain slew his
   brother, and made the Jews to slay Christ, and have troubled the men,
   trowest thou I may not do that thou have a maid with thee, and use her
   at thy pleasure? Take this ointment and anoint withal her house
   withoutforth, and I shall come and kindle her heart in thy love, that I
   shall compel her to assent to thee. And the next night following the
   devil went and enforced him to move her heart unto unlawful love. And
   when she felt it, she recommended herself devoutly to God, and
   garnished her with the sign of the cross, and the devil, all afraid of
   the sign of the cross, fled away from her, and came again to Cyprian
   and stood before him. And Cyprian said to him: Why hast thou not
   brought to me this virgin? And the devil said: I see in her a sign
   which feared me, that all strength is failed in me. Then Cyprian left
   him, and called another devil more stronger than he was. And he said: I
   have heard thy commandment and have seen the non-power of him, but I
   shall amend it and accomplish thy will. Then the devil went to her, and
   enforced to move her heart in love, and inflame her courage in things
   not honest. And she recommended her to God devoutly, and put from her
   that temptation by the sign of the cross, and blew on the devil, and
   threw him anon away from her. And he fled all confused and came tofore
   Cyprian, and Cyprian said to him: Where is the maid that I sent thee
   for? and the devil said: I acknowledge that I am overcome and am
   rebutted, and I shall say how, for I saw in her a sign horrible, and
   lost anon all my virtue. Then Cyprian left him, and blamed him, and
   called the prince of the devils. And when he was come he said:
   Wherefore is your strength so little, which is overcome of a maid ?
   Then the prince said to him: I shall go and vex her with great fevers,
   and I shall inflame more ardently her heart, and I shall arouse and
   bedew her body with so ardent desire of thee that she shall be all
   frantic: and I shall offer to her so many things that I shall bring her
   to thee at midnight. Then the devil transfigured himself in the
   likeness of a maid, and came to this holy virgin, and said: I am come
   to thee for to live with thee in chastity, and I pray thee that thou
   say what reward shall we have for to keep us so. And the virgin
   answered: The reward is great, and the labour is small. And the devil
   said to her: What is that then that God commanded when he said: Grow
   and multiply and replenish the earth? Then, fair sister, I doubt that
   if we abide in virginity that we shall make the word of God vain, and
   be also despising and inobedient, by which we shall fall into a
   grievous judgment, where we shall have no hope of reward, but shall run
   in great torment and pain. Then by the enticement of the devil the
   heart of the virgin was smitten with evil thoughts, and was greatly
   inflamed in desire of the sin of the flesh, so that she would have gone
   thereto, but then the virgin came to herself, and considered who that
   it was that spake to her. And anon she blessed her with the sign of the
   cross, and blew against the devil, and anon he vanished away and melted
   like wax, and incontinent she was delivered from all temptation. A
   little while after, the devil transfigured him in the likeness of a
   fair young man, and entered into her chamber, and found her alone in
   her bed, and without shame sprang into her bed and embraced her, and
   would have had a done with her. And when she saw this she knew well
   that it was a wicked spirit, and blessed her as she had done tofore,
   and he melted away like wax. And then by the sufferance of God she was
   vexed with axes and fevers. And the devil slew many men and beasts, and
   made to be said by them that were demoniacs that, a right great
   mortality should be throughout all Antioch, but if Justina would
   consent unto wedlock and have Cyprian. Wherefore all they that were
   sick and languishing in maladies lay at the gate of Justina's father
   and friends, crying that they should marry her and deliver the city of
   that right great peril. Justina then would not consent in no wise, and
   therefore everybody menaced her. And in the sixth year of that
   mortality she prayed for them, and chased and drove thence all that
   pestilence. And when the devil saw that he profited nothing, he
   transumed and transfigured him in the form of Justina for to defoul the
   fame of Justina, and in mocking Cyprian he advanced him that he had
   brought to him Justina. And came to him in likeness of her, and would
   have kissed him as if she had languished for his love. And when Cyprian
   saw him and supposed that it had been Justina, he was all replenished
   with joy, and said: Thou art welcome, Justina, the fairest of all
   women; and anon as Cyprian named Justina, the devil might not suffer
   the name, but as soon as he heard it he vanished away as a fume or
   smoke. And when Cyprian saw him deceived, he was all heavy and
   sorrowful, and was then more burning and desirous in the love of
   Justina, and woke long at the door of the virgin, and as him seemed he
   changed him sometimes into a bird by his art magic, and sometimes into
   a woman, but when he came to the door of the virgin he was neither like
   woman nor bird, but appeared Cyprian as he was. Acladius, by the
   devil's craft, was anon turned into a sparrow, and when he came to the
   window of Justina, as soon as the virgin beheld him, he was not a
   sparrow, but showed himself as Acladius, and began to have anguish and
   dread, for he might neither fly ne leap, and Justina dreading lest he
   should fall and break himself, did do set a ladder by which he went
   down, warning him to cease of his woodness, lest he should be punished
   as a malefactor by the law. Then the devil, being vanquished in all
   things, returned to Cyprian, and held him all confused tofore him, and
   Cyprian said to him: And how art not thou overcome, what unhappy is
   your virtue that ye may not overcome a maid, have ye no might over her,
   but she overcometh you and breaketh you all to pieces? Tell me, I pray
   thee, in whom she hath all this great might and strength. And the devil
   said: If thou wilt swear to me that thou wilt not depart from me ne
   forsake me, I shall show to thee her strength and her victory; to whom
   Cyprian said: By what oath shall I swear? And the devil said: Swear
   thou by my great virtues that thou shalt never depart from me. And
   Cyprian said: I swear to thee by thy great virtues that I shall never
   depart from thee. Then the devil said to him, weeping to be sure of
   him: This maid maketh the sign of the cross, and anon then we wax
   feeble and lose all our might and virtue, and flee from her, like as
   wax fleeth from the face of the fire. And Cyprian said then to him: The
   crucified God is then greater than thou? And the devil said: Yea,
   certainly he is greater than all others, and all them that we here
   deceive, he judgeth them to be tormented with fire inextinguishable.
   And Cyprian said: Then ought I to be made friend of him that was
   crucified, lest I fall hereafter into such pains. To whom the devil
   said: Thou hast sworn by the might and virtues of my strengths, the
   which no man may forswear, that thou shalt never depart from me. To
   whom Cyprian said: I despise thee, and forsake thee and all thy power,
   and renounce thee and all thy devils, and garnish and mark me with the
   sign of the cross, and anon the devil departed all confused.

   Then Cyprian went to the bishop, and when the bishop saw him he weened
   that he were come to put the christian men in error, and said: Let it
   suffice unto thee, Cyprian, them that be without forth, for thou mayst
   nothing prevail against the church of God, for the virtue of Jesu
   Christ is joined thereto, and is not overcome. And Cyprian said: I am
   certain that the virtue of our Lord Jesu Christ is not overcome, and
   then he recounted all that was happened, and did him to be baptized of
   him. And after, he profited much, as well in science as in life. And
   when the bishop was dead, Cyprian was ordained bishop, and placed the
   blessed virgin Justina with many virgins in a monastery, and made her
   abbess over many holy virgins. S. Cyprian sent then epistles to martyrs
   and comforted them in their martyrdom.

   The earl of that country heard of the fame and renomee of Cyprian and
   Justina, and he made them to be presented tofore him and demanded them
   if they would do sacrifice. And when he saw that they abode steadfastly
   in the faith of Jesu Christ, he commanded that he should be put in a
   caldron full of wax, pitch, and grease, burning and boiling. And all
   this gave to them marvellous refreshing, and did to them no grief ne
   pain. And the priest of the idols said to the provost of that place:
   Command me, sire, to stand and to be tofore the caldron, and I shall
   anon overcome all their virtue. And then he came tofore the caldron and
   said: Great is the god Hercules, and Jupiter the father of gods. And
   anon the great fire issued from under the caldron and anon consumed and
   burnt him. Then Cyprian and Justina were taken out of the caldron and
   sentence was given against them, and they were both beheaded together.
   And their bodies were thrown to hounds and were there seven days, and
   after they were taken up and translated to Rome, and as it is said, now
   they rest at Placentia. And they suffered death in the seventh calends
   of October, about the year of our Lord two hundred and eighty, under
   Diocletian.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Here follow the Lives of SS. Cosmo and Damian, and first of their names.

   Cosmo is said of cosmos, which is to say a form, shape, or ornation.
   Or, after Isidore, cosmos in Greek is said clean in Latin. He was a
   form to others in example, he was ornate in good virtues, and clean
   from all vices. Damian is said of dama, which is a beast humble and
   meek. Or damianus is said of dogma, which is doctrine, and ana, that is
   above, or of damum, that is sacrifice. Or Damianus is said as it were
   the hand of our Lord. He had meekness in conversation, supernal
   doctrine in predication, his sacrifice was in mortification of his
   flesh, and he was the hand of our Lord in medicinal curation and
   healing.

Of the Saints Cosmo and Damian.

   Cosmo and Damian were brethren germane, that is of one father and of
   one mother, and were of the city Egea, and born of a religious mother
   named Theodora. They were learned in the art of medicine, and of
   leechcraft, and received so great grace of God that they healed all
   maladies and languors, not only of men but also cured and healed
   beasts. And did all for the love of God without taking of any reward.
   There was a lady which had spent all her goods in medicines, and came
   to these saints, and anon was healed of her sickness, and then she
   offered a little gift to S. Damian, but he would not receive it. And
   she sware and conjured him by horrible oaths that he granted to receive
   it, and not for covetise of the gift, but for to obey to the devotion
   of her that offered it, and that he would not be seen to despise the
   name of our Lord of which he had been conjured. And when S. Cosmo knew
   it, he commanded that his body should not be laid after his death with
   his brother's. And the night following our Lord appeared to S. Cosmo
   and excused his brother. And when Lysias heard their renomee he made
   them to be called tofore him, and demanded their names and their
   country. And then the holy martyrs said: Our names be Cosmo and Damian,
   and we have three other brethren which be named Antimas, Leontius, and
   Euprepius, our country is Arabia, but christian men know not fortune.
   Then the proconsul or judge commanded them that they should bring forth
   their brethren, and that they should all together do sacrifice to the
   idols. And when in no wise they would do sacrifice, but despised the
   idols, he commanded they should be sore tormented in the hands and
   feet. And when they despised his torments, he commanded them to be
   bound with a chain and thrown into the sea, but they were anon
   delivered by the angel of our Lord, and taken out of the sea, and came
   again tofore the judge. And when the judge saw them, he said: Ye
   overcome our great gods by your enchantments; ye despise the torments
   and make the sea peaceable. Teach ye me your witchcraft, and in the
   name of the god Adrian, I shall follow you. And anon as he had said
   this two devils came and beat him greatly in the visage, and he crying
   said: O ye good men, I pray you that ye pray for me to our Lord, and
   they then prayed for him and anon the devils departed. Then the judge
   said: Lo! ye may see how the gods had indignation against me, because I
   thought to have forsaken them, but I shall not suffer my gods to be
   blasphemed. And then he commanded them to be cast into a great fire,
   but anon the flame sprang far from them and slew many of them that
   stood by. And then they were commanded to be put on a torment named
   eculee, but they were kept by the angel of our Lord, and the tormentors
   tormented them above all men, and yet were they taken off without hurt
   or grief, and so came all whole tofore the judge. Then the judge
   commanded the three to be put in prison, and made Cosmo and Damian to
   be crucified, and to be stoned of the people, but the stones returned
   to them that threw them, and hurt and wounded many of them. Then the
   judge, replenished with woodness, made the three brethren to stand by
   the cross, and commanded that four knights should shoot arrows to Cosmo
   and Damian, but the arrows returned and hurt many, and did no harm to
   the martyrs. And when the judge saw that, he was confused in all
   things, he was anguishous unto the death, and did do behead all five
   brethren together.

   Then the christian men doubted of the word that S. Cosmo had said, that
   his brother should not be buried with him, and as they thought thereon
   there came a voice which cried and said: They be all of one substance,
   bury them all together in one place. And they suffered death under
   Diocletian about the year of our Lord two hundred and eighty-seven.

   It happened that a husbandman after that he had laboured in the field
   about reaping of his corn, he slept with open mouth in the field, and a
   serpent entered by his mouth into his body. Then he awoke and felt
   nothing, and after returned into his house. And at even he began to be
   tormented and cried piteously, and called unto his help the holy saints
   of God, Cosmo and Damian, and when the pain and anguish increased he
   went to the church of the saints, and fell suddenly asleep, and then
   the serpent issued out of his mouth like as it had entered.

   There was a man that should have gone a long voyage, and recommended
   his wife to Cosmo and Damian, and left a token with her that, if he
   sent for her by that token she should come to him. And the devil knew
   well the token, and transfigured himself in the form of a man, and
   brought to the woman the sign of her husband and said: Thine husband
   hath sent me from that city to thee for to lead thee to him. And yet
   she doubted for to go with him and said: I know well the token, but
   because he left me in the keeping of the saints Cosmo and Damian, swear
   to me upon their altar that thou shalt bring me to him surely, and then
   I shall go with thee, and he sware like as she had said. Then she
   followed him. And when she came in a secret place the devil would have
   thrown her down off her horse for to have slain her. And when she felt
   that, she cried to God and to the saints Cosmo and Damian for help, and
   anon these saints were there with a great multitude clothed in white,
   and delivered her, and the devil vanished away. And they said to her:
   We be Cosmo and Damian, to whose oath thou believedest, therefore we
   have hied us to come to thine help.

   Felix, the eighth pope after S. Gregory, did do make a noble church at
   Rome of the saints Cosmo and Damian, and there was a man which served
   devoutly the holy martyrs in that church, who a canker had consumed all
   his thigh. And as he slept, the holy martyrs Cosmo and Damian, appeared
   to him their devout servant, bringing with them an instrument and
   ointment of whom that one said to that other: Where shall we have flesh
   when we have cut away the rotten flesh to fill the void place? Then
   that other said to him: There is an Ethiopian that this day is buried
   in the churchyard of S. Peter ad Vincula, which is yet fresh, let us
   bear this thither, and take we out of that morian's flesh and fill this
   place withal. And so they fetched the thigh of the sick man and so
   changed that one for that other. And when the sick man awoke and felt
   no pain, he put forth his hand and felt his leg without hurt, and then
   took a candle, and saw well that it was not his thigh, but that it was
   another. And when he was well come to himself, he sprang out of his bed
   for joy, and recounted to all the people how it was happed to him, and
   that which he had seen in his sleep, and how he was healed. And they
   sent hastily to the tomb of the dead man, and found the thigh of him
   cut off, and that other thigh in the tomb instead of his. Then let us
   pray unto these holy martyrs to be our succour and help in all our
   hurts, blechures and sores, and that by their merits after this life we
   may come to everlasting bliss in heaven. Amen.
     __________________________________________________________________

              Here followeth of S. Forsey, and first of his name.

   Forsey is said of forma, that is the rule of vertu to others by
   example. Or he may be said Forsey, like as sitting out of paradise as
   long as the battle of angels and of devils dured for him. Or he is said
   of tors, which is clarte, and of sedio sedis to sit, for he sitteth in
   the clearness perdurable.

Of S. Forsey.

   Forsey was a bishop, and Bede writeth the history of him. And like as
   he shone in all bounty and virtue, so at his last end he yielded up his
   spirit. And when he passed, he saw two angels coming to him which bare
   his soul up to heaven; and the third angel came with a white shield
   shining, and he went before. And after that he saw devils crying, and
   heard how they said: Let us go tofore and make a battle tofore him. And
   when they were gone tofore him they returned against him, and threw to
   him burning darts, but the angel that went before received them with
   his shield. And then the devils set them against the angels, and said
   that he had always said idle words, and therefore he ought not without
   pain use the blessed life. And the angel said to them: If ye purpose
   not against him the principal vices, he shall not perish for the small.
   And then the devil said: If God be righteous this man shall not be
   saved, for it is written: If ye be not converted and made like as one
   of my little children, ye shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven.
   To whom the angel, excusing him, said. He had indulgence in his heart,
   but he obtained the custom and usage. And the devil said: Like as he
   hath taken evil custom, so let him receive vengeance by the sovereign
   judge. And the holy angel said: We shall be judged tofore God. Then the
   devil was still; yet he arose again, and said: Unto now we trowed that
   God had been true, for all those sins that be not purged in earth, he
   promised that they should everlastingly be punished. This man received
   a vesture of a usurer and was not thereof punished, where is then the
   righteousness of God? To whom the angel said: Hold your peace, for ye
   know not the secret judgments of God. As long as a man hopeth to do his
   penance, so long the mercy of God is ready to the man. The devil
   answered: Here is no place of penance. To whom the angel said: Ye know
   not the profoundness of the judgments of God. Then the devil smote him
   so grievously that, after, when he was re-established to life, the
   token and trace of the stroke abode ever after. Then the devils took
   one that was tormented in the fire and threw him on Forsey so that he
   burnt his shoulder, and then Forsey saw well that it was the usurer of
   whom he had received the vestment. And the angel said to him: Because
   thou receivedst it, he hath burnt thee, if thou hadst not received the
   gift of him that is dead in sins, this pain should not have burnt thee,
   and thou hast this pain of burning because thou receivedst of the
   vestment of him. And that other devil then said: Yet must he pass by
   the strait gate whereas we may surmount and overcome him. And said to
   the angel. God commanded to love his neighbour as himself. And the
   angel said: This man hath done good works to his neighbours. And the
   adversary said: It sufficeth not but if he hath loved them as himself.
   To whom the angel said. The fruit of love is to do well, for God shall
   reward ever man after his works. And the enemy said: Because he hath
   not fulfilled the words of love he shall be damned. Then the devils
   fighting were overcome of the angels, and yet the devil said: If God be
   not wicked, this man shall not escape without pain, for he promised to
   renounce and forsake the world, and he hath not done it. Then the angel
   answered: He loved not those things that be of the world, but he loved
   well to dispend them unto them that had need. And the devil answered:
   In whatsomever manner he loved them it was against the commandment of
   God. And these adversaries thus vanquished, yet the devil began again
   malicious accusations, saying: It is written: If thou show not to the
   wicked man his wickedness, I shall require his blood of thine hand and
   this man hath not showed worthily penance to the sinners. And the angel
   said. When the sinners despise the word that they hear, then the tongue
   of the doctor is letted to speak. When he seeth that his predication is
   heard and despised, then it appertaineth well to a wise man to be
   still, when it is no time to speak. And this battle was right strong,
   so much that they came tofore the angel of God, and that the good had
   overcome the adversaries. Then this holy man was environed with great
   clearness, and as Bede saith one of the angels said to him: Behold the
   world. Then he turned him, and saw a valley dark and tenebrous, and
   four fires in the air above, which were far that one from that other.
   And the angel said to him: These be four fires that burn, that one is
   the fire of leasings, for in baptism all promise to renounce the devil
   and all his works, and they accomplish it not. The second is of
   covetise, that is when the richesse of the world is set tofore heavenly
   things. The third is of dissension, that is when men dare not offend
   their neighbours for villainous and vicious things. The fourth is of
   wickedness and felony, when they despoil them that be feeble and poor,
   by fraud and deceit, as by extortion and tyranny for nought. And after,
   these fires assembled together in one, and he approached to it and
   doubted and was afeard, and said to the angel: Sir, this fire
   approacheth to me. And the angel answered: This that thou hast not set
   afire shall not burn thee, for this fire here examineth the people
   after their merits, and like as the bodies burn by will not convenable,
   right so burneth the fire by pain due. And at the last the soul was
   brought again to his proper body, and his neighbours wept, which had
   supposed that he had been dead. And after this he lived a certain time,
   and finished his life laudably in good works.
     __________________________________________________________________

 Here followeth the feast of S. Michael the archangel, and first the exposition
                                  of his name.

   Michael is expounded sometimes as God. And oft-times, as S. Gregory
   saith, when a thing of marvellous virtue is done, Michael is sent
   forth, so that he, by the deed and the name, be given to understand
   that none may do that God may do, and therefore be attributed to him
   many things of marvellous virtue. For like as Daniel witnesseth, he
   shall arise and address in the time of Antichrist against him, and
   shall stand as a defender and keeper for them that be chosen. He also
   fought with the dragon and his angels, and casting them out of heaven,
   had a great victory. He also had a great plea and altercation with the
   devil for the body of Moses, because he would not show it; for the
   children of Israel should have adored and worshipped it. He received
   the souls of saints and brought them into the paradise of exultation
   and joy. He was prince of the synagogue of the Jews, but now he is
   established of our Lord, prince of the church of Jesu Christ. And as it
   is said, he made the plagues of Egypt, he departed and divided the Red
   Sea, he led the people of Israel by the desert and set them in the land
   of promission, he is had among the company of holy angels as bannerer,
   and bearing the sign of our Lord, he shall slay by the commandment of
   God, right puissantly, Antichrist that shall be in the Mount of Olivet.
   And dead men shall arise at the voice of this same archangel. And he
   shall show at the day of judgment the cross, the spear, the nails and
   the crown of thorns of Jesu Christ.

Of S. Michael.

   The holy solemnity of S. Michael is said, appearing, dedication,
   victory and memory. The apparition of this angel is manifold. The first
   is when he appeared in the Mount of Gargan. This mountain is in Naples,
   which is named Gargan and is by the city named Syponte. And in the year
   of our Lord three hundred and ninety, was in the same city of Syponte a
   man which was named Garganus, which, after some books, had taken that
   name of the mountain, or else the mountain took the name of the man.
   And he was right rich, and had a great multitude of sheep and beasts,
   and as they pastured about the sides of the mountains it happed that a
   bull left the other beasts, and went upon high on the mountain and
   returned not home again with the other beasts. Then this rich man, the
   owner, took a great multitude of servants, and did do seek this bull
   all about, and at the last he was founden on high on the mountain by
   the entry of a hole or a cave. And then the master was wroth because he
   had strayed alone from other beasts, and made one of his servants to
   shoot an arrow at him. And anon the arrow returned with the wind and
   smote him that had shot it, wherewith they of the city were troubled
   with this thing, and went to the bishop and inquired of him what was to
   be done in this thing, that was so wonderful. And then he commanded
   them to fast three days and to pray unto God. And when this was done S.
   Michael appeared to the bishop, saying: Know ye that this man is so
   hurt by my will. I am Michael the archangel, which will that this place
   be worshipped in earth, and will have it surely kept. And therefore I
   have proved that I am keeper of this place by the demonstrance and
   showing of this thing. And then anon the bishop and they of the city
   went with procession unto that place, and durst not enter into it, but
   made their prayers withoutforth.

   The second apparition was in the year of our Lord seven hundred and
   ten, in a place which was named Tumba, by the seaside, six miles from
   the city of Apricens. S. Michael appeared to the bishop of that city
   and commanded him to do make a church in the foresaid place, like as it
   was made in the mount of Gargan, and in like wise should hallow the
   memory of S. Michael there. And the bishop doubted in what place it
   should be made. And S. Michael said to him in the place where he should
   find a bull hid of thieves. And yet he doubted of the largeness of the
   place, and S. Michael appeared to him, and said that he should make it
   of the brede that he should find that the bull had trodden and traced
   with his feet. And there were two rocks which no man's power might
   remove. Then S. Michael appeared to a man and commanded him that he
   should go to that same place and take away the two rocks. And when he
   came, he removed the two rocks as lightly as they had weighed nothing.
   And when the church was edified there, Michael set a piece of stone of
   marble there, upon which he stood, and a part of the pall that he had
   laid on the altar of that other church he brought thither to this
   church. And because they had great penury and need of water, they made,
   by the admonishment of the angel, a hole in a stone of marble, and anon
   there flowed out so much water that unto this day they be sustained by
   the benefit thereof. And this apparition is solemnly hallowed the
   seventeenth kalends of November in that place.

   And there happed in the same place a miracle worthy to be put in
   remembrance. This mountain is environed about with the sea-ocean, but
   on S. Michael's day it avoideth twice and giveth way to the people. And
   as a great company of people went to the church, it happed that a woman
   great with child, nigh her time of deliverance, was in the company, and
   when they returned, the waves and water came with great force, so that
   the company for dread fled to the rivage. And the woman great with
   child might not flee, but was taken and wrapped in the floods of the
   sea, but S. Michael kept the wife all whole, and she was delivered and
   childed among the waves in the middle of the sea. And she took the
   child between her arms and gave it suck, and after, when the sea was
   withdrawn, she went a-land all whole with her child.

   The third apparition happed in the time of Gregory the pope. For when
   the said pope had established the litanies for the pestilence that was
   that time, and prayed devoutly for the people, he saw upon the castle
   which was said sometime: The memory of Adrian, the angel of God, which
   wiped and made clean a bloody sword, and put it into a sheath. And
   thereby he understood that his prayers were heard. Then he did do make
   there a church in the honour of S. Michael, and that castle is yet
   named the Castle Angel. And yet another apparition was in the Mount of
   Gargan when he appeared and gave victory to them of Syponte, which is
   hallowed the eighth ides of July.

   The fourth apparition is that which is in the Gerarchy of the same
   angels. For the first apparition is said Epiphany, that is, the
   apparition of sovereigns, the second is said Hyperphania, that is, the
   mean apparition, and that other is said Hypophania, that is, the most
   low apparition. And Gerarchia is said of gerar, that is, holy, and of
   archos, that is, a prince, and so Gerarchia is to say a holy
   principate, and every Gerarchia containeth three orders of angels. For
   the sovereign Gerarchia after the assignation of S. Denis containeth
   Cherubim, Seraphim, and the thrones: the middle containeth the
   dominations, the virtues, and the potestates; and the last containeth
   the principates, angels, and archangels. And the ordinance and
   disposition of them may be seen by semblable and like in earthly
   principates. For of the ministers that be about a king, some work
   immediately about the person of the king, as cubiculers, counsellors,
   and the assistants, and they be like unto the order of the first
   Gerarchia. Some there be that have the rule of the realm, some in one
   province, some in another, as be lieutenants, captains of chivalry, and
   judges, and they be like unto the second Gerarchia. And others be
   assigned to particular offices in the divers parts of the realm, as
   mayors, sheriffs, bailiffs, and such other less offices, and these be
   like to the orders of the third Gerarchia. The three orders of the
   first Gerarchia be taken inasmuch as they assist God and be converted
   to him. And thereto be three things necessary, that is to wit,
   sovereign love, and that is as touching the order of seraphim, which be
   said fiery; perfect knowledge, that is touching cherubim, which is as
   much to say as plenitude of science and perpetual fruition or usance;
   as touching the thrones which be said sitting, for God sitteth and
   resteth in them. The three orders of the middle Gerarchia be taken and
   had inasmuch as they dominate and govern the university of people in
   common. This seigniory and this governing is in three things: the first
   in seigniory and commanding, and that appertaineth to the order of
   domination, which seignioreth above others that be lower, and
   addresseth them in all the ministries divine, and commandeth to them
   all things. And that saith Zechariah, in the fifth chapter, that one
   angel saith to another: Run and speak to the child. Secondly, in doing,
   and this appertaineth to the order of virtues. To whom nothing ne is
   impossible to execute which that is commanded to them, for to them is
   given power to do all things difficult which be pertaining to divine
   mystery, and therefore it is attributed to them to do miracles.
   Thirdly, in constraining, for to constrain the impediments and
   destourbles, and this appertaineth to the order of the potestates. And
   this is signified in Tobit, where Raphael bound the devil in the
   overest desert. The three orders of the last Gerarchia be taken after
   that they have government and limited. Some of them seigniory and
   govern in one province, and that be they of the order of the
   principates, like as the prince of Persia seignioreth upon the
   Persians, like as it is read in Daniel in the tenth chapter. And some
   be deputed to the governance of a multitude of a city, and they be said
   archangels, and the other be committed to the governance of one person,
   and they be said angels, and be said to show the small things and
   little, because that their service and ministry is limited unto one
   man. Archangels be said more and greater, for the weal of a multitude
   is better and more worthy than the weal of one man. In the assignation
   of the orders of the first Gerarchia, Gregory accordeth with Dionysius,
   and Bernard also, which is taken about their fruition, which is in
   burning love as touching to Seraphim, in profound cognition as to
   Cherubim, and in perpetual retention as touching the thrones. But they
   discord in the assignation of the middle and last two orders, that is,
   principates and virtues. Gregory and Bernard have another
   consideration, that is to wit. that the middle Gerarchia is in his
   seigniory or prelacy, and the last is taken in his pity or
   ministration. The prelacy in angels is treble. For angels dominate over
   spirits angelic, and they be said dominations, and they dominate also
   over good works, and they be said principates, and they dominate over
   devils, and they be said potestates, and the order and the degrees of
   their dignity appeareth in these things. The ministry of them is
   threefold. Some standeth in working, some in teaching, and in teaching,
   some more and some less. The first appertaineth to virtues, the second
   to archangels, and the third to angels. The fifth apparition is it
   which is read in the History Tripartite. There is a place beside
   Constantinople whereas sometime the goddess Vesta was worshipped, but
   now there is builded a church in the honour of S. Michael, and is named
   Michael's place. There a man that was named Aquiline was taken with a
   right great fever, moved of red colour, and the physicians gave to him,
   so burning in an ague, a drink, which anon he vomited out at his mouth,
   and what he ate or drank always he vomited and casted out, so that he
   was nigh dead, and did him to be borne to that place, and supposed well
   there to be soon dead or healed. And then S. Michael appeared to him
   and said to him that he should make a confection of honey and wine and
   pepper, and whatsomever he ate he should wet therein, and so should he
   have plein health. Which thing he did, and anon he was delivered from
   his malady, how well that after the judgment of the physicians that
   drink or medicine was contrary to them that be choleric. This is had in
   the History Tripartite.

   Secondly, this solemnity of S. Michael is said victory, and the victory
   of S. Michael is manifold. And also of other angels, the first is that
   S. Michael gave to them of Syponte in this manner. After a certain time
   that the place was found, they of Naples were yet paynims, and ordained
   their host for to fight against them of Syponte and Benevento. And by
   the counsel of the bishop, the christian men took truce for three days
   that they might fast those three days and require their patron S.
   Michael unto their aid and help. In the third night the holy S. Michael
   appeared to the said bishop and said that their prayers were heard, and
   promised them to have victory, and commanded them to run on their
   enemies at the fourth hour of the day without more tarrying. And when
   they ran against them the mountain of Gargan began strongly to tremble
   and a great tempest arose, so that lightning flew about and a dark
   cloud covered the mountain, so that six hundred of their adversaries
   died of the fiery arrows which came from the air. And all the residue
   of them, that were not slain, left their idolatry and submitted them
   anon to the christian faith. The second victory of S. Michael was when
   he put out of heaven the dragon Lucifer with all his followers. Of
   which is said in the Apocalypse: Factum est prelium magnum, Apocalypsis
   duodecimo. For when Lucifer coveted to be like to God, the archangel
   which bare the banner of the celestial host, came and chased Lucifer
   out of heaven with all them that followed him, and hath inclosed them
   in dark air unto the day of doom. For they be not suffered to dwell in
   heaven, neither in the upper part of the air, because that place is
   clear and delectable, ne yet to be in earth with us, to the end that
   they should not overmuch tempt ne torment us. But they be in the air
   between heaven and earth, so that when they look upward they may behold
   the joy that they have lost, and have thereof great sorrow, and when
   they look downward they may see the men mount up to heaven from whence
   they fell. Notwithstanding, by the divine dispensation they descend oft
   unto us in earth, as like it hath been showed to some holy men. They
   fly about us as flies, they be innumerable, and like flies they fill
   the air without number. Whereof saith Haymo: As the philosophers said,
   and doctors have opinion, this air is also full of devils and of wicked
   spirits as the sunbeams be full of small motes, which is small dust or
   powder. And how well that they be so many, nevertheless after the
   sentence of Origen, their power ne strength is but right little, and
   that we may overcome them here. And if any of them be overcome of any
   holy man, he may never after tempt a man of that vice of which he is
   overcome. The third victory is that angels have every day of the devils
   when they fight for us against them, and deliver us from their
   temptations. And they deliver us in three manners. First, in refraining
   the power of the devil, like as it is said (Apocalypsis vicesimo), of
   the angel that bound the devil and sent him into abysm, that is the pit
   of hell; and Tobit, which saith that the angel Raphael bound the devil
   in the outerest desert. And this binding is none other thing but the
   refraining of his puissance and might. Secondly, he delivereth us in
   refraining our covetise, the which thing is in Genesis xxxii. chap.:
   there where he saith that, the angel took the sinew of Jacob, and anon
   it dried up. Thirdly, in impressing in our hearts the memory of the
   passion of our Lord, this is signified Apocalypsis vii., where it is
   said: Ne will ye not grieve ne noye in the earth ne in the sea, ne the
   trees, till we have marked them. Ezechiel saith: The sign of Thau be in
   the foreheads of the people. Thau is made like a headless cross, and
   they that be marked therewith dread not the angel smiting, whereof is
   said: Upon whom ye see Thau, slay them not. The fourth victory is that
   the archangel Michael shall have of Antichrist when he shall slay him.
   Then Michael, the great prince, shall arise, as it is said Danielis
   xii.: He shall arise for them that be chosen as a helper and a
   protector, and shall strongly stand against Antichrist. And after, as
   the gloss saith: Antichrist shall feign him to be dead, and shall hide
   him three days, and after, he shall appear saying that he is risen from
   death to life, and the devils shall bear him by art magic, and shall
   mount up into the air, and all the people shall marvel and worship him.
   And at the last he shall mount up on the Mount of Olivet, and when he
   shall be in a pavilion, in his siege, entered into that place where our
   Lord ascended, Michael shall come and shall slay him. Of which victory
   is understood, after S. Gregory, that which is said in the Apocalypse.
   The battle is made in heaven. This word of the treble battle in heaven
   is expounded of the battle that he had with Lucifer when he expulsed
   him out of heaven, and of the battle that he had with the devils that
   torment us. And of this last solemnity is said dedication, because on
   this day the said place in the Mount Gargan was dedicate and hallowed
   of him by revelation. For when they of Syponte were returned from the
   occision of their adversaries, and had so noble victory, yet doubted
   they to enter into the said place and hallow it to the archangel. Then
   the bishop went and asked counsel of Pope Pelagius, and he answered: If
   the church ought to be dedicated, that ought to be on that day that the
   victory was done, and if it please otherwise to S. Michael, men ought
   to require his will thereof. And then the pope, the bishop, and the men
   of the city, fasted three days, and S. Michael appeared to the bishop
   and said: It is no need to you to dedicate and hallow that I have
   hallowed, and commanded that he should enter into that place the next
   day with the people, and should frequent it with prayers, and they
   should feel that he should be a special patron to them. And he gave to
   them a sign of consecration, that was that they should go up thereto by
   a postern towards the east, and they should find there the steps of a
   man impressed in a marble stone. Then the bishop on the morn, and much
   great people, came to the place and entered in, and found a great cave
   and three altars of which two were set toward the south, and the third
   toward the east much honourably, and was covered all about with a red
   mantle. And when the solemnities of the masses were done, and the
   people had taken holy communion, all returned to their proper places,
   and the bishop left there priests and clerks for to sing and say goodly
   the divine office. And within the said church sourdeth clear water and
   sweet, which the common people drinketh and be healed thereby of many
   diverse maladies. And when the pope heard these things he established
   to hallow this day in the honour of S. Michael and of all the holy
   angels, and to be kept holy through all the world. Fourthly, this
   solemnity is said the Memory of S. Michael, how well that we all
   solemnise this feast in the honour of all the archangels of our Lord.
   We do the memory and the honours generally, and it appertaineth, and is
   behoveful to us, to give to them laud, praising, and honour, by
   manifold reasons expert, that is to wit, for they be our keepers, our
   ministers, our brethren, our neighbours, the bearers of our souls into
   heaven, and representers of our prayers unto God, right noble knights
   of the king of heaven, and perdurable comforters of them that be in
   heaviness and tribulations. And first we ought to honour them for they
   be our keepers, wherefore we ought to worship them. To every man be
   given two angels, one evil, or to stir him to ill, and one good, to
   keep him. The good angels be deputed to the keeping of men in their
   birth, and after the nativity also, and be always with them when they
   be full grown. And in these three estates is an angel necessary to a
   man. For when he is yet little in the womb he may be dead and be
   damned. When he is out of the womb before he be grown, he may be let
   from baptism, and when he is grown he may be drawn to divers sins. The
   devil deceiveth them that be grown, by fallacy and by hearkening, he
   flattereth them by delices and blandishes, and oppresseth virtue by
   violence. Therefore it is need that a good angel be deputed to the
   keeping of a man to the end that he address and induce man against the
   fallacy, that he exhort, and summon him to do good against fiattering
   and blandishes, and that he defend him from oppression against
   violence. And the profit of the keeping of the angel to a man may be
   assigned in four manners. The first, that the soul may profit in the
   weal and good of grace, and this doth the angel to the soul in three
   manners. And the first is in to removing all letting to do well and
   good, and that is signified in Exodi duodecimo, where the angel smote
   all the first begotten of Egypt Secondly, in awaking or exciting from
   sloth and that is signified Zachari quarto: The angel of the Lord hath
   aroused me as a man that is waked out of his sleep. Thirdly, in leading
   a man in the way of penance and bringing again and this is signified in
   Tobit, in the fifth chapter in the angel that led him and brought him
   again. The second profit that the angel doth, is that he fall not into
   sin, and this doth the angel in three manners. First, in letting the
   evil to be done that it be not done, and this is signified in the book
   of Numbers in the twenty-second chapter. For Balaam, which went for to
   curse Israel, was let of the angel. Secondly, in blaming the sin past,
   that man depart from it, and that is signified in the book of Judges in
   the second chapter, how the angels blamed the children of Israel for
   breaking of the law, wherefor they wept. Thirdly in bringing strength
   for to take away the sin present, and this is signified in Lot, when he
   was led out by force, he, his wife, and his daughters from the city of
   Sodom, that is to wit, from the customance of sin. The third effect and
   profit is that if he fall, that he arise anon again, and this doth the
   angel in three manners. First, in moving a man to contrition, and this
   is signified in Tobit, in the twelfth chapter, where, as he taught
   Tobias to anoint the eyes of his father with gall, that is to
   understand, contrition of the heart anointeth the eyes of the heart.
   Secondly, in purging lips by confession, and that this is signified in
   Isaiah, the fifth chapter, where the angel purged the lips of Isaiah.
   Thirdly, in enjoying to satisfaction, and that is signified in Luke,
   fifteenth chapter, that saith that greater joy is in heaven of a sinner
   doing penance than of ninety-nine rightful men which need no penance.
   The fourth profit is that man fall not so oft into sin as the devil
   inciteth him thereto, and this doth he in three manners, that is to
   wit, in refraining the puissance and might of the devil, in affeebling
   the covetise and desire of sin, and in imprinting in our minds the
   passion of our Lord Jesu Christ, of which things it is said tofore. We
   ought to honour them, secondly, for they be our administrators, like as
   the apostle saith, ad Hebreos x. They be spirits of administration, all
   spirits be sent for us. The superiors be sent to the moyens, the moyens
   be sent to the lowest, and the lowest be sent to us, and this sending
   cometh of the divine bounty. And in this sending appeareth how much the
   divine bounty appertaineth to the love of our health. Secondly, of the
   charity of the angel; for this sending appertaineth that it be of
   ardent charity specially to desire the health of others, wherefore
   Isaiah saith: Lo! I am here Lord, send me forth. And the angels may
   help us because they see that we have need of them, and may well
   overcome the evil spirits and angels, and therefore the law of charity
   angelic requireth that they be sent to us. Thirdly, this sending is
   needful to the need of man, for they be sent to inflame our affection
   to love, wherefore, in sign hereof, it is read that they were sent in a
   fiery chair. Secondly, they be sent to enlumine to understanding unto
   knowledge, and this is signified Apocalypsis x. in the angel which had
   a book open in his hand. Thirdly, they be sent for to strengthen in us
   all our perfection unto the end, and that is signified I Regum xix.,
   where the angel brought to Elijah a loaf of bread baked under ashes and
   a vessel of water, and he ate and walked in the strength of that meat
   unto the mount of God, Oreb. Thirdly, they ought to be honoured for
   they be our brethren and our neighbours, for all they that be chosen be
   taken to the orders of angels, the some unto the overeat, and some to
   the lowest, and some to the middle, for the diversity of their merits.
   And howbeit that the Blessed Virgin be above all, like as S. Gregory
   showeth in his homily. For he saith: There be some that take the small
   things, but yet they leave not to show it to the brethren, and they run
   in the number of angels. And there be they that may take the
   sovereignties of the secrets celestial and show it to others, and these
   be the archangels celestial. And these be the archangels, and be they
   that make marvellous signs and works puissantly, and these be they that
   with virtues work. And some there be that chase away the wicked spirits
   by the virtue of prayer and by strength of their power received of God,
   and these have their merits with the potestates. And there be some that
   by their virtues mount above the merits of them that be chosen, and
   dominate over the brethren, and sort their merit with the principates.
   And there be some that overcome and dominate over all vices in
   themselves, and they by right be called of the world, gods among men.
   Like as God said to Moses: Lo! I have established the god of Pharaoh,
   and these be with the dominations. And there be some that sit in the
   thrones like presidents and examine the works and deeds of others, by
   whom when holy church is governed, all they that be chosen be judged,
   and these be with the thrones, and be they that with the charity and
   love of God and their neighbour before others be full, and these by
   their merits have taken their sort in the number of cherubim, for
   cherubim is said the plenitude of science, and as Paul saith, the
   plenitude of the law is love and charity. And these be they that,
   embraced in the burning love of supernal contemplation, wish only to be
   in the desire of their maker. They desire nothing of this world, but
   only be fed in the love of the Lord perdurable, they eschew all earthly
   things, and overpass by thought all temporal things. They love, they
   burn, and rest in that burning love, they burn in loving and be
   inflamed in speaking, and all that ever they touch in any manner by
   word, they make them anon to burn in the love of God. And where shall
   these take their sort but among the number of Seraphim? Hc Gregorius;
   this saith S. Gregory. Fourthly, they ought to be honoured because that
   they be bearers of our souls into Paradise, and this do they in three
   manners. The first, in making ready the way, as Malachi saith in the
   third chapter: Lo! here I send mine angel which shall make ready thy
   way tofore thy face. Secondly, in bearing them to heaven by the way
   made ready, like as it is said in Exodus the four and twentieth
   chapter: I send to thee mine angel which shall keep thee in thy way,
   and shall bring thee to the land which I have promised to thy fathers.
   Thirdly, in setting them in heaven, and hereof saith Luke, cap. xvi. It
   was done when the beggar died, his soul was borne of angels into
   Abraham's bosom. Fifthly, they ought to be honoured because they be
   representers of our souls tofore God, and this representation is in
   three manners. First, they represent our prayers tofore God, and this
   saith Tobit the xii. chapter. When thou prayedest with tears and
   buryedest the dead men, I offered thy prayer to our Lord. Secondly,
   they allege for us tofore our Lord, and hereof saith Job the xxxiii.
   chapter. If there were an angel speaking for him and said one of a
   thousand, that he show the equity of the man, our Lord should have
   mercy and pity on him. Also Zechariah primo. And the angel of our Lord
   answered and said: O Lord of all strengths, shalt not thou have pity of
   Jerusalem and of the cities of Judah to whom thou art wroth? This is
   the seventieth year. Thirdly, they show the sentence of God, as it is
   said in Daniel that the angel Gabriel flying said: Sith the beginning
   of the prayers the word issued out, that is to wit, the sentence of
   God, and I am come for to show it to thee, for thou art a man of
   desires. Of these three things saith Bernard upon the Canticles. The
   angel seeketh moyen between the love and the lover in offering the
   desires and bringing gifts, and moveth her and pleaseth him. Sixthly,
   they ought to be honoured, for they be the right noble knights of the
   king perdurable, after that Job saith in the twenty-fifth chapter: Is
   not this the noble number of his knights? For as we see in the knights
   of some king, that some of them dwell always in the hall of the king,
   and accompany the king, and sing honour and solace to the king, and
   some others keep the cities and castles of the king, and others fight
   against the enemies of the king, thus is it of the knights of Christ.
   Some be in the hall royal, that is to say in the heaven imperial, and
   accompany always the king of kings, and sing always songs and gladness
   to his honour and glory, saying: Sanctus, sanctus, sanctus, blessing,
   and clearness, and wisdom. And the others keep the cities, the towns,
   the castles, and the faubourgs, they be deputed to the keeping of us,
   keeping the state of virgins, of continents, of married people, and the
   castles of religion, whereof Isaiah saith: Upon the walls of Jerusalem
   I have established keepers. Others there be that fight and vanquish the
   enemies of God, of whom it is said in the Apocalypse: There is a battle
   made in heaven, that is, after some exposition in the church militant,
   Michael and his angels fought with the dragon. The seventh and the last
   they ought to be honoured, because they be comforters of them that be
   in tribulation, and hereof saith Zechariah in the first chapter: The
   angel that spake to me good words were words of comfort. And this do
   they in three manners. First, in comforting and strengthening, Danielis
   decimo. For whereas Daniel fell, the angel of our Lord touched him and
   said: Be not afeard ne dread thee nothing, peace be to thee, comfort
   thyself and be boystous. Secondly, in keeping from impatience, and this
   saith David: He hath commanded his angels to keep thee in all thy ways.
   Thirdly, in refreshing and lessing that tribulation, and that is
   signified in Daniel, the third chapter, there whereas the angel of our
   Lord descended in the furnace with three children, and made the middle
   of the furnace as it had been a wind blowing with a soft dew. By these
   ensamples we may understand that we ought to give honour to the holy
   company of angels, and to pray them to keep us in this wretched life
   from our enemies the devil, the world, and the flesh, that after, when
   we shall depart, they present our souls unto Almighty God in heaven,
   there to dwell and

   abide sempiternally with them, quod ipse prestatur,
   qui sine fine vivit et regnat in secula seculorum. Amen.
     __________________________________________________________________

           Here followeth the Life of Jerome, and first of his name.

   Jeronimus is said of gerar, that is holy, and of nemus, that is to say
   a wood. And so Jerome is as much to say as a holy wood. Or it is said
   of norma, that is to say law, whereof is said in his legend that Jerome
   is interpreted a holy law. He was farforth holy, that is to say firm or
   clean or dyed of blood, or deputed to holy usage, like as vessels of
   the temple be said holy for they be ordained to holy usage. He was
   holy, that is to say steadfast, in holy work by long perseverance, he
   was clean in mind by purity, he was dyed in blood by thinking of the
   passion of our Lord Jesu Christ, he was deputed to holy usage by the
   exposition of holy Scripture, he was said a holy wood by the
   conversation that he sometimes did and abode in the wood. And he was
   said law for the rules of his discipline which he taught to his monks,
   or because he expounded and interpreted the holy law and Scripture.
   Jerome also is interpreted the vision of beauty or judging words. There
   is beauty manifold. First is spiritual, which is in the soul. Second,
   moral, which is in honesty of manners. The third is intellectual, which
   is in the angels. The fourth is substantial, which is divine. The fifth
   is heavenly, which is in the country of saints. This five-fold beauty
   had S. Jerome in himself. For he had spiritual in diversity of virtues;
   the moral had he in the honesty of his life; he had intellectual in the
   excellence of purity; he had the substantial in burning charity; he had
   the celestial in the perdurable and excellent clearness or clarte. He
   judged the speeches and words, his own well examined in clearly
   pronouncing, the others being true in confirming, the false condemning
   and confusing, and the doubtful in expounding.

Of S. Jerome.

   Jerome was the son of a noble man named Eusebius, born of the town
   Stridon, which is in the utter end of Dalmatia and of Pannonia. He,
   being yet a child, went to Rome and was there taught in letters of
   Greek, Latin, and Hebrew. He had for his teacher in grammar Donatus, in
   rhetoric Victorinus, the orator, and he was day and night occupied, and
   exercised himself in divine Scriptures, which he drew covetously, and
   after shed it out abundantly. And as he writeth in an epistle to
   Eustochius, that on a time as he read on a day Plato, and in the night
   Tully desirously, because that the book of the prophets pleased him
   not, he was about mid-Lent taken with a sudden and burning fever, that
   all his body was cold, in such wise that there was no vital heat save a
   little which he felt in his breast. And as the exequies for his death
   were making ready, he was suddenly brought to the judgment of God, and
   there he was demanded of what condition he was, and he answered boldly
   that he was a christian man. And the judge said: Thou liest, thou art a
   Ciceronian, and no christian man, whereas thy treasure is, there is thy
   heart. Then S. Jerome was still and said nothing, and anon then the
   judge commended that he should be sore beaten. Then he cried and said:
   Have mercy on me, Lord, have mercy on me. Then they that were assisting
   our Lord prayed him that he would forgive this young man his trespass.
   And he then began to swear and say: Lord, if ever I read or hear more
   secular books, I shall forsake thee. And with the words of this promise
   and oath he was let go, and anon he revived. And then he saw himself
   all bewept. And of the strokes of the beatings that he received tofore
   the throne of our Lord, the tokens of the strokes and lashes were seen
   on his shoulders right horrible and great. And from then forthon he
   became good, and read divine books with as great study as ever he had
   read the books of poetry and of paynims. And when he was
   nine-and-twenty years old he was ordained cardinal priest in the church
   of Rome. And when Liberius was dead all the people cried to have S.
   Jerome sovereign priest. And when he began to blame the jollity and
   lavish life of some clerks and monks, they had indignation and despite
   of him, and lay in a wait to hurt and slander him. And as John Beleth
   saith: They scorned and mocked him by the clothing of a woman. For on a
   night when he arose to matins, as he was accustomed, he found a woman's
   clothing lying by his bed which his enemies had laid there. And he
   weeping that they had been his own, did them on, and so clothed came in
   to the church, and this did they that had envy at him because others
   should ween that he had a woman in his chamber. And when he saw that,
   he eschewed their woodness and went unto Gregory Nazianzen, bishop of
   Constantinople. And when he had learned of him the holy Scripture and
   holy letters, he went into desert, where, what, and how much he
   suffered for Christ's sake, he recounted to Eustochium, and said that
   when he was in that great desert and waste wilderness, which is so
   burnt by the sun that it gave to the monks a right dry habitacle, I
   supposed me then to be at Rome among the delices, and my members
   scalded, burnt, made dry and black like to the skin of a Morian or an
   Ethiopian, and I was always in tears and weepings. And when the very
   sleep came and oppressed me against which I oft repugned, then I laid
   my dried bones on the bare earth. Of meats and drink I speak not, for
   they that were sick used only cold water, and for to take any thing
   boiled or roasted, it was to them lechery. And yet nevertheless I was
   oft fellow unto scorpions and wild beasts, and yet the carols of
   maidens and the embracements of lechery grew in my cold body and in my
   flesh, wherefore I wept continually, and for to adaunt and subdue my
   proud flesh I rose at midnight all the week long, joining oft the night
   with the day, and I ceased not to beat my breast, praying our Lord to
   render to me the peaceable peace of my flesh. And I also doubted my
   proper cell as fearing my conceits and thoughts, wherefore I went and
   departed wroth, and revenging myself, passed alone through the sharp
   and thick deserts. And as our Lord is witness, after many weepings and
   tears, it seemed to me that I was among the company of angels, this
   during four years.

   Then his penance thus done, he returned to the town of Bethlehem, where
   as a wise and a prudent beast he offered himself to abide by the crib
   of our Lord. And then his holy Bible, which with study he had
   translated, and other books he read, and led the day forth with fasting
   unto even. And there he assembled many disciples unto him for to Iabour
   there in his holy purpose, and abode there in the translation of holy
   Scripture fifty-five years and six months, and remained a pure virgin
   unto the end of his life. And how well that it be said in his legend
   that he was ever a virgin, yet nevertheless he wrote of himself to
   Palmatian: I bear virginity into heaven, not for that I have virginity,
   but for I marvel more that I have it not. Then at the last he being
   weary for to travail, lay down in his bed wherover hung a cord on a
   beam, whereon he laid and held his hands for to lift up himself that he
   might do the service of God as much as he might.

   On a day towards even Jerome sat with his brethren for to hear the holy
   lesson, and a lion came halting suddenly in to the monastery, and when
   the brethren saw him, anon they fled, and Jerome came against him as he
   should come against his guest, and then the lion showed to him his foot
   being hurt. Then he called his brethren, and commanded them to wash his
   feet and diligently to seek and search for the wound. And that done,
   the plant of the foot of the lion was sore hurt and pricked with a
   thorn. Then this holy man put thereto diligent cure, and healed him,
   and he abode ever after as a tame beast with them. Then S. Jerome saw
   that God had sent him to them, not only for the health of his foot, but
   also for their profit, and joined to the lion an office, by the accord
   of his brethren, and that was that he should conduct and lead an ass to
   his pasture which brought home wood, and should keep him going and
   coming, and so he did. For he did that which he was commanded, and led
   the ass thus as a herdsman, and kept him wisely going and coming, and
   was to him a right sure keeper and defender, and always at the hour
   accustomed he and the ass came for to have their refection and for to
   make the ass to do the work accustomed.

   On a time it happed that the ass was in his pasture, and the lion slept
   fast, and certain merchants passed by with camels and saw the ass
   alone, and stole him and led him away. And anon after, the lion awoke
   and when he found not his fellow, he ran groaning hither and thither,
   and when he saw that he could not find him he was much sorrowful and
   durst not come in, but abode at the gate of the church of the
   monastery, and was ashamed that he came without the ass. And when the
   brethren saw that he was come more late than he was wont, and without
   the ass, they supposed that by constraint of hunger he had eaten the
   ass, and would not give to him his portion accustomed, and said to him:
   Go and eat that other part of the ass that thou hast devoured, and fill
   thy gluttony. And because they doubted, and they would wit if he had so
   eaten, they went to the pastures of the town to see if they could have
   any demonstrance of the death of the ass, and they found nothing, and
   returned and told it to Jerome, and then he commanded them to enjoin
   him to do the office of the ass. Then they hewed down bushes and boughs
   and laid upon him, and he suffered it peaceably. And on a day when he
   had done his office, he went out to the fields and began to run hither
   and thither desiring to know what was done to his fellow, and saw from
   far merchants that came with camels charged and laden, and the ass
   going tofore them. It was the manner of that region that when the
   people went far with camels, they had an ass or a horse going tofore
   with a cord about his neck for to conduct the better the camels. And
   when the lion knew the ass, with a great roaring he ran on them so
   terribly that all the merchants fled, and he so feared the camels with
   beating the earth with his tail that, he constrained them to go
   straight unto the cell with all their charge and lading. And when the
   brethren saw this they told it to Jerome, and he said: Brethren, wash
   the feet of our guests and give them meat, abide ye the will of our
   Lord hereupon. And then the lion began to run joyously throughout all
   the monastery, as he was wont to do, and kneeled down to every brother
   and fawned them with his tail, like as he had demanded pardon of the
   trespass that he had done. And S. Jerome, which knew well what was to
   come, said to his brethren: Go and make ye ready all things necessary
   for guests that be coming to us. And as he thus said, there came to him
   a messenger, saying to him that there were guests at the gate that
   would speak with the abbot. And as soon as they were come they kneeled
   to the abbot, and required of him pardon. And he raised and made them
   to stand up goodly, and commanded them to take their own good, and not
   to take away other men's. And then they prayed the holy saint that he
   would take the half of their oil, and he refused it. And at the last he
   commanded to take a measure of oil, and then they promised that they
   should bring every year a measure of oil to that church, and their
   heirs after them.

   It was anciently the custom that whosomever would might sing in the
   church, so that Theodosius the emperor, as John Beleth saith, required
   and prayed Damasus the pope that he would commit to some wise man of
   the church to ordain the office and ordinal of the church. And then he
   knew well that Jerome was a man that knew the languages of Greek,
   Latin, and Hebrew, and in all science, and committed to him the said
   sovereign office. And then Jerome divided the psalter by ferias, and to
   every feria a nocturn proper be assigned, and established in the end of
   every psalm to be said: Gloria petri. And after, he ordained reasonably
   to be sung the epistles and gospels, and all other things appertaining,
   save the song which he sent from Bethlehem unto the pope. Which all was
   approved and ratified of him and of the cardinals for to be used
   perpetually and so confirmed.

   After this, in the mouth of the spelunke or cave in which our Lord lay,
   he did do make his monument or sepulture. And when he had accomplished
   eighty-eight years and six months he was there buried. In what
   reverence S. Austin had him in, it appeareth in his epistles that he
   sent to him, in one of the which he wrote in this manner: To his right
   dear friend; most best beloved and most clean in observing and
   embracing of chastity, unto Jerome, Austin, etc. And in another place
   he writeth thus of him: S. Jerome, priest, learned in letters of Greek,
   Latin, and Hebrew, and in holy writings approved unto his last age, of
   whom the nobleness of his fair eloquence hath resplended from the east
   unto the west, like unto the clearness of the sun. Prosper saith also
   of him in his Chronicles: Jerome, priest, was in Bethlehem sometime,
   clear to all the world, of noble engine, and lived in translating and
   writing of holy Scripture, and with high and noble study served the
   universal church. He said also of himself to Albigen: I never enforced
   me so much from mine infancy as for to eschew a swelling courage and
   enhanced head, and calling against him the hate of God. And ever I have
   dreaded the sure things, and have entended with all my heart to the
   monastery and to hospitality and have received gladly all comers save
   heretics, and have washed their feet. Isidore saith thus in the book of
   Etymology: Jerome was wise in three languages, whose interpretation is
   taken tofore other, for it is more holding and clear by words and it is
   interpreted of a very christian. It is written also of Jerome in the
   dialogue of Severus, disciple of S. Martin, which was in his time:
   Jerome without the merit of the faith and dowry of virtues is not only
   instruct in letters of Latin, but in Greek and Hebrew, so that none
   ought to be compared to him in every science, the which had war
   perpetual against the wicked men. The heretics hated him for he left
   never to impugn against them, the clerks hated him, for he reproved
   their sins and their life. But plainly good men loved him and marvelled
   of him, for they that deemed him a heretic were mad. He was all in
   lessons, all in books, he never rested day ne night but always read or
   wrote. Hc Severus. And like as it appeareth by these words, and also
   he witnesseth himself, he suffered many persecutors and detractors,
   which persecutions he suffered patiently and goodly, as it appeared in
   an epistle that he sent to Assela: I give thankings to our Lord God
   that I am worthy that the world hate me, and that wicked men and
   janglers hold me for evil. For I know well that men come to heaven by
   the defaming of wicked men more than by good renomee, and I would that
   the company of miscreants should pursue and persecute me for the name
   and right of our Lord. My will is that the reproof of the world arise
   more fervently against me so that I might deserve to be praised of our
   Lord, and that I may hope the reward of his promise. Temptation is
   desirous and agreeable whose merit in resisting is to be hoped reward
   of Christ in heaven. Ne the cursing ne malediction is not grievous
   which is changed into divine laud and praising. He died about the year
   of our Lord three hundred and eighty-eight.
     __________________________________________________________________

                    Here followeth the Life of S. Remigius.

   Remigius is said of remige that is a boatman or a rower. Or it is said
   of remis, which be instruments by which the ship is rowed and
   conducted, and of gyon, that is to say wrestling. He governed the
   church and kept it from peril of wreck, and brought it to the port of
   heaven. And for the church he wrestled against the assaults of the
   devil.

Of S. Remigius.

   S. Remigius converted to the faith the king and the people of France.
   The king had a wife named Clotilde, which was christian, and she
   enforced her much to convert her husband to the christian faith, but
   she might not. And when she had a child she would have christened him,
   but the king defended it to her. And she rested not till at the last
   the king granted that it should be christian, and after that it was
   christened, it died anon. Then said the king: Now it appeareth well
   that Christ is a vile God, for because he may not keep him which in his
   faith should have been enhanced in my kingdom after me. And she said to
   him: Now feel I well that I am loved of my God because he hath received
   the first fruit of my womb; he hath enhanced to a better kingdom my
   son, and to reign perpetually without end, which is much better than
   thy kingdom is. And soon after she conceived again, and had a fair son,
   whom with great prayers she baptized as she did the first, but anon
   after, he was sick, so that they had no hope of his life. And then the
   king said to his wife: Certainly this is a feeble god which may not
   conserve, ne keep none that is baptized in his name, and if thou hadst
   a thousand and didst them to be baptized, all should perish. Yet
   nevertheless the child revived and was whole, so that he reigned after
   his father, and the faithful queen enforced her to bring her husband to
   the faith, but he refused it in all manners.

   It is said in that other feast which is after the Epiphany, how the
   king was converted to the faith. And the foresaid king Clovis, when he
   was christened, said that he would give to S. Remigius, for to endow
   his church, as much land as he might go about whilst he slept at
   mid-day, and so it was done. But there was a man which had a mill
   within the circuit which S. Remigius had closed. And as S. Remigius
   went about it the milner put him out with great indignation and great
   despite. And S. Remigius said to him

   Friend, have no disdain and let it not be too hard if we have also this
   mill with that other. Nevertheless the milner put him out, and anon the
   wheel of the mill began to turn contrary, and then the milner cried
   after S. Remigius and said: Servant of God, come and let us have the
   mill together. And S. Remigius said: Nay, it shall neither be mine nor
   thine, and anon the earth opened and swallowed in all the mill.

   And S. Remigius knew by the spirit of prophecy and by the will of God,
   that a great famine should come, and assembled in a town great plenty
   of wheat. And the drunken villains of the town mocked and scorned him
   of his providence, and set the garners afire. And when he knew it he
   came thither, and because he was cold for age and his last time
   approached fast, he sat down by the fire and warmed him, and said with
   a peaceable heart: The fire is always good. Nevertheless they that made
   that fire, and all the men of their lineage, were broken in their
   members and the women gouty. And this endured in the same town unto the
   time of Charles, which chased and made them go their way, and so
   disperpled them.

   And it is to be known that the feast of S. Remigius that is hallowed in
   January, is the feast of his blessed death and disposition, and this is
   the feast of the translation of his blessed body. For when, after his
   death, the holy body should have been brought to the church of S.
   Timothy and Apollinarius with the shrine, and came nigh unto the church
   of S. Christopher, it began to weigh so much that they might not move
   it from thence in no manner. At the last they prayed our Lord that he
   would vouchsafe to show them if it were his will that the body should
   be buried in that church, whereas no relics rest. And then anon they
   took up the body lightly enough and buried him there honourably. And
   many miracles were there showed, so that they enlarged and made the
   church more ample and large.

   And then they made an oratory behind the altar, and would have dolven
   for to have laid the body in that oratory, but they could not move it
   in no manner. Then they watched, and prayed unto our Lord, and at
   midnight they fell all asleep, and on the morn they found the sepulchre
   with the body in the place, which angels had borne thither while they
   slept. And this was the kalends of October which afterwards by long
   time on the same day, it was translated into a feretre or shrine of
   silver. He flourished about the year of our Lord four hundred and
   ninety.
     __________________________________________________________________

          Here followeth the Life of S. Logier, and first of his name.

   Leodegarius or Logier is said of leos, that is to say, people, and of
   ganos, that is to say, angel. Logier was angel of the people. For an
   angel is properly light, and is a messenger for to show the people good
   works. And so he showed to the people tofore the deed how he and
   Ebroinus should finish their lives.

Of S. Logier.

   Logier when he shone and resplended in all virtue he deserved to be
   bishop of Autun. Clotaire was dead. He was much grieved for the cure
   and charge of the realm, and by the will of God and counsel of the
   princes he crowned Childeric, yet young, to be king. But Ebroinus would
   have made Theodoric, brother of Childeric, king, not for the profit of
   the realm, but because he was put out of his power and was hated of all
   the people, and doubted the ire of the king and of the princes, and
   therefore he required of the king licence for to enter into religion,
   and the king granted it to him. Then the king did hold his brother
   Theodoric in guard that he should machine nothing against the realm.
   And by the holiness and providence of the good bishop Logier all the
   people were in joy and in peace.

   And soon after, the king being impaired by evil counsel was moved in
   wrath against this holy bishop, servant of God, and sought means
   ententively how he might convenably put him to death. But Logier
   suffered all goodly, and reputed his enemies like as his friends, and
   did so much toward the king, that on Easter-day he should sing mass in
   the city, whereof he was bishop. And that day it was told to him that
   the king should perform that night all that he had treated for his
   death, but he ne doubted nothing, but dined that day with the king at
   his own table. And then he fled his persecutor in such manner that he
   went to the monastery of Luxen, there, serving our Lord, in which
   Ebroinus there was hid in the habit of a monk, and also served him in
   great charity. And a while after the king died, and Theodoric was
   enhanced into the reign. For which thing the blessed S. Logier, moved
   by the weeping and tears of the people, and constrained by the
   commandment of his abbot, returned unto his see in his city. But
   Ebroinus anon renounced his religion, and was ordained steward of the
   king. And howbeit that he was evil tofore, yet he was worse after, and
   studied how he might bring Logier to death, and sent knights for to
   take him. And when the blessed Logier knew it he would have escaped
   from the woodness and malice. And as he issued out of the town in the
   habit of a bishop, he was taken of the knights, which anon put out his
   eyes. And then two years after, S. Logier with Guerin his brother, whom
   Ebroinus had exiled, were brought unto the palace of the king. And as
   Ebroinus mocked the bishop, they answered wisely and peaceably.
   Notwithstanding, that wicked man Ebroinus sent Guerin for to be stoned
   to death with stones, and made the bishop to be led all the night
   barefoot upon sharp stones, on which the water ran fast. And when he
   heard that he prayed God in his torments, he made to cut out the tongue
   of his head, and after to keep in prison, for to make him suffer new
   torments. But for all that he lost never his speech, but entended to
   preach and exhortation as well as he might, and said tofore how he and
   Ebroinus should die, and when. Then a great light in manner of a crown
   environed his head, which much people saw, and some demanded him what
   thing it was, and he kneeled down and made his prayers, yielding graces
   to God, and admonished all them that were there that they should change
   their life into a better. And when Ebroinus heard that, he had great
   envy at him, and sent four men for to smite off his head. And when they
   led him forth, he said to them: It is no need to you to labour any
   more, but fulfil ye here the desire of him that sent you. And then
   three of them had so great pity of him that they kneeled down and
   required pardon, and the fourth smote off his head, which anon was
   ravished of the devil, and being thrown in the fire, ended his life
   miserably.

   Then two years after Ebroinus heard that God showed many miracles for
   his blessed saint, and the renomee of it shone over all, and he was
   tormented with cursed envy, and sent thither a knight to weet the
   truth, and to return and tell to him. And when the knight came thither,
   he proudly smote the tomb with his foot, and said: An evil death may he
   have that saith and believeth that this dead body may do miracles. And
   anon he was ravished of the devil and died suddenly, and the saint was
   the more worshipped by his death. And when Ebroinus heard this, he was
   then more tormented with malice of envy, and enforced to quench the
   fame of the holy saint. But after the saying tofore of the saint he
   feloniously slew himself with a sword. And this holy bishop S. Logier
   suffered death about the year of our Lord six hundred and eighty, in
   the time of Constantine the fourth.
     __________________________________________________________________

 Here followeth the Life of S. Francis, first beginner of the friars minor, and
                               first of his name.

   Francis was first named John, but after his name was changed and was
   called Francis. The cause of changing of his name was manifold. First,
   for the reason of his marvellous changing, for it is known that he
   received of God by miracle the French tongue, and it is said in his
   legend that when he was replenished of the grace of God, and of the
   ardour of the Holy Ghost he pronounced out burning words in French.
   Secondly, by the reason to publish his office, whereof is said in his
   legend that, the divine providence gave to him that name, because of
   his singular and inaccustomed name, the opinion of his mystery might be
   known throughout all the world. Thirdly, by reason of his office in
   effect, whereupon was given to understand that by him and by his sons
   he should make many servants of the devil and bond to sin, free.
   Fourthly, by reason of great courage and magnanimity of heart. For
   Frenchmen be said of fierceness, for in them is natural fierceness and
   great courage of heart. Fifthly, by reason of virtuosity in speaking,
   for his word carved away the vices like an axe. Sixthly, by reason that
   he chased away commonly the devils. Seventhly, by reason of honesty in
   his conversation, and of perfection of work. And it is said that some
   signs that were borne in Rome tofore the consuls, which were in terror
   of the people and in worship, were called Franciscas.

Of S. Francis.

   Francis, servant and friend of Almighty God, was born in the city of
   Assisi, and was made a merchant unto the twenty-fifth year of his age,
   and wasted his time by living vainly, whom our Lord corrected by the
   scourge of sickness, and suddenly changed him into another man, so that
   he began to shine by the spirit of prophecy. For on a time he with
   other men of Perugia was taken prisoner, and were put in a cruel
   prison, where all the others wailed and sorrowed, and he only was glad
   and enjoyed. And when they had reproved him thereof, he answered: Know
   ye, said he, that I am joyful, for I shall be worshipped as a saint
   through all the world.

   On a time he went to Rome because of devotion, and he took off all his
   clothes and clad him with the clothes of a beggar, and sat among the
   poor men tofore the church of S. Peter, and as one of them, begged and
   ate eagerly with them, and much oftener would have done, but the shame
   of being known of people letted him. The old enemy the devil enforced
   him to let him of his holy purpose, and showed to him a woman monstrous
   and horribly disfigured, crookbacked and lame, which was in that city,
   and he said to him if he left not that he had enterprised, he would
   make him semblable and like unto her. But he was comforted of our Lord,
   which heard a voice saying to him: Francis, take these bitter things
   for the sweet, and despise thyself if thou desire to know me.

   On a time he met a leper whom naturally men abhor, but he remembered
   him of the word that was said of God, and ran to him and kissed him,
   and anon the lazar vanished away, wherefore he went to the habitation
   of the lazars and kissed devoutly their hands, and gave to them money,
   and let them have no need of such as he might do.

   On a time he entered into the church of S. Damian for to make his
   prayers, and the image of Jesu Christ spake unto him and said: Francis,
   go and repair my house which is all destroyed as thou seest. And from
   that hour the soul of him liquefied, and the passion of Jesu Christ was
   marvellously infixed in his heart. And then he did great pain, and was
   busy in repairing the church, and sold all that he had, and gave the
   money thereof to a priest, and he durst not receive it for fear of his
   parents and kin. Then he, casting it away tofore the priest as dust,
   setting not thereby, wherefore he was taken of his father and bound,
   and he restored to him his money, and resigned also his clothes, and so
   naked he fled to our Lord, and clad him with hair. And then the blessed
   Francis went unto a simple man, whom he took instead of his father, and
   prayed him that like as his father doubled on him his curses, that in
   contrary he should bless him. His own brother germane seeing him in a
   winter time have on him but foul and few clothes, and that he trembled
   for cold and was entending to his prayers, said to his fellow: Go to
   Francis and say to him that he sell to thee a pennyworth of his sweat.
   And when he heard it he answered with a glad cheer: I will sell it unto
   my Lord God. On a day he heard in the church that which our Lord said
   to his disciples when he sent them to preach, and anon he addressed him
   with all his might to do and keep all those things; he did off his
   hosen and shoon from his feet and clad him with a foul coat, and took a
   cord for his girdle. He went on a time in a snow by a wood, and was
   taken by thieves, and they demanded him what he was, and he said that
   he was the messenger of God, and anon they took him and cast him in the
   snow, saying to him: Lie there, thou villain messenger of God. Many
   noble and unnoble clerks and laymen had despised the world and begun to
   follow him, and the holy father enseigned and taught them the
   perfection of the gospel, which was for to be in poverty, and that they
   should go by the way of simpleness. He wrote then a rule, after the
   gospel, to himself and his brethren, had and to be had, which Pope
   Innocent confirmed. And from then forthon he began to spread more
   ardently the seeds of the Word of God, and went about cities and
   castles by a fervent and marvellous desire. There was a friar which
   seemed outward of marvellous holiness, and kept silence so straitly
   that he would not be shriven by words but by signs, and every man
   praised him as a saint. This holy man Francis came thither and said:
   Leave ye brethren to praise him, for I shall not yet praise him lest it
   be by feigntise of the devil, let him be warned to be shriven twice in
   the week by word and speaking, and if he do it not, this is but
   temptation of the devil and fraudulous deceit. And then the friars
   warned him so to do, and he put his finger to his mouth, and shook his
   head, and showed that in no wise he would confess him. And anon after
   he returned again to worldly life as a hound to his vomit, and went out
   of his order, and finished his life in sinful acts and works.

   On a time S. Francis was weary of going, and rode upon an ass, and his
   fellow, one Leonard of Assisi, was also weary of going, and S. Francis
   began to think thus and to say in himself: His kin and my kin were not
   like, and incontinent he alighted down, and said to the friar: It
   appertaineth not to me to ride and thee to go afoot, for thou art more
   noble than I am. And the friar was abashed, and kneeled down and
   required pardon.

   On a time, as he passed by a place, a noble lady ran so hastily against
   him that she might not speak for weariness, and he asked of her what
   she would. And she said: Pray for me, father, for I may not perform the
   purpose of health which I have begun, for my husband, which letteth me,
   doth to me many adversities in the service of God. And he said to her:
   Go thy way, daughter, for thou shalt have anon comfort of him, and say
   to thine husband, in God's name and mine, that now is the time of
   health, and hereafter shall be time of equity and right. And when she
   had said so to her husband, the man was suddenly changed and avowed to
   God continence and chastity.

   On a time a poor labourer was almost lost in a wood for thirst. and
   this holy saint impetred a fountain by his prayers. He said on a time
   to a friar, that was familiar with him, this secret which was showed to
   him by the Holy Ghost. There is a servant of God living in the world on
   this day, for whose sake, as long as he shall live, our Lord shall
   suffer no famine among the people. But without doubt it is said that,
   when he was dead all that condition was changed to the contrary, for
   after his blessed death he appeared to the same friar and said to him:
   Lo! now is the famine come, which as long as I lived upon earth, our
   Lord would not suffer to come.

   On an Easter day the friars Greek that were in desert had laid their
   table more curiously than in another time, and had made ready the
   glasses and set them on the board. And when S. Francis saw that he anon
   withdrew him, and set on his head the hat of a poor man which was
   there, and bare his staff in his hand, and went out and abode at the
   gate. And when the friars ate at dinner, he cried at the door that they
   should give for the love of God an alms to a poor sick man. Then the
   poor man was called in and entered and sat down alone upon the earth,
   and set his dish in the dust, which when the friars saw they were
   abashed and were sore aghast. And he said to them: I see the table
   arrayed and adorned, and I know well that it is not for poor men that
   seek their meat from door to door.

   He loved poverty in himself and in all others, so that he always called
   poverty his lady, but when he saw one more poor than himself he had
   thereof envy, and doubted to be overcome of him. On a day he saw a poor
   woman and he showed her to his fellow and said: The poverty of this
   woman doth to us shame, and reproveth strongly our poverty, for, for my
   riches I have chosen my lady poverty, and she shineth more in this
   woman than in me.

   When on a time a poor man passed tofore him, and the holy man was moved
   with inward compassion, his fellow said to him: Though this man be
   poor, peradventure there is not a richer of his will in all the
   province. Then S. Francis said to him anon: Despoil thee of thy coat
   and give it to the poor man, and knowledge thyself culpable and kneel
   down to his feet, to whom anon he obeyed and did so.

   On a time three women like of visage and all things, and of habit,
   entered and met him, and saluted in this manner: Welcome my lady
   poverty, and anon they vanished away and were no more seen.

   On a time as he came to the city of Arezzo, and a mortal battle was
   moved in the city, this holy man saw within the burgh, on the ground,
   the devils making joy and were glad. Then he called his fellow named
   Silvester, and said to him: Go to the gate of the city and command to
   these devils in God's name, that is Almighty, that they go out of the
   city. Then he went hastily and cried strongly: All ye devils depart
   from hence in the name of God and by the commandment of Francis our
   Father. And they went away, and then the citizens anon became to
   accord.

   The foresaid Sylvester when he was yet a secular priest saw in his
   sleep a golden cross issue out of the mouth of S. Francis, of the which
   the over end touched heaven and the arms of the cross stretched forth
   from that one to that other part of the world. Then this priest had
   compunction and left the world, and followed perfectly this holy man
   Francis. And on a time as this holy man was in prayer, the devil called
   him thrice by his own name, and when the holy man had answered him, he
   said: None in this world is so great a sinner, but if he convert him
   our Lord would pardon him, but who that slayeth himself by hard penance
   shall never find mercy. And anon this holy man knew by the revelation
   the fallacy and deceit of the fiend, how he would have withdrawn him
   for to do well. And when the devil saw that he might not prevail
   against him, he tempted him by grievous temptation of the flesh, and
   when this holy servant of God felt that, he despoiled him of his
   clothes and beat himself right hard with a hard cord, saying: Thus,
   brother ass, it behoveth thee to remain and to be beaten; and when the
   temptation departed not, he went out and plunged himself in the snow
   all naked, and made seven great balls of snow and purposed to have
   taken them into his body and said: This greatest is thy wife, and of
   these four, two be thy daughters, and two thy sons, and the other
   twain, that one thy chamberer, and that other thy varlet or yeoman;
   haste thee and clothe them, for they all die for cold, and if thy
   business that thou hast about them grieve thee sore, then serve our
   Lord perfectly. And anon the devil departed from them all confused, and
   S. Francis returned again into his cell glorifying God.

   And as he dwelled on a time with Leo the cardinal of S. Cross, in a
   night the devils came to him and beat him right grievously. Then he
   called his fellow and said to him: These be devils, jailers of our
   Lord, whom he sendeth to punish the excesses, but I can remember me of
   none offences that I have done, but by the mercy of God I have washed
   them away by satisfaction. But peradventure he hath sent me them
   because he will not suffer me to fall, because I dwell in the courts of
   great lords, which thing peradventure engendereth not good suspection
   to my right poor brethren, which suppose I abound in delices. And early
   in the morning he arose and departed thence.

   On a time, as he was in his prayers, he saw upon the covering of the
   house assemblies and companies of devils which ran hither and thither
   with great noise, and he went out, and signed him with the sign of the
   cross, and said: I say to you in the name of Almighty God that ye
   devils do to my body all that is suffered to you to do, and I shall
   suffer it patiently. For I have no greater enemy than my body, and ye
   shall avenge me of mine adversary, whiles ye take on it vengeance by my
   life. Then they vanished away all confused.

   There was a friar which was fellow of S. Francis was on a time
   ravished, and saw in spirit the glorious place in heaven, wherein he
   saw, among other seats, a right noble seat, shining of more noble glory
   than all the others. And as he marvelled for whom this noble seat was
   kept, he heard that it was said that this seat belonged sometime to one
   of the princes that fell, and is now made ready to the meek and humble
   Francis.

   And when S. Francis issued from his prayers, that friar demanded him:
   Father, what weenest thou of thyself? And he said: I ween that I am
   greatest of all sinners. And anon the spirit came into the heart of the
   friar and said: Behold what was the vision that thou sawest, for
   humility shall lift up the most meek man unto the seat lost by pride.

   This holy man S. Francis saw in a vision above him, Seraphin crucified,
   the which emprinted in him the signs of his crucifying, that him seemed
   that he was crucified, and that in his hands, his feet, and in his
   side, him seemed were the sign of the wounds of the crucifying, but he
   did hide these tokens as much as he might, that no man should see them.
   And yet nevertheless some saw them in his life, and at his death they
   were seen of many, and were showed by many miracles that those signs
   were true. Of which miracles twain shall suffice for to be set here.
   There was a man named Rogier, and was in Apulia tofore the image of S.
   Francis, and began to think and say: May this be true that this man was
   so ennobled by such miracle, or was this an illusion or an invention
   dissimuled of his brethren the friars? And as he thought this, he heard
   suddenly a sound like as a quarel had been shot out of an arbalaste or
   a crossbow, and he felt him grievously hurt in his left hand, but there
   appeared no hurt in his glove, and then he took off his glove, and saw
   in the palm of his hand a wound as it had been of an arrow, out of
   which wound there issued so great pain of ache and burning, that almost
   he died for sorrow and pain. And then he repented him, and said that he
   believed right verily the signs and tokens of S. Francis; and when he
   had prayed by two days S. Francis by his holy signs and stigmata, he
   was anon delivered of his pain and made all whole.

   In the realm of Castile there was a man devout to S. Francis which went
   on a time to compline to the church of S. Francis. And men lay in await
   for to slay him, and instead of another man he was taken by error and
   ignorance, and was wounded and left as half dead; and after, the cruel
   murderer stuck his sword in his throat, and left it therein, and might
   not draw it out, but went his way. And then men cried and ran hither
   and thither, and the man was bewailed like as he had been dead. And
   when they rang to matins at midnight at the church of the friars, the
   wife of the man began to cry: Arise up, sire, and go to matins, for the
   bell calleth thee. And anon he lifted up his hand to show that some man
   should take away the sword from his throat, and anon in the sight of
   them all the sword sprang out afar as it had been thrown of a strong
   champion, and anon the man arose perfectly whole, and said that S.
   Francis came to him and joined his stigmatas to my wounds, and anointed
   them with the sweetness of his signs and sewed them together
   marvellously by his touching. And when he would have gone, I showed him
   that he should take away the sword for else I should not con speak, and
   anon he took it out, and threw it away far from him, and healed me with
   touching my throat with his signs.

   The two clerks, great luminaries of the world, that is to say S.
   Dominic and S. Francis, were in the city of Rome tofore the Lord
   Hostience, which afterward was pope of Rome. And this bishop said to
   them: Wherefore make ye not of your friars bishops and prelates, which
   should prevail more by teaching and example giving? And there

   was long contention between them who should first answer, and humility
   overcame Francis that he would not speak tofore that other, and then S.
   Dominic humbly obeyed and said: Sire, our brethren be lifted up in good
   degree if they know it, and I shall never suffer to my power that ever
   they shall hope to have any higher dignity. After that answered S.
   Francis: Sire, my brethren be called minors, because they would not be
   made greater. And the blessed S. Francis full of right great simplicity
   admonished and warned all creatures to love their creator. He preached
   to birds and was heard of them, they suffered him to touch them, and
   without licence they would not return ne flee from him. And on a time
   when he preached, the swallows chittered and sang, and anon by his
   commandment they were still. There was also, on a time, a bird on a
   fig-tree beside his cell which sang oft full sweetly. And S. Francis
   put forth his hand and called that bird, and anon the bird obeyed and
   came upon his hand. And he said to her, Sing my sister and praise thy
   Lord, and then anon she sang, and departed not till she had licence.

   He spared to touch lights, lamps, and candles, because he would not
   defile them with his hands. He went honourably upon the stones for the
   worship of him that was called Stone. He gathered the small worms out
   of the way because they should not be trodden with the feet of them
   that passed by. He commanded in winter to give honey unto bees, that
   they should not perish for hunger. He called all beasts his brethren.
   He was replenished of marvellous joy for the love of his Creator. He
   beheld the sun, the moon, and the stars, and summoned them to the love
   of their Maker. He defended for to make him a great crown, saying: I
   will that my simple brethren have part in my head.

   There was a secular man which saw S. Francis, the servant of God,
   preaching at S. Severin's, and saw by revelation of God, that S.
   Francis was stretched on a cross made of two clear swords, of which
   that one came from his head to his feet, and that other stretched from
   that one hand to that other, so that he never had seen such a
   demonstrance. Then he was moved in his heart, and entered into the
   order, and finished goodly his life.

   On a time, as S. Francis was sick on his eyes for continual weeping,
   his brethren said to him that he should refrain him from weeping, and
   he answered: The visitation of the light perdurable is not to be put
   away for the light that we have here with the flies. And when his
   brethren constrained him to take a medicine for his eyes, and the
   surgeon held a burning iron in his hand, the blessed Francis said: My
   brother fire, be thou to me in this hour debonair and curable: I pray
   to our Lord that made thee, that thou attemper my heat. And then he
   made the sign of the cross against the fire, and the fiery iron was put
   in his tender flesh from his ear unto his eyelids, and he felt no pain.

   He was strongly sick in the desert of S. Urban, and when he felt that
   nature failed in him he asked for to drink wine, and there was none.
   And they brought to him water, and he blessed it and made the sign of
   the cross thereon, and it was converted and turned into right good
   wine. And the holy man gat of our Lord that which the poverty of the
   desert might not get. And as soon as he had tasted it, he became strong
   and was all whole.

   He had liefer hear blame of himself than praising, and for because that
   the people praised in him anything of merit of holiness, he commanded
   to some brother to say to him in his ear some villainy in blaming him
   and defouling. And when such a brother, so constrained against his
   will, called him villain merchant, and unprofitable fool, then was he
   glad and blessed him, and said: God bless thee, for thou sayest right
   very true words, and this thing appertaineth to me for to hear.

   And this holy S. Francis would never be more master ne governor, but he
   would be more subject, ne so willingly command as obey. And therefore
   he left for to be general, and demanded to be under the warden, to
   whose will he always submitted himself in all things. He promised
   always obedience to the friar with whom he went, and kept it.

   When a friar had done something against the rule of obedience, and had
   sign of penance, yet this holy S. Francis, for to fear others,
   commanded to cast the hood of him into the fire, and when it had been a
   while in the fire, he commanded to take it out and give it again to the
   friar, and the hood , was taken out of the fire without hurt.

   He went on a time by the morass of Venice and found there a great
   multitude of birds singing and he said to his fellows: Our sisters,
   these birds, give laud to their Maker, let us go in the middle of them,
   and sing we our hours canonical to our Lord. And they entered in among
   them and they moved not, but because they might not hear each other for
   the chittering and noise of birds he said: My sister birds, cease your
   songs till we have yielded unto our Lord due praisings. And then they
   held them still, and when they had finished their lauds, he gave to
   them licence to sing again, and anon they reprised their song after
   their custom.

   He was on a time harboured with a knight, and S. Francis said to him:
   Brother, fair host, agree to that I shall say to thee, confess thy
   sins, for thou shalt soon eat in another place. And anon he granted
   that to him, and ordained for his meiny, and took penance of health.
   And also soon as they went to the table the host died suddenly.

   On a time he found a great multitude of birds, and then he said to
   them: My brethren, ye ought strongly to praise and give laud to your
   Maker which hath clad you with feathers and hath given to you pens for
   to fly and hath granted you the purity of the air and governed you
   without charge or business. And the birds turned their beaks or bills
   to him and spread their wings, and stretched their necks and addressed
   their heads and beheld him intently. And he passed forth by the middle
   of them so nigh that he touched them with his coat, and none of them
   arose out from his place till he gave to them leave that they flew
   together.

   On a time when he preached at the castle Almarye, and he might not be
   heard for the swallows which made their nests, to whom he said: My
   sister swallows, it is time that I speak, for ye have said enough, be
   ye now still till the word of God be accomplished. And they obeyed and
   were still anon.

   And as this holy man S. Francis passed through Apulia, he found in his
   way a purse full of money, and when his fellow saw it, they would have
   taken it for to have given it to the poor people, but he would not
   suffer him in no manner, and said to him: Son, it appertaineth not to
   thee to take the goods of others. And when his fellow hasted to take it
   S. Francis prayed a little, and after, commanded him to take the purse,
   which then found therein a great adder, instead of money. And when the
   friar saw that he began to doubt, but he would obey and took the purse
   in his hands, and there sprang out anon a serpent venomous. And then S.
   Francis said to him: Money is none other thing to the servant of God
   but the devil, which is a serpent venomous.

   There was a friar grievously tempted, and he began to think that if he
   had anything written with the hand of their father S. Francis, that
   that temptation should be chased away anon, but he durst in no wise
   discover this thing. On a time S. Francis called him and said: Son,
   bring to me parchment and ink, for I will write something praising to
   God. And when he had written he said: Take this charter and keep it
   unto the day of thy death diligently, and anon all his temptation went
   away. And the same friar, when S. Francis lay sick, began to think: Our
   Father approacheth the death, and if I might have, after his death, his
   coat I should be greatly comforted. And after this the saint called him
   and said: I give to thee this my coat; if thou have thereto, after my
   death, plain right. He was lodged on a time in Alexandria, in Lombardy,
   with an honest man, which demanded him, if for the observance of the
   gospel he should eat of all that which was set tofore him, and he
   consented to the devotion of the host; and then the host did do make
   ready a capon of seven years old, and as they ate there came an untrue
   man which demanded alms for the love of God, and anon when this blessed
   man heard that blessed name, he sent to him a member of the capon, and
   the cursed man kept it. And on the morn when the holy man preached, he
   showed that piece of the capon, and said, Lo! see here what flesh this
   friar eateth whom ye honour as a saint, for he gave it to me yester
   even, but this piece of the capon was seen of all the people as it were
   fish, and that man was blamed of all the people, and said that he was
   mad, and when he understood it, he was ashamed and demanded pardon; and
   when this man came again to his good thought, the flesh returned again
   to his own kind and form.

   On a time as he sat at the table, and collation was made of the poverty
   of the Blessed Virgin our Lady, anon S. Francis arose and began to weep
   and sob sorrowfully, so that his visage was all wet of tears, and began
   to eat the remnant of his bread upon the ground. He would also that
   right great reverence should be done to the hands of priests, to whom
   was given power to sacre the blessed sacrament of our Lord. And then he
   said oft: If it happed me to meet any saint coming from heaven, and
   also a poor priest, I would first go kiss the priest's hands, and would
   say to the saint: Holy saint, abide a while, for the hands of this
   priest have handled the son of life, and hath performed a thing above
   humanity. He was ennobled in his life by many miracles, for the bread
   that was brought to him to bless gave health to many sick men. He
   converted the water into wine, of which a sick man anon tasted and
   received anon health, and also did many other miracles. And when his
   last days approached, and he was grieved by long infirmity; then he
   made himself to be laid upon the bare ground, and did do call all the
   friars that were there, and when they were all present he blessed them.
   And like as our Lord fed his disciples at supper on Shere-thursday, he
   gave to each of them a morsel of bread, and warned them, as he was wont
   to do, to give laud to their Maker. And the very death which is to all
   men horrible and hateful, he admonished them to praise it, and also he
   warned and admonished death to come to him, and said: Death, my sister,
   welcome be thou; and when he came at the last hour, he slept in our
   Lord. Of whom a friar saw the soul in the manner of a star, like to the
   moon in quantity, and to the sun in clearness.

   There was a friar named Augustin, which was minister and servant in the
   labour of the earth, and as he was in his last end, and had lost his
   speech, he escried suddenly and said: Abide me, father, abide, I shall
   go with thee. Then the friars demanded him what he said, and he said:
   See ye not our father Francis that goeth unto heaven, and anon he slept
   in peace, and followed his holy father. A lady which had been devout to
   the blessed Francis died, and the clerks and priests were at the bier
   for to sing the exequies of her. She arose up suddenly off the bier,
   and called one of the priests that were there and said: Father, I would
   confess me; I was dead, and should have been put in a cruel prison,
   because I had not shriven me of a sin that I shall say, but S. Francis
   prayed for me, that this confessed and showed I shall have forgiveness,
   and anon as I shall have said and confessed it to thee I shall rest in
   peace tofore you all. And then she was confessed and assoiled, and
   rested anon in our Lord.

   The friars of Viterbo would have borrowed a cart of a man, and he
   answered in despite: I had liefer see two of you flayed with S. Francis
   than I should lend you my cart, but he came again to himself and
   reproved himself, and repented him of the blame that he had said, and
   doubted the ire of God. And anon his son was sick and died, and when he
   saw his son dead he slept on the earth weeping, and called S. Francis
   and said: I am he that sinned, thou shouldest have beaten me, give
   again to me, holy saint, praying devoutly to thee, whom thou hast taken
   away from me, blaming thee and blaspheming wickedly. And anon his son
   revived and said: When I was dead S. Francis led me by a long way and
   dark, and at the last he brought me unto a right fair green, and after
   said to me: Return to thy father, I will no longer hold thee. There was
   a poor man which owed unto a certain rich man a quantity of money, and
   prayed him, for the love of S. Francis, he would prolong the term of
   payment. To whom he answered proudly: I shall set thee in such a place
   that neither Francis ne none other shall help thee. And anon he took
   and bound him, and set him in a dark prison, and anon after, S. Francis
   came thither and brake up the prison, and loosed his bonds and brought
   the man all safely to his own house. There was a knight which detracted
   the works and miracles of S. Francis, and on a time as he played at the
   dice, he being all enraged, and full of woodness and cruelness, said to
   them that stood by him: lf S. Francis be a saint, let come eighteen on
   the dice, and anon came in three dice in each of them six, and so it
   appeared nine times, at every time three sixes at each cast, and then
   he adjousting woodness to woodness, he said: If it be true that Francis
   be a saint, let a sword rive me through my body this day, and if he be
   no saint, that it escape safely. And when the playing at dice was
   ended, because he had made that prayer in sin, he said injury to his
   nephew, and he took his sword and stack it through his belly and slew
   him anon.

   There was a man that had lost his thigh that he could not move it, and
   cried to S. Francis thus, saying: Help me, S. Francis, remember thee of
   the devotion and of the service that I have done to thee, for I carried
   thee upon mine ass, and kissed thy feet, and thy hands, and now I die
   for pain of this right hard torment. Then the holy man appeared to him
   with a little staff that he held, which had the sign of Thau, and
   touched therewith the place of his pain, and the postume brake, and he
   received anon full health, but the sign of Thau abode alway in the same
   place. With that sign S. Francis was wont always to sign his letters.

   There was a maid which dwelled in the mountains of Apulia in a castle,
   and her father and mother ne had but only this daughter, and she died,
   and her mother was much devout toward S. Francis, but then she was full
   of heaviness, and S. Francis appeared to her and said: Weep no more,
   for the light of thy lantern is quenched, and it appertaineth not that
   I yield her again to thee by thy prayer. But yet the mother had
   affiance and trust in the saint, and would not suffer to bear away the
   body, but in calling S. Francis, she took her daughter that was dead
   and raised her up alive and whole. There was a little child in Rome
   fallen out of a window to the ground and died forthwith, and they
   called to S. Francis for help, and he was anon restored to life. In the
   city of Suessa, it happed that a house fell and slew a child, and when
   they had put the corpse in a chest for to bury, the mother called on S.
   Francis with all her devotion, and about midnight the child coughed and
   arose all whole, and began to praise God.

   Friar James of Reaten had passed a flood in a vessel with other friars
   which were set aland, and he hasted so sore after to go out because he
   was last, and the ship recoiled backward into the water, so that he
   fell down into the deepest of the flood, and then all the friars prayed
   S. Francis for him, and he himself, as he might, with like devotion,
   called the holy saint unto his aid and help, in his heart, and that
   same friar began to go in the bottom of the water, as dry as he had
   gone on the earth, and caught the boat, which was drowned, and brought
   it to the bank, and came up without wetting of his clothes that he
   ware, ne never drop of water touched his coat ne wet nothing on him.
   Then let us devoutly pray this holy father, S. Francis, to be our
   succour and aid in our adversities and perils, and help, that by his
   merits we may after this short life come into everlasting life in
   heaven. Amen.
     __________________________________________________________________

        Here followeth the Life of S. Pelagienne, and first of her name.

   Pelagienne is said of pelagus, which is as much to say as the sea, for
   as in the sea all waters abound, in like wise abounded she in the sea
   of this world of all riches, and of delices. She was the sea of
   iniquity and the flood of sins, but she plunged after into the sea of
   tears, and washed her in the flood of baptism.

Of S. Pelagienne.

   Pelagienne was the foremost and noblest of the women of Antioch, full
   of riches in all things. She was right fair of body, noble of habit,
   vain and variable of courage, and not chaste of body. On a time as she
   went through the city with great pride and ambition, that there was
   nothing seen on her but gold and silver and precious stones, and over
   all whereas she went she filled the air with divers odours and sweet
   smells, and tofore and after her went a great multitude of young men
   and maidens, which were also clad with right noble vesture and rich.
   And a holy father which was named Nonnon, bishop of Heliopolis, which
   now is called Damietta, passed through the city and saw her. Then he
   began to weep right bitterly because she had more care to please the
   world than she had to please God; and then fell down upon the pavement
   and smote the earth with his visage, and wet it with his tears, and
   said: O most high God, have pity on me, sinner, the adornments and
   array of one common woman hath surmounted in one day all the wisdom of
   all my life. O Lord, let not the array of one woman of folly confound
   me tofore the sight of thy dreadful majesty. She hath arrayed herself
   with high study, and all her might for earthly things, and I had
   purposed, Lord, to have pleased thee, but I have not accomplished it
   because of my negligence. Then he said to them that were with him: In
   truth I say to you that God shall set this woman in witness against us
   in the doom, because that she so busily painteth her for to please
   worldly friends and lovers, when we be negligent for to please the
   heavenly spouse, our Lord God. And when he had said these, or semblable
   words, he fell suddenly asleep, and him seemed that a foul dove or
   black culver flew about him whilst he was at mass at the altar. And
   when he commanded that they that were not baptized should depart and go
   their way, this dove departed anon and came again after the mass, and
   was plunged in a vessel full of water, and went out all clean and
   white, and flew up so high that she might not be seen, and then he
   awoke.

   On a time when he preached in a church Pelagienne was present. She then
   became so repentant that she sent him a lettter by a messenger thus
   saying: To the holy bishop of Jesu Christ, Pelagienne, disciple of the
   devil, etc. If thou art verily the disciple of Jesu Christ, the which,
   as I have heard said, descended from heaven for the sinners, vouchsafe
   to receive me, repentant sinful woman. To whom the bishop sent again: I
   pray thee not to tempt my humility, for I am a sinful man. If thou
   desirest to be saved, thou mayst not see me alone, but among other men
   thou shalt see me. Then she came to him tofore many, and took his feet,
   and most bitterly weeping, she said: I am Pelagienne, the sea of
   iniquity, flood of sins, the swallow of perdition, and the devourer of
   souls. I have deceived many by deceits which now all I abhor. Then the
   bishop demanded her, saying: What is thy name? She said: I have been
   called from my birth Pelagienne, but for the pomp of my clothing men
   call me Margaret. Then the bishop received her benignly, and enjoined
   to her healthful penance, and informed her in the dread of God
   diligently, and regenerated her by holy baptism. The devil then cried
   there, saying: O what violence I suffer of this old servant of God. O
   violence, O evil old age, accursed be the day in which thou wert born
   contrary to me, for thou hast taken away my greatest hope.

   On a night, whilst Pelagienne slept, the devil came to her and awoke
   her, and said: Lady Margaret, what harm did I ever to thee? Have I not
   adorned thee in all riches and in all glory? I pray thee tell me
   wherein I have angered thee, and I shall amend it anon. I require thee,
   leave me not lest I be made reproach unto the christian people. And
   then she blessed her and blew on him, and the devil vanished away. And
   the third day after, she assembled all the goods that she had and gave
   it to the poor people for the love of God. And a little while after she
   fled away by night, without knowledge of any person, and took the habit
   of a hermit and set herself in a little cell, and there served our Lord
   in much great abstinence. And was of much great and good renomee unto
   all the people, and led a right holy life and good, and was called
   brother Pelagien. After, a deacon of the same bishop that had baptized
   her, went to Jerusalem for to visit there the holy places. Then that
   bishop said to him that, after the visitation of the holy places he
   should seek a monk that was named Pelagien, and that he should visit
   him, for he should find there the true servant of our Lord, and so he
   did. And anon she knew him, but he knew her not for the great leanness
   that she had. And Pelagien demanded him: Have ye a bishop? And he said:
   Yea, lady. And she said to him: Say to him that he pray for me, for
   truly he is the apostle of Jesu Christ. And then the priest departed
   and came again the third day, but when he came he knocked at the door
   of the cell and none answered, he opened the window and saw that she
   was dead. Then he came and told it to the bishop. Then the bishop and
   the clergy and all the monks assembled for to do the exequies for this
   holy man, and when they had taken the body out of the cell, they found
   that she was a woman. And then they marvelled greatly, and gave
   thankings unto God, and buried the body much honourably the eighth day
   of October, the year of our Lord two hundred and four score.
     __________________________________________________________________

      Here followeth of S. Margaret, said Pelagien, and first of her name.

   This virgin Margaret had twain names; she was called Margaret and
   Pelagien. Insomuch as she was named Margaret, she is always likened to
   a flower, for she had in her, flower of her virginity. And in that she
   was called Pelagien, she might be said of pena, pain, and lego, legis,
   to gather. For she gathered pain in many manners in the religion where
   she put herself as a man for to keep to God her vlrginity.

Of S. Margaret, otherwise Pelagien.

   Margaret, otherwise called Pelagien was a right noble virgin, right
   rich and right fair, and was much nobly kept by the diligence of her
   friends. For she was instructed in good manners, and she was ententive
   to keep chastity, and honest in such wise that she refused to be seen
   of all men in any manner. And at the last she was required to marriage
   of a noble young man, and by the accord of one and other of each
   other's friends, all things necessary to the wedding were made ready
   and had with much great glory of riches and delices. And when the day
   of wedding came, that the younglings and maidens were assembled in
   right great noblesse tofore the chamber, and the fathers and the
   mothers made great feast for the marriage with great joy, the virgin
   was inspired of God that the damage of her virginity was brought by so
   great harmful enjoying, and stretched her to the earth sore weeping,
   and began to think in her heart the recompense of her virginity, and
   the sorrows that follow of marriage, and reputed all the joys of the
   world as ordure and filth. And that night she kept her from the company
   of her husband, and at midnight she commended her to God, and cut off
   her hair, and clad her in the habit of a man, and fled from thence to a
   monastery of monks, and did do call her brother Pelagien. And there was
   received of the abbot, and diligently instructed and taught, and she
   held herself there holily and religiously. And when the prior, which
   was thereby, of nuns was dead, by consent of the abbot and of the
   ancient men, she was set to be master of the abbey of nuns, howbeit
   that she refused it strongly. And as she administered not only their
   necessaries but also food to the soul continually without blame, the
   devil had envy of her, and thought he might occupy her good time by
   some objection of sin. And a virgin which was dwelling without the
   gates had sinned in lechery by the intimation of the devil, and when
   her belly arose so that she might not hide it, all the virgins were so
   afraid and so shamefaced, and also the monks of either monastery, that
   they wist not what to do, and supposed verily that Pelagien, which was
   provost, and also familiar with the woman, had done this deed, and so
   condemned him without judgment. And then he was put out and wist not
   why, and was closed in a pit within a rock. And then he that was most
   cruel of all the monks, was ordained for to minister him, which served
   him with barley bread and water, and that in right little quantity. And
   when the monks had enclosed him they departed and left Pelagien there
   alone. And she was not troubled in any manner, but ever thanked God,
   and comforted herself in her continence by the ensample of holy saints.
   At the last when she knew that her end approached, she wrote letters
   unto the abbot and to the monks in this wise. I, of noble lineage, was
   called Margaret in the world, but for I would eschew the temptations of
   the world, I called myself Pelagien. I am a man. I have not lived for
   to deceive, but I have showed that I have the virtue of a man, and have
   virtue of the sin which was put on me, and I innocent thereof have done
   the penance, therefore I require you, forasmuch as I am not known for a
   woman, that the holy sisters may bury me, so that the demonstrance of
   me dying may be the cleansing of my living, and that the women may know
   that I am a virgin whom they judged for adulterer. And when they heard
   hereof the monks and the nuns ran unto the pit in which she was
   enclosed, and the women then had knowledge that she was a woman, and
   virgin without touching of man. And then they were penitent, and had
   great repentance of that which they had done, and buried her in the
   church among the virgins honourably.
     __________________________________________________________________

         Here followeth of S. Thais or Thaisis, and first of her name.

   Thais is said of taphos, that is to say death, for she was cause of the
   death of many that died for her in sin. Or she is said of thalos, that
   is to say delight, for she was delicious to men, and accomplished all
   worldly delights, or she is said of thalamo, that is will or affection
   of martiage, for at the last she had will to be married to God by great
   penance.

Of S. Thaisis.

   Thaisis, as it is read in Vitas Patrum, was a common woman, and of so
   great beauty that many followed her, and sold all their substance, that
   they came unto the utterest poverty. And they that were her lovers
   fought for her, and strove for jealousy, so that they otherwhile slew
   each other, and thereof her house was oft full of blood of young men
   that drew to her. Which thing came to the knowledge of a holy abbot
   named Pafuntius, and he took on him secular habit, and a shilling in
   his purse, and went to her in a city of Egypt, and gave to her a
   shilling, that is to say twelve pence, as it had been cause for to sin
   with her. And when she had taken this money, she said to him: Let us
   enter into the chamber here within. And when they were both entered
   into the chamber, she said to him that he should go into the bed, which
   was preciously adorned with clothes; then said he to her: If there be
   any more secret place here, let us go thereto; and then she led him
   into divers secret places; and he said always he doubted to be seen.
   And she said to him: There is within a place where no man entereth, and
   there shall no man see us but God, and if thou dread him there is no
   place that may be hid from him. And when the old man heard that, he
   said to her: And knowest thou that there is a God? And she answered: I
   know that there is a God, and a realm of a to-coming world, for them
   that shall be saved, and also torments in hell for sinners. And he said
   to her: If thou knowest this, wherefore hast thou lost so many souls?
   And thou shalt not only give accounts for thine own sin, but thou must
   reckon them that by thee have sinned. And when she heard this, she
   kneeled down to the feet of the abbot Pafuntius, and sore weeping, she
   prayed him to receive her to penance, saying: Father, I acknowledge me
   penitent and contrite, and trust verily by thy prayer that I shall have
   remission and forgiveness of my sins. I ask of thee but the space of
   three hours, and after that I shall go whithersomever thou wilt, and
   shall do that which thou shalt command me. And when he had given to her
   that term and assigned her whither she should come, then she took all
   those goods that she had won with sin, and brought them into the middle
   of the city tofore the people, and burnt them in the fire, saying: Come
   ye forth all that have sinned with me, and see ye how I burn that which
   ye have given to me. And the value of the goods that she burnt was of
   five hundred pounds of gold. And when she had all burnt it, she went to
   the place which the abbot had assigned to her. And there was a
   monastery of virgins, and there he closed her in a cell, and sealed the
   door with lead. And the cell was little and straight, and but one
   little window open, by which was ministered of her poor living. For the
   abbot commanded that they should give to her a little bread and water.
   And when the abbot should depart, Thaisis said to him: Father, where
   shall I shed the water, and that which shall come from the conduits of
   nature? And he said to her: In thy cell, as thou art worthy. And then
   she demanded how she should pray, and he answered: Thou art not worthy
   to name God, ne that the name of the Trinity be in thy mouth, ne
   stretch thy hands to heaven, because thy lips be full of iniquities,
   and thine hands full of evil attouchings, and foul ordures, but look
   only towards the east and say oft of these words: Qui plasmasti me,
   miserere mei, Lord that hast formed me, have mercy on me. And when she
   had been there three years closed, the abbot Pafuntius remembered and
   sorrowed, and went to the abbot Anthony for to require of him if God
   had forgiven her her sins. And the cause told, S. Anthony called his
   disciples and commanded them that they should all wake that night and
   be in prayer so that God should declare to some of them the cause why
   the abbot Pafuntius was come. And then as they prayed without ceasing,
   the abbot Paul, the greatest disciple of S. Anthony, saw suddenly in
   heaven a bed arrayed with precious vestments, which three virgins
   arrayed, with clear visages. And these three virgins were named, the
   first was Dread which drew Thaisis from evil, and the second Shame of
   the sins that she committed, and that made her to deserve pardon, and
   the third was Love of Righteousness, which brought her to high
   sovereign place. And when Paul had said to him that the grace of this
   vision was only by the merits of S. Anthony, a goodly voice answered
   that it was not only by the merits of Anthony, his father, but by the
   merit of Thaisis, the sinner. And on the morn when the abbot Paul
   recounted his vision, and they had known the will of God, the abbot
   Pafuntius departed with great joy and went anon to the monastery where
   she was, and opened the door of the cell. And she prayed him that she
   might yet abide there enclosed in, and the abbot said to her, Issue and
   go out, for God hath forgiven to thee thy sins. And she answered: I
   take God to witness that sith I entered herein I have made of all my
   sins a sum, and have set them tofore mine eyes, and like as the breath
   departeth not from the mouth and the nostrils, so the sins departed
   never from mine eyes, but always have bewept them. To whom the abbot
   Pafuntius said: God hath not pardoned thee thy sins for thy penance,
   but because that thou hast had always dread in thy courage. And he took
   her out from thence, and she lived after, fifteen days, and then she
   rested in our Lord.

   The abbot Effrem converted in like wise another common woman, for when
   that common woman would have drawn S. Effrem for to have sinned
   dishonestly, he said to her: Follow me, and she followed. And when they
   came in a place where a great multitude of men were, he said to her,
   Sit down here, that I may have to do with thee; and she said: How may I
   do this among so great multitude of people here standing? And he said,
   If thou be ashamed of the people, thou oughtest to have greater shame
   of God which seeth all things hid, and she went away all ashamed.
     __________________________________________________________________

          Here followeth the Life of S. Denis, and first of his name.

   Denis is as much to say as hastily fleeing, or Denis is said of dia,
   which is as much to say as two, and nysus, which is to say lift up, for
   he was lifted up after two things, that is, after the body and after
   the soul. Or Denis may be said of Diana, that is Venus, the goddess of
   beauty, and of sios, that is to say God, as who saith, he is fair to
   God; or as some say he is said of Dionisia, that is, after Isidore, a
   precious stone black, which is good against drunkenness. He was hasty
   in fleeing the world by perfect renunciation. He was lift up by
   contemplation of things within forth, he was fair to God by beauty of
   virtues. He profited to sinners against drunkenness of vices, and he
   had many names tofore his conversion, for he was called Areopagita, for
   the street that he dwelled in. He was called Theosophus, that is to say
   wise to God. Also of the wise men of Greece, he is said unto this day
   Pterigiontuvrani, that is to say, the wing of heaven, for he flew
   marvellously with the wing of spiritual understanding into heaven. Also
   he was said Macarius, that is, blessed. Also he was said of his country
   lonicus. Ionica, as saith Papias, is one of the languages of Greeks. Or
   Ionices be said a manner of round pillars. Or Ionicum is said a foot of
   versifying which hath two syllables short and twain long. By which he
   is showed that he was wise and knowing God by inquisition of things
   privy and hid, wing of heaven by love of things celestial, and blessed
   by possession of everlasting goods. By other things it is showed that
   he was a marvellous rhetorician by eloquence, a sustainer and a bearer
   up of the church by doctrine, short to himself by humility, and long to
   others by charity. S. Austin saith in the eighth book of the City of
   God that Ionique is a kind of philosophers, Italian, which be towards
   Italy, and lonian which be of the parts of Greece, and because that
   Denis was a sovereign philosopher he was named Ionicus. And Methodius
   of ConstantinopIe indited his life and his passion in Greekish tongue,
   and Anastasius in Latin, which was a writer of the Bible of the church
   of Rome, as Hincmar, bishop of Rheims, saith.

Of S. Denis.

   S. Denis Areopagite was converted to the faith of Jesu Christ of S.
   Paul the apostle. And he was called Areopagite of the street that he
   dwelled in. And in that street called Areopage was the temple of Mars,
   for they of Athens named every street of the gods that they worshipped
   in the same, and that street that they worshipped in the god Mars, they
   called Areopage, for Areo is to say Mars, and pagus is a street, and
   where they worshipped Pan, they named Panopage, and so of all other
   streets. Areopage was the most excellent street, because that the noble
   men haunted it, and therein were the scholars of the arts liberal, and
   Denis dwelled in that street, which was a right great philosopher. And
   forasmuch as the plant of wisdom of the deity was in him he was called
   Theosophus, that is to say, knowing God. And one Apollophanes was his
   fellow in philosophy. There were also Epicureans, which said that all
   felicity of man was in only delight of the body. And Stoics, which held
   opinion that it was in the only virtue of courage. And then on the day
   of the passion of our Lord when darkness was upon the universal world,
   the philosophers that were at Athens could not find in causes natural
   the cause of that darkness. And it was no natural eclipse, for the moon
   was then from the sun, and was fifteen days old, and so was in a
   perfect distance from the sun, and nevertheless an eclipse taketh not
   away the light in the universal parts of the world, and it may not
   endure three hours long. And it appeareth that this eclipse took away
   all the light, by that which S. Luke saith that, our Lord suffered in
   all his members; and because that the eclipse was in Heliopolis, in
   Egypt, and Rome and in Greece. And Orosius saith that it was in Greece,
   and in the end of Asia the less, and saith that when our Lord was
   nailed to the cross there was a right great trembling and earthquave
   through the world. The rocks were cut asunder, and the mountains
   cloven, right great floods fell in many parts, more than they were wont
   to do, and that day, from the sixth hour unto the ninth hour, the sun
   lost his sight throughout all the lands of the universal world. And in
   that night there was no star seen in all Egypt, and this remembereth
   Denis to Apollophanes, saying in his epistle: The world was dark
   commonly of obscurity of darkness, and after the only diameter returned
   purged, and when he had found that the sun might not suffer such
   heaviness, and that we may not have knowledge in our courage, ne
   understand yet the mystery of this thing by our conning and wisdom.
   And, O Apollophanes, mirror of doctrine, what shall I say of these
   secrets and hid things? I attribute and put them to thee as to a mouth
   divine, and not as to understanding ne speech human. To whom he said: O
   good Denis, these be the mutations of divine things, and in the end it
   is signified all along, the day and the year of the annunciation that
   Paul our Doctor said to our deaf ears, and by the signs that all men
   cried, which I remembered, I have found the very truth and am delivered
   from the leash of falseness. These be the words of Denis that he wrote
   in his epistle to Polycarp, and to Apollophanes, saying: We were, we
   twain, at Heliopolis, and we saw the moon of heaven go disordinately,
   and the time was not convenable. And yet again from the ninth hour unto
   evensong time, at the diameter of the sun established above all natural
   ordinance, that eclipse we saw begin in the east and coming unto the
   term of the sun. After that returning again, and not purged of that
   default, but was made contrary after the diameter. Then Denis and
   Apollophanes went to Heliopolis in Egypt by desire to learn astronomy.
   And after, Denis returned again. That the said eclipse took away the
   light from the universal parts of the world, it appeareth that Eusebius
   witnesseth in his chronicles, which saith that he hath read in the
   dictes of the Ethnicians that there was in Bithynia, which is a
   province of Asia the less, a great earth shaking, and also the greatest
   darkness that might be, and also saith that in Nicene, which is a city
   of Bithynia, that the earth trembling threw down houses. And it is read
   in Scholastica Historia that the philosophers were brought to this,
   that they said that: The God of nature suffered death, or else the
   ordinance of nature in this world was dissolved, or that the elements
   lived, or the God of nature suffered, and the elements had pity on him.
   And it is said in another place, that Denis saith: This night signified
   that the new very light of the world should come. And they of Athens
   made unto this God an altar, and set this title thereupon: This is the
   altar of the God unknown. And on every altar of their gods the title
   was set above in showing to whom that altar was dedicated, and when the
   Athenians would make their sacrifice unto this unknown God, the
   philosophers said: This God hath no need of none of our gods, but let
   us kneel down tofore him and pray unto him devoutly, for he requireth
   not the oblations of beasts but the devotions of our courages. And
   after, when the blessed S. Paul came to Athens, the Epicurean
   philosophers and Stoics disputed with him. Some of them said: What will
   this sower of words say? And others said that he seemed a shower of new
   gods that be devils. And then they brought him into the street of the
   philosophers, for to examine their new doctrine, and they said to him:
   Bringest thou any new tidings? We would know what thou hast brought to
   us. For the Athenians entended to none other thing but to hear some new
   things. And then when S. Paul had beholden all their altars he saw
   among them the altar of God unknown, and Paul said: Whom honour ye that
   ye know not, him show I to you to be very God that made heaven and
   earth. And after, he said to Denis, whom he saw best learned in divine
   things: Denis, what is he, that unknown God? And Denis said: He is
   verily a God which among gods is not showed, but to us he is unknown,
   and to come into the world and to reign without end. And Paul said: Is
   he a man only, or spirit? And Denis said: He is God and man but he is
   unknown, because his conversation is in heaven. Then said S. Paul: This
   is he that I preach, which descended from heaven, and took our nature
   human, and suffered death and arose again the third day.

   And as S. Denis disputed yet with S. Paul, there passed by adventure by
   that way a blind man tofore them, and anon Denis said to Paul: If thou
   say to this blind man in the name of thy God: See, and then he seeth, I
   shall anon believe in him, but thou shalt use no words of enchantment,
   for thou mayst haply know some words that have such might and virtue.
   And S. Paul said: I shall write tofore the form of the words, which be
   these: In the name of Jesu Christ, born of the virgin, crucified and
   dead, which arose again and ascended into heaven, and from thence shall
   come for to judge the world: See. And because that all suspicion be
   taken away, Paul said to Denis that he himself should pronounce the
   words. And when Denis had said those words in the same manner to the
   blind man, anon the blind man recovered his sight. And then Denis was
   baptized and Damaris his wife and all his meiny, and was a true
   christian man and was instructed and taught by S. Paul three years, and
   was ordained bishop of Athens, and there was in predication, and
   converted that city, and great part of the region, to christian faith.
   And it is said that S. Paul showed to him that he saw when he was
   ravished into the third heaven, like as S. Denis saith and showeth in
   divers places, whereof he speaketh so clearly of the hierarchies of
   angels, and of the orders and of the dispositions and offices of them,
   so that it is not supposed that he learned of any other, but only of
   him that was ravished into the third heaven, and had seen all things.
   He flourished by the spirit of prophecy like as it appeareth in an
   epistle that he sent to John the Evangelist, in the isle of Patmos, to
   which he was sent in exile, whereas he prophesied that he should come
   again, saying thus: Enjoy thou verily beloved, very wonderful and to be
   desired, right well beloved, thou shalt be let out from the keeping
   tbat thou hast in Patmos, and shalt return unto the land of Asia, and
   thou shalt make there the following of thy good God, and the good works
   of him, and shalt deliver them to them that shall come after thee. And,
   as it is seen and showed in the book of the names divine, he was at the
   dying of the blessed Virgin Mary. And when he heard that Peter and Paul
   were imprisoned at Rome under Nero, he ordained a bishop under him, and
   came for to visit them. And when they were martyred and passed to God,
   and Clement was set in the see of Rome, after a certain time he was
   sent of the said Clement into France, and he had in his company
   Rusticus and Eleutherius, and then he came with them to Paris and
   converted there much people to the faith, and did do make many
   churches, and set in them clerks of divers orders. And then he shone by
   so great heavenly grace that, when the bishops of the idols moved by
   strife the people against him, and the people came for to destroy him,
   anon as they had seen him they left all their cruelty, and kneeled down
   at his feet, where they had so great dread that they fled away from him
   for fear.

   But the devil which had envy, and saw every day his power minished and
   destroyed, and that the church increased and had victory of him, moved
   Domitian the emperor in so great cruelty that he made a commandment
   that whosomever might find any christian man, that he should constrain
   them to do sacrifice or torment them by divers torments. And then he
   sent the provost Fescennius of Rome to Paris against the christian men.
   And found there the blessed Denis preaching, and made him cruelly to be
   beaten, bespit and despised, and fast to be bounden with Rusticus and
   Eleutherius, and to be brought tofore him: And when he saw that the
   saints were constant and firm in the acknowledging of our Lord, he was
   much heavy and sorrowful. Then came thither a noble matron, which said
   that her husband was foully deceived of these enchanters, and then anon
   the husband was sent for, and he abiding in the confession of our Lord,
   was anon put to death. And the saints were beaten cruelly of twelve
   knights, and were straightly bounden with chains of iron, and put in
   prison. The day following, Denis was laid upon a gridiron, and
   stretched all naked upon the coals of fire, and there he sang to our
   Lord saying: Lord thy word is vehemently fiery, and thy servant is
   embraced in the love thereof. And after that he was put among cruel
   beasts, which were excited by great hunger and famine by long fasting,
   and as soon as they came running upon him he made the sign of the cross
   against them, and anon they were made most meek and tame. And after
   that he was cast into a furnace of fire, and the fire anon quenched,
   and he had neither pain ne harm. And after that he was put on the
   cross, and thereon he was long tormented, and after, he was taken down
   and put into a dark prison with his fellows and many other christian
   men. And as he sang there the mass and communed the people, our Lord
   appeared to him with great light, and delivered to him bread, saying:
   Take this, my dear friend, for thy reward is most great with me. After
   this they were presented to the judge and were put again to new
   torments, and then he did do smite off the heads of the three fellows,
   that is to say, Denis, Rusticus, and Eleutherius, in confessing the
   name of the holy Trinity. And this was done by the temple of Mercury,
   and they were beheaded with three axes. And anon the body of S. Denis
   raised himself up, and bare his head between his arms, as the angel led
   him two leagues from the place, which is said the hill of the martyrs,
   unto the place where he now resteth, by his election, and by the
   purveyance of God. And there was heard so great and sweet a melody of
   angels that many of them that heard it believed in our Lord. And
   Laertia, wife of the foresaid provost Lubrius, said that she was
   christian, and anon she was beheaded of the wicked felons, and was
   baptized in her blood, and so died.

   And Virbius his son, which was a knight at Rome under three emperors,
   came afterward to Paris and was baptized, and put himself in the number
   of the religious. And the wicked paynims doubted that the good
   christian men would bury the body of Rusticus and Eleutherius, and
   commanded that they should be cast into the river Seine. And a noble
   woman bade them to dine that bare them, and whilst they dined, this
   lady took away the bodies and buried them secretly in a field of hers,
   and after, when the persecution was ceased, she took them thence, and
   laid them honourably with the body of S. Denis. And they suffered death
   about the year of our Lord four score and sixteen, under Domitian. The
   years of the age of S. Denis four score and ten.

   On a time when Regulus the holy bishop sang mass at Arles, and
   rehearsed the names of the apostles in the canon, he added and joined
   thereto the blessed martyrs Denis, Rusticus, and Eleutherius, which so
   said, many supposed that they yet lived, and marvelled why he so
   rehearsed their names in the canon. And they so wondering, there
   appeared upon the cross of the altar three doves sitting, which had the
   names of the saints marked and written on their breasts with blood,
   which diligently beholding, they understood well that the saints were
   departed out of this world. And Hincmar, bishop of Rheims, saith in an
   epistle which he sent to Charles that, this Denis that was sent into
   France was Denis Areopagite as afore is said, and the same saith
   Johannes Scotus in an epistle to Charles, lest by the reason of the
   counting of the time should be said against, as some would object.
   About the year of our Lord eight hundred and thirty-two, in the time of
   Louis, king of France, the messengers of Michael, emperor of
   Constantinople, among other things, brought to Louis, son of Charles le
   Grand, the books of S. Denis of the hierarchy of the angels, translated
   out of Greek into Latin, and were received with great joy, and that
   same night were nineteen sick men healed in his church.

   About the year of our Lord six hundred and forty-three, like as it is
   contained in a chronicle, Dagobert, king of France, which reigned long
   tofore Pepin, began to have from his childhood great reverence to S.
   Denis, for when he doubted in that time the ire of his father Clothair,
   he fled anon to the church of S. Denis. And when this holy king was
   dead, it was showed in a vision unto a holy man that, the soul of him
   was ravished to judgment, and that many saints accused him that he had
   despoiled their churches. And as the wicked angels would have had him
   to the pains, the blessed Denis came thither, and by him he was
   delivered at his coming, and escaped from the pains, and peradventure
   the soul returned to the body and did penance. King Clovis discovered
   the body of S. Denis not duly, and brake the bone of his arm and
   ravished it away covetously, and anon he became out of his mind. Then
   let us worship Almighty God in his saints, that we, by their merits,
   may amend ourselves in this wretched life, that we may after this life
   come into his sempiternal bliss in heaven. Amen.
     __________________________________________________________________

             Here followeth of S. Calixtus, and first of his name.

   Calixtus is said of caleo, cales, that is to say, eschauffe or make
   warm. For he was hot and burning, first in the love of God, and after,
   he was hot and burning in getting and purchasing souls, and thirdly, he
   was hot in destroying the false idols, and also in showing the pains
   for sin.

Of S. Calixtus.

   Calixtus the pope was martyred the year of our Lord two hundred and
   twenty-two, under Alexander the emperor. And by the works of the said
   emperor the most apparent part of Rome was then burnt by vengeance of
   God, and the left arm of the idol Jupiter, which was of fine gold, was
   molten. And then all the priests of the idols went to the emperor
   Alexander, and required him that the gods that were angry might be
   appeased by sacrifices. And as they sacrificed on a Thursday by the
   morn, the air being all clear, four of the priests of the idols were
   smitten to death with one stroke of thunder. And the altar of Jupiter
   was burnt, so that all the people fled out of the walls of Rome. And
   when Palmatius, consul, knew that Calixtus with his clerks. hid him
   over the water of Tiber, he required that the christian men, by whom
   this evil was happed and come, should be put out for to purge and
   cleanse the city. And when he had received power for to do so, he
   hasted him incontinent with his knights for to accomplish it, and anon
   they were all made blind. And then Palmatius was afeard, and showed
   this unto Alexander. And then the emperor commanded that the Wednesday
   all the people should assemble and sacrifice to Mercury, that they
   might have answer upon these things. And as they sacrificed, a maid of
   the temple, which was named Juliana, was ravished of the devil, and
   began to cry: The god of Calixtus is very true and living, which is
   wroth and hath indignation of our ordures. And when Palmatius heard
   that, he went over Tiber unto the city of Ravenna unto S. Calixtus, and
   was baptized of him, he, his wife, and all his meiny. And when the
   emperor heard that, he did do call him, and delivered him to
   Simplician, senator, for to warn and treat him by fair words, because
   he was much profitable for the commune. And Palmatius persevered in
   fastings and in prayers. Then came to him a man which promised to him
   that if he healed his wife, which had the palsy, that he would believe
   in God anon. And when Palmatius had adored and prayed, the woman that
   was sick arose, and was all whole, and ran to Palmatius saying: Baptize
   me in the name of Jesu Christ, which hath taken me by the hand and
   lifted me up. Then came Calixtus and baptized her and her husband, and
   Simplician and many others. And when the emperor heard hereof, he sent
   to smite off the heads of all them that were baptized, and made
   Calixtus to live five days in the prison without meat and drink, and
   after, he saw that Calixtus was the more comforted and glad, and
   commanded that he should every day be beaten with staves. And after, he
   made a great stone to be bounden to his neck, and to be thrown down
   from an height out of a window into a pit. And Asterius, his priest,
   took up the body out of the pit, and after, buried the body in the
   cemetery of Calipodium.
     __________________________________________________________________

                                    GLOSSARY

   achaufed, pp., kindled. adjousting, pr. p.,Fr. ajouter, adding.
   alleged, v., Fr. alleger, mitigated. ampulles, n., flasks or phials.
   anenst, adv., in the sight of. artillour, n., engineer, avoid, v., to
   destroy.

   bain, n., (Fr.) a bath. blechures, n., Fr. blessures, wounds. boystous,
   adj., strong. brede, n., the size.

   canticis, n., the Song of Solomon. capax, adj., able to meet or
   withstand. celyer, n., cupboard or store place. chasse, n., box or
   shrine. clock, n., Fr, cloche, bell, complained, v., pitied. con, v.,
   be able to. conjured, v., exorcised. courage, n., mind.

   defended, v., forbade. do make, did do make =caused to be made.

   eculee, n., the rack. empeshment, n., Fr. empchement, hindrance.
   enseign, v., Fr. enseigner, to teach.

   feria, n., day of the week.

   gins, n., snares.

   holm, n., elm tree.

   japes, n., gibes. juments, n., mares.

   kittled, v., tickled, excited.

   leasings, n., lies. lettrure, n., learning. leye, v., stain or pollute.

   malerous, adj., Fr. malheureux, evil disposed. meiny. n.. retinue.

   noot, v., know not.

   porret, n., leek.

   quarel, n., arrow.

   rather, adj., former. refrigery, n., refreshment. renoinee, n., renown.
   rogneth, v.. to eat away.

   sacred, pp., consecrated. sort, v., adapt or place. sourd, v., issue,
   spring.

   terrien, adj., earthly. thau, n., the Greek t , a headless cross.
   truffes, n., flouts.

   utas, n., octave.

   wood, adj., mad.
     __________________________________________________________________

            This document is from the Christian Classics Ethereal
               Library at Calvin College, http://www.ccel.org,
                   generated on demand from ThML source.
