     __________________________________________________________________

           Title: The Golden Legend, vol. 2
      Creator(s): Voragine, Jacobus de (1230-1298)
     Print Basis: T. & A. Constable, Ltd. 1900
          Rights: Copyright claimed by Paul Halsall, Sept. 2000; commercial use
                  prohibited.
   CCEL Subjects: All;
      LC Call no: BX 4654.J334 V.2
     __________________________________________________________________

The GOLDEN LEGEND or LIVES of the SAINTS

Compiled by Jacobus de Voragine, Archbishop of Genoa, 1275

First Edition Published 1470

ENGLISHED by WILLIAM CAXTON, First Edition 1483

VOLUME TWO

From the Temple Classics Edited by F.S. ELLIS

First issue of this Edition, 1900

Reprinted 1922, 1931
     __________________________________________________________________

                             The History of Joshua

   After Moses, Joshua was duke and leader of the children of Israel, and
   brought them into the land of behest, and did many great battles. For
   whom God showed many great marvels and in especial one; that was that
   the sun stood still at his request, till he had overcome his enemies,
   by the space of a day. And our Lord, when he fought, sent down such
   hail-stones that slew more of his enemies with the stones than with
   man's hand.

   Joshua was a noble man and governed well Israel, and divided the land
   unto the twelve tribes by lot. And when he was an hundred and ten years
   old he died. And divers dukes after him judged and deemed Israel, of
   whom be noble histories, as of Jephthah, Gideon, and Sampson, which I
   pass over unto the histories of the kings, which is read in holy church
   from the first Sunday after Trinity Sunday, unto the first Sunday of
   August. And in the month of August is read the Book of Sapience, and in
   the month of September be read the histories of Job, of Tobit, and of
   Judith, and in October the history of the Maccabees, and in November
   the book of Ezechiel and his visions. And in December the history of
   Advent. and the book of lsaiah unto Christmas and after the feast of
   Epiphany unto Septuagesima be read the Epistles of Paul. And this is
   the rule of the temporal through the year, etc.
     __________________________________________________________________

                              The History of Saul.

   The first Sunday after Trinity Sunday unto the first Sunday of the
   month of August is read the Book of Kings.

   This history maketh mention that there was a man named Elkanah which
   had two wives, that one was named Hannah, and the name of the second
   Peninnah. Peninnah had children and Hannah had none but was barren. The
   good man at such days as he was bounden, went to his city for to make
   his sacrifice and worship God. In this time Hophni and Phineas sons of
   Eli; the great priest, were priests of our Lord. This Elkanah gave to
   Peninnah at such times as he offered, to her sons and daughters,
   certain parts, and unto Hannah he gave but one part. Peninnah did much
   sorrow and reproof to Hannah because she had had no children, and thus
   did every year, and provoked her to wrath, but she wept for sorrow and
   ate no meat. To whom Elkanah her husband said: Hannah, why weepest
   thou? and wherefore eatest thou not? Why is thine heart put to
   affliction? Am I not better to thee than ten sons? Then Hannah arose
   after she had eaten and drunk in Shilo and went to pray unto our Lord,
   making to him a vow if that she might have a son she should offer him
   to our Lord. Eli that time sat tofore the posts of the house of our
   Lord. And Hannah besought and prayed our Lord, making to him a vow, if
   that she might have a son she should offer him to our Lord. And it was
   so that she prayed so heartily in her thought and mind, that her lips
   moved not, wherefore Eli bare her on hand that she was drunk. And she
   said: Nay, my Lord, I am a sorrowful woman, I have drunken no wine ne
   drink that may cause me to be drunken, but I have made my prayers, and
   cast my soul in the sight of Almighty God. Repute me not as one of the
   daughters of Belial, for the prayer that I have made and spoken yet is
   of the multitude of the heaviness and sorrow of my heart. Then Eli the
   priest said to her: Go in peace, the God of Israel give to thee the
   petition of thy heart for that thou hast prayed him. And she said:
   Would God that thy handservant might find grace in thy sight. And so
   she departed, and on the morn they went home again in to Ramatha. After
   this our Lord remembered her, and Elkanah knew her, and she conceived,
   and at time accustomed brought forth and bare a fair son and named him
   Samuel for so much as she asked him of our Lord. Wherefore Elkanah, her
   husband, went and offered a solemn sacrifice and his vow accomplished,
   but Hannah ascended not with him. She said to her husband that she
   would not go till her child were weaned and taken from the pap. And
   after when Samuel was weaned, and was an infant, the mother took him,
   and three calves and three measures of meal, and a bottle of wine, and
   brought him unto the house of our Lord in Shilo and sacrificed that
   calf and offered the child to Eli, and told to Eli that she was the
   woman that prayed our Lord for that child. And there Hannah worshipped
   our Lord and thanked him, and there made this psalm which is one of the
   canticles: Exultavit cor meum in domino, et exaltatum est cornu meum in
   deo meo, and so forth, all the remnant of that psalm. And then Elkanah
   with his wife returned home to his house. After this our Lord visited
   Hannah, and she conceived three sons, and two daughters, which she
   brought forth. And Samuel abode in the house of our Lord and was
   minister in the sight of Eli. But the two sons of Eli, Hophni and
   Phineas were children of Belial, not knowing our Lord, but did great
   sins against the commandments of God. And our Lord sent a prophet to
   Eli because he corrected not his sons, and said he would take the
   office from him and from his house, and that there should not be an old
   man in his house and kindred, but should die ere they came to man's
   estate, and that God should raise a priest that should be faithful and
   after his heart.

   Samuel served and ministered our Lord in a surplice before Eli. And on
   a time as Eli lay in his bed his eyes were so dimmed that he might not
   see the lantern of God till it was quenched and put out. Samuel slept
   in the temple of our Lord whereas the ark of God was, and our Lord
   called Samuel, which answered: I am ready, and ran to Eli and said: I
   am ready, thou calledst me. Which said: I called thee not my son,
   return and sleep, and he returned and slept. And our Lord called him
   the second time, and he arose and went to Eli and said: Lo! I am here,
   thou calledst me, which answered: I called thee not, go thy way, and
   sleep. Samuel knew not the calling of our Lord yet, ne there was never
   revelation showed him tofore. And our Lord called Samuel the third
   time, which arose and came to Eli and said: I am here, for thou
   calledst me. Then Eli understood that our Lord had called him, and said
   to Samuel: Go and sleep, and if thou be called again thou shalt say:
   Speak, Lord, for thy servant heareth thee. Samuel returned and slept in
   his place, and our Lord came and called him: Samuel! Samuel! and Samuel
   said: Say, Lord, what it pleaseth, for thy servant heareth. And then
   our Lord said to Samuel: Lo! I make my word to be known in Israel that
   whoso heareth, his ears shall ring and sound thereof. In that day I
   shall raise against Eli all that I have said upon his house. I shall
   begin and accomplish it. I have given him in knowledge that I shall
   judge his house for wickedness, forasmuch as he knoweth his sons to do
   wickedly, and hath not corrected them. Therefore I have sworn to the
   house of Eli that the wickedness of his house shall not be made clean
   with sacrifices ne gifts never. Samuel slept till on the morn, and then
   he rose and opened the doors of the house of our Lord in his surplice;
   and Samuel was afeard to show this vision unto Eli. Eli called him and
   asked what our Lord hath said to him and charged him to tell him all:
   and Samuel told to him all that our Lord had said, and hid nothing from
   him. And he said: He is our Lord, what it pleaseth him, let him do.
   Samuel grew, and our Lord was with him in all his works. And it was
   known to all Israel from Dan to Beersheba that Samuel was the true
   prophet of our Lord. After this it was so that the Philistines warred
   against the children of Israel, against whom there was a battle, and
   the children of Israel overthrown and put to flight. Wherefore they
   assembled again, and took with them the ark of God which Hophni and
   Phineas, sons of Eli, bare, and when they came with a great multitude
   with the ark, the Philistines were afraid. Notwithstanding they fought
   against them manly and slew thirty thousand footmen of the children of
   Israel and took the ark of God. And the two sons of Eli were slain,
   Hophni and Phineas. And a man of the tribe of Benjamin ran for to tell
   this unto Eli which sat abiding some tidings of the battle. This man,
   as soon as he entered into the town, told how the field was lost, the
   people slain, and how the ark was taken. And there was a great sorrow
   and cry. And when Eli heard this cry and wailing he demanded what this
   noise was and meant, and wherefore they so sorrowed. Then the man hied
   and came and told to Eli. Eli was at that tide ninety-eight years old,
   and his eyes were waxen blind and might not see, and he said: I am he
   that came from the battle, and fled this day from the host. To whom Eli
   said: What is there done my son? He answered: The host of Israel is
   overthrown and fled tofore the Philistines, and a great ruin is made
   among the people, thy two sons be slain and the ark of God is taken.
   And when Eli heard him name the ark of God he fell down backward by the
   door and brake his neck and there died. He was an old man and had
   judged Israel forty years. Then the Philistines took the ark of God and
   set it in their temple of Dagon by their god Dagon, in Ashdod. On the
   morn the next day early, when they of Ashdod came into their temple,
   they saw their god Dagon lie on the ground tofore the ark of God upon
   his face, and the head and the two hands of Dagon were cut off. And
   there abode no more but the trunk only in the place. And God showed
   many vengeances to them of the country as long as the ark was with
   them, for God smote them with sickness in their secret parts, and wells
   boiled in towns and fields of that region, and there grew among them so
   many mice, that they suffered great persecution and confusion in that
   city. The people seeing this vengeance and plague said: Let not the ark
   of the God of Israel abide longer with us, for his hand is hard on us
   and on Dagon our god, and sent for the great masters and governors of
   the Philistines, and when they were gathered they said: What shall we
   do with the ark of the God of Israel? And they answered: Let it be led
   all about the cities, and so it was, and a great vengeance and death
   was had upon all the cities, and smote every man with plague from the
   most to the least; in such wise that the nether parts of them putrified
   and rotted off them, and that they made to them seats of furs and skins
   to sit soft. And then they sent the ark of God into Acheron and when
   they of Acheron saw the ark, they cried saying: They have brought the
   ark of the God of Israel to us, for to slay us and our people. They
   cried that the ark should be sent home again, for much people were dead
   by the vengeance that was taken on them in their secret parts, and a
   great howling and wailing was among them. The ark was in the region of
   the Philistines seven months. After this they counselled with their
   priests what they should do with the ark, and it was concluded it
   should be sent home again, but the priests said: If ye send it home,
   send it not void, but what ye owe pay for your trespass and sin, and
   then ye shall be healed and cured of your sicknesses. And so they
   ordained after the number of the five provinces of the Philistines,
   five pieces of gold and five mice of gold, and led to a wain and put in
   it two wild kine, which never bare yoke, and said, Leave their calves
   at home and take the ark and set it on the wain, and also the vessels
   and pieces of gold that ye have paid for your trespass, set them at the
   side of the ark and let them go where they will, and thus they sent the
   ark of God unto the children of Israel.

   Samuel then governed Israel long, and when he was old he set his sons
   judges on Israel, whose names were Joel and Abiah. And these two his
   sons walked not in his ways, but declined after covetise and took gifts
   and perverted justice and doom. Then assembled and gathered together
   all the greatest of birth of the children of Israel, and came to Samuel
   and said: Lo! thou art old and thy sons walk not in thy ways, wherefore
   ordain to us a king that may judge and rule us like as all other
   nations have. This displeased much to Samuel when they said Ordain on
   us a king. Then Samuel counselled on this matter with our Lord, to whom
   God said: Hear the voice of the people that speak to thee: they have
   not cast only thee away, but me, that I should not reign on them, for
   they do now like as they ever have done sith I brought them out of
   Egypt unto this day; that is that they have served false gods and
   strange, and so do they to thee. Notwithstanding hear them, and tell to
   them tofore, the right of the king, and how he shall oppress them.

   Samuel told all this to the people that demanded to have a king, and
   said: This shall be the right of a king that shall reign on you. He
   shall take your sons and make them his men of war, and set them in his
   chariots and shall make them his carters and riders of his horse in his
   chariots and carts, and shall ordain of them tribunes and centurions,
   earers and tillers of his fields, and mowers and reapers of his corn,
   and he shall make them smiths, and armourers of harness and cars, and
   he shall also take your daughters and make them his unguentaries, and
   ready at his will and pleasure; he shall also take from you your fields
   and vineyards and the best olives and give them to his servants, and he
   shall task and dime your corn and sheaves, and the rents of your
   vineyards he shall value for to give to his officers and servants, and
   shall take from you your servants, both men and women, and set them to
   his works. And your asses and beasts he also shall take to his labour,
   your flocks of sheep he shall task and take the tenth or what shall
   please him, and ye shall be to him thrall and servants. And ye shall
   cry then wishing to flee from the face of your king, and our Lord shall
   not hear you nor deliver you because ye have asked for you a king. Yet
   for all this the people would not hear Samuel, but said: Give to us a
   king, for a king shall reign on us, and we shall be as all other people
   be. And our king shall judge us and go before us, and he shall fight
   our battles for us. And Samuel heard all and counselled with our Lord.
   To whom God commanded to ordain to them a king, and so he did, for he
   took a man of the tribe of Benjamin whose name was Saul, a good man and
   chosen, and there was not a better among all the children of Israel,
   and he was higher of stature from the shoulder upward than any other of
   all the people. And Samuel anointed him king upon Israel, and said to
   him: Our Lord God hath anointed thee upon his heritage and ordained
   thee a prince, and thou shalt deliver his people from the hands of his
   enemies that be in the circuit and countries about, and so departed
   from him. And Samuel after this gathered the people together and said:
   Our Lord saith that he hath brought you from the land of Egypt, and
   saved you from the hands of all the kings that were your enemies and
   pursued you, and ye have forsaken our Lord God that hath only delivered
   you from all your evil and tribulations, and have said: Ordain upon us
   a king. Wherefore now stand every each in his tribe, and we shall lot
   who shall be our king. And the lot fell on the tribe of Benjamin, and
   in that tribe the lot fell upon Saul the son of Kish. And they sought
   him and could not find him, and it was told him that he was hid in his
   house at home, and the people ran thither and fetched him and set him
   amidst all the people. And he was higher than any of all the people
   from the shoulder upward. Then Samuel said to the people, Now ye see
   and behold whom our Lord hath chosen, for there is none like him of all
   the people. And then all the people cried: Vivat Rex, live the king.
   Samuel wrote the law of the realm to the people in a book, and put it
   tofore our Lord. Thus was Saul made the first king in Israel, and anon
   had much war, for on all sides men warred on the children of Israel,
   and he defended them, and Saul had divers battles and had victory.

   Samuel came on a time to Saul and said God commanded him to fight
   against Amalek and that he should slay and destroy man, woman, and
   child, ox, cow, camel and ass and sheep, and spare nothing. Then Saul
   assembled his people and had two hundred thousand footmen and twenty
   thousand men of the tribe of Judah, and went forth and fought against
   Amalek and slew them, sauf he saved Agag the King of Amalek alive, and
   all other he slew, but he spared the best flocks of sheep and of other
   beasts, and also good clothes, and wethers, and all that was good he
   spared, and whatsomever was foul he destroyed. And this was showed to
   Samuel by our Lord, saying: Me forthinketh that I have ordained Saul
   king upon Israel, for he hath forsaken me, and not fulfilled my
   commandments. Samuel was sorry herefor, and wailed all the night. On
   the morn he rose and came to Saul, and Saul offered sacrifice to our
   Lord of the pillage that he had taken. And Samuel demanded of Saul what
   noise that was he heard of sheep and beasts, and he said that they were
   of the beasts that the people had brought from Amalek to offer unto our
   Lord, and the residue were slain. They have spared the best and fattest
   for to do sacrifice with unto thy Lord God. Then said Samuel to Saul:
   Rememberest thou not that whereas thou wert least among the tribes of
   Israel thou wert made upperest? And our Lord anointed thee, and made
   thee king. And he said to thee: Go and slay the sinners of Amalek and
   leave none alive, man ne beast; why hast thou not obeyed the
   commandment of our Lord? And hast run to robbery and done evil in the
   sight of God? And then said Saul to Samuel: I have taken Agag, king of
   the Amalekites, and brought him with me, but I have slain Amalek. The
   people have taken of the sheep and beasts of the best for to offer unto
   our Lord God. And then said Samuel: Trowest thou that our Lord would
   rather have sacrifice and offerings than not to obey his commandments.
   Better is obedience than sacrifice, and better it is to take heed to do
   after thy Lord than to offer the fat kidneys of the wethers. For it is
   a sin to withstand and to repugn against his Lord like the sin of
   idolatry. And because thou hast not obeyed our Lord, and cast away his
   word, our Lord hath cast thee away that thou shalt not be king. Then
   said Saul to Samuel: I have sinned for I have not obeyed the word of
   God and thy words, but have dreaded the people and obeyed to their
   request, but I pray thee to bear my sin and trespass and return with me
   that I may worship our Lord. And Samuel answered, I shall not return
   with thee. And so Samuel departed, and yet ere he departed, he did do
   slay Agag the king. And Samuel saw never Saul after unto his death..

   Then our Lord bade Samuel to go and anoint one of the sons of Isai,
   otherwise called Jesse, to be king of Israel. And so he came into
   Bethlehem unto Jesse and bade him bring his sons tofore him. This Jesse
   had eight sons, he brought tofore Samuel seven of them, and Samuel said
   there was not he that he would have. Then he said that there was no
   more, save one which was youngest and yet a child, and kept sheep in
   the field. And Samuel said: Send for him, for I shall eat no bread till
   he come. And so he was sent for and brought. He was ruddy and fair of
   visage and well favoured, and Samuel arose, and took an horn with oil
   and anointed him in the middle of his brethren. And forthwith the
   spirit of our Lord came directly in him that same day and ever after
   Then Samuel departed and came in to Ramah. And the spirit of our Lord
   went away from Saul and an evil spirit oft vexed him. Then his servants
   said to him: Thou oft art vexed with an evil spirit, it were good to
   have one that could harp, to be with thee when the spirit vexeth thee,
   thou shalt bear it the lighter. And he said to his servants: Provide ye
   to me such one. And then one said: I saw one of Jesse's sons play on a
   harp, a fair child and strong, wise in his talking and our Lord is with
   him. Then Saul sent messages to Jesse for David, and Jesse sent David
   his son with a present of bread, wine, and a kid, to Saul. And always
   when the evil spirit vexed Saul, David harped tofore him and anon he
   was eased, and the evil spirit went his way.

   After this the Philistines gathered them into great hosts to make war
   against Saul and the children of Israel, and Saul gathered the children
   of Israel together and came against them in the vale of Terebinthe. The
   Philistines stood upon the hill on that other part, and the valley was
   between them. And there came out of the host of the Philistines a great
   giant named Goliath of Gath; he was six cubits high and a palm, and a
   helmet of brass on his head, and was clad in a habergeon. The weight of
   his habergeon was of five thousand shekels of weight of metal. He had
   boots of brass on his calves, and his shoulders were covered with
   plates of brass. His glaive was as a great colestaff, and there was
   thereon six shekels of iron, and his squire went tofore him and cried
   against them of Israel, and said they should choose a man to fight a
   singular battle against Goliath, and if he were overcome the
   Philistines should be servants to Israel, and if he prevailed and
   overcame his enemy, they of Israel should serve the Philistines, and
   thus he did cry forty days long. Saul and the children of Israel were
   sore afraid. David was at this time in Bethlehem with his father, and
   kept sheep, and three of his brethren were in the host with Saul. To
   whom Jesse said: lodgings of the Philistines, and took all the pillage.

   David took the head of Goliath and brought it into Jerusalem, and his
   arms he brought into his tabernacle. And Abner brought David, having
   the head of Goliath in his hand, tofore Saul. And Saul demanded of him
   of what kindred that he was, and he said that he was son of Jesse of
   Bethlehem, and forthwith that same time Jonathan, the son of Saul,
   loved David as his own soul. Saul then would not give him licence to
   return to his father, and Jonathan and he were confederate and swore
   each of them to be true to other, for Jonathan gave his coat that he
   was clad withal, and all his other garments, unto his sword and spear,
   unto David. And David did all that ever Saul bade him do wisely and
   prudently. And when he returned from the battle, and Goliath was slain,
   the women came out from every town singing with choirs and timpanes
   against the coming of Saul with great joy and gladness, saying: Saul
   hath slain a thousand and David hath slain ten thousand. And this
   saying displeased much to Saul, which said: They have given to David
   ten thousand and to me one thousand; what may he more have save the
   realm, and to be king? For this cause Saul never loved David after that
   day, ne never looked on him friendly but ever sought means afterward to
   destroy David, for he dreaded that David should be lord with him, and
   put him from him. And David was wise and kept him well from him. And
   after this he wedded Michal, daughter of Saul, and Jonathan made oft
   times peace between Saul and David, yet Saul kept no promise, but ever
   lay in wait to slay David. And Jonathan warned David thereof. And David
   gat him a company of men of war to the number of four hundred, and kept
   him in the mountains.

   And on a time David was at home with his wife Michal, and Saul sent
   thither men of war to slay him in his house in the morning; and when
   Michal heard thereof, she said to David: But if thou save thyself this
   night, to-morn thou shalt die, and she let him out by a window by which
   he escaped and saved himself. Michal took an image and laid in his bed,
   and a rough skin of a goat on the head of the image, and covered it
   with clothes. And on the morn Saul sent spies for David, and it was
   answered to them that he lay sick in his bed. Then after this sent Saul
   messengers for to see David, and said to them: Bring him to me in his
   bed that he may be slain. And when the messengers came they found a
   simulachre or an image in his bed, and goats' skins on the head. Then
   said Saul to Michal his daughter: Why hast thou mocked me so, and hast
   suffered mine enemy to flee? And Michal answered to Saul and said: He
   said to me: Let me go or I shall slay thee.

   David went to Samuel in Rama and told him all that Saul had done to
   him. And it was told to Saul that David was with Samuel, and he sent
   thither messengers to take him. And when they came they found them with
   the company of prophets, and they sat and prophesied with them. And he
   sent more. And they did also so. And the third time he sent more
   messengers. And they also prophesied. And then Saul being wroth asked
   where Samuel and David were, and went to them, and he prophesied when
   he came also, and took off his clothes and was naked all that day and
   night before Samuel. David then fled from thence and came to Jonathan
   and complained to him saying: What have I offended that thy father
   seeketh to slay me? Jonathan was sorry therefore, for he loved well
   David. After this Saul ever sought for to slay David. And on a time
   Saul went into a cave for to ease him, and David was within the cave,
   to whom his squire said: Now hath God brought thine enemy into thine
   hand; now go and slay him. And David said: God forbid that I should lay
   any hand on him, he is anointed. I shall never hurt ne grieve him, let
   God do his pleasure. And he went to Saul and cut off a gobet of his
   mantle and kept it. And when Saul was gone out, soon after issued David
   out and cried to Saul saying: Lo! Saul, God hath brought thee into my
   hands. I might have slain thee if I had would, but God forbade that I
   should lay hand on thee, my lord anointed of God. And what have I
   offended that thou seekest to slay me? Who art thou? said Saul. Art
   thou not David my son? Yes, said David, I am thy servant, and kneeled
   down and worshipped him. Then said Saul: I have sinned, and wept and
   also said: Thou art rightfuller than I am, thou hast done to me good
   end I have done to thee evil. And thou hast well showed to me this day
   that God had brought me into shine hand, and thou hast not slain me.
   God reward thee for this, that thou hast done to me; now know I well
   that thou shalt reign in Israel. I pray thee to be friendly to my seed,
   and destroy not my house, and swear and promise me that thou take not
   away my name from the house of my father; and David sware and promised
   to Saul. And then Saul departed and went home, and David and his people
   went in to surer places. Anon after this Samuel died, and was buried in
   his house in Rama. And all Israel bewailed him greatly. Then there was
   a rich man in the mount of Carmel that hight Nabal, and on a time he
   sheared and clipped his sheep, to whom David sent certain men, and bade
   them say that David greeted him well, and whereas aforetimes his
   shepherds kept his sheep in desert, he never was grievous to them, ne
   they lost not so much as a sheep as long as they were with us, and that
   he might ask his servants for they could tell, and that he would now in
   their need send them what it pleased him. Nabal answered to the
   children of David: Who is that David? Trow ye that I shall send the
   meat that I have made ready for them that shear my sheep and send it to
   men that I know not? The men returned and told to David all that he had
   said. Then said David to his men: Let every man take his sword and gird
   him withal, and David took his sword and girt him. And David went and
   four hundred men followed him, and he left two hundred behind him. One
   of the servants of Nabal told to Abigail, Nabal's wife, how that David
   had sent messengers from the desert unto his lord, and how wroth and
   wayward he was, and also he said that those men were good enough to
   them when they were in desert, ne never perished beast of ours as long
   as they were there. They were a wall and a shield for us both day and
   night all the time that we kept our flocks there, wherefore consider
   what is to be done. They purpose to do harm to him and to servants. And
   she arose and took with her five maidens which went afoot by her, and
   she rode upon an ass, and followed the messengers, and was made wife to
   David. And David also took another wife called Ahinoam of Jezreel, and
   both two were his wives.

   After this Saul alway sought David for to slay him. And the people
   called Zyphites told to Saul that David was hid in the hill of Hachilah
   which was on the after part of the wilderness, and Saul took with him
   three thousand chosen men and followed and sought David. David when he
   heard of the coming of Saul went into the place whereas Saul was, and
   when he was asleep he took one with him and went into the tent where
   Saul slept, and Abner with him and all his people. Then said Abishai to
   David: God hath put thine enemy this day in thine hands, now I shall go
   and smite him through with my spear, and then after that we shall have
   no need to dread him. And David said to Abishai: Slay him not; who may
   extend his hand into the anointed king of God and be innocent? And
   David said yet more: By the living God, but if God smite him or the
   days come that he shall die or perish in battle, God be merciful to me,
   as I shall not lay my hand on him that is The anointed of our Lord. Now
   take the spear that standeth at his head, and the cup of water, and let
   us go. David took the spear and the cup and departed thence and there
   was not one that saw them ne awaked, for they slept all. Then when
   David was on the hill far from them, David cried to the people and to
   Abner, saying: Abner, shalt not thou answer? And Abner answered: Who
   art thou that cryest and wakest the king? And David said to Abner: Art
   thou not a man and there is none like thee in Israel? why hast thou not
   therefore kept thy lord the king? There is one of the people gone in to
   slay the king thy lord; by the living Lord it is not good that ye do,
   but be ye worthy to die because ye have not kept your lord anointed of
   our Lord. Now look and see where the king's spear is, and the cup of
   water that stood at his head. Saul knew the voice of David and said: Is
   not this thy voice, my son David? And David said: It is my voice, my
   lord king. For what cause dost thou, my lord, pursue me thy servant?
   what thing have I done and what evil have I committed with my hand?
   Thou seest well I might have slain thee if I would; God judge between
   thee and me. And Saul said: I have sinned, return, my son; I shall
   never hereafter do thee harm ne evil, for thy soul is precious in my
   sight this day. It appeareth now that I have done follily, and am
   ignorant in many things. Then said David: Lo! here is the spear of the
   king, let a child come fetch it, our Lord shall reward to every man
   after his justice and faith. Our Lord hath this day brought thee into
   my hands, and yet I would not lay mine hand on him that is anointed of
   our Lord. And like as thy soul is magnified this day in my sight, so be
   my soul magnified in the sight of God and deliver me from all anguish.
   Saul said then to David: Blessed be thou, my son David. And David went
   then his way, and Saul returned home again.

   And David said in his heart: Sometime it might hap to me to fall and
   come into the hands of Saul, it is better I flee from him and save me
   in the land of the Philistines. And he went thence with six hundred men
   and came to Achish king of Gath and dwelled there. And when Saul
   understood that he was with Achish he ceased to seek him. And Achish
   delivered to David a town to dwell in named Ziklag.

   After this the Philistines gathered and assembled much people against
   Israel. And Saul assembled all Israel and came unto Gilboa; and when
   Saul saw al! the host of the Philistines, his heart dreaded and fainted
   sore, he cried for to have counsel of our Lord. And our Lord answered
   him not, ne by swevens ne by priests, ne by prophets. Then said Saul to
   his servants: Fetch to me a woman having a phiton, otherwise called a
   phitoness or a witch. And they said that there was such a woman in
   Endor. Saul then changed his habit and clothing, and did on other
   clothing, and went and two men with him, and came to the woman by
   night, and made her by her craft to raise Samuel. And Samuel said to
   Saul: Why hast thou put me from my rest, for to arise? And Saul said: I
   am coarted thereto, for the Philistines fight against me, and God is
   gone from me, and will not hear me, neither by prophets, ne by swevens.
   And Samuel said: What askest thou of me when God is gone from thee and
   gone unto David? God shall do to thee as he hath said to thee by me,
   and shall cut thy realm from thine hand, and shall give it to thy
   neighbour David. For thou hast not obeyed his voice, ne hast not done
   his commandment in Amalek; therefore thou shalt lose the battle and
   Israel shall be overthrown. To-morrow thou and thy children shall be
   with me, and our Lord shall suffer the children of Israel to fall in
   the hands of the Philistines. Anon then Saul fell down to the earth.
   The words of Samuel made him afeard and there was no strength in him,
   for he had eaten no bread of all that day, he was greatly troubled.
   Then the phitoness desired him to eat, and she slew a paschal lamb that
   she had, and dighted and set it tofore him, and bread. And when he had
   eaten he walked with his servants all that night. And on the morn the
   Philistines assailed Saul and them of Israel, and fought a great
   battle, and the men of Israel fled from the face of the Philistines,
   and many of them were slain in the mount of Gilboa. The Philistines
   smote in against Saul and his sons, and slew Jonathan and Abinadab, and
   Melchi-shua, sons of Saul. And all the burden of the battle was turned
   on Saul, and the archers followed him and wounded him sore. Then said
   Saul to his squire: Pluck out thy sword and slay me, that these men
   uncircumcised come not and, scorning, slay me; and his squire would not
   for he was greatly afeard. Then Saul took his sword and slew himself,
   which thing when his squire saw, that is that Saul was dead, he took
   his sword and fell on it and was dead with him. Thus was Saul dead, and
   his three sons and his squire, and all his men that day together. Then
   the children of Israel that were thereabouts, and on that other side of
   Jordan, seeing that the men of Israel fled, and that Saul and his three
   sons were dead, left their cities and fled. The Philistines came and
   dwelled there; and the next day the Philistines went for to rifle and
   pillage them that were dead, and they found Saul and his three sons
   Iying in the hill of Gilboa. And they cut off the head of Saul, and
   robbed him of his armour, and sent it into the land of the Philistines
   all about, that it might be showed in the temple of their idols, and
   unto the people; and set up his arms in the temple of Ashtaroth, and
   hung his body on the wall of Bethshan. And when the men that dwelt in
   Jabesh-Gilead saw what the Philistines had done unto Saul, all the
   strongest men of them arose and went all that night and took down the
   bodies of Saul and of his sons from the wall of Bethshan and burnt
   them, and took the bones and buried them in the wood of Jabesh-Gilead
   and fasted seven days.

   Thus endeth the life of Saul which was first king upon Israel, and for
   disobedience of God's commandment was slain, and his heirs never
   reigned long after.
     __________________________________________________________________

                              The History of David

   Here followeth how David reigned after Saul, and governed Israel.
   Shortly taken out of the Bible, the most historial matters and but
   little touched.

   After the death of Saul David returned from the journey that he had
   against Amalek. For whilst David had been out with Achish the king,
   they of Amalek had been in Ziklag and taken all that was therein
   prisoners, and robbed and carried away with them the two wives of
   David. and had set fire and burnt the town. And when David came again
   home and saw the town burnt he pursued after, and by the conveying of
   one of them of Amalek that was left by the way sick, for to have his
   life he brought David upon the host of Amalek whereas they sat and ate
   and drank. And David smote on them with his meiny and slew down all
   that he found, and rescued his wives and all the good that they had
   taken, and took much more of them. And when he was come to Ziklag, the
   third day after there came one from the host of Saul, and told to David
   how that Israel had lost the battle, and how they were fled, and how
   Saul the king and Jonathan his son were slain. David said to the young
   man that brought these tidings: How knowest thou that Saul and Jonathan
   be dead? And he answered it was so by adventure that I came upon the
   mount of Gilboa, and Saul rested upon his spear, and the horsemen and
   the chariots of the Philistines approached to himward, and he looked
   behind him and saw me, and called me, and said to me: Who art thou? And
   I said I am an Amalekite, and then he said: Stand upon me and slay me,
   for I am full of anguish, and yet my soul is in me. And I then standing
   on him slew him, knowing well that he might not live after the ruin.
   And I took the diadem from his head, and the armylle from his arm,
   which I have brought hither to thee, my lord. David took and rent his
   vestment, and all the men that were him, and wailed and sorrowed much
   the death of Saul and Jonathan and of all the men of Israel, and fasted
   that day till even. And David said to the young man: Of whence art
   thou? And he said: I am the son of an Amalekite. And David said to him:
   Why dreadedst thou not to put thy hand forth to slay him that is
   anointed of God? David called one of his men, and bade him slay him.
   And he smote him and slew him. And David said: Thy blood be on thy
   head! thine own mouth hath spoken against thee, saying: I have slain
   Saul which was king anointed of our Lord.

   David sorrowed and bewailed much the death of Saul and of Jonathan.
   After this David counselled with our Lord and demanded if he should go
   in to one of the cities of Judah. And our Lord bade him go, and he ask
   and because God hath said thou shalt reign upon my people and be their
   governor, therefore we shall obey thee. And all the seniors of Israel
   came and did homage to David in Hebron, and anointed him king over
   them.

   David was thirty years old when he began to reign and he reigned forty
   years. He reigned in Hebron upon Judah seven years and six months, and
   in Jerusalem he reigned thirty-three years upon all Israel and Judah.
   David then made him a dwelling-place in the hill of Sion in Jerusalem
   And after this the Philistines made war against him but he oft
   overthrew them, and slew many of them, and made them tributary to him,
   and after brought the ark of God in Jerusalem, and set it in his house.
   After this yet the Philistines made war again unto him and other kings
   were aiding and helping them against David, whom David overcame and
   slew and put under.

   And on a time when Joab was out with his men of war Iying at a siege
   tofore a city, David was at home, and walked in his chamber, and as he
   looked out at a window he saw a fair woman wash her and bain her in her
   chamber, which stood against his house, and demanded of his servants
   who she was, and they said she was Uriah's wife. He sent for her and
   lay by her and gat her with child. And when David understood that she
   was with child, he sent letters to Joab and bade him to send home to
   him Uriah; and Joab sent Uriah to David, and David demanded how the
   host was ruled, and after bade him go home to his house and wash his
   feet. And Uriah went thence, and the king sent to him his dish with
   meat. Uriah would not go home, but lay before the gate of the king's
   house with other servants of the king's. And it was told to the king
   that Uriah went not home, and then David said to Uriah: Thou comest
   from a far way, why goest thou not home? And Uriah said to David: The
   ark of God and Israel and Judah be in the pavilions, and my lord Joab
   and the servants of thee, my lord, lie on the ground, and would ye that
   I should go to my house and eat and drink, and sleep with my wife? By
   thy health and by the health of my soul I shall not do so. Then David
   said to Uriah, Abide here then this night, and to-morrow I shall
   deliver thee. Uriah abode there that day and the next, and David made
   him eat tofore him and made him drunk, yet for all that he would not go
   home, but lay with the servants of David. Then on the morn David wrote
   a letter to Joab, that he should set Uriah in the weakest place of the
   battle and where most jeopardy was, and that he should be left there
   that he might be slain. And Uriah bare this letter to Joab, and it was
   so done as David had written, and Uriah was slain in the battle. And
   Joab sent word to David how they had fought, and how Uriah was slain
   and dead. When Uriah's wife heard that her husband was dead, she
   mourned and wailed him; and after the mourning David sent for her and
   wedded her, and she bare him a son. And this that David had committed
   on Uriah displeased greatly our Lord.

   Then our Lord sent Nathan the prophet unto David, which, when he came,
   said to him: There were two men dwelling in a city, that one rich and
   that other poor. The rich man had sheep and oxen right many, but the
   poor man had but one little sheep, which he bought and nourished and
   grew with his children, eating of his bread and drinking of his cup,
   and slept in his bosom. She was to him as a daughter. And on a time
   when a certain pilgrim came to the rich man, he, sparing his own sheep
   and oxen to make a feast to the pilgrim that was come to him, took the
   only sheep of the poor man and made meat thereof to his guest. David
   was wroth and said to Nathan: By the living God, the man that hath so
   done is the child of death, the man that hath so done shall yield
   therefor four times double. Then said Nathan to David: Thou art the
   same man that hath done this thing. This said the Lord God of Israel: I
   have anointed thee king upon Israel, and I have kept thee from the hand
   of Saul, and I have given to thee an house to keep in thine household
   and wives in thy bosom. I have given to thee the house of Israel and
   the house of Judah, and if these be small things I shall add an l give
   to thee much more and greater. Why hast thou therefore despised the
   word of God and hast done evil in the sight of our Lord? Thou hast
   slain Uriah with a sword, and his wife hast thou taken unto thy wife,
   and thou hast slain him with the sword of the sons of Ammon. Therefore
   the sword shall not go from thy house, world without end, forasmuch as
   thou hast despised me and hast taken Uriah's wife unto thy wife. This
   said our Lord: I shall raise evil against thee, and shall take thy
   wives in thy sight and give them to thy neighbour, and he shall lie
   with thy wives tofore thine eyes. Thou hast done it privily, but I
   shall make this to be done and open in the sight of all Israel. And
   then said David to Nathan: Peccavi! I have sinned against our Lord.
   Nathan said: Our Lord hath taken away thy sin, thou shalt not die, but
   for as much as thou hast made the enemy to blaspheme the name of God,
   therefore the son that is born to thee shall die by death. And Nathan
   returned to his house. And for this sin David made this psalm: Miserere
   mei deus, which is a psalm of mercy, for David did great penance for
   these sins of adultery and also of homicide.

   For as I once was beyond the sea riding in the company of a noble
   knight named Sir John Capons, and was also doctor in both laws, and was
   born in Malyorke, and had been viceroy and governor of Arragon and
   Catalonia, and that time counsellor unto the Duke of Burgundy, Charles,
   it happed we communed of the history of David; and this said nobleman
   told me that he had read that David did this penance following for
   these said sins. That he dolved him in the ground standing naked unto
   the head, so long that the worms began to creep in his flesh, and made
   a verse of this psalm Miserere, and then came out, and when he was
   whole thereof he went in again and stood so again as long as afore is
   said and made the second verse, and so as many times he was dolven in
   the earth as be verses in the said psalm of Miserere mei deus, and
   every time was abiding therein till he felt the worms creep in his
   flesh. This was a great penance and a token of a great repentance, for
   there be in the psalm twenty-one verses, and twenty-one times he was
   dolven. Thus this nobleman told me, riding between the town of Ghent in
   Flanders and the town of Brussels in Brabant.

   Therefore God took away this sin, and forgave it him, but the son that
   she brought forth died. And after this Bathsheba, that had been Uriah's
   wife, conceived and brought forth another son named Solomon, which was
   well-beloved of God, and after David, Solomon was king.

   After this David had much war and trouble and anger, in so much that on
   a time Amnon, oldest son of David, loved Thamar his sister. This Thamar
   was Absalom's sister by the mother's side, and Amnon forced and lay by
   her, and when he had done his pleasure, he hated her, and threw her out
   of his chamber, and she complained unto Absalom. David knew hereof, and
   was right sorry for it, but he would not rebuke his son Amnon for it,
   for he loved him because he was his first begotten son. Absalom hated
   Amnon ever after, and when Absalom on a time did do shear his sheep he
   prayed all his brethren to come eat with him, and made them a feast
   like a king's feast. At which feast he did do slay his brother Amnon;
   and anon it was told to the King David that Absalom had slain all the
   king's sons. Wherefore the king was in great heaviness and sorrow, but
   anon after it was told him that there was no more slain but Amnon, and
   the other sons came home. And Absalom fled into Geshur, and was there
   three years, and durst not come home. And after by the moyen of Joab he
   was sent for, and came into Jerusalem, but yet he might not come in his
   father the king's presence, and dwelled there two years, and might not
   see the King his father. This Absalom was the fairest man that ever
   was, for from the sole of his foot unto his head there was not a spot;
   he had so much hair on his head that it grieved him to bear, wherefore
   it was shorn off once a year, it weighed two hundred shekels of good
   weight. Then when he abode so long that he might not come to his
   father's presence he sent for Joab to come speak with him, and he would
   not come. He sent again for him and he came not. Then Absalom said to
   his servants: Know ye Joab's field that lieth by my field? They said
   yea. Go ye, said he, and set fire in the barley that is therein, and
   burn it. And Joab's servants came and told to Joab that Absalom had set
   fire on his corn. Then Joab came to Absalom and said: Why hast thou set
   fire on my corn! And he said, I have sent twice to thee, praying thee
   to come to me that I might send thee to the king, and that thou
   shouldst say to him why I came from Geshur; it had been better for me
   for to have abiden there. I pray thee that I may come to his presence
   and see his visage, and if he remember my wickedness let him slay me.
   Joab went in to the King and told to him all these words. Then was
   Absalom called, and entered in to the king, and he fell down and
   worshipped the king, and the king kissed him. After this Absalom did do
   make for himself chariots and horsemen and fifty men for to go before
   him, and walked among the tribes of Israel; and greeted and saluted
   them, taking them by the hand, and kissed them, by which he gat to him
   the hearts of the people; and said to his father that he had avowed to
   make sacrifice to God in Hebron, and his father gave him leave. And
   when he was there he gathered people to him, and made himself king, and
   did do cry that all men should obey and wait on him as king of Israel.
   When David heard this he was sore abashed and was fain to flee out of
   Jerusalem. And Absalom came with his people and entered into Jerusalem
   into his father's house, and lay by his father's concubines, and after
   pursued his father to depose him. And David ordained his people and
   battle against him, and sent Joab, prince of his host, against Absalom,
   and divided his host into three parts, and would have gone with them,
   but Joab counselled that he should not go to the battle whatsomever
   happed, and then David bade them to save his son Absalom.

   And they went forth and fought, and Absalom with his host was
   overthrown and put to flight. And as Absalom fled upon his mule he came
   under an oak, and his hair flew about a bough of the tree and held so
   fast that Absalom hung by his hair, and the mule ran forth. There came
   one to Joab and told him how that Absalom hung by his hair on a bough
   of an oak, and Joab said: Why hast thou not slain him? The man said:
   God forbid that I should set hand on the king's son; I heard the king
   say: keep my son Absalom alive and slay him not. Then Joab went and
   took three spears, and fixed them in the heart of Absalom as he hung on
   the tree by his hair, and yet after this ten young men, squires of
   Joab, ran and slew him. Then Joab trumped and blew the retreat, and
   retained the people that they should not pursue the people flying. And
   they took the body of Absalom and cast it in a great pit, and laid on
   him a great stone. And when David knew that his son was slain, he made
   great sorrow and said: O my son Absalom, my son Absalom, who shall
   grant to me that I may die for thee, my son Absalom, Absalom my son! It
   was told to Joab that the king wept and sorrowed the death of his son
   Absalom, and all their victory was turned into sorrow and wailing, in
   so much that the people eschewed to enter into the city. Then Joab
   entered into the king and said: Thou hast this day discouraged the
   cheer of all thy servants because they have saved thy life, and the
   lives of thy sons and daughters, of thy wives and of thy concubines,
   thou lovest them that hate thee, and hatest them that love thee, and
   showest well this day that thou settest little by thy dukes and
   servants; and truly I know now well that if Absalom had lived and all
   we thy servants had been slain, thou haddest been pleased. Therefore,
   arise now and come forth and satisfy the people; or else I swear to
   thee by the good lord that there shall not one of thy servants abide
   with thee till tomorrow, and that shall be worse to thee than all the
   harms and evils that ever yet fell to thee. Then David the king arose
   and sat in the gate, and anon it was shown to all the people that the
   king sat in the gate. And then all the people came in tofore the king,
   and they of Israel that had been with Absalom fled into their
   tabernacles, and after came again unto David when they knew that
   Absalom was dead.

   And after, one Sheba, a cursed man, rebelled and gathered people
   against David. Against whom Joab with the host of David pursued, and
   drove him unto a city which he besieged, and by the means of a woman of
   the same city Sheba's head was smitten off and delivered to Joab over
   the wall, and so the city was saved, and Joab pleased. After this David
   called Joab, and bade him number the people of Israel, and so Joab
   walked through all the tribes of Israel, from Dan to Beersheba, and
   over Jordan and all the country, and there were founder in Israel eight
   hundred thousand strong men that were able to fight and to draw sword,
   and of the tribe of Judah fifty thousand fighting men. And after that
   the people was numbered, the heart of David was smitten by our Lord and
   was heavy, and said: I have sinned greatly in this deed, but I pray the
   Lord to take away the wickedness of thy servant, for I have done
   follily. David rose on the morn early, and the word of our Lord came to
   Gad the prophet saying: that he should go to David and bid him choose
   one of three things that he should say to him. When Gad came to David
   he said that he should choose whether he would have seven years hunger
   in his land, or three months he should flee his adversaries and
   enemies, or to have three days pestilence. Of these three God biddeth
   thee choose which thou wilt; now advise thee and conclude what I shall
   answer to our Lord. David said to Gad: I am constrained to a great
   thing, but it is better for me to put me in the hands of our Lord, for
   his mercy is much more than in men, and so he chose pestilence.

   Then our Lord sent pestilence the time constitute, and there died of
   the people from Dan to Beersheba seventy thousand men. And when the
   angel extended his hand upon Jerusalem for to destroy it, our Lord was
   merciful upon the affliction, and said to the angel so smiting: It
   sufficeth now, withdraw thy hand. David said to our Lord when he saw
   the angel smiting the people: I am he that have sinned and done
   wickedly, what have these sheep done? I beseech thee that thy hand turn
   upon me and upon the house of my father. Then came Gad to David and
   bade him make an altar in the same place where he saw the angel; and he
   bought the place, and made the altar, and offered sacrifices unto our
   Lord, and our Lord was merciful, and the plague ceased in Israel.

   David was old and feeble and saw that his death approached, and
   ordained that his son Solomon should reign and be king after him.
   Howbeit that Adonijah his son took on him to be king during David's
   life. For which cause Bathsheba and Nathan came to David, and tofore
   them he said that Solomon should be king, and ordained that he should
   be set on his mule by his prophets Nathan, Zadok the priest and
   Benaiah, and brought in to Sion. And there Zadok the priest and Nathan
   the prophet anointed him king upon Israel and blew in a trump and said:
   Live the King Solomon. And from thence they brought him into Jerusalem
   and set him upon his father's seat in his father's throne, and David
   worshipped him in his bed, and said: Blessed be the Lord God of Israel
   that hath suffered me to see my son in my throne and seat. And then
   Adonijah and all they that were with him were afeard, and dreading
   Solomon ran away, and so ceased Adonijah. The days of David approached
   fast that he should die, and did do call Solomon before him, and there
   he commanded him to keep the commandments of our Lord and walk in his
   ways, and to observe his ceremonies, his precepts and his judgments, as
   it is written in the law of Moses, and said: Our Lord confirm thee in
   thy reign, and send to thee wisdom to rule it well. And when David had
   thus counselled and commanded him to do justice and keep God's law, he
   blessed him and died, and was buried with his fathers. This David was
   an holy man and made the holy psalter, which is an holy book and is
   contained therein the old law and the new law. He was a great prophet,
   for he prophesied the coming of Christ, his nativity, his passion, and
   resurrection, and also his ascension, and was great with God, yet God
   would not suffer him to build a temple for him, for he had shed man's
   blood. But God said to him, his son that should reign after him should
   be a man peaceable, and he should build the temple to God. And when
   David had reigned forty years king of Jerusalem, over Judah and Israel,
   he died in good mind, and was buried with his fathers in the city of
   David.
     __________________________________________________________________

                            The History of Solomon.

   After David, reigned Solomon his son, which was in the beginning a good
   man and walked in the ways and laws of God. And all the kings about him
   made peace with him and was king confirmed, obeyed and peaceable in his
   possession, and according to his father's commandment did justice.
   First on Joab that had been prince of his father's host, because he
   slew two good men by treason slay him not, and contrary said that other
   woman: Let it not be given to me ne to thee, but let it be divided. The
   king then answered and said: Give the living child to this woman, and
   let it not be slain; this is verily the mother. All Israel heard how
   wisely the king had given this sentence and dreaded him, seeing that
   the wisdom of God was in him in deeming of rightful dooms.

   After this Solomon sent his messengers to divers kings for cedar trees
   and for workmen, for to make and build a temple unto our Lord. Solomon
   was rich and glorious, and all the realms from the river of the ends of
   the Philistines unto the end of Egypt were accorded with him, and
   offered to him gifts and to serve him all the days of his life. Solomon
   had daily for the meat of his household thirty measures, named chores,
   of corn, and sixty of meal, ten fat oxen, and twenty oxen of pasture
   and an hundred wethers, without venison that was taken, as harts,
   goats, bubals, and other flying fowls and birds. He obtained all the
   region that was from Tiphsa unto Azza, and had peace with all the kings
   of all the realms that were in every part round about him. In that time
   Israel and Judah dwelled without fear and dread, every each under his
   vine and fig tree from Dan unto Beersheba. And Solomon had forty
   thousand racks for the horses of his carts, chariots and cars, and
   twelve thousand for horses to ride on, by which prefects brought
   necessary things for the table of king Solomon, with great diligence in
   their time. God gave to Solomon much wisdom and prudence in his heart,
   like to the gravel that is in the sea-side, and the sapience and wisdom
   of Solomon passed and went tofore the sapience of all them of the
   Orient and of Egypt, and he was the wisest of all men, and so he was
   named. He spake three thousand parables, and five thousand songs, and
   disputed upon all manner trees and virtue of them, from the cedar that
   is in Lebanon unto the hyssop that groweth on the wall, and discerned
   the properties of beasts, fowls, reptiles and fishes, and there came
   people from all regions of the world for to hear the wisdom of Solomon.

   And Solomon sent letters to Hiram, king of Tyre, for to have his men to
   cut cedar trees with his servants, and he would yield to them their
   hire and meed, and let him wit how that he would build and edify a
   temple to our Lord. And Hiram sent to him that he should have all that
   he desired, and sent to him cedar trees and other wood. And Solomon
   sent to him corn in great number, and Solomon and Hiram confederated
   them together in love and friendship. Solomon chose out workmen of all
   Israel the number of thirty thousand men of whom he sent to Lebanon ten
   thousand every month, and when ten thousand went the others came home,
   and so two months were they at home, and Adonias was overseer and
   commander on them. Solomon had seventy thousand men that did nothing
   but bear stone and mortar and other things to the edifying of the
   temple, and were bearers of burdens only, and he had eighty thousand of
   hewers of stone and masons in the mountain, without the prefects and
   masters, which were three thousand three hundred that did nothing but
   command and oversee them that wrought. Solomon commanded the workmen to
   make square stones, great and precious, for to lay in the foundament,
   which the masons of Israel and masons of Hiram hewed, and the
   carpenters made ready the timber. Then began Solomon the temple to our
   Lord, in the fourth year of his reign he began to build the temple. The
   house that he builded had seventy cubits in length, and twenty cubits
   in breadth, and thirty in height, and the porch tofore the temple was
   twenty cubits long after the measure of the breadth of the temple, and
   had ten cubits of breadth tofore the face of the temple, and for to
   write the curiosity and work of the temple, and the necessaries, the
   tables and cost that was done in gold, silver and latten, it passeth my
   cunning to express and English them. Ye that be clerks may see it in
   the Second Book of Kings and the Second Book of Paralipomenon. It is
   wonder to hear the costs and expenses that was made in that temple, but
   I pass over. It was on making seven years, and his palace was thirteen
   years ere it was finished. He made in the temple an altar of pure gold,
   and a table to set on the loaves of proposition of gold, five
   candlesticks of gold on the right side and five on the left side, and
   many other things, and took all the vessels of gold and silver that his
   father David had sanctified and hallowed, and brought them into the
   treasury of the house of our Lord. After this he assembled all the
   noblest and greatest of birth of them of Israel, with the princes of
   the tribes and dukes of the families, for to bring the Ark of God from
   the city of David, Sion, into the temple. And the priests and Levites
   took the Ark and bare it and all the vessels of the sanctuary that were
   in the tabernacle. King Solomon, with all the multitude of the children
   that were there, went tofore the Ark and offered sheep and oxen without
   estimation and number.

   And the priests set the Ark in the house of our Lord in the oracle of
   the temple, in sancta sanctorum, under the wings of cherubim. In the
   ark was nothing but the two tables of Moses of stone which Moses had
   put in. And then Solomon blessed our Lord tofore all the people, and
   thanked him that he had suffered him to make an house unto his name,
   and besought our Lord that he whosomever prayed our Lord for any
   petition in that temple, that he of his mercy would hear him and be
   merciful to him. And our Lord appeared to him when the edifice was
   accomplished perfectly, and said to Solomon: I have heard thy prayer
   and thine oration that thou hast prayed tofore me. I have sanctified
   and hallowed this house that thou hast edified for to put my name
   therein for evermore, and my eyes and heart shall be thereon always.
   And if thou walk before me like as thy father walked in the simplicity
   of heart and in equity, and wilt do all that I have commanded thee, and
   keep my judgments and laws, I shall set the throne of thy reign upon
   Israel evermore, like as I have said to thy father David, saying: There
   shall not be taken away a man of thy generation from the reign and seat
   of Israel. If ye avert and turn from me, ye and your sons, not
   following ne keeping my commandments and ceremonies that I have showed
   tofore you, but go and worship strange gods, and honour them, I shall
   cast away Israel from the face of the earth that I have given to them,
   and the temple that I have hallowed to my name, l shall cast it away
   from my sight. And it shall be a fable and proverb, and thy house an
   example shall be to all people; every man that shall go thereby shall
   be abashed and astonied, and shall say: Why hath God done thus to this
   land and to thy house? And they shall answer: For they have forsaken
   their Lord God that brought them out of the land of Egypt, and have
   followed strange gods, and them adored and worshipped, and therefore
   God hath brought on them all this evil: here may every man take
   ensample how perilous and dreadful it is to break the commandment of
   God.

   Twenty year after that Solomon had edified the temple of God and his
   house, and finished it perfectly, Hiram the king of Tyre went for to
   see towns that Solomon had given to him, and they pleased him not.
   Hiram had sent to king Solomon an hundred and twenty besants of gold,
   which he had spent on the temple and his house, and on the wall of
   Jerusalem and other towns and places that he had made. Solomon was rich
   and glorious that the fame ran, of his sapience and wisdom and of his
   building and dispence in his house, through the world, in so much that
   the queen of Sheba came from far countries to see him and to tempt him
   in demands and questions. And she came into Jerusalem with much people
   and riches, with camels charged with aromatics and gold infinite. And
   she came and spake to king Solomon all that ever she had in her heart.
   And Solomon taught her in all that ever she purposed tofore him. She
   could say nothing but that the king answered to her, there was nothing
   hid from him. The queen of Sheba then seeing all the wisdom of Solomon,
   the house that he had builded, and the meat and service of his table,
   the habitacles of his servants, the order of the ministers, their
   clothing and array, his butlers and officers, and the sacrifices that
   he offered in the house of our Lord, when she saw all these things, she
   had no spirit to answer, but she said to king Solomon: The word is true
   that I heard in my land, of thy words and thy wisdom, and I believed
   not them that told it to me, unto the time that I myself came and have
   seen it with mine eyes, and I have now well seen and proved that the
   half was not told to me. Thy sapience is more, and thy works also, than
   the tidings that I heard. Blessed be thy servants, and blessed be these
   that stand always tofore thee and hear thy sapience and wisdom, and thy
   Lord God be blessed whom thou hast pleased, and hath set thee upon the
   throne of Israel, for so much as God of Israel loveth thee and hath
   ordained thee a king for to do righteousness and justice. She gave then
   to the king an hundred and twenty besants of gold, many aromatics, and
   gems precious. There were never seen tofore so many aromatics ne so
   sweet odours smelling as the queen of Sheba gave to king Solomon.

   King Solomon gave to the queen of Sheba all that ever she desired and
   demanded of him, and after returned into her country and land. The
   weight of pure gold that was offered every year to Solomon was six
   hundred and sixty-six talents of gold, except that that the merchants
   offered, and all they that sold, and all the kings of Arabia and dukes
   of that land. Solomon made two hundred shields of the purest gold and
   set them in the house of Lebanon; he made him also a throne of ivory
   which was great and was clad with gold, which had six grees or steps,
   which was richly wrought with two lions of gold holding the seat above,
   and twelve small lions standing upon the steps, on every each twain,
   here and there. There was never such a work in no realm. And all the
   vessels that king Solomon drank of were of gold, and the ceiling of the
   house of Lebanon in which his shields of gold were in was of the most
   pure gold. Silver was of no price in the days of king Solomon, for the
   navy of the king, with the navy of Hiram went in three years once into
   Tarsis and brought them thence gold and silver, teeth of elephants and
   great riches. The king Solomon was magnified above all the kings of the
   world in riches and wisdom, and all the world desired to see the cheer
   and visage of Solomon, and to hear his wisdom that God had given to
   him. Every man brought to him gifts, vessels of gold and silver,
   clothes and armour for war, aromatics, horses and mules every year.
   Solomon gathered together chariots and horsemen; he had a thousand four
   hundred chariots and cars, and twelve thousand horsemen, and were
   lodged in small cities and towns about Jerusalem by the king. There was
   as great abundance and plenty of gold and silver in those days in
   Jerusalem as stones or sycamores that grow in the field, and horses
   were brought to him from Egypt and Chao. What shall I all day write of
   the riches, glory and magnificence of king Solomon? It was so great
   that it cannot be expressed, for there was never none like to him, ne
   never shall none come after him like unto him. He made the book of the
   parables containing thirty-one chapters, the book of the Canticles, the
   book of Ecclesiastes, containing twelve chapters, and the book of
   Sapience containing nineteen chapters. This king Solomon loved overmuch
   women, and specially strange women of other sects; as king Pharaoh's
   daughters and many other of the gentiles, of whom God had commanded to
   the children of Israel that they should not have to do with them, ne
   they with their daughters, for God said certainly they should turn your
   hearts to serve their gods. To such women Solomon was coupled with most
   burning love. He had seven hundred wives which were as queens, and
   three hundred concubines, and these women turned his heart. For when he
   was old he so doted and loved them that they made him honour their
   strange gods, and worshipped Ashtareth, Chemosh and Moloch, idols of
   Zidonia, of Moabites, and Ammonites, and made to them Tabernacles for
   to please his wives and concubines, wherefore God was wroth with him,
   and said to him: Because thou hast not observed my precepts and my
   commandments that I commanded thee, I shall cut thy kingdom and divide
   it and give it to thy servant but not in thy day, I shall not do it for
   love that I had to David thy father; but from the hand of thy son I
   shall cut it but not all, I shall reserve to him one tribe for David's
   love, and Jerusalem that I have chosen. And after this divers kings
   became adversaries to Solomon, and was never in peace after.

   It is said, but I find it not in the Bible, that Solomon repented him
   much of this sin of idolatry and did much penance therefor, for he let
   him be drawn through Jerusalem and beat himself with rods and scourges,
   that the blood flowed in the sight of all the people. He reigned upon
   all Israel in Jerusalem forty years, and died and was buried with his
   fathers in the city of David, and Rehoboam his son reigned after him.
     __________________________________________________________________

                            The History of Rehoboam.

   After Solomon, reigned his son Rehoboam. He came to Sichem and thither
   came all the people for to ordain him king. Jeroboam and all the
   multitude of Israel spake to Rehoboam, and said: Thy father set on us
   an hard yoke and great impositions, now thou hast not so much need,
   therefore less it and minish it, and ease us of the great and hard
   burden and we shall serve thee. Rehoboam answered and said: Go ye and
   come again the third day and ye shall have an answer. When the people
   was departed, Rehoboam made a counsel of the seniors and old men that
   had assisted his father Solomon whiles he lived, and said to them: What
   say ye? and counsel me that I may answer to the people, which said to
   Rehoboam: If thou wilt obey and agree to this people, and agree to
   their petition, and speak fair and friendly to them, they shall serve
   thee always. But Rehoboam forsook the counsel of the old men, and
   called the young men that were of his age, and asked of them counsel.
   And the young men that had been nourished with him bade him say to the
   people in this wise: Is not my finger greater than the back of my
   father? If my father hath laid on you a heavy burden, I shall add and
   put more to your burden; my father beat you with scourges, and I shall
   beat you with scorpions. The third day after, Jeroboam and all the
   people came to Rehoboam to have their answer, and Rehoboam left the
   counsel of the old men, and said to them like as the young men had
   counselled him. And anon the people of Israel forsook Rehoboam, and of
   twelve tribes, there abode with him no more but the tribe of Judah and
   Benjamin. And the other ten tribes departed and made Jeroboam their
   king, and never returned unto the house of David after unto this day.
   And thus for sin of Solomon, and because Rehoboam would not do after
   the counsel of the old men, but was counselled by young men, the ten
   tribes of Israel forsook him, and departed from Jerusalem, and served
   Jeroboam, and ordained him king upon Israel. Anon after this, Jeroboam
   fell to idolatry and great division was ever after between the kings of
   Judah and the kings of Israel. And so reigned divers kings each after
   other in Jerusalem after Rehoboam, and in Israel after Jeroboam. And
   here I leave all the history and make an end of the book of Kings for
   this time etc. For ye that list to know how every king reigned after
   other, ye may find it in the first chapter of Saint Matthew which is
   read on Christmas day in the morning tofore Te Deum, which is the
   genealogy of our Lady.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Here followeth the History of Job, read on the first Sunday of September.

   There was a man in the land of Uz named Job, and this man was simple,
   rightful and dreading God, and going from all evil. He had seven sons
   and three daughters, and his possession was seven thousand sheep, three
   thousand camels, five hundred yoke of oxen, five hundred asses, and his
   family and household passing much and great. He was a great man and
   rich among all the men of the orient. And his sons went daily each to
   other house making great feasts, ever each one as his day came, and
   they sent for their three sisters for to eat and drink with them. When
   they had thus feasted each other, Job sent to them and blessed and
   sanctified them, and rising every day early, he offered sacrifices for
   them all, saying: Lest my children sin and bless not God in their
   hearts. And thus did Job every day.

   On a day when the sons of God were tofore our Lord, Satan came and was
   among them, to whom our Lord said: Whence comest thou? Which answered,
   I have gone round about the earth and through walked it. Our Lord said
   to him: Hast thou not considered my servant Job, that there is none
   like unto him in the earth, a man simple, rightful, dreading God, and
   going from evil? To whom Satan answered: Doth Job dread God idly? If so
   were that thou overthrewest him, his house and all his substance round
   about, he should soon forsake thee. Thou hast blessed the work of his
   hands, and his possession is increased much in the earth, but stretch
   out thy hand a little, and touch all that he hath in possession, and he
   shall soon grudge and not bless thee. Then said our Lord to Satan: Lo !
   all that which he owneth and hath in possession, I will it be in thy
   hand and power, but on his person ne body set not thy hand. Satan
   departed and went from the face of our Lord. On a day as his sons and
   daughters ate, and drank wine, in the house of the oldest brother,
   there came a messenger to Job which said: The oxen eared in the plough
   and the ass pastured in the pasture by them, and the men of Sabea ran
   on them, and smote thy servants, and slew them with of sword, and I
   only escaped for to come and to show it to thee. And whiles he spake
   came another and said: The fire of God fell down from heaven and hath
   burnt thy sheep and servants and consumed them, and I only escaped for
   to come and show it to thee. And yet whiles he spake came another and
   said: The Chaldees made three hosts and have enveigled thy camels and
   taken them, and have slain thy servants with sword, and I only escaped
   for to bring thee word. And yet he speaking another entered in and
   said: Thy sons and daughters, drinking wine in the house of thy first
   begotten son, suddenly came a vehement wind from the region of desert
   and smote the four corners of the house, which falling oppressed thy
   children, and they be all dead, and I only fled for to tell it to thee.
   Then Job arose, and cut his coat, and did do shave his head, and
   falling down to the ground, worshipped and adored God, saying: I am
   come out naked from the womb of my mother and naked shall return again
   thereto. Our Lord hath given and our Lord hath taken away, as it hath
   pleased our Lord, so it is done, the name of our Lord be blessed. In
   all these things Job sinned not with his lips, ne spake nothing follily
   against our Lord, but took it all patiently.

   After this it was so that on a certain day when the children of God
   stood tofore our Lord, Satan came and stood among them, and God said to
   him: Whence comest thou? To whom Satan answered: I have gone round the
   earth, and walked through it. And God said to Satan, Hast thou not
   considered my servant Job that there is no man like him in the earth, a
   man simple, rightful, dreading God, and going from evil, and yet
   retaining his innocency? Thou hast moved me against him that I should
   put him to affliction without cause. To whom Satan said: Skin for skin,
   and all that ever a man hath he shall give for his soul. Nevertheless,
   stretch thine hand and touch his mouth and his flesh, and thou shalt
   see that he shall not bless thee. Then said God to Satan: I will well
   that his body be in thine hand, but save his soul and his life. Then
   Satan departed from the face of our Lord and smote Job with the worst
   blotches and blains from the plant of his foot unto the top of his
   head, which was made like a lazar and was cast out and sat on the
   dunghill. Then came his wife to him and said: Yet thou abidest in thy
   simpleness, forsake thy God and bless him no more, and go die. Then Job
   said to her: Thou hast spoken like a foolish woman; if we have received
   and taken good things of the hand of our Lord, why shall we not sustain
   and suffer evil things? In all these things Job sinned not with his
   lips. Then three men that were friends of Job, hearing what harm was
   happed and come to Job, came ever each one from his place to him, that
   one was named Eliphas the Temanite, another Bildad the Shuhite, and the
   third, Zophar Naamathite. And when they saw him from far they knew him
   not, and crying they wept. They came for to comfort him, and when they
   considered his misery they tare their clothes and cast dust on their
   heads, and sat by him seven days and seven nights, and no man spake to
   him a word, seeing his sorrow. Then after that Job and they talked and
   spake together of his sorrow and misery, of which S. Gregory hath made
   a great book called: The morals of S. Gregory, which is a noble book
   and a great work.

   But I pass over all the matters and return unto the end, how God
   restored Job again to prosperity. It was so that when these three
   friends of Job had been long with Job, and had said many things each of
   them to Job, and Job again to them, our Lord was wroth with these three
   men and said to them: Ye have not spoken rightfully, as my servant Job
   hath spoken. Take ye therefore seven bulls and seven wethers and go to
   my servant Job and offer ye sacrifice for you. Job my servant shall
   pray for you. I shall receive his prayer and shall take his visage.
   They went forth and did as our Lord commanded them. And our Lord beheld
   the visage of Job, and saw his penance when he prayed for his friends.
   And our Lord added to Job double of all that Job had possessed. All his
   brethren came to him, and all his sisters, and all they that tofore had
   known him, and ate with him in his house, and moved their heads upon
   him, and comforted him upon all the evil that God had sent to him. And
   each of them gave him a sheep and a gold ring for his ears. Our Lord
   blessed more Job in his last days than he did in the beginning. And he
   had then after fourteen thousand sheep, six thousand camels, one
   thousand yoke of oxen, one thousand asses. And he had seven sons and
   three daughters. And the first daughter's name was Jemima, the second
   Kezia, and the third Keren-happuch. There was nowhere found in the
   world so fair women as were the daughters of Job. Their father Job gave
   to them heritage among their brethren, and thus Job by his patience gat
   so much love of God, that he was restored double of all his losses. And
   Job lived after, one hundred and forty years, and saw his sons and the
   sons of his sons unto the fourth generation, and died an old man, and
   full of days.
     __________________________________________________________________

Here followeth the history of Tobit which is read the third Sunday of September.

   Tobit of the tribe and of the city of Nephthali, which is in the
   overparts of Galilee upon Aser, after the way that leadeth men
   westward, having on his left side the city of Sepheth, was taken in the
   days of Salmanazar, King of the Assyrians, and put in captivity, yet he
   forsook not the way of truth, but all that he had or could get he
   departed daily with his brethren of his kindred which were prisoners
   with him. And how be it that he was youngest in all the tribe of
   Nephthali yet did he nothing childishly. Also when all other went unto
   the golden calves that Jeroboam, King of Israel had made, this Tobit
   only fled the fellowship of them all, and went to Jerusalem into the
   temple of our Lord. And there he adored and worshipped the Lord God of
   Israel, offering truly his first fruits and tithes in so much that in
   the third year he ministered unto proselytes and strangers all the
   tithe. Such things and other like to these he observed whilst he was a
   child, and when he came to age and was a man he took a wife named Anna,
   of his tribe, and begat on her a son, naming after his own name Tobias,
   whom from his childhood he taught to dread God and abstain him from all
   sin. Then after when he was brought by captivity with his wife and his
   son into the city of Nineveh with all his tribe, and when all ate of
   the meats of the Gentiles and Paynims, this Tobit kept his soul clean
   and was never defouled in the meats of them. And because of remembered
   our Lord in all his heart, God gave him grace to be in the favour of
   Salmanazar the king which gave to him power to go where he would.
   Having liberty to do what he would, he went then to all them in
   captivity and gave to them warnings of health. When he came on a time
   in Rages, city of the Jews, he had such gifts as he had been honoured
   with of the king, ten besants of silver. And when he saw one Gabael
   being needy which was of his tribe, he lent him the said weight of
   silver upon his obligation. Long time after this when Salmanazar the
   king was dead, Sennacherib his son reigned for him, and hated, and
   loved not, the children of Israel. And Tobit went unto all his kindred
   and comforted them, and divided to every each of them as he might of
   his faculties and goods.

   He fed the hungry and gave to the naked clothes, and diligently he
   buried the dead men and them that were slain. After this when
   Sennacherib returned, fleeing the plague from the Jewry, that God had
   sent him for his blasphemy, and he, being wroth, slew many of the
   children of Israel, and Tobit always buried the bodies of them, which
   was told to the king, which commanded to slay him, and took away all
   his substance. Tobit then with his wife and his son hid him and fled
   away all naked, for many loved him well. After this, forty-five days,
   the sons of the king slew the king, and then returned Tobit unto his
   house, and all his faculties and goods were restored to him again.
   After this on a high festival day of our Lord when that Tobit had a
   good dinner in his house. he said to his son: Go and fetch to us some
   of our tribe dreading God, that they may come and eat with us. And he
   went forth and anon he returned telling to his father that one of the
   children of Israel was slain and lay dead in the street. And anon he
   leapt out of his house, leaving his meat, and fasting came to the body,
   took it and bare it in to his house privily, that he might secretly
   bury it when the sun went down. And when he had hid the corpse, he ate
   his meat with wailing and dread, remembering that word that our Lord
   said by Amos the prophet: The day of your feast shall be turned into
   lamentation and wailing. And when the sun was gone down he went and
   buried him. All his neighbours reproved and chid him, saying for this
   cause they were commanded to be slain, and unnethe thou escapedst the
   commandment of death, and yet thou buriest dead men. But Tobit, more
   dreading God than the king, took up the bodies of dead men and hid them
   in his house, and at midnight he buried them. It happed on a day after
   this that when he was weary of burying dead men, he came home and laid
   him down by a wall and slept. And from a swallow's nest above there
   fell down hot dung of them on his eyes, and he was thereof blind. This
   temptation suffered God to fall to him, that it should be an example to
   them that shall come after him of his patience, like as it was of holy
   Job. For from his infancy he dreaded ever God and kept his precepts and
   was not grudging against God for his blindness, but he abode immovable
   in the dread of God, giving and rendering thankings to God all the days
   of his life. For like as Job was assailed so was Tobit assailed of his
   kinsmen, scorning him and saying to him: Where is now thy hope and
   reward for which thou gavest thy alms and madest sepulchres? Tobit
   blamed them for such words, saying to them: In no wise say ye not so,
   for we be the sons of holy men, and we abide that life that God shall
   give to them that never shall change their faith from him. Anna his
   wife went daily to the work of weaving, and got by the labour of her
   hands their livelihood as much as she might. Whereof on a day she gat a
   kid and brought it home. When Tobit heard the voice of the kid
   bleating, he said: See that it be not stolen, yield it again to the
   owner, for it is not lawful for us to eat ne touch anything that is
   stolen. To that his wife all angry answered: Now manifestly and openly
   is thine hope made vain, and thy alms lost. And thus with such and like
   words she chid him. Then Tobit began to sigh and began to pray our Lord
   with tears saying: O Lord, thou art rightful, and all thy dooms be
   true, and all thy ways be mercy, truth, and righteousness. And now,
   Lord, remember me, and take now no vengeance of my sins, ne remember
   not my trespasses, ne the sins of my fathers. For we have not obeyed
   thy commandments, therefore we be betaken in to direption, captivity,
   death, fables, and into reproof and shame to all nations in which thou
   hast dispersed us. And now, Lord, great be thy judgments, for we have
   not done according to thy precepts, ne have not walked well tofore
   thee. And now, Lord, do to me after thy will, and command my spirit to
   be received in peace, it is more expedient to me to die than to live.

   The same day it happed that Sara, daughter of Raguel in the city of
   Medes, that she was rebuked and heard reproof of one of the handmaidens
   of her father. For she had been given to seven men, and a devil named
   Asmodeus slew them as soon as they would have gone to her; therefore
   the maid reproved her saying: We shall never see son ne daughter of
   thee on the earth, thou slayer of thy husbands. Wilt thou slay me as
   thou hast slain seven men? With this voice and rebuke she went up in
   the upperest cubicle of the house. And three days and three nights she
   ate not, ne drank not, but was continually in prayers beseeching God
   for to deliver her from this reproof and shame. And on the third day,
   when she had accomplished her prayer, blessing our Lord she said:
   Blessed be thy name, God of our fathers, for when thou art wroth thou
   shalt do mercy and in a time of tribulation thou forgivest sins to them
   that call to thee. Unto thee, Lord, I convert my visage, and unto thee
   I address mine eyes. I ask and require thee that thou assoil me from
   the bond of the reproof and shame, or certainly upon the earth keep me.
   Thou knowest well, Lord, that I never desired man, but I have kept
   clean my soul from all concupiscence. I never meddled me with players,
   ne never had part of them that walk in lightness. I consented for to
   take an husband with thy dread, but I never gave consent to take one
   with my lust. Or I was unworthy to them or haply they were unworthy to
   me, or haply thou hast conserved and kept me for some other man. Thy
   counsel is not in man's power. This knoweth every man that worshippeth
   thee, for the life of him if it be in probation shall be crowned, and
   if it be in tribulation it shall be delivered, and if it be in
   correction, it shall be lawful to come to mercy. Thou hast none
   delectation in our perdition, for after tempest thou makest
   tranquillity, and after weeping and shedding of tears thou bringest in
   exultation and joy. Thy name, God of Israel be blessed, world without
   end.

   In that same time were the prayers of them both heard in the sight of
   the glory of the high God. And the holy angel of God, Raphael, was sent
   to heal them both. Of whom in one time were the prayers recited in the
   sight of our Lord God. Then when Tobit supposed his prayers to be heard
   that he might die, he called to him his son Tobias, and said to him:
   Hear, my son, the words of my mouth, and set them in thy heart as a
   fundament. When God shall take away my soul, bury my body, and thou
   shalt worship thy mother all the days of her life, thou owest to
   remember what and how many perils she hath suffered for thee in her
   womb. When she shall have accomplished the time of her life, bury her
   by me. All the days of thy life have God in thy mind, and beware that
   thou never consent to sin, ne to disobey ne break the commandments of
   God. Of thy substance do alms, and turn never thy face from any poor
   man, so do that God turn not his face from thee. As much as thou
   mayest, be merciful, if thou have much good give abundantly, if thou
   have but little, yet study to give and to depart thereof gladly, for
   thou makest to thee thereof good treasure and meed in the day of
   necessity, for alms delivereth a man from all sin and from death, and
   suffereth not his soul to go in to darkness. Alms is a great sikerness
   tofore the high God unto all them that do it. Beware, my son, keep thee
   from all fornication, and suffer not thyself save with thy wife to know
   that sin; and suffer never pride to have domination in thy wit, ne in
   thy word, that sin was the beginning of all perdition. Whosomever work
   to thee any thing, anon yield to him his meed and hire, let never the
   hire of thy servant ne meed of thy mercenary remain in no wise with
   thee. That thou hatest to be done to thee of other, see that thou never
   do to an other. Eat thy bread with the hungry and needy, and cover the
   naked with thy clothes. Ordain thy bread and wine upon the sepulture of
   a righteous man, but eat it not ne drink it with sinners. Ask and
   demand counsel of a wise man. Always and in every time bless God and
   desire of him that he address thy ways, and let all thy counsels abide
   in him. I tell to thee, my son, that when thou wert a little child I
   lent to Gabael ten besants of silver, dwelling in Rages the city of
   Medes, upon an obligation, which I have by me. And therefore spere and
   ask how thou mayst go to him, and thou shalt receive of him the said
   weight of silver and restore to him his obligation. Dread thou not, my
   son; though we lead a poor life, we shall have much good if we dread
   God and go from sin and do well. Then young Tobias answered to his
   father: All that thou hast commanded me I shall do, father; but how I
   shall get this money I wot never; he knoweth not me, ne I know not him;
   what token shall I give him? And also I know not the way thither. Then
   his father answered to him and said: I have his obligation by me, which
   when thou shewest him, anon he shall pay thee. But go now first and
   seek for thee some true man, that for his hire shall go with thee
   whiles I live, that thou mayest receive it.

   Then Tobias went forth and found a fair young man girt up and ready for
   to walk, and not knowing that it was the angel of God, saluted him and
   said: From whence have we thee, good young man? And he answered: Of the
   children of Israel. And Tobias said to him. Knowest thou the way that
   leadeth one into the region of Medes? To whom he answered: I know it
   well, of all the journeys I have oft walked and have dwelled with
   Gabael our brother which dwelled in Rages the city of Medes, which
   standeth in the hill of Ecbathanis. To whom Tobias said: I pray thee
   tary here a while till I have told this to my father. Then Tobias went
   in to his father and told to him all these things, whereon his father
   marvelled and prayed him that he should bring him in. Then the angel
   came in and saluted the old Tobit and said: Joy be to thee always. And
   Tobit said: What joy shall be to me that sit in darkness, and see not
   the light of heaven. To whom the youngling said: Be of strong belief;
   it shall not be long but of God thou shalt be cured and healed. Then
   said Tobit to him: Mayest thou lead my son unto Gabael in Rages city of
   Medes, and when thou comest again I shall restore to thee thy meed. And
   the angel said: I shall lead him thither and bring him again to thee.
   To whom Tobit said: I pray thee to tell me of what house or of what
   kindred art thou. To whom Raphael the angel said: Thou needest not to
   ask the kindred of him that shall go with thy son, but lest haply I
   should not deliver him to thee again: I am Azarias son of great
   Ananias. Tobit answered: Thou art of a great kindred, but I pray thee
   be not wroth, though I would know thy kindred. The angel said to him: I
   shall safely lead thy son thither, and safely bring him and render him
   to thee again. Tobit then answered saying: Well mote ye walk, and our
   Lord be in your journey, and his angel fellowship with you. Then, when
   all was ready that they should have with them by the way, young Tobias
   took leave of his father and mother, and bade them farewell. When they
   should depart the mother began to weep and say: Thou hast taken away
   and sent from us the staff of our old age, would God that thilke money
   had never been for which thou hast sent him, our poverty sufficeth
   enough to us that we might have seen our son. Tobit said to her: Weep
   not, our son shall come safely again and thine eyes shall see him. I
   believe that the good angel of God hath fellowship with him, and shall
   dispose all things that shall be needful to him, and that he shall
   return again to us with joy. With this the mother ceased of her weeping
   and was still.

   Then young Tobias went forth and an hound followed him. And the first
   mansion that they made was by the river of Tigris, and Tobias went out
   for to wash his feet, and there came a great fish for to devour him,
   whom Tobias fearing cried out with a great voice: Lord, he cometh on
   me, and the angel said to him: Take him by the fin and draw him to
   thee. And so he did and drew him out of the water to the dry land. Then
   said the angel to him: Open the fish and take to thee the heart, the
   gall, and the milt, and keep them by thee; they be profitable and
   necessary for medicines. And when he had done so he roasted of the
   fish, and took it with them for to eat by the way, and the remnant they
   salted, that it might suffice them till they came into the city of
   Rages. Then Tobias demanded of the angel and said: I pray thee,
   Azarias, brother, to tell me whereto these be good that thou hast
   bidden me keep. And the angel answered and said: If thou take a little
   of his heart and put it on the coals, the smoke and fume thereof
   driveth away all manner kind of devils, be it from man or from woman,
   in such wise that he shall no more come to them. And Tobias said: Where
   wilt thou that we shall abide? And he answered and said: Hereby is a
   man named Raguel, a man nigh to thy kindred and tribe, and he hath a
   daughter named Sara, he hath neither son ne daughter more than her.
   Thou shalt owe all his substance, for thee behoveth to take her to thy
   wife. Then Toby answered and said: I have heard say that she hath been
   given to seven men, and they be dead, and I have heard that a devil
   slayeth them. I dread therefore that it might hap so to me, and I that
   am an only son to my father and mother, I should depose their old age
   with heaviness and sorrow to hell. Then Raphael the angel said to him:
   Hear me, and I shall show thee wherewith thou mayst prevail against
   that devil; these that took their wedlock in such wise that they
   exclude God from them and their mind, and wait but to their lust as a
   horse and mule in whom is none understanding, the devil hath power upon
   them. Thou therefore when thou shalt take a wife, and enterest into her
   cubicle, be thou continent by the space of three days from her, and
   thou shalt do nothing but be in prayers with her: and that same night
   put the heart of the fish on the fire, and that shall put away the
   devil. The second night thou shalt be admitted in copulation of holy
   patriarchs. The third night ye shall follow the blessing that sons may
   be begotten of you both, and after the third night thou shalt take the
   virgin with dread of God, more for love of procreation of children than
   for lust of thy body, that thou mayst follow the blessing of Abraham in
   his seed. Then they went and entered into Raguel's house, and Raguel
   received them joyously, and Raguel, heholding well Tobias, said to Anna
   his wife: How like is this young man unto my cousin! And when he had so
   said he asked them: Whence be ye, young men my brethren? And they said:
   Of the tribe of Nephthalim, of the captivity of Nineveh. Raguel said to
   them: Know ye Tobit my brother? Which said: We know him well. When
   Raguel had spoken much good of him, the angel said to Raguel: Tobit of
   whom thou demandest is father of this young man. And then went Raguel,
   and with weeping eyes kissed him, and weeping upon his neck said: The
   blessing of God be to thee, my son, for thou art son of a blessed and
   good man. And Anna his wife and Sara his daughter wept also.

   After they had spoken, Raguel commanded to slay a wether, and make
   ready a feast. When he then should bid them sit down to dinner, Tobias
   said: I shall not eat here this day ne drink but if thou first grant to
   me my petition, and promise to me to give me Sara thy daughter. Which
   when Raguel heard he was astonied and abashed, knowing what had fallen
   to seven men that tofore had wedded her, and dreaded lest it might
   happen to this young man in like wise. And when he held his peace and
   would give him none answer the angel said to him: Be not afeard to give
   thy daughter to this man dreading God, for to him thy daughter is
   ordained to be his wife, therefore none other may have her. Then said
   Raguel: I doubt not God hath admitted my prayers and tears in his
   sight, and I believe that therefore he hath made you to come to me that
   these may be joined in one kindred after the law of Moses, and now have
   no doubt but I shall give her to thee. And he taking the right hand of
   his daughter delivered it to Tobias saying: God of Abraham, God of
   Isaac, and God of Jacob be with you, and he conjoin you together and
   fulfil his blessing in you. And took a charter and wrote the
   conscription of the wedlock. And after this they ate, blessing our Lord
   God. Raguel called to him Anna his wife and bade her to make ready
   another cubicle. And she brought Sara her daughter therein, and she
   wept, to whom her mother said: Be thou strong of heart, my daughter,
   our Lord of heaven give to thee joy for the heaviness that thou hast
   suffered. After they had supped, they led the young man to her. Tobias
   remembered the words of the angel, and took out of his bag part of the
   heart of the fish, and laid it on burning coals. Then Raphael the angel
   took the devil and bound him in the upperest desert of Egypt. Then
   Tobias exhorted the virgin and said to her: Arise, Sara, and let us
   pray to God this day, and to-morrow, and after to-morrow, for these
   three nights we be joined to God. And after the third night we shall be
   in our wedlock. We be soothly the children of saints, and we may not so
   join together as people do that know not God. Then they both arising
   prayed together instantly that health might be given to them. Tobias
   said: Lord God of our fathers, heaven and earth, sea, wells, and
   floods, and all creatures that be in them, bless thee. Thou madest Adam
   of the slime of the earth, and gavest to him for an help Eve, and now,
   Lord, thou knowest that for the cause of lechery I take not my sister
   to wife, but only for the love of posterity and procreation of
   children, in which thy name be blessed world without end. Then said
   Sara: Have mercy on us, Lord, have mercy, and let us wax old both
   together in health. And after this the cocks began to crow, at which
   time Raguel commanded his servants to come to him, and they together
   went for to make and delve a sepulchre. He said: Lest haply it happen
   to him as it hath happed to the seven men that wedded her. When they
   had made ready the foss and pit, Raguel returned to his wife and said
   to her: Send one of thine handmaidens, and let her see if he be dead,
   that he may be buried ere it be light day. And she sent forth one of
   her servants, which entered into the cubicle and found them both safe
   and whole, and sleeping together, and she returned and brought good
   tidings. And Raguel and Anna blessed our Lord God and said: We bless
   thee, Lord God of Israel. that it hath not happed to us as we supposed;
   thou hast done to us thy mercy, and thou hast excluded from us our
   enemy pursuing us, thou hast done mercy on two only children. Make
   them, Lord, to bless thee to full, and to offer to thee sacrifice of
   praising and of their health, that the university of peoples may know
   that thou art God only in the universal earth. Anon then Raguel
   commanded his servants to fill again the pit that they had made ere it
   waxed light, and bade his wife to ordain a feast, and make all ready
   that were necessary to meat. He did do slay two fat kine and four
   wethers, and to ordain meat for all his neighbours and friends, and
   Raguel desired and adjured Tobias that he should abide with him two
   weeks. Of all that ever Raguel had in possession of goods he gave half
   part to Tobias, and made to him a writing that the other half part he
   should have after the death of him and his wife. Then Tobias called the
   angel to him, which he trowed had been a man, and said to him: Azarias,
   brother, I pray thee to take heed to my words; if I make myself servant
   to thee I shall not be worthy to satisfy thy providence. Nevertheless I
   pray thee to take to thee the beasts and servants and go to Gabael in
   Rages the city of Medes, and render to him his obligation, and receive
   of them the money and pray him to come to my wedding. Thou knowest
   thyself that my father numbereth the days of my being out, and if I
   tarry more his soul shall be heavy, and certainly thou seest how Raguel
   hath adjured me, whose desire I may not despise. Then Raphael, taking
   four of the servants of Raguel and two camels, went to Rages the city
   of Medes, and there finding Gabael, gave to him his obligation and
   received all the money, and told to him of Tobias, son of Tobit, all
   that was done, and made him come with him to the wedding. When then he
   entered the house of Raguel, he found Tobias sitting at meat, and came
   to him and kissed him, and Gabael wept and blessed God saying: God of
   Israel bless thee, for thou art son of the best man and just, dreading
   God and doing alms, and the blessing be said upon thy wife and your
   parents, and that you may see the sons of your sons unto the third and
   fourth generation, and your seed be blessed of the God of Israel, which
   reigneth in secula seculorum. And when all had said Amen, they went to
   the feast. And with the dread of God they exercised the feast of their
   weddings. Whiles that Tobias tarried because of his marriage, his
   father Tobit began to be heavy saying: Trowest thou wherefore my son
   tarrieth and why he is holden there? Trowest thou that Gabael be dead,
   and no man is there that shall give him his money?

   He began to be sorry and heavy greatly, both he and Anna his wife with
   him, and began both to weep because at the day set he came not home.
   His mother therefore wept with unmeasurable tears, and said: Alas, my
   son, wherefore sent we thee to go this pilgrimage? The light of our
   eyes, the staff of our age, the solace of our life, the hope of our
   posterity, all these only having in thee, we ought not to have let thee
   go from us. To whom Tobit said: Be still and trouble thee not, our son
   is safe enough, the man is true and faithful enough with whom we sent
   him. She might in no wise be comforted, but every day she went and
   looked and espied the way that he should come if she might see him come
   from far. Then Raguel said to Tobias his son-in-law: Abide here with
   me, and I shall send messengers of thy health and welfare to Tobit thy
   father. To whom Tobias said: I know well that my father and my mother
   accompt the days, and the spirit is in great pain within them. Raguel
   prayed him with many words, but Tobias would in no wise grant him. Then
   he delivered to him Sara his daughter, and half part of all his
   substance in servants, men and women, in beasts, camels, in kine and
   much money. And safe and joyful he let him depart from him, saying: The
   angel of God that is holy be in your journey, and bring you home whole
   and sound, and that ye may and all things well and rightful about your
   father and mother, and that mine eyes may see your sons ere I die. And
   the father and mother taking their daughter kissed her and let her
   depart, warning her to worship her husband's father and mother, love
   her husband, to rule well the meiny, to govern the house and to keep
   herself irreprehensible, that is to say, without reproof.

   When they thus returned and departed, they came to Charram which is the
   half way to Nineveh, the thirteenth day. Then said the angel to Tobias:
   Tobias, brother, thou knowest how thou hast left thy father, if it
   please thee we will go tofore and let thy family come softly after,
   with thy wife and with thy beasts. This pleased well to Tobias; and
   then said Raphael to Tobias: Take with thee of the gall of the fish, it
   shall be necessary. Tobias took of the gall and went forth tofore. Anna
   his mother sat every day by the way in the top of the hill, from whence
   she might see him come from far, and whilst she sat there and looked
   after his coming, she saw afar and knew her son coming, and running
   home she told to her husband saying: Lo! thy son cometh. Raphael then
   said to young Tobias: Anon as thou enterest in to the house adore thy
   Lord God, and giving to him thankings, go to thy father and kiss him.
   And anon then anoint his eyes with the gall of the fish that thou
   bearest with thee, thou shalt well know that his eyes shall be opened,
   and thy father shall see the light of heaven and shall joy in thy
   sight. Then ran the dog that followed him and had been with him in the
   way, and came home as a messenger, fawning and making joy with his
   tail. And the blind father arose and began offending his feet to run to
   meet his son, giving to him his hand, and so taking, kissed him with
   his wife, and began to weep for joy. When then they had worshipped God
   and thanked him, they sat down together. Then Tobias taking the gall of
   the fish anointed his father's eyes, and abode as it had been half an
   hour, and the slime of his eyes began to fall away like as it had been
   the white of an egg, which Tobias took and drew from his father's eyes,
   and anon he received sight. And they glorified God, that is to wit he
   and his wife and all they that knew him.

   Then said Tobit the father: I bless thee, Lord God of Israel, for thou
   hast chastised me, and thou hast saved me, and, lo! I see Tobias my
   son. After these seven days Sara the wife of his son came and entered
   in with all the family, and the beasts whole and sound, camels and much
   money of his wife's, and also the money that he had received of Gabael.
   And he told to his father and mother all the benefits of God that was
   done to him by the man that led him. Then came Achiacharus and Nasbas,
   cousins of Tobias, joying and thanking God of all the goods that God
   had showed to him. And seven days they ate together making feast, and
   were glad with great joy. Then old Tobit call his son Tobias to him,
   and said: What may we give to this holy man that cometh with thee? Then
   Tobias answering said to his father: Father, what meed may we give to
   him, or what may be worthy to him for his benefits? He led me out and
   hath brought me whole again, he received the money of Gabael; he did me
   have my wife and he put away the devil from her; he hath made joy to my
   parents, and saved myself from devouring of the fish, and hath made
   thee see the light of heaven, and by him we be replenished with all
   goods; what may we then worthily give to him? Wherefore I pray thee,
   father, that thou pray him if he vouchsafe to take the half of all that
   I have. Then the father and the son calling him took him apart and
   began to pray him that he would vouchsafe to take half the part of all
   the goods that they had brought. Then said he to them privily: Bless ye
   God of heaven and before all living people knowledge ye him, for he
   hath done to you his mercy. Forsooth to hide the sacrament of the king
   it is good, but for to show the works of God and to knowledge them it
   is worshipful. Oration and prayer is good, with fasting and alms, and
   more than to set up treasures of gold. For alms delivereth from death,
   and it is she that purgeth sins and maketh a man to find everlasting
   life. Who that knowledge to him, for he hath showed his majesty into
   the sinful people. Confess ye therefore sinners, and do ye justice
   tofore our Lord by believing that he shall do to you his mercy, aye
   soothly, and my soul shall be glad in him. All ye chosen of God, bless
   ye him and make ye days of gladness and knowledge ye to him. Jerusalem
   city of God, our Lord hath chastised thee in the works of his hands,
   confess thou to our Lord in his good things and bless thou the God of
   worlds that he may re-edify in thee his tabernacle, and that he may
   call again to thee all prisoners and them that be in captivity and that
   thou joy in omnia secula seculorum. Thou shalt shine with a bright
   light, and all the ends of the earth shall worship thee. Nations shall
   come to thee from far, and bringing gifts shall worship in thee our
   Lord, and shall have thy land into sanctification. They shall call in
   thee a great name, they shall be cursed that shall despise thee, and
   they all shall be condemned that blaspheme thee. Blessed be they that
   edify thee, thou shalt be joyful in thy sons, for all shall be blessed,
   and shall be gathered together unto our Lord. Blessed be they that love
   thee and that joy upon thy peace. My soul, bless thou our Lord, for he
   hath delivered Jerusalem his city. I shall be blessed if there be left
   of my seed for to see the clearness of Jerusalem. The gates of
   Jerusalem shall be edified of sapphire and emerald, and all the circuit
   of his walls of precious stone; all the streets thereof shall be paved
   with white stone and clean; and Alleluia shall be sung by the ways
   thereof. Blessed be the Lord that hath exalted it that it may be his
   kingdom in secula seculorum, Amen. And thus Tobit finished these words.
   And Tobit lived after he had received his sight forty-two years, and
   saw the sons of his nephews, that is, the sons of the sons of his son
   young Tobias. And when he had lived one hundred and two years he died,
   and was honorably buried in the city of Nineveh.

   He was fifty-six years old when he lost his sight, and when he was
   sixty years old he received his sight again. The residue of his life
   was in joy, and with good profit of the dread of God he departed in
   peace. In the hour of his death he called to him Tobias his son, and
   seven of his young sons, his nephews, and said to them: The destruction
   of Nineveh is nigh, the word of God shall not pass, and our brethren
   that be disperpled from the land of Israel shall return thither again.
   All the land thereof shall be fulfilled with desert, and the house that
   is burnt therein shall be re-edified, and thither shall return all
   people dreading God. And Gentiles shall leave their idols and shall
   come in Jerusalem and shall dwell therein, and all the kings of the
   earth shall joy in her, worshipping the king of Israel. Hear ye
   therefore, my sons, me your father, serve ye God in truth and seek ye
   that ye do that may be pleasing to him, and command ye to your sons
   that they do righteous ness and alms, that they may remember God and
   bless him in all time in truth and in all their virtue. Now therefore,
   my sons, hear me and dwell ye no longer here, but whensoever your
   mother shall die, bury her by me and from then forthon dress ye your
   steps that ye go hence, I see well that wickedness shall make an end of
   it. It was so then after the death of his mother, Tobias went from
   Nineveh with his wife and his sons, and the sons of his sons, and
   returned unto his wife's father and mother, whom they found in good
   health and good age, and took the cure and charge of them, and were
   with them unto their death, and closed their eyes. And Tobias received
   all the heritage of the house of Raguel and saw the sons of his sons
   unto the fifth generation. And when he had complished ninety-nine years
   he died in the dread of God, and with joy they buried him. All his
   cognation and all his generation abode in good life and in holy
   conversation, and in such wise as they were acceptable as well to God
   as to men, and to all dwelling on the earth.
     __________________________________________________________________

  Here beginneth the story of Judith which is read the last Sunday of October.

   Arphaxad, king of the Medes, subdued into his empire many peoples and
   edified a mighty city, which he named Ecbatane, and made it with stones
   squared, and polished them. The walls thereof were of height seventy
   cubits, and breadth thirty cubits, and the towers thereof of were an
   hundred cubits high. And he glorified himself as he that was mighty in
   puissance and in the glory of his host and of his chariots.
   Nebuchadnezzar then in the twelfth year of his reign, which was king of
   the Assyrians, and reigned in the city of Nineveh, fought against
   Arphaxad and took him in the field, whereof Nebuchadnezzar was exalted
   and enhanced himself, and sent unto all regions about and unto
   Jerusalem till the Mounts of Ethiopia, for to obey and hold of him.
   Which all gainsaid him with one will, and without worship sent home his
   messengers void, and set nought by him. Then Nebuchadnezzar, having
   them at great indignation, swore by his reign and by his throne that he
   would avenge him on them all, and thereupon called all his dukes,
   princes, and men of war, and held a counsel in which was decreed that
   he should subdue all the world unto his empire. And thereupon he
   ordained Holofernes prince of his knighthood, and bade him go forth,
   and in especial against them that had despised his empire; and bade him
   spare no realm ne town but subdue all to him. Then Holofernes assembled
   dukes and masters of the strength of Nebuchadnezzar, and numbered one
   hundred and twenty thousand footmen, and horsemen shooters twelve
   thousand. And tofore them he commanded to go a multitude of innumerable
   camels laden with such things as were needful to the host, as victual,
   gold and silver, much that was taken out of the treasury of the kings.
   And so went to many realms which he subdued; and occupied a great part
   of the orient till he came approaching the land of Israel. And when the
   children of Israel heard thereof they dreaded sore lest he should come
   among them into Jerusalem and destroy the temple, for Nebuchadnezzar
   had commanded that he should extinct all of the gods of the earth, and
   that no god should be named ne worshipped but he himself, of all the
   nations that Holofernes should subdue.

   Eliachim, then priest in Israel, wrote unto all them in the mountains
   that they should keep the strait ways of the mountains, and so the
   children of Israel did as the priest had ordained. Then Eliachim, the
   priest, went about all Israel and said to them: Know ye that God hath
   heard your prayers, if ye abide and continue in your prayers and
   fastings in the sight of God. Remember ye of Moses, the servant of God,
   which overthrew Amalek trusting in his strength, and in his power, in
   his host, in his helmets, in his chariots, and in his horsemen; not
   fighting with iron but with praying of holy prayers. In like wise shall
   it be with all the enemies of Israel if ye persevere in this work that
   ye have begun. With this exhortation they continued praying God. They
   persevered in the sight of God, and also they that offered to our Lord
   were clad with sackcloth, and had ashes on their heads, and with all
   their heart they prayed God to visit his people Israel. It was told to
   Holofernes prince of the knighthood of the Assyrians that the children
   of Israel made them ready to resist him, and had closed the ways of the
   mountains, and he was burned in overmuch fury in great ire. He called
   all the princes of Moab and dukes of Ammon and said to them: Say ye to
   me, what people is this that besiege the mountains, or what or how many
   cities have they? And what is their virtue, and what multitude is of
   them? Or who is king of their knighthood? Then Achior, duke of all of
   them of Ammon, answering said: If thou of deignest to hear me I shall
   tell thee truth of this people that dwelleth in the mountains, and
   there shall not issue out of my mouth one false word. This people
   dwelled first in Mesopotamia, and was of the progeny of the Chaldees,
   but would not dwell there for they would not follow the gods of their
   fathers that were in the land of Chaldees, and going and leaving the
   ceremonies of their fathers, which was in the multitude of many gods,
   they honoured one, God of heaven, which commanded them to go thence
   that they should dwell in Canaan. Then after was there much hunger,
   that they descended into Egypt, and there abode four hundred years, and
   multiplied that they might not be numbered. When the king of Egypt
   grieved them in his buildings, bearing clay tiles, and subdued them,
   they cried to our Lord, and he smote the land of Egypt with divers
   plagues. When they of Egypt had cast them out from them, the plagues
   ceased from them and then they would have taken them again and would
   have called them to their service, and they fleeing, their God opened
   the sea to them that they went through dry-foot, in which the
   innumerable host of the Egyptians pursuing them were drowned, that
   there was not one of them saved for to tell to them that came after
   them. They passed thus the Red Sea, and he fed them with manna forty
   years, and made bitter waters sweet, and gave them water out of a
   stone. And wheresoever this people entered without bow or arrow, shield
   or sword, their God fought for them, and there is no man may prevail
   against this people but when they departed from the culture and honor
   of their God. And as oft as they have departed from their God and
   worshipped other strange gods, so oft have they been overcome with
   their enemies. And when they repent and come to the knowledge of their
   sin, and cry their God mercy, they be restored again, and their God
   giveth to them virtue to resist their enemies. They have overthrown
   Cananeum the king, Jebusee, Pheresee, Eneum, Etheum and Amoreum, and
   all the mighty men in Esebon, and have taken their lands and cities and
   possess them, and shall, as long as they please their God. Their God
   hated wickedness, for tofore this time when they went from the laws
   that their God gave to them, he suffered them to be taken of many
   nations into captivity, and were disperpled. And now late they be come
   again and possess Jerusalem wherein is sancta sanctorum, and be come
   over these mountains whereas some of them dwell. Now therefore, my
   lord, see and search if there be any wickedness of them in the sight of
   their God, and then let us go to them, for their God shall give them
   into thy hands and they shall be subdued under the yoke of thy power.

   And when Achior had said thus, all the great men about Holofernes were
   angry and had thought for to have slain him, saying each to other: Who
   is this that may make the children of Israel resist the king
   Nebuchadnezzar and his army and host? Men cowards and without might and
   without any wisdom of war. Therefore that Achior may know that he saith
   not true, let us ascend the mountains, and when the mighty men of them
   be taken let him be slain with them, that all men may know that
   Nebuchadnezzar is god of the earth, and that there is none other but
   he. Then when they ceased to speak, Holofernes having indignation said
   to Achior: Because thou hast prophesied us of the children of Israel
   saying, that their God defended them, I shall show to thee that there
   is no god but Nebuchadnezzar, for whom we have overcome them all and
   slain them as one man, then shalt thou die with them by the sword of
   the Assyrians, and all Israel shall be put into ruin and perdition, and
   then shall be known that Nebuchadnezzar is lord of all the earth, and
   the sword of my knighthood shall pass through thy sides. And thou shalt
   depart hence and go to them, and shalt not die unto the time that I
   have them and thee. And when I have slain them with my sword thou shalt
   in like wise be slain with like vengeance. After this Holofernes
   commanded his servants to take Achior, and lead him to Bethulia and to
   put him in the hands of them of Israel. And so they took Achior and
   ascended the mountains, against whom came out men of war. Then the
   servants of Holofernes turned aside and bound Achior to a tree hands
   and feet with cords, and left him and so returned to their lord. Then
   the sons of Israel coming down from Bethulia loosed and unbound him,
   and brought him to Bethulia, and he being set amid the people was
   demanded what he was, and why he was so sore there bounden. And he told
   to them all the matter like as it is aforesaid, and how Holofernes had
   commanded him to be delivered unto them of Israel. Then all the people
   fell down on to their faces worshipping God, and with great lamentation
   and weeping, with one will made their prayers unto our Lord God of
   heaven, and that he would behold the pride of them, and to the meekness
   of them of Israel, and take heed to the faces of his hallows and show
   to them his grace and not forsake them, and prayed God to have mercy on
   them and defend them from their enemies. And on that other side,
   Holofernes commanded his hosts to go up and assail Bethulia, and so
   went up, of footmen one hundred and twenty thousand, and twelve
   thousand horsemen, and besieged the town, and took their water from
   them, in so much that they that were in the town were in great penury
   of water, for in all the town was not water enough for one day, and
   such as they had was given to the people by measure. Then all the
   people young and old came to Ozias which was their prince, with Charmis
   and Gothoniel, all with one voice crying: God the Lord deem between us
   and thee, for thou hast done to us evil what thou spakest not peaceably
   with the Assyrians, for now we shall be delivered into the hands of
   them. It is better for us to live in captivity under Holofernes and
   live, than to die here for thirst, and see our wives and children die
   before our eyes. And when they had made this piteous crying and
   yelling, they went all to their church, and there a long while prayed
   and cried unto God knowledging their sins and wickedness, meekly
   beseeching him to show his grace and pity on them. Then at last Ozias
   arose up, and said to the people: Let us abide yet five days, and if
   God send us no rescue ne help us not in that time that we may give
   glory to his name, else we shall do as ye have said. And when that
   Judith heard thereof, which was a widow and a blessed woman, and was
   left widow three years and six months.

   After that Manasses her husband died, anon she went into the overest
   part of her house in which she made a privy bed, which she and her
   servants closed, and having on her body a hair, had fasted all the days
   of her life save Sabbaths and of new moons, and the feasts of the house
   of Israel. She was a fair and her husband had left her much riches,
   with plentiful meiny, and possessions of droves of oxen and flocks of
   sheep, and she was a famous woman and dreaded God greatly. And when she
   had heard that Ozias had said, that the fifth day the city should be
   given over if God helped them not, she sent for the priests Chambris
   and Charmis and said to them: What is this word in which Ozias hath
   consented that the city should be delivered to the Assyrians if within
   five days there come no help to us? And who be ye that tempt the Lord
   God? This word is not to stir God to mercy but rather to arouse wrath
   and woodness. Ye have set a time of mercy doing by God, and in your
   doom ye have ordained a day to him. O good Lord, how patient is he, let
   us ask him for forgiveness with weeping tears; he shall not threaten as
   a man, ne inflame in wrath as a son of a man, therefore meek we our
   souls to him and in a contrite spirit and meeked, serve we to him, and
   say we weeping to God, that after his will he show to us his mercy, and
   as our heart is troubled in the pride of them, so also of our
   humbleness and meekness let us be joyful. For we have not followed the
   sin of our fathers that forsook their God and worshipped strange gods,
   wherefore they were given and be taken into hideous and great
   vengeance, into sword, ravin, and into confusion to their enemies; we
   forsooth know no other god but him. Abide we meekly the comfort of him,
   and he shall keep us from our enemies, and he shall make all gentiles
   that arise against him, and shall make them without worship the Lord
   our God. And now ye brethren, ye thee be priests, on whom hangeth the
   life of the people of God, pray ye unto Almighty God that he make of me
   steadfast in the purpose that I have proposed. Ye shall stand at the
   gate and I shall go out with my handmaid. And pray ye the Lord that he
   steadfast make my soul, and do ye nothing till I come again.

   And then Judith went into her oratory, and arrayed her with her
   precious clothing and adornments, and took unto her handmaid certain
   victuals such as she might lawfully eat, and when she had made her
   prayers unto God she departed in her most noble array toward the gate,
   whereas Ozias and the priests abode her, and when they saw her they
   marvelled of her beauty. Notwithstanding they let her go, saying: God
   of our fathers give thee grace and strengthen all the counsel of thine
   heart with his virtue and glory to Jerusalem, and be thy name in the
   number of saints and of righteous men. And they all that were there
   said : Amen and, fiat! fiat! Then she praising God passed through the
   gate, and her handmaid with her. And when she came down the hill, about
   the springing of the day, anon the spies of the Assyrians took her
   saying: Whence comest thou, or whither goest thou? The which answered:
   I am a daughter of the Hebrews and flee from them, knowing that they
   shall be taken by you, and come to Holofernes for to tell him their
   privities, and I shall show him by what entry he may win them, in such
   wise as one man of his host shall not perish. And the men that heard
   these words beheld her visage and wondered of her beauty, saying to
   her: Thou hast saved thy life because thou hast founden such counsel,
   come therefore to our Lord, for when thou shalt stand in his sight he
   shall accept thee. And they led her to the tabernacle of Holofernes.
   And when she came before him anon Holofernes was caught by his eyes,
   and his tyrant knights said to him: Who despised the people of Jews
   that have so fair women, that not for them of right we ought against
   them? And so Judith seeing Holofernes sitting in his canape that was of
   purple, of gold, smaragdos and precious stones within woven, and when
   she had seen his face she honored him, falling down herself unto the
   earth. And the servants of Holofernes took her up, he so commanding.
   Then Holofernes said to her: Be thou not afeard ne dread thee not. I
   never grieved ne noyed man that would serve Nebuchadnezzar. Thy people
   soothly, if they had not despised me, I had not raised my people ne
   strength against them. Now tell to me the cause why thou wentest from
   them, and that it hath pleased thee to come to us. And Judith said:
   Take the words of thine handmaid, and if thou follow them, a perfect
   thing God shall do with thee. Forsooth Nebuchadnezzar is the living
   king of the earth, and thou hast his power for to chastise all people,
   for men only serve not him, but also the beasts of the field obey to
   him, his might is known over all. And the children of Israel shall be
   yielded to thee, for their God is angry with them for their wickedness.
   They be enfamined and lack bread and water, they be constrained to eat
   their horse and beasts, and to take such holy things as be forbidden in
   their law, as wheat, wine, and oil, all these things God hath showed to
   me. And they purpose to waste such things as they ought not touch, and
   therefore and for their sins they shall be put in the hands of their
   enemies, and our Lord hath showed me these things to tell thee. And I
   thine handmaid shall worship God, and shall go out and pray him, and
   come in and tell thee what he shall say to me, in such wise that I
   shall bring thee through the middle of Jerusalem, and thou shalt have
   all the people of Israel under thee, as the sheep be under the
   shepherd, in so much there shall not an hound bark against thee. And
   because these things be said to me by the providence of God, and that
   God is wroth with them, I am sent to tell thee these things.

   Forsooth, all these words pleased much to Holofernes, and to his
   people, and they marvelled of the wisdom of her. And one said to
   another. There is not such a woman upon earth in sight, in fairness,
   and in wit of words. And Holofernes said to her: God hath done well
   that he hath sent thee hither for to let me have knowledge, and if thy
   God do to me these things he shall be my God, and thou and thy name
   shall be great in the house of Nebuchadnezzar. Then commanded
   Holofernes her to go in where his treasure lay, and to abide there, and
   to give to her meat from his feast, to whom she said that she might not
   eat of his meat, but that she hath brought meat with her for to eat.
   Then Holofernes said: When that meat faileth what shall we give to thee
   to eat? And Judith said that she should not spend all till God shall do
   in my hands those things that I have thought. And the servants led her
   into his tabernacle, and she desired that she might go out in the night
   and before day to pray, and come in again. And the lord commanded his
   cubiculers that she should go and come at her pleasure three days
   during. And she went out into the valley of Bethulia and baptized her
   in the water of the well. And she stretched her hands up to the God of
   Israel, praying the good Lord that he would govern her way for to
   deliver his people; and thus she did unto the fourth day. Then
   Holofernes made a great feast, and sent a man of his which was gelded,
   named Bagoas, for to entreat Judith to lie with his lord, and to come
   eat and drink with him. And Judith said: What am I that should gainsay
   my lord's desire? I am at his commandment, whatsomever he will that I
   do, I shall do, and please him all the days of my life. And she rose
   and adorned herself with her rich and precious clothes, and went in and
   stood before Holofernes, and Holofernes' heart was pierced with her
   beauty, and he burned in the lust and desire of her, and said to her:
   Sit down and drink in joy, for thou hast found grace before me. Judith
   said: I shall drink my lord, for my life is magnified this day before
   all the days of my life. And she ate and drank such as her handmaid had
   ordained for her. And Holofernes was merry and drank so much wine that
   he never drank so much in one day in all his life, and was drunken. And
   at even, when it was night, Holofernes went into his bed, and Bagoas
   brought Judith in to his chamber and closed the door. And when Judith
   was alone in the chamber, and Holofernes lay and slept in overmuch
   drunkenness, Judith said to her handmaid that she should stand without
   forth before the door of the privy chamber and wait about, and Judith
   stood before the bed praying with tears and with moving of her lips
   secretly, saying: O Lord God of Israel, conform me in this hour to the
   works of my hands, that thou raise up the city of Jerusalem as thou
   hast promised, and that I may perform this that I have thought to do.
   And when she had thus said, she went to the pillar that was at his
   bed's head, and took his sword and loosed it, and of when she had drawn
   it out, she took his hair in her hand and said: Confirm me God of
   Israel in this hour, and smote twice in the neck and cut off his head,
   and left the body lie still, and took the head and wrapped it in the
   canape and delivered it to her maid, and bade her to put it in her
   scrip, and they two went out after their usage to pray. And they passed
   the tents, and going about the valley came to the gate of the city, and
   Judith said to the keepers of the walls: Open the gates, for God is
   with us that hath done great virtue in Israel. And anon when they heard
   her call, they called the priests of the city, and they came running
   for they had supposed no more to have seen her, and lighting lights all
   went about her.

   She then entered in and stood up in a high place and commanded silence,
   and said: Praise ye the Lord God that forsaketh not men hoping in him;
   and in me his handwoman, hath fulfilled his mercy that he promised to
   the house of Israel, and hath slain in my hand the enemy of his people
   this night. And then she brought forth the head of Holofernes and
   showed It to them saying: Lo! here the head of Holofernes, prince of
   the chivalry of Assyrians, and lo! the canape of him in which he lay in
   his drunkenhood, where our Lord hath smitten him by the hand of a
   woman. Forsooth God liveth, for his angel kept me hence going, there
   abiding, and from thence hither returning, and the Lord hath not
   suffered me, his handwoman, to be defouled, but without pollution of
   sin hath called me again to you joying in his victory, in my escaping
   and in your deliverance. Knowledge ye him all for good, for his mercy
   is everlasting, world without end. And all they, honouring our Lord,
   said to her: The Lord bless thee in his virtue, for by thee he hath
   brought our enemies to naught. Then Ozias, the prince of the people,
   said to her: Blessed be thou of the high God before all women upon
   earth, and blessed be the Lord that made heaven and earth, that hath
   addressed thee in the wounds of the head of the prince of our enemies.
   After this Judith bade that the head should be hanged up on the walls,
   and at the sun rising every man in his arms issue out upon your
   enemies, and when their spies shall see you, they shall run into the
   tent of their prince, to raise him and to make him ready to fight, and
   when his lords shall see him dead, they shall be smitten with so great
   dread and fear that they shall flee, whom ye then shall pursue, and God
   shall bring them and tread them under your feet. Then Achior seeing the
   virtue of the God of Israel, left his old heathen's customs and
   believed in God, and was circumcised in his privy members, and put
   himself to the people of Israel, and all succession of his kindred unto
   this day. Then at the springing of the day they hung the head of
   Holofernes on the walls, and every man took his arms and went out with
   great noise, which thing seeing, the spies ran together to the
   tabernacle of Holofernes, and came making noise for to make him to
   arise, and that he should awake, but no man was so hardy to knock or
   enter into his privy chamber. But when the dukes and leaders of
   thousands came, and other, they said to the privy chamberlains: Go and
   awake your lord, for the mice be gone out of their caves and be ready
   to call us to battle. Then Bagoas his bawd, went into his privy chamber
   and stood before the curtain, and clapped his hands together, weening
   he had slept with of Judith. And when he perceived no moving of him, he
   drew the curtain and seeing the dead body of Holofernes, without head,
   Iying in his blood, cried with great voice, weeping and rending his
   clothes, and went in to the tabernacle of Judith and found her not, and
   started out to the people and said: A woman of the Hebrews hath made
   confusion in the house of Nebuchadnezzar, she hath slain Holofernes,
   and he is dead, and she hath his head with her. And when the princes
   and captains of the Assyrians heard this, anon they rent their clothes,
   and intolerable dread fell on them, and were sore troubled in their
   wits and made a horrible cry in their tents. And when all the host had
   heard how Holofernes was beheaded, counsel and mind flew from them, and
   with great trembling for succour began to flee, in such wise that none
   would speak with other, but with their heads bowed down fled for to
   escape from the Hebrews, whom they saw armed coming upon them, and
   departed fleeing by fields and ways of hills and valleys. And the sons
   of Israel, seeing them fleeing, followed them, crying with trumps and
   shouting after them, and slew and smote down all them that they
   overtook. And Ozias sent forth unto all the cities and regions of
   Israel, and they sent after all the young men and valiant to pursue
   them by sword, and so they did unto the uttermost coasts of Israel. The
   other men soothly, that were in Bethulia, went in to the tents of the
   Assyrians, and took all the prey that the Assyrians had left, and when
   the men that had pursued them were returned, they took all their beasts
   and all the movable goods and things that they had left, so much that
   every man from the most to the least were made rich by the prey that
   they took. Then Joachim the high bishop of Jerusalem came unto
   Bethulia, with all the priests, for to see Judith, and when she came
   tofore them all, they blessed her with one voice, saying: Thou glory of
   Jerusalem, thou gladness of Israel, thou the worship doing of our
   people, thou didst manly, and thine heart is comforted because thou
   lovedst chastity and knewest no man after the death of thy husband, and
   therefore the hand of God hath comforted thee. And therefore thou shalt
   be blessed world without end, and all the people said: Fiat! fiat! be
   it done, be it done. Certainly the spoils of the Assyrians were unnethe
   gathered and assembled together in thirty days, of the people of
   Israel, but all the proper riches that were appertaining to Holofernes
   and could be found that had been his, they were given to Judith as well
   gold, silver, gems, clothes, as all other appurtenances to household;
   and all was delivered to her of the people, and the folks, with women
   and maidens, joyed in ye to the Lord in cymbals, mannerly sing to him a
   new psalm. Fully joy ye, and inwardly call ye his name, and so forth.
   And for this great miracle and victory all the people came to Jerusalem
   for to give laud, honour, and worship unto our Lord God. And after they
   were purified they offered sacrifices, vows, and behests unto God, and
   the joy of this victory was solemnised during three months, and after
   that, each went home again into his own city and house, and Judith
   returned into Bethulia, and was made more great and clear to all men of
   the land of Israel. She was joined to the virtue of chastity, so that
   she knew no man all the days of her life after the death of Manasses,
   her husband, and dwelled in of the house of her husband an hundred and
   five years, and she left her demoiselle free. And after this she died
   and is buried in Bethulia and all the people bewailed her seven days.
   During her life after this journey was no trouble among the Jews, and
   the day of this victory of the Hebrews was accepted for a feastful day,
   and hallowed of the Jews and numbered among their feasts unto this day.
     __________________________________________________________________

                             The Life of S. Andrew

   After the feasts of our Lord Jesu Christ tofore set in order follow the
   legends of Saints, and first of S. Andrew.

   Andrew is expounded, and is as much as to say as fair, or answering
   unto strength, and it is said of andor, that is as much to say as
   strength; or Andrew is said thus, as antipos of ana, which is to say
   high, and of tropos which is conversion, so that Andrew is to say, a
   man highly converted, and in heaven addressed unto his maker. He was
   fair in his life, answering in wisdom and in doctrine, strong in pain
   and converted high in glory. The priests and deacons of Achaia wrote
   his passion like as they had seen it with their eyes.

   Andrew and some other disciples were called three times of our Lord. He
   called them first in the knowledging of him, as when S. Andrew was with
   John the Baptist, his master, and another disciple; he heard that John
   said: Lo! here the Lamb of God; and then he went anon with another
   disciple, and came to Jesu Christ and abode with him all that day. And
   then S. Andrew found Simon, his brother, and brought him to Jesu
   Christ, and the next day following they went to their craft of fishing.
   And after this he called them the second time by the stagne of
   Gennesereth, which is named the sea of Galilee. He entered into the
   ship of Simon and of Andrew, and there was taken great multitude of
   fish, and he called James and John, which were in another ship, and
   they followed him, and after went into their proper places.

   After this he called them from their fishing, and said: Come, follow
   me, I shall make you fishers of men. Then they left their ships and
   nets, and followed him, and after this they abode with him, and went no
   more to their own houses. And howbeit he called Andrew and some other
   to be apostles, of which calling, Matthew saith in the third chapter:
   He called to him them that he would. And after the ascension of our
   Lord, the apostles were departed, and Andrew preached in Scythia and
   Matthew in Murgondy. And the men of this country refused utterly the
   preaching of S. Matthew, and drew out his eyes, and cast him in prison
   fast bounden. In the meanwhile an angel, sent from our Lord, and
   commanded him to go to S. Matthew into Murgondy, and he answered that
   he knew not the way. And then the angel commanded him that he should go
   unto the seaside, and that be should enter into the first ship that he
   should find, and so he did gladly, in accomplishing the commandment,
   and went into the city by the leading of the angel, and had wind
   propitious. And when he was come he found the prison open, where S.
   Matthew was in; and when he saw him he wept sore and worshipped him;
   and then our Lord rendered and gave again to S. Matthew his two eyes
   and his sight. And then S. Matthew departed from thence and came into
   Antioch, and S. Andrew abode in Murgondy, and they of the country were
   wroth that S. Matthew was so escaped. Then took they S. Andrew and drew
   him through the places, his hands bounden in such wise that the blood
   ran out. He prayed for them to Jesu Christ, and converted them by his
   prayer; and from thence he came to Antioch. This that is said of the
   blinding of S. Matthew, I suppose that it is not true, nor that the
   evangelist was not so infirm, but that he might get for his sight that
   S. Andrew gat for him so lightly.

   It was so that a young man came and followed S. Andrew, against the
   will of all his parents; and on a time his parents set fire on the
   house where he was with the apostle, and when the flame surmounted
   right high, the child took a brush full of water and sprinkled withal
   the fire, and anon the fire quenched. And then his friends and parents
   said: Our son is made an enchanter. And as they would have gone up by
   the ladders, they were suddenly made blind, that they saw not the
   ladders, and then one of them recried and said: Wherefore enforce ye
   you against them? God fighteth for them and ye see it not. Cease ye and
   leave off, lest the ire of our Lord fall on you. Then many of them that
   saw this believed in our Lord, and the parents died within forty days
   after, and were put in one sepulchre.

   There was a woman with child, joined in wedlock with a homicide who was
   troubled greatly upon her deliverance; and at the time of childing she
   might not be delivered. She bade her sister to go to Diana and pray to
   her that she help me. She went and prayed, and Diana said to her, which
   was the devil in an idol: Wherefore prayest thou to me? I may not help
   ne profit thee, but go unto Andrew the apostle which may help thee and
   thy sister. And she went to him, and brought him to her sister, which
   travailed in great pain, and began to perish. And the apostle said to
   her: By good right thou sufferest this pain; thou conceivedst in
   treachery and sin, and thou counselledst with the devil. Repent thee,
   and believe in Jesu Christ, and thou shalt be anon delivered of thy
   child. And when she believed and was repentant, she was delivered of
   her child, and the pain and sorrow passed and ceased.

   An old man called Nicholas by name, went unto the apostle and said to
   him: Sir, I have lived fifty years, and always in lechery. And I took
   on a time a gospel, in praying God that he would give me from then
   forthon continence. But I am accustomed in this sin, and full of evil
   delectation, in such wise that I shall return to this sin accustomed.
   On a time that I was inflamed by luxury, I went to the bordel, and
   forgat the gospel upon me, and anon the foul woman said: Go hence thou
   old man, for thou art an angel of God, touch me not, nor come not near
   me, for I see marvel upon thee. And I was abashed of the word of the
   woman, and I remembered that I had the gospel upon me, wherefore I
   beseech thee to pray God for me and for my health. And when S. Andrew
   heard this he began to weep, and prayed from tierce unto nones. And
   when he arose he would not eat, and said: I shall eat no meat till I
   know whether our Lord shall have pity of this old man. And when he had
   fasted five days, a voice came to S. Andrew and said to him: Andrew,
   thy request is granted for the old man, for like as thou hast fasted
   and made thyself lean, so shall he fast and make himself lean by
   fastings for to be saved. And so he did, for he fasted six months to
   bread and water. and after that he rested in peace and good works. Then
   came a voice that said: I have gotten Nicholas by thy prayers whom I
   had lost.

   A young christian man said to S. Andrew: My mother saw that I was fair,
   and required me for to have to do sin with her; and when I would not
   consent to her in no manner, she went to the judge, and would return
   and lay to me the sin of so great a felony. Pray for me that I die not
   so untruly; for when I shall be accused I shall hold my peace and speak
   not one word, and have liefer to die than to defame and slander my
   mother so foully. Thus came he to judgment, and his mother accused him,
   saying that he would have defouled her. And it was asked of him oft if
   it was so as she said, and he answered nothing. Then said S. Andrew to
   her: Thou art most cruel of all women, which for the accomplishment of
   thy lechery wilt make thy son to die. Then said this woman to the
   provost: Sir, sith that my son came, and accompanied with this man, he
   would have done his will with me, but I withstood him that he might
   not. And anon the provost and judge commanded that the son should be
   put in a sack anointed with glue, and thrown into the river, and S.
   Andrew to be put in prison till he had advised him how he might torment
   him. But S. Andrew made his prayer to God, and anon came an horrible
   thunder, which feared them all, and made the earth to tremble strongly
   and the woman was smitten with the thunder unto the death. And the
   other prayed the apostle that they might not perish, and he prayed for
   them, and the tempest ceased. Thus then the provost believed in God,
   and all his meiny.

   After this, as the apostle was in the city of Nice, the citizens said
   to him that there were seven devils without the city, by the highway,
   which slew all them that passed forthby. And the apostle Andrew
   commanded them to come to him, which came in the likeness of dogs, and
   sith he commanded them that they should go whereas they should not
   grieve ne do harm to any man; and anon they vanished away. And when the
   people saw this they received the faith of Jesu Christ. And when the
   apostle came to the gate of another city there was brought out a young
   man dead. The apostle demanded what was befallen him, and it was told
   him that seven dogs came and strangled him. Then the apostle wept and
   said: O Lord God, I know well that these were the devils that I put out
   of Nice; and after said to the father of him that was dead: What wilt
   thou give to me if I raise him? And he said: I have nothing so dear as
   him, I shall give him to thee. And anon the apostle made his prayers
   unto almighty God, and raised him from death to life, and he went and
   followed him.

   On a time there were forty men by number, which were coming by the sea,
   sailing unto the apostle, for to receive of him the doctrine of the
   faith. And the devil raised and moved a great storm and so horrible a
   torment that all they were drowned together. And when their bodies were
   brought tofore the apostle, he raised them from death to life anon, and
   there they said all that was befallen to them. And therefore it is read
   in an hymn that he rendered the life to young men drowned in the sea.
   And the blessed S. Andrew, whilst he was in Achaia, he replenished all
   the country with churches and converted the people to the faith of Jesu
   Christ and informed the wife of AEgeas, which was provost and judge of
   the town, in the faith, and baptized her. And when AEgeas heard this he
   came into the city of Patras and constrained the christians to
   sacrifice. And S. Andrew came unto him, and said: It behoveth thee
   which hast deserved to be a judge, to know thy judge which is in
   heaven, and he so known, to worship him, and so worshipping, withdraw
   thy courage from the false gods. And AEgeas said: Thou art Andrew that
   preachest a false law, which the princes of Rome have commanded to be
   destroyed. To whom Andrew said: The princes of Rome knew never how the
   son of God came and taught and informed them that the idols be devils,
   and he that teacheth such things angereth God, and he, so angered,
   departeth from them that he heareth them not, and therefore be they
   caitiffs of the devil and be so illused and deceived that they issue
   out of the body all naked, and bear nothing with them but sins.

   And AEgeas said to him: These be the vanities that your Jesus preached,
   which was nailed on the gallows of the cross. To whom Andrew said: He
   received with his agreement the gibbet of the cross, not for his culp
   and trespass, but for our redemption. And AEgeas said: When he was
   delivered of his disciple, taken and holden with the Jews, and
   crucified by the knyghts, how sayst thou that it was by his agreement?
   Then S. Andrew began to show by five reasons that Jesu Christ received
   death by his own agreement and will, forasmuch as he came tofore his
   passion, and said to his disciples that it should be, when he said: We
   shall go up to Jerusalem, and the son of the maid shall be betrayed.
   And also for that Peter would withdraw him, he reproved him, and said:
   Go after me, Sathanas. And also for that he showed that he had power to
   suffer death, and to rise again when he said: I have power to put away
   my soul and to take it again. And also for that he knew tofore him that
   betrayed him, when he gave him his supper, and showed him not. And also
   for that he chose the place where he should be taken, for he knew well
   that the traitor should come. And S. Andrew said that he had been at
   all these things, and yet he said more, that the mystery of the cross
   was great. To whom AEgeas said: It may not be said mystery, but
   torment, and if thou wilt not grant to my sayings, truly I shall make
   thee prove this mystery. And Andrew said to him: If I doubted the
   gibbet of the cross I would not preach the glory thereof. I will that
   thou hear the mystery, and if thou knew and believedst on it thou
   shouldst be saved. Then he showed to him the mystery of the cross, and
   assigned five reasons. The first is this: Forasmuch as the first man
   that deserved death was because of the tree, in breaking the
   commandment of God, then is it thing convenable that the second man
   should put away that death, in suffering the same on the tree. The
   second was that, he that was made of earth not corrupted, and was
   breaker of the commandment, then was it thing convenable that he that
   should repel this default, should be born of a virgin. The third; for
   so much as Adam had stretched his hand disordinately to the fruit
   forbidden, it was thing convenable that the new Adam should stretch his
   hands on the cross. The fourth; for so much as Adam had tasted sweetly
   the fruit forbidden, it is therefore reason that it be put away by
   thing contrary; so that Jesu Christ was fed with bitter gall. The
   fifth; for as much as Jesu Christ gave to us his immortality, it is
   thing reasonable, that he take our mortality. For if Jesu Christ had
   not been dead, man had never been made immortal. And then said AEgeas:
   Tell to thy disciples such vanities, and obey thou to me, and make
   sacrifice unto the Gods almighty. And then said S. Andrew: I offer
   every day unto God Almighty, a lamb without spot, and after that he is
   received of all the people, so liveth he and is all whole. Then
   demanded AEgeas how that might be. And Andrew said: Take the form for
   to be a disciple, and thou shalt know it well. I shall demand thee,
   said AEgeas, by torments. Then he being all angry, commanded that he
   should be enclosed in prison, and on the morn he came to judgment, and
   the blessed S. Andrew unto the sacrifice of the idols. And AEgeas
   commanded to be said to him: If thou obey not to me, I shall do hang
   thee on the cross, for so much as thou hast praised it. And thus as he
   menaced him of many torments S. Andrew said to him: Think what torment
   that is most grievous that thou mayst do to me, and the more I suffer,
   the more I shall be agreeable to my king, because I shall be most firm
   in the torments and pain. Then commanded AEgeas that he should be
   beaten of twenty-one men, and that he should be so beaten, bounden by
   the feet and hands unto the cross, to the end that his pain should
   endure the longer. And when he was led unto the cross, there ran much
   people thit And when he saw the cross from far he saluted it, and said:
   All hail cross which art dedicate in the body of Jesu Christ, and wert
   adorned with the members of him, as of precious stones. Tofore that our
   Lord ascended on thee, thou wert the power earthly, now thou art the
   love of heaven; thou shalt receive me by my desire. I come to thee
   surely and gladly so that thou receive me gladly as disciple of him
   that hung on thee. For I have alway worshipped thee and have desired
   thee to embrace. O thou cross which hast received beauty and noblesse
   of the members of our Lord, whom I have so long desired and curiously
   loved, and whom my courage hath so much desired and coveted, take me
   from hence, and yield me to my master, to the end that he may receive
   me by thee. And in thus saying, he despoiled and unclad him, and gave
   his clothes unto the butchers. And then they hung him on the cross,
   like as to them was commanded. And there he lived two days, and
   preached to twenty thousand men that were there. Then all the company
   swore the death of AEgeas, and said: The holy man and debonair ought
   not to suffer this. Then came thither AEgeas for to take him down off
   the cross. And when Andrew saw him he said: Wherefore art thou come to
   me, AEgeas? If it be for penance thou shalt have it, and if it be for
   to take me down, know thou for certain thou shalt not take me hereof
   alive; for I see now my lord and king that abideth for me. Therewith
   they would have unbound him, and they might in nowise touch him for
   their arms were bynomen and of no power. And when the holy S. Andrew
   saw that the world would have taken him down off the cross he made this
   orison hanging on the cross, as S. Austin saith in the book of penance:
   Sire, suffer me not to descend from this cross alive, for it is time
   that thou command my body to the earth, for I have born long the
   charge, and have so much watched upon that which was commanded to me,
   and have so long travailed, that I would now be delivered of this
   obedience, and be taken away from this agreeable charge. I remember
   that it is much grievous, in proud bearing, in doubting, unsteadfast in
   nourishing, and have gladly laboured in the refraining of them. Sire,
   thou knowest how oft the world hath entended to withdraw me from the
   purity of contemplation, how oft he hath entended to awake me from the
   sleep of my sweet rest, how much and how oft times he hath made me to
   sorrow, and as much as I have had might I have resisted it right
   debonairly in fighting against it, and have by thy work and aid
   surmounted it: and I require of thee just and debonair guerdon and
   reward, and that thou command that I go not again thereto, but I yield
   to thee that which thou hast delivered me. Command it to another and
   empesh me no more, but keep me in the resurrection, so that I may
   receive the merit of my labour. Command my body unto the earth, so that
   it behoveth no more to wake, but let it be stretched freely to thee,
   which art fountain of joy never failing. And when he had said this,
   there came from heaven a right great shining light, which environed him
   by the space of half an hour, in such wise that no man might see him.
   And when this light departed he yielded and rendered therewith his
   spirit. And Maximilla, the wife of AEgeas, took away the body of the
   apostle, and buried it honourably. And ere that AEgeas was come again
   to his house, he was ravished with a devil by the way, and died tofore
   them all. And it is said that out of the sepulchre of S. Andrew cometh
   manna like unto meal, and oil which hath a right sweet savour and
   odour. And by that is shewed to the people of the country when there
   shall be plenty of goods. For when ther cometh but little of manna, the
   earth shall bring forth but little fruit, and when it cometh
   abundantly, the earth bringeth forth fruit plenteously. And this might
   well happen of old time, for the body of him was transported into
   Constantinople.

   There was a bishop that led an holy and religious life, and loved S.
   Andrew by great devotion, and worshipped him above all other saints, so
   that in all his works he remembered him every day, and said certain
   prayers in the honour of God and S. Andrew, in such wise that the enemy
   had envy on him, and set him for to deceive him with all his malice,
   and transformed him into the form of a right fair woman, and came to
   the palace of the bishop, and said that she would be confessed to him.
   And the bishop bade her to go confess her to his penitencer, which had
   plain power of him. And she sent him word again that she would not
   reveal nor show the secrets of her confession to none but to him, and
   so the bishop commanded her to come; and she said to him: Sir, I pray
   thee that thou have mercy on me; I am so as ye see in the years of my
   youth, and a maid, and was deliciously nourished from my infancy, and
   born of royal lineage, but I am come alone, in a strange habit; for my
   father which is a right mighty king would give me to a prince by
   marriage; whereto I answer that I have horror of all beds of marriage,
   and I have given my virginity to Jesu Christ for ever, and therefore I
   may not consent to carnal copulation. And in the end he constrained me
   so much that I must consent to his will or suffer divers torments; so
   that I am fled secretly away, and had liefer be in exile, than to break
   and corrupt my faith to my spouse. And because I hear the praising of
   your right holy life, I am fled unto you and to your guard, in hope
   that I may find with you place of rest, whereas I may be secret in
   contemplation, and eschew the evil perils of this present life, and
   flee the diverse tribulations of the world. Of which thing the bishop
   marvelled him greatly, as well for the great noblesse of her lineage,
   as for the beauty of her body, for the burning of the great love of
   God, and for the honest fair speaking of this woman. So that the bishop
   answered to her, with a meek and pleasant voice: Daughter, be sure and
   doubt nothing; for he for whose love thou hast despised thyself and
   these things, shall give to thee the great thing. In this time present
   is little glory or joy, but it shall be in time to come. And I which am
   sergeant of the same, offer me to thee, and my goods; and choose thee
   an house where it shall please thee, and I will that thou dine with me
   this day. And she answered and said: Father, require of me no such
   thing, for by adventure some evil suspicion might come thereof. And
   also the resplendour of your good renomee might be thereby impaired. To
   whom the bishop answered: We shall be many together, and I shall not be
   with you alone, and therefore there may be no suspicion of evil. Then
   they came to the table, and were set, that one against that other, and
   the other folk here and there, and the bishop entendeth much to her,
   and beheld her alway in the visage, and he marvelled of her great
   beauty. And thus as he fixed his eyes on her his courage was hurt, and
   the ancient enemy, when he saw the heart of him, hurt [him] with a
   grievous dart. And this devil apperceived it and began to increase her
   beauty more and more; insomuch that the bishop was then ready for to
   require her to sin when he might.

   Then a pilgrim came and began to smite strongly at the gate or door,
   and they would not open it. Then he cried and knocked more strongly;
   and the bishop asked of the woman if she would that the pilgrim should
   enter. And she said; Men should ask first of him a question, grievous
   enough, and if he could answer thereto, he should be received, and if
   he could not, he should abide without, and not come in, as he that were
   not worthy but unwitting. And all agreed to her sentence, and enquired
   which of them were sufficient to put the question. And when none was
   found sufficient, the bishop said: None of us is so sufficient as ye,
   dame, for ye pass us all in fair speaking, and shine in wisdom more
   than we all; propose ye the question. Then she said: Demand ye of him,
   which is the greatest marvel that ever God made in little space. And
   then one went and demanded the pilgrim. The pilgrim answered to the
   messenger that it was the diversity and excellence of the faces of men:
   for among all so many men as have been sith the beginning of the world
   unto the end, two men might not be found of whom their faces were like
   and semblable in all things. And when the answer was heard, all they
   marvelled and said that this was a very and right good answer of the
   question. Then the woman said: Let the second question be proposed to
   him, which shall be more grievous to answer to, for to prove the better
   the wisdom of him, which was this: Whether the earth is higher than all
   the heaven? And when it was demanded of him the pilgrim answered: In
   the heaven imperial where the body of Jesu Christ is, which is form of
   our flesh, he is more high than all the heaven. Of this answer they
   marvelled all when the messenger reported it, and praised marvellously
   his wisdom. Consequently she said the third question, which was more
   dark and grievous to assoil. For to prove the third time his wisdom,
   and that then he be worthy to be received at the bishop's table, demand
   and ask of him; How much space is from the abysm unto the same heaven.
   Then the messenger demanded of the pilgrim, and he answered him: Go to
   him that sent thee to me and ask of him this thing, for he knoweth
   better than I, and can better answer to it, for he hath measured this
   space when he fell from heaven into the abysm, and I never measured it.
   This is nothing a woman but it is a devil which hath taken the form of
   a woman. And when the messenger heard this, he was sore afraid and told
   tofore them all this that he had heard. And when the bishop heard this
   and all other, they were sore afraid. And anon forthwith, the devil
   vanished away tofore their eyes.

   And after, the bishop came again to himself, and reproved himself
   bitterly, weeping, repenting and requiring pardon of his sin, and sent
   a messenger for to fetch and bring in the pilgrim, but he found him
   never after. Then the bishop assembled the people, and told to them the
   manner of this thing, and prayed them that they would all be in orisons
   and prayers, in such wise that our lord would show to some person who
   this pilgrim was which had delivered him from so great peril. And then
   it was showed that night to the bishop that it was S. Andrew which had
   put him in the habit of a pilgrim for the deliverance of him. Then
   began the bishop more and more to have devotion and remembrance to S.
   Andrew than he had tofore.

   The provost of a city had taken away a field from the church of S.
   Andrew, and by the prayer of the bishop he was fallen into a strong
   fever. And then he prayed the bishop that he would pray for him, and he
   would again yield the field. And when the bishop had prayed for him,
   and he had his health, he took the field again. Then the bishop put
   himself to prayer and orisons, and brake all the lamps of the church,
   and said: There shall none of them be lighted till that our Lord hath
   venged him on his enemy, and that the church have recovered that which
   she hath lost. And then the provost was strongly tormented with fevers,
   and sent to the bishop by messengers that he should pray for him, and
   he would yield again his field and another semblable. Then the bishop
   answered: I have heretofore prayed for him, and God heard and granted
   my prayer, and when he was whole, he took from me again the field. And
   then the provost made him to be borne to the bishop, and constrained
   him for to enter into the church for to pray. And the bishop entered
   into the church, and anon the provost died, and the field was
   re-established unto the church. Et sic est finis.
     __________________________________________________________________

               Here beginneth the Life of S. Nicholas the Bishop.

   Nicholas is said of Nichos, which is to say victory, and of laos,
   people, so Nicholas is as much as to say as victory of people, that is,
   victory of sins, which be foul people. Or else he is said, victory of
   people, because he enseigned and taught much people by his doctrine to
   overcome vices and sins. Or Nicholas is said of Nichor, that is the
   resplendour or shining of the people, for he had in him things that
   make shining and clearness. After this S. Ambrose saith: The word of
   God, very confession, and holy thought, make a man clean. And the
   doctors of Greece write his legend, and some others say that Methodius
   the patriarch wrote it in Greek, and John the deacon translated it into
   Latin and adjousted thereto many things.

   Nicholas, citizen of the city of Patras, was born of rich and holy kin,
   and his father was Epiphanes and his mother Johane. He was begotten in
   the first flower of their age, and from that time forthon they lived in
   continence and led an heavenly life. Then the first day that he was
   washed and bained, he addressed him right up in the bason, and he would
   not take the breast nor the pap but once on the Wednesday and once on
   the Friday, and in his young age he eschewed the plays and japes of
   other young children. He used and haunted gladly holy church; and all
   that he might understand of holy scripture he executed it in deed and
   work after his power. And when his father and mother were departed out
   of this life, he began to think how he might distribute his riches, and
   not to the praising of the world but to the honour and glory of God.
   And it was so that one, his neighbour, had then three daughters,
   virgins, and he was a nobleman: but for the poverty of them together,
   they were constrained, and in very purpose to abandon them to the sin
   of lechery, so that by the gain and winning of their infamy they might
   be sustained. And when the holy man Nicholas knew hereof he had great
   horror of this villainy, and threw by night secretly into the house of
   the man a mass of gold wrapped in a cloth. And when the man arose in
   the morning, he found this mass of gold, and rendered to God therefor
   great thankings, and therewith he married his oldest daughter. And a
   little while after this holy servant of God threw in another mass of
   gold, which the man found, and thanked God, and purposed to wake, for
   to know him that so had aided him in his poverty. And after a few days
   Nicholas doubled the mass of gold, and cast it into the house of this
   man. He awoke by the sound of the gold, and followed Nicholas, which
   fled from him, and he said to him: Sir, flee not away so but that I may
   see and know thee. Then he ran after him more hastily, and knew that it
   was Nicholas; and anon he kneeled down, and would have kissed his feet,
   but the holy man would not, but required him not to tell nor discover
   this thing as long as he lived.

   After this the bishop of Mirea died and other bishops assembled for to
   purvey to this church a bishop. And there was, among the others, a
   bishop of great authority, and all the election was in him. And when he
   had warned all for to be in fastings and in prayers, this bishop heard
   that night a voice which said to him that, at the hour of matins, he
   should take heed to the doors of the church, and him that should come
   first to the church, and have the name of Nicholas they should sacre
   him bishop. And he showed this to the other bishops and admonished them
   for to be all in prayers; and he kept the doors. And this was a
   marvellous thing, for at the hour of matins, like as he had been sent
   from God, Nicholas arose tofore all other. And the bishop took him when
   he was come and demanded of him his name. And he, which was simple as a
   dove, inclined his head, and said: I have to name Nicholas. Then the
   bishop said to him: Nicholas, servant and friend of God, for your
   holiness ye shall be bishop of this place. And sith they brought him to
   the church, howbeit that he refused it strongly, yet they set him in
   the chair. And he followed, as he did tofore in all things, in humility
   and honesty of manners. He woke in prayer and made his body lean, he
   eschewed company of women, he was humble in receiving all things,
   profitable in speaking, joyous in admonishing, and cruel in correcting.

   It is read in a chronicle that, the blessed Nicholas was at the Council
   of Nice; and on a day, as a ship with mariners were in perishing on the
   sea, they prayed and required devoutly Nicholas, servant of God,
   saying: If those things that we have heard of thee said be true, prove
   them now. And anon a man appeared in his likeness, and said: Lo! see ye
   me not? ye called me, and then he began to help them in their exploit
   of the sea, and anon the tempest ceased. And when they were come to his
   church, they knew him without any man to show him to them, and yet they
   had never seen him. And then they thanked God and him of their
   deliverance. And he bade them to attribute it to the mercy of God, and
   to their belief, and nothing to his merits.

   It was so on a time that all the province of S. Nicolas suffered great
   famine, in such wise that victual failed. And then this holy man heard
   say that certain ships laden with wheat were arrived in the haven. And
   anon he went thither and prayed the mariners that they would succour
   the perished at least with an hundred muyes of wheat of every ship. And
   they said: Father we dare not, for it is meted and measured, and we
   must give reckoning thereof in the garners of the Emperor in
   Alexandria. And the holy man said to them: Do this that I have said to
   you, and I promise, in the truth of God, that it shall not be lessed or
   minished when ye shall come to the garners. And when they had delivered
   so much out of every ship, they came into Alexandria and delivered the
   measure that they had received. And then they recounted the miracle to
   the ministers of the Emperor, and worshipped and praised strongly God
   and his servant Nicholas. Then this holy man distributed the wheat to
   every man after that he had need, in such wise that it sufficed for two
   years, not only for to sell, but also to sow. And in this country the
   people served idols and worshipped the false image of the cursed Diana.
   And to the time of this holy man, many of them had some customs of the
   paynims, for to sacrifice to Diana under a sacred tree; but this good
   man made them of all the country to cease then these customs, and
   commanded to cut off the tree. Then the devil was angry and wroth
   against him, and made an oil that burned, against nature, in water, and
   burned stones also. And then he transformed him in the guise of a
   religious woman, and put him in a little boat, and encountered pilgrims
   that sailed in the sea towards this holy saint, and areasoned them
   thus, and said: I would fain go to this holy man, but I may not,
   wherefore I pray you to bear this oil into his church, and for the
   remembrance of me, that ye anoint the walls of the hall; and anon he
   vanished away. Then they saw anon after another ship with honest
   persons, among whom there was one like to Nicholas, which spake to them
   softly: What hath this woman said to you, and what hath she brought?
   And they told to him all by order. And he said to them: This is the
   evil and foul Diana; and to the end that ye know that I say truth, cast
   that oil into the sea. And when they had cast it, a great fire caught
   it in the sea, and they saw it long burn against nature. Then they came
   to this holy man and said to him: Verily thou art he that appeared to
   us in the sea and deliveredst us from the sea and awaits of the devil.

   And in this time certain men rebelled against the emperor; and the
   emperor sent against them three princes Nepotian, Ursyn, and Apollyn.
   And they came into the port Adriatic, for the wind, which was contrary
   to them; and the blessed Nicholas commanded them to dine with him, for
   he would keep his people from the ravin that they made. And whilst they
   were at dinner, the consul, corrupt by money, had commanded three
   innocent knights to be beheaded. And when the blessed Nicholas knew
   this, he prayed these three princes that they would much hastily go
   with him. And when they were come where they should be beheaded, he
   found them on their knees, and blindfold, and the righter brandished
   his sword over their heads. Then S. Nicholas embraced with the love of
   God, set him hardily against the righter, and took the sword out of his
   hand, and threw it from him, and unbound the innocents, and led them
   with him all safe. And anon he went to the judgment to the consul, and
   found the gates closed, which anon he opened by force. And the consul
   came anon and saluted him: and this holy man having this salutation in
   despite, said to him: Thou enemy of God, corrupter of the law,.
   wherefore hast thou consented to so great evil and felony, how darest
   thou look on us? And when he had sore chidden and reproved him, he
   repented, and at the prayer of the three princes he received him to
   penance. After, when the messengers of the emperor had received his
   benediction, they made their gear ready and departed, and subdued their
   enemies to the empire without shedding of blood and sith returned to
   the emperor, and were worshipfully received. And after this it happed
   that some other in the emperor's house had envy on the weal of these
   three princes, and accused them to the emperor of high treason, and did
   so much by prayer and by gifts that they caused the emperor to be so
   full of ire that he commanded them to prison, and without other demand,
   he commanded that they should be slain that same night. And when they
   knew it by their keeper, they rent their clothes and wept bitterly; and
   then Nepotian remembered him how S. Nicholas had delivered the three
   innocents, and admonested the others that they should require his aid
   and help. And thus as they prayed S. Nicholas appeared to them, and
   after appeared to Constantine the emperor, and said to him: Wherefore
   hast thou taken these three princes with so great wrong, and hast
   judged them to death without trespass? Arise up hastily, and command
   that they be not executed, or I shall pray to God that he move battle
   against thee, in which thou shalt be overthrown, and shalt be made meat
   to beasts. And the emperor demanded: What art thou that art entered by
   night into my palace and durst say to me such words? And he said to
   him: I am Nicholas bishop of Mirea. And in like wise he appeared to the
   provost, and feared him, saying with a fearful voice: Thou that hast
   Iost mind and wit, wherefore hast thou consented to the death of
   innocents? Go forth anon and do thy part to deliver them, or else thy
   body shall rot, and be eaten with worms, and thy meiny shall be
   destroyed. And he asked him: Who art thou that so menaces me? And he
   answered: Know thou that I am Nicholas, the bishop of the city of
   Mirea. Then that one awoke that other, and each told to other their
   dreams, and anon sent for them that were in prison, to whom the emperor
   said: What art magic or sorcery can ye, that ye have this night by
   illusion caused us to have such dreams? And they said that they were
   none enchanters ne knew no witchcraft, and also that they had not
   deserved the sentence of death. Then the emperor said to them: know ye
   well a man named Nicholas? And when they heard speak of the name of the
   holy saint, they held up their hands towards heaven, and prayed our
   Lord that by the merits of S. Nicholas they might be delivered of this
   present peril. And when the emperor had heard of them the life and
   miracles of S. Nicholas, he said to them: Go ye forth, and yield ye
   thankings to God, which hath delivered you by the prayer of this holy
   man, and worship ye him; and bear ye to him of your jewels, and pray ye
   him that he threaten me no more, but that he pray for me and for my
   realm unto our Lord. And a while after, the said princes went unto the
   holy man, and fell down on their knees humbly at his feet, saying:
   Verily thou art the sergeant of God, and the very worshipper and lover
   of Jesu Christ. And when they had all told this said thing by order, he
   lift up his hands to heaven and gave thankings and praisings to God,
   and sent again the princes, well informed, into their countries.

   And when it pleased our Lord to have him depart out this world, he
   prayed our Lord that he would send him his angels; and inclining his
   head he saw the angels come to him, whereby he knew well that he should
   depart, and began this holy psalm: In te domine speravi, unto, in manus
   tuas, and so saying: Lord, into thine hands I commend my spirit, he
   rendered up his soul and died, the year of our Lord three hundred and
   forty- three, with great melody sung of the celestial company. And when
   he was buried in a tomb of marble, a fountain of oil sprang out from
   the head unto his feet; and unto this day holy oil issueth out of his
   body, which is much available to the health of sicknesses of many men.
   And after him in his see succeeded a man of good and holy life, which
   by envy was put out of his bishopric. And when he was out of his see
   the oil ceased to run, and when he was restored again thereto, the oil
   ran again.

   Long after this the Turks destroyed the city of Mirea, and then came
   thither forty- seven knights of Bari, and four monks showed to them the
   sepulchre of S. Nicholas. And they opened it and found the bones
   swimming in the oil, and they bare them away honourably into the city
   of Bari, in the year of our Lord ten hundred and eightyseven.

   There was a man that had borrowed of a Jew a sum of money, and sware
   upon the altar of S. Nicholas that he would render and pay it again as
   soon as he might, and gave none other pledge. And this man held this
   money so long, that the Jew demanded and asked his money, and he said
   that he had paid him. Then the Jew made him to come tofore the law in
   judgment, and the oath was given to the debtor. And he brought with him
   an hollow staff, in which he had put the money in gold, and he leant
   upon the staff. And when he should make his oath and swear, he
   delivered his staff to the Jew to keep and hold whilst he should swear,
   and then sware that he had delivered to him more than he ought to him.
   And when he had made the oath, he demanded his staff again of the Jew,
   and he nothing knowing of his malice delivered it to him. Then this
   deceiver went his way, and anon after, him list sore to sleep, and laid
   him in the way, and a cart with four wheels came with great force and
   slew him, and brake the staff with gold that it spread abroad. And when
   the Jew heard this, he came thither sore moved, and saw the fraud, and
   many said to him that he should take to him the gold; and he refused
   it, saying, But if he that was dead were not raised again to life by
   the merits of S. Nicholas, he would not receive it, and if he came
   again to life, he would receive baptism and become Christian. Then he
   that was dead arose, and the Jew was christened.

   Another Jew saw the virtuous miracles of S. Nicholas, and did do make
   an image of the saint, and set it in his house, and commanded him that
   he should keep well his house when he went out, and that he should keep
   well all his goods, saying to him: Nicholas, lo! here be all my goods,
   I charge thee to keep them, and if thou keep them not well, I shall
   avenge me on thee in beating and tormenting thee. And on a time, when
   the Jew was out, thieves came and robbed all his goods, and left,
   unborne away, only the image. And when the Jew came home he found him
   robbed of all his goods. He areasoned the image saying these words: Sir
   Nicholas, I had set you in my house for to keep my goods from thieves,
   wherefore have ye not kept them? Ye shall receive sorrow and torments,
   and shall have pain for the thieves. I shall avenge my loss, and
   refrain my woodness in beating thee. And then took the Jew the image,
   and beat it, and tormented it cruelly. Then happed a great marvel, for
   when the thieves departed the goods, the holy saint, like as he had
   been in his array, appeared to the thieves, and said to them: Wherefore
   have I been beaten so cruelly for you and have so many torments? See
   how my body is hewed and broken; see how that the red blood runneth
   down by my body; go ye fast and restore it again, or else the ire of
   God Almighty shall make you as to be one out of his wit, and that all
   men shall know your felony, and that each of you shall be hanged. And
   they said: Who art thou that sayest to us such things? And he said to
   them: I am Nicholas the servant of Jesu Christ, whom the Jew hath so
   cruelly beaten for his goods that ye bare away. Then they were afeard,
   and came to the Jew, and heard what he had done to the image, and they
   told him the miracle, and delivered to him again all his goods. And
   thus came the thieves to the way of truth, and the Jew to the way of
   Jesu Christ. A man, for the love of his son, that went to school for to
   learn, hallowed, every year, the feast of S. Nicholas much solemnly. On
   a time it happed that the father had do make ready the dinner, and
   called many clerks to this dinner. And the devil came to the gate in
   the habit of a pilgrim for to demand alms: and the father anon
   commanded his son that he should give alms to the pilgrim. He followed
   him as he went for to give to him alms, and when he came to the quarfox
   the devil caught the child and strangled him. And when the father heard
   this he sorrowed much strongly and wept, and bare the body into his
   chamber, and began to cry for sorrow, and say: Bright sweet son, how is
   it with thee? S. Nicholas, is this the guerdon that ye have done to me
   because I have so long served you? And as he said these words, and
   other semblable, the child opened his eyes, and awoke like as he had
   been asleep, and arose up tofore all, and was raised from death to
   life.

   Another nobleman prayed to S. Nicholas that he would, by his merits,
   get of our Lord that he might have a son, and promised that he would
   bring his son to the church, and would offer up to him a cup of gold.
   Then the son was born and came to age, and the father commanded to make
   a cup, and the cup pleased him much, and he retained it for himself,
   and did do make another of the same value. And they went sailing in a
   ship toward the church of S. Nicholas, and when the child would have
   filled the cup, he fell into the water with the cup, and anon was lost,
   and came no more up. Yet nevertheless the father performed his avow, in
   weeping much tenderly for his son; and when he came to the altar of S.
   Nicholas he offered the second cup, and when he had offered it, it fell
   down, like as one had cast it under the altar. And he took it up and
   set it again upon the altar, and then yet was it cast further than
   tofore and yet he took it up and remised it the third time upon the
   altar; and it was thrown again further than tofore. Of which thing all
   they that were there marvelled, and men came for to see this thing. And
   anon, the child that had fallen in the sea, came again prestly before
   them all, and brought in his hands the first cup, and recounted to the
   people that, anon as he was fallen in the sea, the blessed S. Nicholas
   came and kept him that he had none harm. And thus his father was glad
   and offered to S. Nicholas both the two cups.

   There was another rich man that by the merits of S. Nicholas had a son,
   and called him: Deus dedit, God gave. And this rich man did do make a
   chapel of S. Nicholas in his dwellingplace; and did do hallow every
   year the feast of S. Nicholas. And this manor was set by the land of
   the Agarians. This child was taken prisoner, and deputed to serve the
   king. The year following, and the day that his father held devoutly the
   feast of S. Nicholas, the child held a precious cup tofore the king,
   and remembered his prise, the sorrow of his friends, and the joy that
   was made that day in the house of his father, and began for to sigh
   sore high. And the king demanded him what ailed him and the cause of
   his sighing; and he told him every word wholly. And when the king knew
   it he said to him: Whatsomever thy Nicholas do or do not, thou shalt
   abide here with us. And suddenly there blew a much strong wind, that
   made all the house to tremble, and the child was ravished with the cup,
   and was set tofore the gate where his father held the solemnity of S.
   Nicholas, in such wise that they all demeaned great joy.

   And some say that this child was of Normandy, and went oversea, and was
   taken by the sowdan, which made him oft to be beaten tofore him. And as
   he was beaten on a S. Nicholas day, and was after set in prison, he
   prayed to S. Nicholas as well for his beating that he suffered, as for
   the great joy that he was wont to have on that day of S. Nicholas. And
   when he had long prayed and sighed he fell asleep, and when he awoke he
   found himself in the chapel of his father, whereas was much joy made
   for him. Let us then pray to this blessed saint that he will pray for
   us to our Lord Jesu Christ which is blessed in secula seculorum. Amen.
     __________________________________________________________________

     Here followeth the Conception of our Blessed Lady. Of the feast of the
                        Conception of our Blessed Lady.

   Maria invenisti graciam apud Dominum. Luca primo capitulo.

   When the angel Gabriel had greeted our Lady for to show to her the
   blessed conception of our Lord, for to take from her all doubts and
   dreads, he comforted her in saying the words aforesaid: Mary, thou hast
   found grace at the Lord. There be four manners of people, of which the
   two be good, and the two be evil. For some there be that seek not God
   nor his grace, as people out of the belief, of whom may be said as it
   is written: Who that believeth not on his Lord God shall die
   perpetually. And other there be that seek God and his grace, but they
   find it not, for they seek it not as they ought to do, as covetous men
   that set all their love in havoir and in solace of the world. Such
   people be likened to them that seek flowers in winter: well seek they
   flowers in winter that seek God and his grace in the covetise of the
   world, which is so cold of all virtues that it quencheth all the
   devotion of the love of God. And well is called the world winter in
   holy scripture; for its evils and vices make men sinners and cold to
   serve God. And therefore saith the Holy Ghost to the soul that is
   amorous, Canticorum cap. ii.; Arise up thou my fair soul, the winter is
   past. Jam enim hiems transiit. For thou hast vanquished the temptations
   of the world which kele my love, and theref as is said Judith, cap.
   xv., Tu gloria Jerusalem, tu laetitia Israel, tu honorificentia, etc.:
   Thou art the glory of Jerusalem, thou art the joy of Israel, thou art
   all the honour of our people. Cap. eodem: Confortatum est cor tuum, eo
   quod castitatem amaveris, et post virum tuum, alterum nescieris: ideo
   et manus Domini confortavit te. et ideo eris benedicta in aeternum:
   Thou hast kept chastity, and therefore thou shalt be blessed
   permanably. Judith viii. Ora pro nobis, quoniam mulier sancta es, etc.
   Item cap. xiv. Benedicta es, etc. It was said to Judith the widow, this
   that we may say to our Lady: Pray for us for ye be an holy woman, ye be
   a daughter that is blessed of the sovereign God above all the women
   that be on the earth. Thirdly, she is compared to the star, for she
   hath dwelled all her life stedfastly in all works of virtue, without
   doing any sin, like as the star holdeth him on the firmament without
   descending to the earth. For as S. Bernard saith: If it were demanded
   to all the saints that ever have been: have ye been without sin? Except
   the glorious Virgin Mary, they might answer this that is written
   Johannis, cap. i. Si dixerimus quoniam non peccavimus, etc.: If we say
   that we have do no sin, we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in
   us.

   This glorious virgin was, in the womb of her mother sanctified more
   plainly and more specially than ever was any other, for as saith S.
   Thomas Aquinas in Compendio: There be three manners of sanctifications,
   the first is common, and given by the sacraments of the holy church,
   like as by baptism and other sacraments, and these give grace but to
   take away the inclination to sin deadly and venially, nay, and this was
   done in the Virgin Mary, for she was hallowed and confirmed in all
   goodness, more than ever was any creature, like as saith S. Austin: She
   did never sin mortal nor venial. For she was so much enlumined by the
   Holy Ghost which descended in her, that through the conception of her
   blessed son Jesu Christ, which rested in her nine months, she was so
   confirmed in all virtues that there abode in her no inclination of sin.
   And therefore the holy church doth her more reverence and honour in
   ordaining to hallow the feast of her conception, because this feast is
   common to the knowledge of holy church by some miracles, like as we
   find reading in this manner:

   Anselm, Archbishop of Canterbury and pastor of England, sendeth
   greeting and benediction in our Lord perpetual unto the bishops that be
   under me, and to all them that have remembrance of the blessed Virgin
   Mary mother of God.

   Right dear brethren, how the conception of the glorious Virgin Mary
   hath been showed sometime in England, in France, and in other countries
   by miracles, I shall rehearse to you.

   In the time that it pleased to God for to correct the people of England
   of their evils and sins, and to constrain them to his service, he gave
   victory in battle to William, the glorious Duke of Normandy, to win and
   conquer the realm of England. And after that he was king of the land,
   anon by the help of God, and of his prudence, he reformed the estates
   and dignities of holy church into better reformation than it had been.
   To which the devil, enemy unto all good works had envy, and pained him
   to empesh and let the good works, as well by falseness of his servants
   as by encumbering of his strangers. For when the Danes heard say that
   England was subject unto the Normans, anon they made them ready to
   withstand it. When king William understood this, anon he sent the Abbot
   of Rumsey, which was named Helsinus, into Denmark for to know the
   truth. This Abbot after that he had done well and diligently the charge
   of his commission, and that he was returned a great part of the sea
   homeward, anon arose a great tempest on the sea, in such wise that the
   cords and other habiliments of the ship brake. And the masters and
   governors of the ship, and all they that were therein, lost the hope
   and trust to escape the peril of this tempest, and all cried devoutly
   to the glorious Virgin Mary, which is comfort to the discomforted, and
   hope to the despaired, and recommended themselves in the keeping of
   God. And anon they saw coming tofore the ship, upon the water, an
   honourable person in habit of a bishop, which called the said abbot in
   the ship, and said to him: Wilt thou escape these perils of the sea,
   and go home whole and safe into thy country? And the abbot answered,
   weeping, that he desired that above all other things. Then said the
   angel to him: Know thou that I am sent hither by our Lady for to say to
   thee that if thou wilt hear me and do thereafter, thou shalt escape
   this peril of the sea. The abbot promised that gladly he would obey to
   that he should say. Then said the angel: Make covenant to God, and to
   me, that thou shalt do hallow the feast of the Conception of our Lady,
   and of her creation, well and solemnly, and that thou shalt go and
   preach it. And the abbot demanded in what time this feast should be
   kept. The angel answered to him, The eighth day of December. And the
   abbot demanded him what office and service he should take for the
   service in holy church. And the angel answered: All the office of the
   nativity of our Lady, save where thou sayest nativity, thou shalt say,
   conception, and anon after the angel vanished away and the tempest
   ceased. And the abbot came home safely into his country with his
   company, and notified to all them that he might, that he had heard and
   seen. And, rights dear sirs, if ye will arrive at the port of health,
   let us hallow devoutly the creation and the conception of the mother of
   our Lord, by whom we may receive the reward of her son in the glory of
   paradise celestial.

   It is also otherwise declared: In the time of Charlemagne, king of
   France, there was a clerk which was brother germain to the king of
   Hungary, which loved heartily the blessed Virgin Mary and was wont to
   say every day matins of her, and the Hours. It happed that by counsel
   of his friends he took in marriage a much fair damsel, and when he had
   wedded her, and the priest had given the benediction on them after the
   mass, anon he remembered that that day he had not said his Hours of our
   Lady, wherefore he sent home the bride, his wife, and the people, to
   his house, and he abode in the church beside an altar for to say his
   Hours; and when he came to this anthem: Pulchra es et decora filia
   Jerusalem; that is to say: Thou art fair and gracious, daughter of
   Jerusalem, anon appeared tofore him the glorious Virgin Mary with two
   angels on either side, and said to him: I am fair and gracious,
   wherefore leavest thou me and takest thou another wife? or where hast
   thou seen one more fair than I am? And the clerk answered: Madam, thy
   beauty surmounteth all the beauty of the world, thou art lift up above
   the heavens and above the angels; what wilt thou that I do? And she
   answered and said: If thou wilt leave thy wife fleshly, thou shalt have
   me thine espouse in the realm of heaven, and if thou wilt hallow the
   feast of my conception, the eighth day of December, and preach it about
   that it may be hallowed, thou shalt be crowned in the realm of heaven.
   And anon therewith our Blessed Lady vanished away.

   Let us then pray to that glorious virgin our Lady Saint Mary, that we
   after this short and transitory life may be crowned in heaven in glory
   celestial, to which God bring us. Amen.
     __________________________________________________________________

            The Lives of the Saints Gentian, Fulcian and Victorice.

   Saints Fulcian and Victorice, of whom the solemnity is hallowed, came
   from the city of Rome for to preach the faith of Jesu Christ into these
   parts, and were in the city of Therouanne and preached there the faith.
   And they repaired by Amiens, and passed by a little village named
   Gains, and found there a good man that believed in God, but he was not
   yet baptized, and was named Gentian. And he saluted them and said:
   Sirs, ye be welcome, and they said: God save you. And after, he
   demanded them: What seek ye? And they answered: We seek one of our
   fellows called Quintin, and he said: Ah! fair sirs, he was but late
   beheaded not long sith, and sentence was given that, where such manner
   people might be found that preached of God, that they should be slain,
   but come ye near, and eat ye a morsel of bread. And as they were there,
   a tyrant that was called Rictius Varus came with servants, and said to
   Gentian: Deliver to us them that be herein, and he said: I shall not do
   it. Then he drew out his sword all naked. Gentian said: They take none
   heed of you. The tyrant Rictius Varus had great anger and sorrow, and
   made to take Gentian, and smote off his head. And after, he made to be
   taken S. Fulcian and S. Victorice, and brought them to Amiens, and said
   to them that they should forsake their God, whom they had made die an
   evil death, and they said they would not. Then he did do take broches
   of iron and put them through their ears and through their nostrils, and
   after did do smite off their heads. And, by the will and power of our
   Lord, they arose up, and took their heads in their hands, and bare them
   two miles far from the place where they had been beheaded. And all
   three were buried together in that town which is called Saint Fulcien.
   A great rage and madness took the tyrant Rictius Varus, and he cried
   through the city of Amiens, all enraged: Alas! alas! alas! now be well
   the Saints avenged on me, and sith died foul in his woodness. And thus
   were the friends of our Lord avenged on the tyrant, and by such
   martyrdom the glorious saints departed out of this life unto the realm
   of heaven. Then pray we unto the glorious martyrs S. Fulcian, S.
   Victorice, and S. Gentian, that they will pray God for us, that by
   their merits we may have pardon and forgiveness of our sins. Amen.
     __________________________________________________________________

              Here followeth the Life of the Blessed Virgin Lucy.

   Lucy is said of light, and light is beauty in beholding, after that S.
   Ambrose saith: The nature of light is such, she is gracious in
   beholding, she spreadeth over all without Iying down, she passeth in
   going right without crooking by right long line; and it is without
   dilation of tarrying, and therefore it is showed the blessed Lucy hath
   beauty of virginity without any corruption; essence of charity without
   disordinate love; rightful going and devotion to God, without squaring
   out of the way; right long line by continual work without negligence of
   slothful tarrying. In Lucy is said, the way of light.

   S. Lucy, the holy virgin, was born in Sicily, and extract and
   engendered of a noble lineage, in the city of Syracuse. When she heard
   of the good fame and renown of S. Agatha or Agaas, which was published
   and spread all about, anon she went to her sepulchre with her mother
   which was named Euthicia, which had a malady, named the bloody flux, by
   the space of four years, the which no master in physic ne surgery could
   heal. And when they were at a mass, one read a gospel which made
   mention of a woman which was healed of the bloody flux by touching of
   the hem of the coat of Jesu Christ. When S. Lucy heard this, anon she
   said to her mother: Mother, if ye believe that this which is read be
   true, and also that S. Agatha hath now presently with her Jesu Christ,
   and also that for his name she suffered martyrdom, and if ye, with this
   belief, touch her sepulchre, without doubt ye shall be anon guerished
   and healed. Upon this they, after the mass, when the people were
   departed, they twain fell down on their knees on the sepulchre of S.
   Agatha in prayers, and weeping began to pray for her help and aid. S.
   Lucy in making her prayers for her mother fell asleep, and she saw in
   her sleep S. Agatha among the angels, nobly adorned and arrayed with
   precious stones, which said thus to her: Lucy, my sweet sister, devout
   virgin to God, wherefore prayest thou to me for thy mother, for such
   thing as thou mayest thyself right soon give to her? For I tell the for
   truth, that for thy faith, and thy good, thy mother is safe and whole.
   With these words S. Lucy awoke all afraid, and said to her mother:
   Mother, ye be guerished and all whole; I pray you for her sake by whose
   prayers ye be healed, that ye never make mention to me for to take an
   husband ne spouse, but all that good that ye would give me with a man,
   I pray you that ye will give it to me for to do alms withal that I may
   come to my saviour Jesu Christ. Her mother answered to her: Fair
   daughter, thy patrimony, which I have received this nine years, sith
   thy father died, I have nothing aminished, but I have multiplied and
   increased it; but abide till I am departed out of this world, and then
   forthon do as it shall please thee. S. Lucy said: Sweet mother, hear my
   counsel: he is not beloved of God, that for his love giveth that which
   he may not use himself, but if thou wilt find God debonair to thee,
   give for him that which thou mayest dispend, for after thy death thou
   mayest in no wise use thy goods. That which thou givest when thou shalt
   die, thou givest it because thou mayest not bear it with thee. Give
   then for God's sake whiles thou livest: and as to such good as thou
   oughtest to give to me with an husband or spouse, begin to give all
   that to your people for the love of Jesu Christ. Hereof spake alway
   Lucy to her mother, and every day they gave alms of their goods. And
   when they had almost sold their patrimony and their jewels, tidings
   came to the knowledge of her spouse that should have wedded her, and
   that she was promised to, the which he demanded hereof the truth of the
   nurse of S. Lucy, and wherefore they sold thus their patrimony. She
   answered cautelously, and said that they did it because that S. Lucy,
   which should have been his wife, had found one which had a more fairer
   and nobler heritage than his was, the which they would buy tofore ere
   they should assemble by marriage. The fool believed it, for he
   understood carnally this that the nurse had said to him spiritually,
   and helped them to sell their heritage. But when he understood that she
   gave all for God's love, and that he felt himself deceived, anon he
   complained on Lucy, and made her to come tofore a judge named
   Paschasius, which was a miscreant and heathen man. And it was because
   she was christian, and that she did against the law of the Emperor,
   Paschasius blamed her, and admonested her to worship and do sacrifice
   to the idols. She said: Sacrifice which pleaseth God is to visit the
   widows and orphans, and to help them in their need: I have not ceased
   these three years past to make to God such sacrifice, and forasmuch as
   I have no more of which I may make yet such sacrifice, I offer to him
   myself, let him do with his offering as it pleaseth him. Paschasius
   said: Thou mightest say these words unto christian people, semblable to
   thee, but to me which keep the commandments of the emperors, thou
   sayest them in vain. S. Lucy said: If thou wilt keep the law of thy
   lords, I shall keep the law of God; thou doubtest to anger them, and I
   shall keep me that I anger not my God; thou wilt please them, and I
   covet only to please our Lord Jesu Christ. Paschasius said: Thou hast
   dispended thy patrimony with the ribalds, and therefore thou speakest
   as a ribald. She said. I have set my patrimony in a sure place; unto
   the corruption of my heart ne body, I never agreed ne suffered it.
   Paschasius said: Who be they that corrupt the heart and the body? She
   said: Ye be that corrupt the hearts, of whom the apostle said: The evil
   words corrupt the good manners. Ye counsel the souls to forsake their
   creator and to ensue the devil in making sacrifice to the idols; the
   corrupters of the body be they that love the short delectations
   corporal, and despite delights spiritual that endure for ever.
   Paschasius said: These words that thou sayest shall finish when thou
   shalt come to thy pains. She said: The words of God may not end ne
   finish. Paschasius said: How then! art thou God? She said: I am the
   handmaid of God, and for so much as I say, they be the words of God,
   for he saith: Ye be not they that speak tofore the princes and judges,
   but the Holy Ghost speaketh in you. Paschasius said: And therefore the
   Holy Ghost is in thee? She said: The apostle saith that they be the
   temple of God that live chastely, and the Holy Ghost dwelleth in them.
   Paschasius said: I shall do bring thee to the bordel, where thou shalt
   lose thy chastity, and then the Holy Ghost shall depart from thee. She
   said: The body may take no corruption but if the heart and will give
   thereto assenting: for if thou madest me to do sacrifice by my hands,
   by force, to the idols, against my will, God shall take it only but as
   a derision, for he judgeth only of the will and consenting. And
   therefore, if thou make my body to be defouled without mine assent, and
   against my will, my chastity shall increase double to the merit of the
   crown of glory. What thing that thou dost to the body, which is in thy
   power, that beareth no prejudice to the handmaid of Jesu Christ. Then
   commanded Paschasius that the ribalds of the town should come, to whom
   he delivered S. Lucy, saying: Call other to you for to defoul her, and
   labour her so much till she be dead. Anon the ribalds would have drawn
   her from thence where she was, and have brought her to the bordel, but
   the Holy Ghost made her so pesant and heavy that in no wise might they
   move her from the place. Wherefore many of the servants of the judge
   put hand to, for to draw with the other, and she abode still. Then they
   bound cords to her hands and feet, and all drew, but she abode alway
   still as a mountain, without moving. Whereof Paschasius was all
   anguishous and angry, and did do call his enchanters, which might never
   move her for all enchantery. Then Paschasius did do yoke for her oxen
   many, for to draw her, and yet they might not move her from the place.
   Then Paschasius demanded her for what reason might it be that a frail
   maid might not be drawn ne moved by a thousand men. She said: It is the
   work of God, and if thou settest thereto yet ten thousand they should
   not move me. Of these words the judge was sore tormented And S. Lucy
   said to him: Wherefore tormentest thou thyself thus? If thou hast
   proved and assayed that I am the temple of God, believe it. If thou
   hast not assayed, learn to assay. And hereof was the judge more
   tormented, for he saw that she made but her mockery with him. Wherefore
   he did do make about S. Lucy a right great fire, and made to be cast on
   her pitch, resin, and boiling oil, and she abode all still tofore the
   fire, and said: I have prayed to Jesu Christ that this fire have no
   domination in me to the end that the christian men that believe in God
   make of thee their derision. And I have prayed for respite of my
   martyrdom for to take away from the christian men the fear and dread to
   die for the faith of Jesu Christ, and to take away from the miscreants
   the avaunting of my martyrdom. The friends of the judge saw that he was
   confused by the words of S. Lucy, and of the drawing much greatly
   tormented, and therefore they roof a sword through her throat, and yet
   for all that she died not anon, but spake to the people, saying: I
   announce and show to you that holy church shall have peace, for
   Diocletian the emperor, which was enemy to holy church is this day put
   out of his seignory, and Maximian, his fellow, is this day dead. And in
   likewise as S. Agatha is patroness and keeper of Catania, in the same
   wise shall I be committed to be patroness of Syracuse, this city. And
   as she spake thus to the people, the sergeants and ministers of Rome
   came for to take Paschasius and bring him to Rome, because he was
   accused tofore the senators of Rome of that he had robbed the province;
   wherefore he received his sentence of the senate, and had his head
   smitten off. S. Lucy never removed from the place where she was hurt
   with the sword, ne died not till the priest came and brought the
   blessed body of our Lord Jesu Christ. And as soon as she had received
   the blessed sacrament she rendered and gave up her soul to God,
   thanking and praising him of all his goodness. In that same place is a
   church edified in the name of her, whereas many benefits have been
   given to the honour of our Lord Jesu Christ, which is blessed world
   without end. Amen.
     __________________________________________________________________

                    Here followeth the life of S. Nicasius.

   In that time that the Vandals wasted and destroyed many cities and
   lands, they came to the city of Rheims in France, in which city S.
   Nicasius was archbishop. He preached the faith of Jesu Christ and
   comforted the people, and admonished them to receive in patience the
   persecution of the Vandals, which had then destroyed the country and
   land all about the city. And as this people called Vandals approached
   the city, the folk came to the archbishop and demanded counsel if they
   should yield them or go and fight for the city. S. Nicasius, to whom
   God had showed tofore that the Vandals came, that all the city should
   be destroyed, impetered and had grant of our Lord that this tribulation
   and this death should be to the health of the souls of them that to
   their power should be repentant of their sins, and sith said to them:
   Let us go surely to the peril of death, and let us abide the mercy of
   God. I am ready to set my soul for my people; let us pray for our
   enemies, and let us desire of their souls like as of our own. Thus as
   he spake to the people, S. Eutropia, his sister, exhorted as much as
   she might the people to receive martyrdom, which was ready.

   After the orisons and the enseignments that they had made to the
   people, they issued out against the Vandals, and S. Nicasius said to
   them: If ye will slay my people, slay me first tofore. And after he
   preached to them the faith of Jesu Christ, and taught them how they
   might be saved; but they would not understand it. Then the holy man set
   him to prayer, and while he prayed his enemies smote off his head. And
   after that the head was smitten off he made an end of his prayer, and
   said in his tongue this verse of the psalter: Adhesit pavimento, etc.
   When S. Eutropia saw her brother martyred, and saw that no man made her
   ready to be martyred, but strove for her beauty, she ran to him that
   had slain her brother, and would have scratched his eyes out of his
   head; and anon she was martyred and many others with her. Then the
   Vandals saw a great company of chivalry of heaven come for to avenge
   the great felony that they had done, and heard a great sound in the
   church; and they had so great fear and dread that they left all their
   armours and fled. And there appeared a great light and clearness upon
   the bodies, that it was seen far by night.

   Then came again some burgesses of them that had fled, and saw the
   clearness, and felt a great odour about the martyrs, and buried them
   about the city, and thanked our Lord and served him more perfectly than
   they had done tofore. Let us pray then to the holy S. Nicasius and to
   S. Eutropia that they will get us grace of our Lord and that they bring
   us into their company. Amen.
     __________________________________________________________________

               Here beginneth the Life of S. Thomas the Apostle.

   Thomas is as much to say as abysm or double, which in Greek is said
   didimus; or else Thomas is said of Thomos, which is said division or
   parting. He was abysm or swallow because he deserved to pierce the
   deepness of divinity, when at his interrogation Jesu Christ answered to
   him: Ego sum via, veritas et vita: I am the way, truth, and life. He is
   said double because he knew Christ in his resurrection in double wise
   more than other knew, for they knew him but only in seeing, but Thomas
   knew him both seeing and feeling. He is said division or departing, for
   he departed his love from the love of the world, and was departed from
   the other apostles at the resurrection. Or Thomas is said as, appeared
   again, that is in the love of God by contemplation. He had there things
   in him of which Prosper saith in the book of the Soul Contemplative,
   and demandeth what it is for to love nothing but to conceive the
   burning of him in his thought, and the talent of God, and the hate of
   sin, and to forsake the world. Or Thomas is as much to say as alway
   going in the love and contemplation of God. Or Thomas is as much as: My
   God, because he said, when he touched the side of our Lord: My God and
   my Lord.

   S. Thomas, when he was in Csarea, our Lord appeared to him, and said:
   The King of India, Gundoferus, hath sent his provost, Abbanes, for to
   seek men that can well the craft of masons, and I shall send thee to
   him. And S. Thomas said: Sir, send me over all save to them of India.
   And our Lord said to him: Go thy way thither surely, for I shall be thy
   keeper, and when thou hast converted them of India, thou shalt come to
   me by the crown of martyrdom. And Thomas said to him: Thou art my lord,
   and I thy servant; thy will be fulfilled. And as the provost went
   through the market, our Lord said to him: Young man, what wilt thou
   buy? and he said: My lord hath sent me for to bring to him some that be
   learned in the science of masonry, that they might make for him a
   palace after the work of Rome. And then our Lord delivered to him S.
   Thomas the Apostle, and told to him that he was much expert in that
   work. And they departed and sailed till they came in a city, where the
   king made a wedding of his daughter, and had do cry that all the people
   should come to this feast of this marriage or else he would be angry.
   And it so happed that the provost and Thomas went thither, and an
   Hebrew maid had a pipe in her hand and praised ever each one with some
   laud or praising. And when she saw the apostle she knew that he was an
   Hebrew because he ate not, but had alway his eyes firm toward heaven.
   And as the maid sang tofore him in Hebrew, she said: The God of heaven
   is one only God, the which created all things and founded the seas. And
   the apostle made her to say these words again. And the butler beheld
   him, and saw that Thomas ate not ne drank not, but alway looked upward
   to heaven. And he came to the apostle and smote him on the cheek; and
   the apostle said to him, that in time to come it be pardoned to thee,
   and that now a wound transitory be given to thee, and said: I shall not
   arise from this place till the hand that hath smitten me be eaten with
   dogs. And anon after, the butler went for to fetch water at a well, and
   there a lion came and slew him and drank his blood, and the hounds drew
   his body into pieces, in such wise that a black dog brought the right
   arm into the hall in the middle of the dinner. And when they saw this,
   all the company was abashed, and the maid remembered the words, and
   threw down her pipe or flute, and fell down at the feet of the apostle.
   And this vengeance blameth S. Austin in his book of Faustius, and saith
   that this was set in of some false prophets, for this thing might be
   suspicious unto many things. Whether it be true or no it appertaineth
   not to me, but I wot well that they should be like as our Lord
   teacheth, which saith: If any man smiteth thee on that one cheek, show
   and offer to him that other, and certainly the apostle held within his
   courage the will of God and of dilection, and without forth he required
   example of correction. This saith S. Austin. And then, at the request
   of the king, the apostle blessed them that were new married, and said:
   Lord God give to these children the blessing of thy right hand, and set
   in their minds the seed of life. And when the apostle was gone, there
   was found, in the hand of the young man that was married, a branch of
   palm full of dates; and when he and his wife had eaten of the fruit
   they fell asleep, and they had one semblable dream. For them seemed
   that a king adorned with precious stones embraced them, and said: Mine
   apostle hath blessed you in such wise that ye shall be partakers of the
   glory perdurable. Then they awoke, and told to each other their dream.
   And then the apostle came to them and said: My king hath appeared right
   now to you, and hath brought me hither, the doors being shut, so that
   my blessing may be fruitful upon you, and that ye may have the sureness
   of your flesh, the which is queen of all virtues and fruit of perpetual
   health, and above the angels' possessions of all good, victory of
   lechery, lord of the faith, discomfiture of devils, and surety of joys
   perdurable. Lechery is engendered of corruption, and of corruption
   cometh pollution, and of pollution cometh sin, and of sin is confusion
   engendered.

   And he thus saying, two angels appeared to them and said: We be the two
   angels deputed for to keep you, and if ye keep well all the
   admonestments of the apostle we shall offer to God all your desires.
   And then the apostle baptized them, and informed them diligently in the
   faith. And long time after the wife, named Pelagia, was sacred with a
   veil, and suffered martyrdom, and the husband named Denis was sacred
   bishop of that city. And after this, the apostle and Abbanes came unto
   the King of India, and the king devised to the apostle a marvellous
   palace, and delivered to him great treasure. And the king went into
   another province, and the apostle gave all the treasure to poor people,
   and the apostle was alway in predications two years or thereabout ere
   the king came, and converted much people without number to the faith.
   And when the king came and knew what he had done, he put him and
   Abbanes in the most deepest of his prisons, and purposed fully to slay
   them and burn. And in the meanwhile Gad, brother of the king, died, and
   there was made for him a rich sepulchre, and the fourth day he that had
   been dead arose from death to life, and all men were abashed and fled.
   And he said to his brother: This man that thou intendest to slay and
   burn is the friend of God, and the angels of God serve him, and they
   brought me in to paradise, and have showed me a palace of gold and
   silver and of precious stones, and it is marvellously ordained. And
   when I marvelled of the great beauty thereof, they said to me: This is
   the palace that Thomas hath made for thy brother. And when I said that
   I would be thereof porter, they said to me: Thy brother is made
   unworthy to have it; if thou wilt dwell therein, we shall pray God to
   raise thee so that thou mayst go buy it of thy brother, in giving to
   him the money that he supposed he had lost. And when he had said this
   he ran to the prison and required of the apostle that he would pardon
   his brother that he had done to him, and then delivered him out of
   prison, and prayed the apostle that he would take and do on him a
   precious vesture. And the apostle said to him: Knowest thou not that
   they which ween to have power in things celestial set nought in nothing
   fleshly ne earthly? And when the apostle issued out of prison, the king
   came against him and fell down at his feet, and required of him pardon.
   Then the apostle said to him: God hath given to you much great grace
   when he hath showed to you his secrets; now believe in Jesu Christ and
   be ye baptized, to the end that thou be prince in the realm perdurable.
   And then the brother of the king said: I have seen the palace that thou
   hast do make to my brother, and I am come for to buy it. And the
   apostle said to him: If it be the will of thy brother it shall be done.
   And the king said: Sith it pleaseth God, this shall be mine, and the
   apostle shall make to thee another; and if peradventure he may not,
   this same shall be common to thee and to me. And the apostle answered
   and said: Many palaces be there in heaven which be made ready sith the
   beginning of the world, that be bought by price of the faith and by
   alms of your riches, which may well go tofore you to these palaces, but
   they may not follow you.

   And after this, at the end of a month, the apostle made to assemble all
   them of the province, and when they were assembled he commanded that
   the feeble and sick should be set apart by themselves. Then he prayed
   for them, and they that were well enseigned and taught said Amen. And
   forthwith came a clear light from heaven which descended upon them, and
   smote down all the people and the apostle to the earth; and they
   supposed they had been smitten with thunder, and so lay by the space of
   half an hour. After, the apostle rose and said: Arise ye up for my lord
   is come as thunder, and hath healed us; and anon they arose all whole
   and glorified God and the apostle. Then began the apostle to teach
   them, and to show to them the degrees of virtue. The first is that they
   should believe in God which is one essence, and treble or three in
   persons, and showed to them examples sensible, how three persons be in
   one essence. The first example in a man is wisdom, and thereof cometh
   understanding, memory, and cunning. Cunning is of that thou hast
   learned the memory or mind, and retainest that thou shouldest forget.
   And the understanding is that thou understandest this that is taught to
   thee and showed. The second example is that, in a vine be three things,
   the stock, the leaf, and the fruit. The third example is that three
   things be in the head of a man, hearing, seeing, and tasting or
   smelling. The second degree that they receive baptism. The third, that
   they keep them from fornication. The fourth, that they keep them from
   avarice. The fifth, that they restrain them from gluttony. The sixth,
   that they keep their penance. The seventh, that they persevere and
   abide in these things. The eighth, that they love hospitality. The
   ninth, that in things to be done they require the will of God, and that
   they require such things by works. The tenth, that they eschew those
   things that be not for to be done. The eleventh, that they do charity
   to their enemies and to their friends. The twelfth, that they keep
   charity, and do work by diligence to keep these things. And after his
   predication, forty thousand men were baptized, without women and small
   children.

   And incontinent he went into the great India where he shone by miracles
   innumerable, for he enlumined and made to see Syntice, the friend of
   Migdonia, which was wife of Carisius, cousin of the king of India. And
   Migdonia said to Syntice: Weenest thou that I may see him? Then
   Migdonia changed her habit by the counsel of Syntice, and put herself
   among the poor women, and came whereas the apostle preached. And he
   began to preach of the maleurte and unhappiness of this life, and said
   that this life is unhappy, wretched and subject to adventures, and is
   so slippery and fleeting, that when one weeneth to hold it, it fleeth
   away. And after, he began to show to them by four reasons that they
   should gladly hear the word of God, and likeneth it to four manner of
   things: first, unto a colour which lighteth the eye of our
   understanding; secondly, to a syrup or a purgation, for the word of God
   purgeth our affection from all fleshly love; thirdly, unto an
   emplaister, because it healeth the wounds of our sins; and fourthly,
   unto meat, because the word of God nourisheth us, and delighteth in
   heavenly love. And in like manner, like as all these things avail not
   to the sick man but if he take and receive them, in like wise the word
   of God profiteth nothing to a languishing sick man, if he hear it not
   devoutly. And as the apostle thus preached, Migdonia believed in God,
   and refused the bed of her husband. Then Carisius did so much that he
   made the apostle to be set in prison. And Migdonia went to him and
   asked him forgiveness, because he was set in prison for her sake. And
   he comforted her sweetly, and said he would suffer it debonairly. And
   then Carisius prayed the king that he would send the queen his wife's
   sister unto her, for to essay if she might turn her, and call her again
   from the christian faith. And the queen was sent thither, and when she
   saw her, and knew of so many miracles as the apostle did, she said:
   They be accursed of God that believe not in his works. Then the apostle
   taught them shortly that were there, four things; first, that they
   should love the church, honour and worship the priests, assemble them
   often in prayers, and often to hear the word of God. And when the king
   saw the queen, he said to her: Why hast thou abided there so long? And
   she then answered: I had supposed that Migdonia had been a fool, but
   she is right wise, for she hath brought me to the apostle, which hath
   made me to know the way of truth, and they be overmuch fools that
   believe not the way of truth, that is to say, that they believe in Jesu
   Christ. And never after would the queen lie with the king. And then the
   king was abashed, and said to his cousin: When I would have recovered
   thy wife I have lost mine, and my wife is worse to me than thine is to
   thee. Then the king commanded that the apostle should be brought tofore
   him, his hands and feet bound; and was commanded that he should
   reconcile the wives to their husbands. And then the apostle said to the
   king, in showing to him by three examples that, as long as he should be
   in the error of the faith they ought not to obey them. That is to wit,
   by the example of the king, by example of the tower, and by example of
   the fountain, and said to him: Thou that art king wilt have no services
   soiled ne foul, but thou hast cleanly servants and neat chamberers. And
   what weenest thou God loveth? Chastity and clean services. Am I then to
   blame if I preach to thee to love God and his servants whom he loveth?
   I have made them clean servants to him; I have founded a tower; and
   thou sayst to me that I should destroy it. Also I have dolven in the
   deep earth, and have brought forth a fountain out of the abysm, and
   thou sayst I should stop it. Then the king was angry, and commanded to
   bring forth pieces of iron burning, and made to set the apostle on them
   all naked, his feet bound. And anon by the will of our Lord, a fountain
   of water sourded and sprang up, and quenched it all. And then the king,
   by the counsel of his cousin, made him to be set in a burning furnace,
   which was made so cold that the next day he issued out all safe,
   without harm. And then thereto, he said: king, thou art nothing more
   noble, ne more mighty than be thy painters, said Carisius to the king:
   Make him to offer sacrifice to one of the gods only, in such wise that
   he fall in the ire of his God that thus delivereth him. And as they
   constrained him and how despisest thou very God and worshippest a
   painting whom thou weenest to be thy God? Like as Carisius hath said to
   thee, that my God should be angry when that I worshipped thy god. And
   if he be angered, it should be more to thy god than to me, for when
   thou shouldest ween that I worshipped thy God, I should worship mine.
   And the king said: Why speakest thou to me such words? And then the
   apostle commanded in Hebrew the devil that was within the idol that, as
   soon as he kneeled tofore the idol, he should anon break it in pieces.
   And the apostle kneeled and said: Lo! see ye that I worship, but not
   the idol; I adore, but not the metal; I worship, but not the false
   image, but I honour and worship my Lord Jesu Christ in the name of whom
   I command thee, devil, which art hid within this image, that thou break
   this false idol. And anon he molt it as wax. And then the priests came
   lowing as beasts, and the bishop of the temple lift up a glaive and run
   the apostle through and said: I shall avenge the injury of my god. And
   the king and Carisius fled away, for they saw that the people would
   avenge the apostle and burn the bishop all quick. And the christian men
   bare away the body of the apostle and buried it worshipfully. Long time
   after, about the year of our Lord two hundred and thirty, the body of
   the apostle was borne into Edessa, the city which sometime was said
   Rages, city of Media; and Alexander the Emperor bare it thither at the
   request of the Syrians. And in this city no man might harbor Jew, ne
   paynim, ne tyrant, that should live. After this Abagar, king of this
   city, desired to have an epistle written with the hand of our Lord, for
   if any men moved war against this city, they took a christian child,
   and set him on the gate, and he should there read the epistle, and the
   same day, what for the virtue of the writing of our Saviour, as for the
   merits of the apostle, the enemies fled or else made peace.

   Isidore, in the book of the Life of the Saints, saith thus of this
   apostle: Thomas, apostle and disciple of our Lord Jesu Christ, and like
   unto our Saviour, preached the Gospel unto miscreants, to them of
   Persia and of Media, to the Hircanians and Bactrians, and he entering
   into the parts of the orient, pierced through the entrails of the
   people. There demened his predication unto the title of his passion,
   and there was he pierced with a glaive and so died. And Chrysostom
   saith that when Thomas came in to the parts of the three kings which
   came to worship our Lord he baptized them, and they were made helpers
   and aiders of our Lord and of christian faith. Pray we then to this
   holy apostle, S. Thomas, that he will be moyen unto our Lord that we
   may have grace of him to amend us in this present life, that we may
   come into his everlasting bliss. Amen.
     __________________________________________________________________

                    Here followeth the Life of S. Anastasia.

   S. Anastasia was daughter to a gentleman of the Romans, but he was a
   paynim. Her mother, which was christian, was taught and informed in the
   faith by S. Chrysogony. The foresaid S. Anastasia was married unto a
   paynim named Publius, but she feigned her always to be sick, in such
   wise that she came not in his company. She went visiting the christian
   prisoners that were in diverse prisons, in poverty and foul clothing,
   and she administered to them such things as they needed, of her good.
   And therefore, her husband made her to be straitly kept, i again for S.
   Anastasia, and did do burn her the year of the incarnation of our Lord
   two hundred and four score, and made the others to die by divers
   torments; among whom there was one from whom was taken much good, and
   alway she said: At the last ye may not take from me Jesu Christ.
   Apollonia, which was a christian woman, toke the body of S. Anastasia,
   and buried it in her garden, and there did do make a fair church. Let
   us pray then unto Almighty God, that by the prayers and merits of S.
   Anastasia we may come unto his everlasting bliss. Amen.
     __________________________________________________________________

                     Here beginneth the Life of S. Eugenia.

   Eugenia, the noble virgin, which was daughter to Philip, duke of
   Alexandria, which for the emperor of Rome governed all the land of
   Egypt. Eugenia issued privily out of her father's palace with two
   servants, and she went into an abbey in the habit and array of a man,
   in which abbey she Ied so holy a life that at the last she was made
   abbot of the same. It happed so that no man knew that she was a woman,
   yet there was a lady accused her of adultery tofore the judge which was
   her own father. Eugenia was put in prison for to be judged to death. At
   the last she said to her father much thing for to draw him to the faith
   of Jesu Christ. She rent her coat and showed to him that she was a
   woman and daughter of him that held her in prison, and so she converted
   her father unto the christian faith. And he was after an holy bishop,
   and at the hour that he sang his mass he was beheaded for the faith of
   Jesu Christ; and the lady that had falsely accused Eugenia was burnt
   with fire of hell with all her party. And after that, Claudia and her
   children came to Rome, and much people were by them converted, and many
   virgins by Eugenia, which Eugenia was much tormented in divers manners,
   and at the last by the sword accomplished her martyrdom, and thus made
   the offering of her proper body to our Lord Jesu Christ, qui est
   benedictus in secula seculorum. Amen.
     __________________________________________________________________

               Here followeth the Life of S. Stephen Protomartyr.

   Stephen is as much to say in Greek as crowned, and in Hebrew example to
   other for to suffer. Or Stephen is as much to say as nobly and truly
   speaking, teaching and governing, or as a friend of the widow women;
   and he was deputed of the apostles to keep the widows. Then he was
   crowned, for he began first to be a martyr, example for the ensample of
   his patience and good life, nobly speaking for right noble predication,
   and well governing for the good enseignments and teaching of widows.

   S. Stephen was one of the seven deacons in the ministry of the
   apostles. for when the number grew of people converted, some began to
   murmur against the Jews that were converted because that the widows and
   wives of them were refused to serve or because they were more grieved
   every day than the other in service. For the apostles did this because
   they should be more ready to preach the word of God. When the apostles
   saw their great murmur, they assembled them all together, and said: It
   is not right that we leave the word of God for to administer and serve
   at the tables, and the gloss saith that the feeding of the soul is
   better than the meat of the body. And consider ye fair brethren, men of
   good renown among you, that be replenished of the Holy Ghost and of
   wisdom, what we shall establish upon this work so that they administer
   and serve, and we shall be in prayer and preaching. And this word
   pleased to them all, and they chose seven men, of whom the blessed
   Stephen was the first and the master, and sith he brought them to the
   apostles, and they set their hands upon them, and ordained them. And
   Stephen, full of grace and strength made great demonstrances and great
   signs to the people. Then the Jews took him and would surmount him in
   disputing, and assailed him for to overcome him in three manners, that
   was by bringing witnesses, by disputations, and by torments. And in
   every each one of them was aid and help given to him from heaven. In
   the first, the Holy Ghost administered his words, in the second, the
   angelic face that feared the false witnesses. In the third, he saw Jesu
   Christ ready to help him, which comforted him to his martyrdom. In
   every battle he had three things; the assault in battle, the aid given,
   and the victory. And in advising and beholding shortly the history, we
   may well see all these things. As the blessed Stephen did many things,
   and preached oft to the people, the Jews made the first battle to him
   for to overcome him by disputations. And some arose of the synagogue
   called libertines, of a religion so named of them that were the sons of
   them that had been in bondage and were made free, and thus they that
   first repugned against the faith were of a bond and thrall lineage, and
   also they of Cyrenia and Alexandria, and of them that were of Cilicia
   and Asia, all these disputed with Stephen. This was the first battle,
   and then he putteth the victory after, and they might not resist his
   wisdom, for the Holy Ghost spake in him: and when they saw that by this
   manner they might not overcome him they returned maliciously. And at
   the second time because they might overcome by false witnesses, they
   brought two false witnesses for to accuse him of four blames, and
   brought him to the judgment. And then the false men accused him of four
   things, that was of blaspheming of God in the law of Moses, in the
   tabernacle, and in the temple, and this was the second battle. And then
   all they that were in judgment saw the face of S. Stephen like as the
   face of an angel: and this was by the help of God, and this was the
   victory of the second battle. For when the false witnesses had all
   said, the prince of the priests said to him: What sayst thou? Then
   Stephen excused him by order of all that which the false witnesses had
   said. And first of the blaspheming of God, saying: God that spake to
   our fathers and prophets, that is God of glory, and praised him in
   three things after this word glory, which is expounded right sweetly.
   The God of glory is given of glory, as it is said in the book of Kings:
   Whosoever shall see my name, I shall glorify him. The God of glory may
   be said, containing glory, as is said in the Proverbs, the eighth
   chapter: Riches and glory be with me, the God of glory, to whom glory
   is due. And thus praised he God in three manners; in that he is
   glorious, glorifying, and to be glorified. And after he excused him of
   the blame in Moses, in praising him much, and especially in three
   things, that is to wit: of fervour of love, for he slew the Egyptian
   that smote the Hebrew, and of the miracles that he did in Egypt or
   desert, and of the familiarity of God, when he spake to him many times
   amiably. And after this he excused him of the third blame that was in
   the law, in praising the law in three manners; first because of the
   giver, that was God; the second of the minister, which was Moses, that
   was a great prophet; and the third because of the for it giveth life
   perdurable. And after, he purged him of the blame of the tabernacle,
   and of the temple, in praising the tabernacle in four manners, one was
   because he was commanded of God to make it, and was showed in vision it
   was accomplished by Moses, and that the ark of witness was therein, and
   he said that the temple succeeded tabernacle. And the blessed Stephen
   purged him of that which was laid to him, of which the Jews saw they
   might not overcome him in that manner. And then they took the third
   battle against him, that they should surmount him by torments. And when
   the blessed S. Stephen saw this, he would keep the commandment of our
   Lord, and enforced him to them in three manners; that was by shame, by
   dread, and by love. First by shame in blaming the hardness of their
   hearts, and said to them: Ye contrary alway the Holy Ghost by your hard
   heads, and hearts not piteous. Like as your fathers that persecuted the
   prophets, and slew them that showed the coming of God. And the gloss
   saith that in three manners they were malicious. clothes taken from the
   altar and laid on them that were sick, were a medicine to many.

   For as it is said in the eighth chapter of the same book, these flowers
   taken upon the altar of S. Stephen were laid on the eyes of a woman
   that was blind, and anon she had again her sight. And also said he in
   the same book that a man that was master of a city, and was named
   Marcial, and was a paynim and would not be converted; and it happed
   that he was strongly sick, and his son in law that was a right good
   man, came into the church of S. Stephen, and took the flowers, and laid
   them under the head of his lord; and anon, when he had slept thereupon,
   on the morning he cried that the bishop should be brought to him, and
   the bishop was not in the town, but the priest came to him and bade him
   to believe in God, and baptized him; and ever as long as he lived after
   he had alway in his mouth: Jesu Christ receive my spirit. And yet he
   wist not that those words were the words that S. Stephen last spake.
   And also he rehearseth another miracle in the same place, that a lady
   called Petronia had been sick much grievously, and had sought many
   remedies for to be healed of her malady, but she felt no heal. But in
   the end she had counsel of a Jew, which gave to her a ring with a
   stone, and that she should bind this ring with a lace to her bare
   flesh, and by the virtue of that stone she should be whole. And when
   she saw that this helped her not, she went to the church of the
   protomartyr, and prayed the blessed S. Stephen for her health, and
   anon, without breaking of the lace or of the ring, the ring fell down
   to the ground, and she felt herself anon all whole.

   Item, the same recounteth another miracle, not less marvellous: that in
   Csarea of Cappadocia, was a lady much noble, of whom the husband was
   dead, but she had ten children, seven sons and three daughters. And on
   a time, when they had angered their mother, she cursed them, and the
   divine vengeance ensued suddenly the malediction of the mother, so that
   all the children were smitten with one semblable and horrible sickness
   on all their members, for which thing they might not dwell in the
   country for shame and for the sorrow that they had, and began to go
   follily through the world. And in whatsoever country they went, ever
   each man beheld them. And it happed that two of them, that is to wit a
   brother and a sister came to Hippo, and the brother was named Paul, and
   the sister Palladia. And there they found Austin the bishop and told to
   him and recounted what was happed. Then they haunted the church of S.
   Stephen by the space of fifteen days, and it was tofore Easter, and
   they prayed strongly the saint for their health. And on Easter-day when
   the people was present Paul entered suddenly within the chancel and put
   him to prayer by great devotion, and with great reverence tofore the
   altar, and as they that were there abode upon the end of the thing, he
   arose up apparently all whole of his trembling. Then S. Austin took him
   and showed him to the people, and said that on the morn he would tell
   them the case. And as he spake to the people the sister was there
   trembling on all her members, and she arose up and entered into the
   chancel of S. Stephen, and anon she slept, and after arose suddenly all
   whole, and was showed to the people as was done tofore of her brother,
   and then graces and thankings were given to S. Stephen for the health
   of them both.

   When Orosius came from Jerusalem he brought to S. Austin of the relics
   of S. Stephen of whom many miracles were showed and done. It is to wit
   that the blessed S. Stephen suffered not death on the day of his feast,
   but it was on the day that his Invention is on, in the month of August.
   And if it be demanded why the feast is changed, it shall be said when
   his Invention shall be said. And this may suffice you for this present,
   for the church will also ordain the feasts which follow the nativity of
   Jesu Christ, for two causes. The first is to Jesu Christ which is head
   and spouse, to the end that the accompanies be joined to him, for Jesu
   Christ spouse of the church in this world adjoineth to him three
   companies, of which companies is said in the Canticles: My white soul
   and ruddy, chosen of thousands. The white is as to S. John the
   Evangelist, a precious confessor, and the ruddy or red is as to S.
   Stephen the first martyr, and chosen of thousands, is to the virginal S
   John company of the innocents. The second reason is that the church
   assembleth also together, the manners of the martyrs, the same by will
   and by work, the second by will and not by deed, the third by deed and
   not by will. The first was the blessed Stephen, the second was in S.
   John the Evangelist, the third was in saints and glorious innocents
   which for God suffered passion.
     __________________________________________________________________

                 And next followeth of S. John the Evangelist.

   John is expounded the grace of God, or he in whom grace is, or to whom
   it is given of our Lord, and therefore been understood four privileges
   that be in the blessed S. John. The first was the noble love of Jesu
   Christ, for he loved him more than the other and showed to him of
   greater love, and therefore he is said the grace of God, also as
   gracious God. And to him he was more gracious than to Peter, for he
   loved him much, but he is love of courage and of sign, and this that is
   of signs is double. That one is for to show familiarity and that other
   is in giving benefices. As to the first he loved that one and the other
   equally, as to the second he loved more John, and as to the third, he
   loved more Peter. The second was virginity when he was chosen virgin of
   God, and therefore it is said in what is that grace, for grace of
   virginity is in a virgin, and when he would marry he was called of God.
   The third is the revelation of the secrets of our Lord, therefore it is
   said to whom grace is given, for to him was given to know many secrets
   and profound, as of the divinity of the Son of God, and of the end of
   the world. The fourth is the recommendation of the mother of God, which
   gift of grace was given of our Lord, for this gift was given to him
   when the mother was given to him into keeping. And Miletus, Bishop of
   Liege, wrote his life, the which Isidore abridged and set it in the
   book of nativities of the life and the death of holy fathers.

   S. John the apostle and evangelist was son of Zebedee, which had
   married the third sister of our Lady to wife, and that was brother to
   S. James of Galicia. This said John signifieth as much as the grace of
   God, and well might he have such a name, for he had of our Lord four
   graces above the other apostles. The first is that he was beloved of
   our Lord. The second was, that our Lord kept to him his virginity like
   as S. Jerome saith, for he was at his wedding, and he abode a clean
   virgin. The third is that our Lord made him to have much great
   revelation and knowledge of his divinity, and of the finishing of the
   world, like as it appeareth in the beginnings of his evangel, and in
   the Apocalypse. The fourth grace is that our Lord committed to him in
   especial the keeping of his sweet mother. He was, after the ascension
   of our Lord, in Jerusalem with the apostles and others, and after that
   they were, by the ordinance of the Holy Ghost, confirmed in the
   christian faith by the universal world, S. John came into Greece where
   he conversed and converted much people and founded many churches in the
   christian faith as well by miracles as by doctrine.

   In this time Domitian was Emperor of Rome, which made right great
   persecutions unto christian men, and did do take S. John, and did him
   to be brought to Rome and made him to be cast into a vat or a ton full
   of hot oil in the presence of the senators, of which he issued out, by
   the help of God, more pure and more fair, without feeling of any more
   heat or chauffing, than he entered in. After this that emperor saw that
   he ceased not to preach the christian faith, he sent him into exile
   unto an isle called Patmos. There was S. John alone, and was visited of
   angels and governed; there wrote he by the revelation of our Lord the
   Apocalypse, which contained the secrets of holy church and of the world
   to come.

   In this same year was Domitian the emperor, for his evils, put to
   death, and all that he had done was revoked by the senators and
   defeated, and thus was S. John brought again from his exile with great
   honour into Ephesus; and all the people of Ephesus came against him
   singing and saying: Blessed be he that cometh in the name of our Lord.
   In that way he raised a woman which was named Drusiana, which had much
   loved S. John and well kept his commandments. And her friends brought
   her tofore S. John all weeping and saving to him: Lo! here is Drusiana
   which much loved thee and did thy commandments, and is dead, and
   desired nothing so much as thy return, and that she might see thee
   tofore her death. Now thou art come hither and she may not see thee. S.
   John had great pity on her that was dead, and of the people that wept
   for her, and commanded that they should set down the bier, and unbind
   and take away the clothes from her. And when they had so done he said,
   hearing all, with a loud voice, Drusiana, my Lord God Jesu Christ
   ariseth thee; Drusiana arise, and go into thy house, and make ready for
   me some refection. Anon she arose and went in to her house for to do
   the commandment of S. John, and the people made three hours long a
   great noise and cry, saying there is but one God, and that is he whom
   S. John preacheth.

   It happed on another day that Crato the philosopher made a great
   assembly of people in the midst of the city, for to show to them how
   they ought to despise the world. And he had ordained two young men
   brethren which were much rich, and had made them to sell their
   patrimony and therewith to buy precious stones, the which these two
   young men brake in the presence of the people, for to show how these
   precious and great riches of the world be soon destroyed. That same
   time S. John passed by, and said to Crato the philosopher: This manner
   for to despise the world that thou showest is vain and foolish
   demonstrance, for it seeketh to have the praising of the world, and God
   reproveth it. My good master Jesu Christ said to a man that demanded of
   him how he might come to everlasting life, that he should go and sell
   his goods and give it, and great dread to lose that which he hath so
   dear and with great pain gotten Sixthly, avaunting and praising, for
   the riches give occasion to be vain glorious and to praise and glorify
   himself. And by this it appeareth that presently is lost the weal of
   humility, without which the grace of God may not be had, and thus is
   gotten, for the world to come, pain and torment by over-great pride.
   Scripture then, nature, creature, fortune, business and care, avaunting
   and praising, ought to make us withdraw for to love riches. S. John
   approved to these two men his doctrine, with his miracles, to be true.
   And ye in the name of him did miracles tofore that ye were sorry and
   repented you of that ye had given your riches to poor people. Now is
   that grace from you departed and ye become meschant and wretches, which
   were in the faith strong and mighty. And tofore, the evil spirits had
   fear and dread of you, and by your commandment they issued out of
   bodies human, now have ye fear and dread of them and be become their
   servants. For whoso loveth the riches of this world, he is servant unto
   a devil named Mammon, and is bond and serf in keeping the riches in
   which he setteth his affiance. And hereof saith the Holy Ghost by the
   prophet David: In imagine pertransit homo, etc.: Vainly is the man
   distroubled which assembleth treasure in this world, and knoweth not
   for whom it is, for when he shall die he shall bear nothing with him,
   and he wotteth not who shall dispend it, for naked we came upon the
   earth and all naked shall we re-enter into it. And to a meschant man it
   sufficeth not when he hath enough, but he is busy day and night to get
   more without rest. For the riches make him fearful to lose that he hath
   gotten, and bringeth to him many businesses and evil rest in making
   worldly delights. And he, dispurveyed, death cometh which taketh all
   from him, and beareth nothing with him save his proper sins. When S.
   John had said all this there was brought tofore him a young man dead,
   which only had been in marriage thirty days. And his mother and friends
   wept sore, which tofore S. John kneeled down on their knees, praying
   him that he would raise him to life. S. John had great pity, and when
   he had long wept he bade to loose and unbind the body and said: O
   Satheus, which wert blinded with fleshly love, soon thou hast lost thy
   soul, and because thou knewest not thy maker Jesu Christ, thou art
   fallen ignorantly into the leash of the right evil fiends, wherefore I
   weep and pray that thou mayst be releved from death to life, and show
   thou to these twain, Actius and Eugenius, what great glory they have
   lost and what pain they have deserved. Anon Satheus releved him in
   yielding thankings to S. John, and blamed much the two disciples in
   saying: I saw your two angels weep and the devils demene joy of your
   perdition, also I saw the realm of heaven made ready for you and full
   of all delights, and ye have follily gotten for you the place of hell,
   dark and tenebrous, full of dragons and of all pains, and therefore it
   behoveth you to pray to the apostle of God that he remise and bring you
   again to your salvation, like as he hath revived me goodly. And among
   all other pains, this Satheus reciteth these that be contained in two
   verses following:

   Vermes et umbrae, flagellum, frigus et ignis, Dmonis aspectus,
   scelerum confusio, luctus.

   that is to say: worms, darkness, scourges, cold, heat, sight of devil,
   confusion of sins, and wailing. Anon then these two men by right great
   repentance prayed S. John that he would pray for them, to whom S. John
   answered that they should do penance thirty days long, and pray to God
   that the rods of gold and the precious stones might return to their
   first proper natures. After these thirty days they came to S. John and
   said to him: Fair father, ye have always preached misericord and mercy,
   and commanded that one should pardon another his trespass, we be
   contrite and repentant of our sins and weep with our eyes for this evil
   worldly covetise, the which we have by them received, and therefore we
   pray you that ye have mercy on us. And S. John answered: Our Lord God
   when he made mention of the sinner he said, I will not the death of the
   sinner, but that he be converted and live, for great joy is in Heaven
   of a sinner repentant. And therefore know ye that he hath received your
   repentance, go ye forth and bear the rods and stones thither where ye
   took them, for they be returned to their first nature. Thus received
   they the grace that they had lost, so that after they did great
   miracles in the name of our Lord Jesu Christ.

   And then after this when the blessed apostle S. John had preached
   through all Asia, and sown the word of Christ, they that worshipped
   idols moved the people against S. John, and came and drove him into the
   temple of Diana for to constrain him to do sacrifice unto that idol. To
   whom S. John said: Sith ye believe that your goddess Diana hath so
   great power, call ye upon her and require her by her power she subvert
   and overthrow the Church of Christ, and if she so do, I shall do
   sacrifice to her, and if she do it not, then let me pray unto my God
   Jesu Christ that he overthrow her temple, and if he so do then believe
   ye in him. To this sentence the most part of the people consented, and
   so they p for I shall yield account for thee to Jesu Christ, and truly
   I shall gladly die for thee like as Jesu Christ died for us. Turn again
   my son, turn again, Jesu Christ hath sent me to thee. And when he heard
   him thus speak he abode with a heavy cheer and wept, repenting him
   bitterly, and fell down to the feet of the apostle, and for penance
   kissed his hand. And the apostle fasted and prayed to God for him, and
   gat for him remission of his sins and forgiveness, and he lived so
   virtuously after, that S. John ordained him to be a bishop.

   Also it is read in the same history that S. John on a time entered into
   a bath for to wash him, and there he found Cerinthus an heretic, whom
   as soon as he saw he eschewed, and went out of it saying: Let us flee
   and go hence lest the bath fall upon us in which Cerinthus the enemy of
   truth washeth him, and as soon as he was out the bath fell down.

   Cassiodorus saith that a man had given to S. John a partridge living,
   and he held it in his hand stroking and playing with it otherwhile for
   his recreation. And on a time a young man passed by with his fellowship
   and saw him play with his bird, which said to his fellows, laughing:
   See how the yonder old man playeth with a bird like a child. Which S.
   John knew anon, by the Holy Ghost, what he had said, and called the
   young man to him and demanded him what he held in his hand, and he said
   a bow. What dost thou withal? said S. John. And the young man said: We
   shoot birds and beasts therewith, to whom the apostle demanded how and
   in what manner. Then the young man bent his bow and held it in his hand
   bent, and when the apostle said no more to him he unbent his bow again.
   Then said the apostle to him: Why hast thou unbent thy bow? And he
   said: Because if it should be long bent it should be the weaker for to
   shoot with it. Then said the apostle, So son, it fareth by mankind and
   by frailty in contemplation, if it should alway be bent it should be
   too weak, and therefor otherwhile it is expedient to have recreation.
   The eagle is the bird that flyeth highest, and most clearly beholdeth
   the sun, and yet by necessity of nature him behoveth to descend low,
   right so when mankind withdraweth him a little from contemplation, he
   after putteth himself higher by a renewed strength, and he burneth then
   more fervently in heavenly things.

   S. John wrote his gospels after the other Evangelists, the year after
   the ascension of our Lord sixty-six, after this that the venerable Bede
   saith. And when he was required and prayed of the bishops of the
   country of Ephesus to write them, S. John prayed also to them, that
   they should fast and pray in their dioceses three days for him to the
   end that he might truly write them. S. Jerome saith of this glorious
   apostle S. John, that, when he was so old, so feeble and so unmighty
   that his disciples sustained and bare him in going to church, and as of
   times he rested, he said to his disciples: Fair children, love ye
   together, and each of you love other. And then his disciples demanded
   why and wherefore he said to them so oft such words. He answered to
   them and said: Our Lord had so commanded, and whosomever accomplished
   well this commandment it should suffice him for to be saved. And
   finally after that he had founded many churches and had ordained
   bishops and priests in them, and confirmed them by his predication in
   the christian faith, the year sixty-eight after the resurrection of
   Jesu Christ, for he was thirty-one years old when our Lord was
   crucified, and lived after sixty-eight years, and thus was all his age
   ninety-nine years. Then came our Lord with his disciples to him and
   said: Come my friend to me, for it is time that thou come, eat and be
   fed at my table with thy brethren. Then S. John arose up and said to
   our Lord Jesu Christ. that he had desired it long time, and began to
   go. Then said our Lord to him: On Sunday next coming thou shalt come to
   me. That Sunday the people came all to the church, which was founded in
   his name and consecrate on that one side of Ephesus, and from midnight
   forth he ceased not to preach to the people that they should establish
   them and be stedfast in the christian faith and obeissant to the
   commandments of God. And after this he said the mass, and houseled and
   communed the people: and after that the mass was finished he bade and
   did do make a pit or a sepulture tofore the altar; and after that he
   had taken his leave and commended the people to God, he descended down
   into the pit or sepulture tofore the altar, and held up his hands to
   heaven and said: Sweet Lord Jesu Christ, I yield me unto thy desire,
   and thank thee that thou hast vouchsafed to call me to thee, if it
   please thee, receive me for to be with my brethren, with whom thou hast
   summoned me, open to me the gate of the life permanable, and lead me to
   the feast of thy well and best dressed meats. Thou art Christ the son
   of the living God, which by the commandment of the father hast saved
   the world, to thee I render and yield grace and thankings, world
   without end, thou knowest well that I have desired thee with all my
   heart. After that he had made his prayer much amorously and piteously,
   anon came upon him great clearness and light, and so great brightness
   that none might see him, and when this light and brightness was gone
   and departed, there was nothing found in the pit or grave but manna,
   which came springing from under upward, like as sand in a fountain or
   springing well, where much people have been delivered of many diseases
   and sicknesses by the merits and prayers of this glorious saint. Some
   say and affirm that he died without pain of death, and that he was in
   that clearness borne into heaven body and soul, whereof God knoweth the
   certainty. And we, that be yet here beneath in this misery, ought to
   pray devoutly to him that he would impetre and get to us the grace of
   our Lord which is blessed in secula seculorum. Amen.

   There was a king, a holy confessor and virgin, named S. Edward, which
   had a special devotion unto S. John Evangelist, and it happed that this
   holy king was at the hallowing of a church dedicate in the honour of
   God and of this holy apostle; and it was that S. John in likeness of a
   pilgrim came to this king and demanded his alms in the name of S. John,
   and the king not having his almoner by him, ne his chamberlain, of whom
   he might have somewhat to give him, took his ring which he bare on his
   finger and gave it to the pilgrim. After these many days, it happened
   two pilgrims of England for to be in the Holy Land, and S. John
   appeared to them and bade them to bear this ring to their king and to
   greet him well in his name, and to tell him that he gave it to S. John
   in likeness of a pilgrim, and that he should make him ready to depart
   out of this world, for he should not long abide here but come into
   everlasting bliss, and so vanished from them. And anon as he was gone
   they had great lust to sleep, and laid them down and slept, and this
   was in the Holy Land, and when they awoke they looked about them and
   knew not where they were. And they saw flocks of sheep and shepherds
   keeping them, to whom they went to know the way, and to demand where
   they were, and when they asked them they spake English and said that
   they were in England, in Kent on Barham Down. And then History they
   thanked God and S. John for their good speed, and came to this holy
   king S. Edward on Christmas day, and delivered to him the ring and did
   their errand, whereof the king was abashed, and thanked God and the
   holy saint that he had warning for to depart. And on the vigil of the
   Epiphany next after he died and departed holily out of this world, and
   is buried in the Abbey of Westminster by London where is yet to this
   day the same ring.

   Isidore, in the book of the life and death of holy saints and fathers,
   saith this: S. John the Evangelist transformed and turned rods of trees
   into fine gold, the stones and gravel of the sea into precious gems and
   ouches, the small broken pieces of gems he reformed into their first
   nature, he raised a widow from death, and brought again the soul a
   young man into his body, he drank venom without hurt or peril, and them
   that had been dead by the same he recovered into the state of life.
     __________________________________________________________________

                  Here followeth the History of the Innocents.

   The Innocents be called innocents for three reasons. First, by cause
   and reason of life, and by reason of pain, and by reason of innocence.
   By reason of life they be said innocents because they had an innocent
   life. They grieved nobody, neither God, by inobedience, ne their
   neighbours by untruth, ne by conceiving of any sin, and therefore it is
   said in the psalter: The innocents and righteous have joined them to
   me. The innocents by their life and righteousness in the faith, by
   reason of pain, for they suffered death innocently and wrongly, whereof
   David saith: They have shed the blood of innocents by reason of
   innocency that they had, because that in this martyrdom they were
   baptized and made clean of the original sin, of which innocence is said
   in the psalter: Keep thou innocency of baptism and see equity of good
   works.

   Holy church maketh feast of the Innocents which were put to death
   because of our Lord Jesu Christ. For Herod Ascalonita for to find and
   put to death our Lord which was born in Bethlehem, he did do slay all
   the children in Bethlehem and there about, from the age of two years
   and under unto one day, unto the sum of one hundred and forty-four
   thousand children. For to understand which Herod it was that so cruelly
   did do put so many children to death, it is to wit that there were
   three Herods, and all three were cruel tyrants, and were in their time
   of great fame and much renowned for their great malice. The first was
   Herod Ascalonita: he reigned in Jerusalem when our Lord was born. The
   second was Herod Antipas, to whom Pilate sent Jesu Christ in the time
   of his passion, and he did do smite off S. John Baptist's head. The
   third was Herod Agrippa, which did do smite off S. James's head, said
   in Galicia, and set S. Peter in prison. But now let us come to this
   first Herod that did do slay the innocent children. His father was
   named Antipater as history scholastic saith, and was king of Idumea and
   paynim; he took a wife which was niece to the king of Arabia, on whom
   he had three sons and a daughter, of whom that one was named Herod
   Ascalonita. This Herod served so well to Julian the emperor of Rome
   that he gave to him the realm of Jerusalem. Then lost the Jews kings of
   their lineage, and then was showed the prophecy of the birth of our
   Lord. This Herod Ascalonita had six sons, Antipater, Alexander,
   Aristobulus, Archelaus, Herod Antipas, and Philip. Of these children,
   Herod sent Alexander and Aristobulus to school to Rome, and Alexander
   became a wise and subtle advocate. And when they were come from school
   again they began to enter into words against Herod their father, to
   whom he would leave his realm after him, wherefore their father was
   angry with them, and put tofore them Antipater their brother for to
   come to the realm. Upon that, incontinent they treated of the death of
   their father, wherefore their father enchased them away, and they went
   again to Rome and complained of their father to the emperor.

   Anon after this came the three kings in to Jerusalem, and demanded
   where the king of Jews was, that was new born. Herod when he heard
   this, he had great dread lest any were born of the true lineage of the
   kings of the Jews, and that he were the very true heir, and of whom he
   might be chased out of the realm. And when he had demanded of the three
   kings how they had had knowledge of the new king, they answered by a
   star being in the air, which was not naturally fixed in the heaven as
   the others were. Then he prayed them that they would return to him
   after that they had worshipped and seen this new king, that he might go
   after and worship the child. This said he fraudulently, for he thought
   to slay him. After that the three kings were gone without bringing him
   any tidings, he thought that anon he would do slay all the children
   newly born in Bethlehem and thereabouts, among whom he thought to slay
   Jesu Christ. But his thought was empeshed and let, for the emperor sent
   to him a citation that he should come to Rome for to answer to the
   accusation that Aristobulus and Alexander, his two sons, had made
   against him, and therefore he durst not put then the children to death,
   to the end that he should not be accused of so cruel a deed with his
   other trespasses; so he was in going to Rome and abiding there, and in
   coming, more than half a year, and in that while Jesus was borne into
   Egypt. When Herod came to Rome the emperor ordained that his sons
   should do him honour and obey him, and he should leave his realm after
   his death where it best pleased him. Upon this, when he was come again,
   and felt himself confirmed of the realm, he was more hardy to slay the
   children than he had tofore thought. Then he sent into Bethlehem and
   did do slay all the children that were of the age of two years, because
   it was passed more than a year that the three kings had told him
   tidings of the king of Jews new-born. But wherefore then did he do slay
   the children that were but one night old? Hereto S. Austin saith that
   Herod doubted that Jesus, to whom the stars served, might make himself
   some younger than he was. After this came upon Herod a right vengeance,
   for like as he dissevered many mothers from their children, in like
   wise was he dissevered from his children. It happed that he had
   suspicion upon his two sons, Alexander and Aristobulus; for one of his
   servants said to him that Alexander had promised to him great gifts if
   he would give to his father to drink poison or venom, and the barber
   said to the king that he had promised him a great thing if, when he
   made the king's beard, he would cut his throat, and for this cause
   Herod did do slay them both, and ordained in his testament that
   Antipater, his son, should be king after him. Upon this Antipater, his
   son, had great desire to come to the realm, and was accused that he had
   made ready venom for to empoison his father, for a maid, a servant,
   afterward showed the same venom to the king, wherefore he did do put
   his son Antipater in prison. When Augustus, the emperor of Rome, heard
   say that Herod ruled thus his children, he then said: I had liefer be
   the swine or hog of Herod than his son, for he which is strange in his
   living spareth his swine, and he put to death his sons.

   Herod when he was seventy years old he fell in a grievous malady by
   right vengeance of God, for a strong fever took him within and without;
   he had his flesh hot and dry chauffed, his feet swelled and became of a
   pale colour. The plants of his feet under began to rot, in such wise
   that vermin issued out, and a stench issued so great out of his breath
   and of his members without forth, that no persons might suffer it. On
   that other side he had great grief and annoy of the anger that he had
   for his sons. When the masters and physicians saw that he might not be
   holpen by no medicine, then they said that this malady was a vengeance
   of God, and for as much as he heard say that the Jews were glad of his
   malady and sickness, therefore he did do assemble the most noble of the
   Jews out of the good towns, and did do put them in prison and said to
   Salome, his sister, and to Alexander her husband: I know well that the
   Jews shall be glad of my death, but if ye will do my counsel and obey
   to me I shall mowe have great plaint and wailing of many that shall
   beweep my death, in this wise that I shall show you. Anon as I shall be
   dead, do ye to be slain all the noble Jews that be in prison, and thus
   shall be no house of the Jews, but they shall, against their will,
   beweep my death. And he had a custom to eat an apple last after meat.
   On a time he demanded a knife for to pare the apple, and one delivered
   him a knife, and shortly he took it, as all despaired, and would have
   slain himself, but anon Aciabus, his neighbour, caught his hand and
   cried loud, that it was supposed that the king had died. Antipater his
   son, which was in prison, had heard the cry and weened his father had
   been dead. He was glad, and promised to the keepers of the prison great
   gifts for to let him out. When Herod knew this by his servant, he
   travailed the more grievously because his son was more glad of his
   death than of his sickness, and anon did do slay him, and ordained in
   his testament, Archelaus to be king after him, and he lived but five
   days after and died in great misery of annoy. Salome, his sister, did
   not his commandment of the Jews that were in prison, but let them go
   out. And Archelaus became king after Herod his father, which as to
   strangers in the battle he was fortunate and happy, but as to his own
   people he was right unhappy. Then I return again; after that, Joseph
   was gone with our Lord into Egypt and was there seven years, unto the
   death of Herod. And after the prophecy of Isaiah, at the entering of
   our Lord into Egypt, the idols fell down, for like as at departing of
   the children out of Egypt, in every house the oldest son of the
   Egyptians lay one dead, in like wise at the coming of our Lord lay down
   the idols in the temples.

   Cassiodorus saith in the History tripartite, in Hermopolin of Thebaid
   there was a tree called Persidis, which is medicinal for all
   sicknesses, for if the leaf or rind of that tree be bound to the neck
   of the sick person, it healeth him anon, and as the blessed Virgin Mary
   fled with her son, that tree bowed down and worshipped Jesu Christ.
   Also Macrobius saith in a chronicle that, a young son of Herod was
   nourished at that time, and he was slain among the other children. And
   then was fulfilled the prophecy saying: The voice is heard in Rama of
   great weeping and wailing, that the sorrowful mothers wept for the
   death of their children, and might not be comforted, because they were
   not alive.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Here followeth the Life of S. Thomas, martyr, of Canterbury, and first the
                            exposition of his name.

   Thomas is as much to say as abisme or double, or trenched and hewn, he
   was an abisme profound in humility, as it appeared in the hair that he
   wore, and in washing of the feet of the poor people, double in
   prelation that was in word and in ensample, and hewn and trenched in
   his passion. S. Thomas the martyr was son to Gilbert Beckett, a burgess
   of the city of London, and was born in the place where as now standeth
   the church called S. Thomas of Acre. And this Gilbert was a good devout
   man, and took the cross upon him, and went on pilgrimage into the Holy
   Land, and had a servant with his knees. And on a Trinity Sunday
   received he his dignity, and there was at that time the king with many
   a great lord and sixteen bishops. And from thence was sent the abbot of
   Evesham to the pope with other clerks for the pall which he gave and
   brought to him, and he full meekly received it. And under his habit he
   ware the habit of a monk, and so was he under within forth a monk, and
   outward a clerk, and did great abstinence making his body lean and his
   soul fat. And he used to be well served at his table, and took but
   little refection thereof, and lived holily in giving good ensample.

   After this, many times the king went over into Normandy, and in his
   absence always S. Thomas had the rule of his son and of the realm,
   which was governed so well that the king could him great thanks, and
   then abode long in this realm. And when so was that the king did any
   thing against the franchise and liberties of holy church, S. Thomas
   would ever withstand it to his power. And on a time when the sees of
   London and of Winchester were vacant and void, the king kept them both
   long in his hand for to have the profits of them; wherefore S. Thomas
   was heavy, and came to the king and desired him to give those two
   bishopricks to some virtuous men. And anon the king granted to him his
   desire and ordained one master Roger, bishop of Winchester, and the
   Earl of Gloucester's son, bishop of London, named Sir Robert. And anon
   after S. Thomas hallowed the abbey of Reading, which the first Henry
   founded. And that same year he translated S. Edward, king and confessor
   at Westminster, where he was laid in a rich shrine. And in some short
   time after, by the enticement of the devil, fell great debate,
   variance, and strife, between the king and S. Thomas, and the king sent
   for all the bishops to appear tofore him at Westminster at a certain
   day, at which day they assembled tofore him, whom he welcomed, and
   after said to them how that the archbishop would destroy his law, and
   not suffer him to enjoy such things as his predecessors had used tofore
   him. Whereto S. Thomas answered that he never intended to do thing that
   should displease the king as far as it touched not the franchise and
   liberties of holy church. Then the king rehearsed how he would not
   suffer clerks that were thieves to have the execution of the law; to
   which S. Thomas said, that he ought not to execute them, but they
   longeth to the correction of holy church, and other divers points; to
   which S. Thomas would not agree. To the which the king said: Now I see
   well that thou wouldest foredo the laws of this land which have been
   used in the days of my predecessors, but it shall not lie in thy power,
   and so the king being wroth departed. Then the bishops all counselled
   S. Thomas to follow the king's intent, or else the land should be in
   great trouble; and in like wise the lords temporal that were his
   friends counselled him the same, and S. Thomas said: I take God to
   record it was never mine intent to displease the king, or to take any
   thing that longeth to his right or honour. And then the lords were glad
   and brought him to the king to Oxenford, and the king deigned not to
   speak to him. And then the king called all the lords spiritual and
   temporal tofore him, and said he would have all the laws of his
   forefathers there new confirmed, and there they were confirmed by all
   the lords spiritual and temporal. And after this the king charged them
   for to come to him to Clarendon to his parliament at a certain day
   assigned, on pain to run in his indignation, and at that time so
   departed. And this parliament was holden at Clarendon, the eleventh
   year of the king's reign, and the year of our Lord eleven hundred and
   sixty-four. At this parliament were many lords which all were against
   S. Thomas. And then the king sitting in his parliament, in the presence
   of all his lords, demanded them if they would abide and keep the laws
   that had been used in his forefathers' days. Then S. Thomas spake for
   the part of holy church, and said: All old laws that be good and
   rightful, and not against our mother holy church, I grant with good
   will to keep them. And then the king said that he would not leave one
   point of his law, and waxed wroth with S. Thomas. And then certain
   bishops required S. Thomas to obey to the king's desire and will, and
   S. Thomas desired respite to know the laws, and then to give him an
   answer. And when he understood them all, to some he consented, but many
   he denied and would never be agreeable to them, wherefore the king was
   wroth and said he would hold and keep them like as his predecessors had
   done before him, and would not minish one point of them. Then S. Thomas
   said to the king with full great sorrow and heavy cheer, Now, my most
   dear lord and gracious king, have pity on us of holy church, your
   bedemen, and give to us respite for a certain time. And thus departed
   each man. And S. Thomas went to Winchester, and there prayed our Lord
   devoutly for holy church, and to give him aid and strength for to
   defend it, for utterly he determined to abide by the liberties and
   franchise, and fell down on his knees and said, full sore weeping: O
   good Lord, I acknowledge that I have offended, and for mine offence and
   trespass this trouble cometh to holy church, I purpose, good Lord, to
   go to Rome for to be assoiled of mine offences; and departed towards
   Canterbury. And anon the king sent his officers to his manors and
   despoiled them, because he would not obey the king's statutes. And the
   king commanded to seize all his lands and goods into his hands, and
   then his servants departed from him, and he went to the seaside for to
   have gone over sea, but the wind was against him, and so thrice he took
   his ship and might not pass. And then he knew that it was not our
   Lord's will that he should yet depart, and returned secretly to
   Canterbury, of whose coming his meiny made great joy. And on the morn
   came the king's officers for to seize all his goods, for the noise was
   that S. Thomas had fled the land; wherefore they had despoiled all his
   manors and seized them into the king's hand. And when they came they
   found him at Canterbury, whereof they were sore abashed, and returned
   to the king informing him that he was yet at Canterbury, and anon after
   S. Thomas came to the king to Woodstock for to pray him to be better
   disposed towards holy church. And then said the king to him in scorn:
   May not we two dwell both in this land? Art thou so sturdy and hard of
   heart? To whom S. Thomas answered: Sire, that was never my thought, but
   I would fain please you, and do all that you desire so that ye hurt not
   the liberties of holy church, for them will I maintain while I live,
   ever to my power. With which words the king was sore moved, and swore
   that he would have them kept, and especial if a clerk were a thief he
   should be judged and executed by the king's law, and by no spiritual
   law, and said he would never suffer a clerk to be his master in his own
   land, and charged S. Thomas to appear before him at Northampton, and to
   bring all the bishops of this land with him, and so departed. S. Thomas
   besought God of help and succour, for the bishops which ought to be
   with him were most against him. After this S. Thomas went to
   Northampton where the king had then his great council in the castle
   with all his lords, and when he came tofore the king he said: I am come
   to obey your commandment, but before this time was never bishop of
   Canterbury thus entreated, for I am head of the Church of England, and
   am to you, Sir King, your ghostly father, and it was never God's law
   that the son should destroy his father which hath charge of his soul.
   And by your striving have you made all the bishops that should abide by
   the right of the church to be against holy church and me, and ye know
   well that I may not fight, but am ready to suffer death rather than I
   should consent to lose the right of holy church. Then said the king,
   Thou speakest as a proud clerk, but I shall abate thy pride ere I leave
   thee, for I must reckon with thee. Thou understandest well that thou
   wert my chancellor many years, and once I lent to thee 500 which thou
   never yet hast repaid, which I will that thou pay me again or else
   incontinent thou shalt go to prison. And then S. Thomas answered: Ye
   gave me that 500, and it is not fitting to demand that which ye have
   given. Notwithstanding he found surety for the said 500 and departed
   for that day. And after this, the next day the king demanded 30,000
   that he had surmised on him to have stolen, he being chancellor,
   whereupon he desired day to answer; at which time he said that when he
   was archbishop he set him free therein without any claim or debt before
   good record, wherefore he ought not to answer unto that demand. And the
   bishops desired S. Thomas to obey the king but in no wise he would not
   agree to such things as should touch against the liberties of the
   church. And then they came to the king, and forsook S. Thomas, and
   agreed to all the king's desire, and the proper servants of S. Thomas
   fled from him and forsook him, and then poor people came and
   accompanied him. And on the night came to him two lords and told to him
   that the king's meiny had emprised to slay him. And the next night
   after he departed in the habit of a brother of Sempringham, and so
   chevissed that he went over sea.

   And in the meanwhile certain bishops went to Rome for to complain on
   him to the pope, and the king sent letters to the king of France not to
   receive him. And the King Louis said that, though a man were banished
   and had committed there trespasses, yet should he be free in France.
   And so after when this holy S. Thomas came, he received him well, and
   gave him licence to abide there and do what he would. In this meanwhile
   the king of England sent certain lords into the pope complaining on the
   Archbishop Thomas, which made grievous complaints, which when the pope
   had heard said, he would give none answer till that he had heard the
   Archbishop Thomas speak, which would hastily come thither. But they
   would not abide his coming, but departed without speeding of their
   intents, and came into England again. And anon after, S Thomas came to
   Rome on S. Mark's day at afternoon, and when his caterer should have
   bought fish for his dinner because it was fasting day, he could get
   none for no money, and came and told to his lord S. Thomas so, and he
   bade him buy such as he could get, and then he bought flesh and made it
   ready for their dinner. And S. Thomas was served with a capon roasted,
   and his meiny with boiled meat. And so it was that the pope heard that
   he was come, and sent a cardinal to welcome him, and he found him at
   his dinner eating flesh, which anon returned and told to the pope how
   he was not so perfect a man as he had supposed, for contrary to the
   rule of the church he eateth this day flesh. The pope would not believe
   him, but sent another cardinal which for more evidence took the leg of
   the capon in his kerchief and affirmed the same, and opened his
   kerchief tofore the pope, and he found the leg turned into a fish
   called a carp. And when the pope saw it, he said, they were not true
   men to say such things of this good bishop. They said faithfully that
   it was flesh that he ate. After this S. Thomas came to the pope and did
   his reverence and obedience, whom the pope welcomed, and after
   communication he demanded him what meat he had eaten, and he said:
   Flesh as ye have heard tofore, because he could find no fish and very
   need compelled him thereto. Then the pope understood of the miracle
   that the capon's leg was turned into a carp, and of his goodness
   granted to him and to all them of the diocese of Canterbury licence to
   eat flesh ever after on S. Mark's day when it falleth on a fish day,
   and pardon withal, which is kept and accustomed unto this day. And then
   S. Thomas informed the pope how the king of England would have him
   consent to divers articles against the liberties of holy church, and
   what wrongs he did to the same, and that for to die he would never
   consent to them. And when the pope had heard him he wept for pity, and
   thanked God that he had such a bishop under him that had so well
   defended the liberties of holy church, and anon wrote out letters and
   bulls commanding all the bishops of Christendom to keep and observe the
   same. And then S. Thomas offered to the pope his bishopric up into the
   pope's hand, and his mitre with the cross and ring, and the pope
   commanded him to keep it still, and said he knew no man more able than
   he was. And after S. Thomas said mass tofore the pope in a white
   chasuble; and after mass he said to the pope that he knew by revelation
   that he should suffer death for the right of holy church, and when it
   should fall that chasuble should be turned from white into red. And
   after he departed from the pope and came down into France unto the
   abbey of Pontigny, and there he had knowledge that when the lords
   spiritual and temporal which had been at Rome were come home and had
   told the king that they might in no wise have their intent, that the
   king was greatly wroth, and anon banished all the kinsmen that were
   longing to S. Thomas that they should incontinent void his land, and
   made them swear that they should go to him and tell to him that for his
   sake they were exiled, and so they went over sea to him at Pontigny and
   he being there was full sorry for them. And after there was a great
   chapter in England of the monks of Citeaux and there the king desired
   them to write to Pontigny that they should no longer keep ne sustain
   Thomas the Archbishop, for if they did, he would destroy them of that
   order being in England. And, for fear thereof they wrote so over to
   Pontigny that he must depart thence with his kinsmen, and so he did,
   and was then full heavy, and remitted his cause to God. And anon after,
   the king of France sent to him that he should abide where it pleased
   him, and dwell in his realm and he would pay for the costs of him and
   his kinsmen. And he departed and went to Sens, and the abbot brought
   him on the way. And S. Thomas told him how he knew by a vision that he
   should suffer death and martyrdom for the right of the church, and
   prayed him to keep it secret during his life. After this the king of
   England came into France, and there told the king how S. Thomas would
   destroy his realm, and then there told how he would foredo such laws as
   his elders had used tofore him, wherefore S. Thomas was sent for, and
   they were brought together. And the king of France laboured sore for to
   set them at accord, but it would not be, for that one would not minish
   his laws and accustoms, and S. Thomas would not grant that he should do
   England against S. Thomas, and was wroth with him and commanded him to
   void his realm with all his kinsmen. And then S. Thomas wist not
   whither to go; but comforted his kinsmen as well as he might, and
   purposed to have gone in to Provence for to have begged his bread. And
   as he was going, the king of France sent for him again, and when he
   came he cried him mercy and said he had offended God and him, and bade
   him abide in his realm where he would, and he would pay for the
   dispenses of him and his kin. And in the meanwhile the king of England
   ordained his son king, and made him to be crowned by the Archbishop of
   York, and other bishops, which was against the statutes of the land,
   for the Archbishop of Canterbury should have consented and also have
   crowned him, wherefore S. Thomas gat a bull for to do accurse them that
   so did against him, and also on them that occupied the goods longing to
   him. And yet after this the king laboured so much that he accorded the
   king of England and S. Thomas which accord endured not long, for the
   king varied from it afterward. But S. Thomas, upon this accord, came
   home to Canterbury, where he was received worshipfully, and sent for
   them that had trespassed against him, and by the authority of the
   pope's bull openly denounced them accursed unto the time they come to
   amendment. And when they knew this they came to him and would have made
   him to assoil them by force; and sent word over to the king how he had
   done, whereof the king was much wroth and said: If he had men in his
   land that loved him they would not suffer such a traitor in his land
   alive.

   And forthwith four knights took their counsel together and thought they
   would do to the king a pleasure, and emprised to slay S. Thomas, and
   suddenly departed and took their shipping towards England. And when the
   king knew of their departing he was sorry and sent after them, but they
   were on the sea and departed ere the messengers came, wherefore the
   king was heavy and sorry.

   These be the names of the four knights: Sir Reginald Fitzurse, Sir Hugh
   de Morville, Sir William de Tracy, Sir Richard le Breton. On Christmas
   day S. Thomas made a sermon at Canterbury in his own church, and
   weeping, prayed the people to pray for him, for he knew well his time
   was nigh, and there executed the sentence on them that were against the
   right of holy church. And that same day as the king sat at meat all the
   bread that he handled waxed anon mouldy and hoar, that no man might eat
   of it, and the bread that they touched not was fair and good for to
   eat.

   And these four knights aforesaid came to Canterbury on the Tuesday in
   Christmas week about Evensong time, and came to S. Thomas and said that
   the king commanded him to make amends for the wrongs that he had done,
   and also that he should assoil all them that he had accursed anon, or
   else they should slay him. Then said Thomas: All that I ought to do by
   right, that will I with a good will do, but as to the sentence that is
   executed I may not undo, but that they will submit them to the
   correction of holy church, for it was done by our holy father the pope
   and not by me. Then said Sir Reginald: But if thou assoil the king and
   all other standing in the curse, it shall cost thee thy life. And S.
   Thomas said: Thou knowest well enough that the king and I were accorded
   on Mary Magdalene day, and that this curse should go forth on them that
   had offended the church.

   Then one of the knights smote him as he kneeled before the altar on the
   head. And one Sir Edward Grim, that was his crossier put forth his arm
   with the cross to bear off the stroke, and the stroke smote the cross
   asunder and his arm almost off, wherefore he fled for fear, and so did
   all the monks, that were that time at compline. And then smote each at
   him, that they smote off a great piece of the skull of his head, that
   his brain fell on the pavement. And so they slew and martyred him, and
   were so cruel that one of them brake the point of his sword against the
   pavement. And thus this holy and blessed Archbishop S. Thomas suffered
   death in his own church for the right of all holy church. And when he
   was dead they stirred his brain, and after went in to his chamber and
   took away his goods, and his horse out of his stable, and took away his
   bulls and writings, and delivered them to Sir Robert Broke to bear into
   France to the king. And as they searched his chamber they found in a
   chest two shirts of hair made full of great knots, and then they said:
   Certainly he was a good man; and coming down into the churchward they
   began to dread and fear that the ground would not have borne them, and
   were marvellously aghast, but they supposed that the earth would have
   swallowed them all quick. And then they knew that they had done amiss.
   And anon it was known all about, how that he was martyred, and anon
   after took this holy body, and unclothed him, and found bishop's
   clothing above, and the habit of a monk under. And next his flesh he
   wore hard hair, full of knots, which was his shirt. And his breech was
   of the same, and the knots slicked fast within the skin, and all his
   body full of worms; he suffered great pain. And he was thus martyred
   the year of our Lord one thousand one hundred and seventy-one, and was
   fifty-three years old. And soon after tidings came to the king how he
   was slain, wherefore the king took great sorrow, and sent to Rome for
   his absolution.

   Now after that S. Thomas departed from the pope, the pope would daily
   look upon the white chasuble that S. Thomas had said mass in, and the
   same day that he was martyred he saw it turned into red, whereby he
   knew well that that same day he suffered martyrdom for the right of
   holy church, and commanded a mass of requiem solemnly to be sung for
   his soul. And when the quire began to sing requiem, an angel on high
   above began the office of a martyr: Letabitur justus, and then all the
   quire followed singing forth the mass of the office of a martyr. And
   the pope thanked God that it pleased him to show such miracles for his
   holy martyr, at whose tomb by the merits and prayers of this holy
   martyr our blessed Lord hath showed many miracles. The blind have
   recovered their sight, the dumb their speech, the deaf their hearing,
   the lame their limbs, and the dead their life. If I should here express
   all the miracles that it hath pleased God to show for this holy saint
   it should contain a whole volume, therefore at this time, I pass over
   unto the feast of his translation, where I propose with the grace of
   God to recite some of them. Then let us pray to this glorious martyr to
   be our advocate, that by his petition we may come to everlasting bliss.
   Amen.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Here followeth the Life of S. Silvester. The interpretation of his name.

   Silvester is said of sile or sol which is light, and of terra the
   earth, as who saith the light of the earth, that is of the church. Or
   Silvester is said of silvas and of trahens, that is to say he was
   drawing wild men and hard unto the faith. Or as it is said in
   glossario, Silvester is to say green, that is to wit, green in
   contemplation of heavenly things, and a toiler in labouring himself; he
   was umbrous or shadowous. That is to say he was cold and refrigate from
   all concupiscence of the flesh, full of boughs among the trees of
   heaven. Eusebius of Csarea compiled his legend, which the blessed
   Blasius in the counsel of seventy bishops recordeth, like as it is had
   in the decree.

Of the Life of S. Silvester.

   Silvester was son of one Justa and was learned and taught of a priest
   named Cyrinus, which did marvellously great alms and made
   hospitalities. It happed that he received a christian man into his
   house named Timothy, who no man would receive for the persecution of
   tyrants, wherefore the said Timothy suffered death and passion after
   that year whilst he preached justly the faith of Jesu Christ. It was so
   that the prefect Tarquinius supposed that Timothy had had great plenty
   of riches, which he demanded of Silvester, threatening him to the death
   but if he delivered them to him. And when he found certainly that
   Timothy had no great riches, he commanded to S. Silvester to make
   sacrifice to the idols, and if he did not he would make him suffer
   divers torments. S. Silvester answered: False, evil man, thou shalt die
   this night, and shalt have torments that ever shall endure, and thou
   shalt know, whether thou wilt or not, that he whom we worship is very
   God. Then S. Silvester was put in prison, and the provost went to
   dinner. Now it happed that as he ate, a bone of a fish turned in his
   throat and stuck fast, so that he could neither have it down ne up, and
   at midnight died like as S. Silvester had said, and then S. Silvester
   was delivered out of prison. He was so gracious that all christian men
   and paynims loved him, for he was fair like an angel to look on, a fair
   speaker, whole of body, holy in work, good in counsel, patient and
   charitable, and firmly established in the faith. He had in writing the
   names of all the widows and orphans that were poor, and to them he
   administered their necessity. He had a custom to fast all Fridays and
   Saturdays. And it was so that Melchiades, the bishop of Rome, died, and
   all the people chose S. Silvester for to be the high Bishop of Rome,
   which sore against his will was made pope. He instituted for to be
   fasted Wednesday, Friday, and Saturday, and the Thursday for to be
   hallowed as Sunday.

   Now it happed that the Emperor Constantine did do slay all the
   christian men over all where he could find them, and for this cause S.
   Silvester fled out of the town with his clerks and hid him in a
   mountain. And for the cruelty of Constantine God sent him such a
   sickness that he became lazar and measel, and by the counsel of his
   physicians he got three thousand young children for to have cut their
   throats, for to have their blood in a bath all hot, and thereby he
   might be healed of his measelry. And when he should ascend into his
   chariot for to go to the place where he should be bathed, the mothers
   of the children came crying and braying for sorrow of their children,
   and when he understood that they were mothers of the children, he had
   great pity on them and said to his knights and them that were about
   him: The dignity of the empire of Rome is brought forth of the fountain
   of pity, the which hath stablished by decree that who that slayeth a
   child in battle shall have his head smitten off, then should it be
   great cruelty to us for to do to ours such thing as we defend to
   strange nations, for so should cruelty surmount us. It is better that
   we leave cruelty and that pity surmount us, and therefore me seemeth
   better to save the lives of these innocents, than by their of death I
   should have again my health, of the which we be not yet certain. Ne we
   may recover nothing for to slay them, for if so were that I should
   thereby have health, that should be a cruel health that should be
   bought with the death of so many innocents. Then he commanded to render
   and deliver again to the mothers their children, and gave to every each
   of them a good gift, and thus made them return to their houses with
   great joy, from whence they departed with great sorrow, and he himself
   returned again in his chariot unto his palace. Now it happed that the
   night after S. Peter and S. Paul appeared to this Emperor Constantine,
   saying to him: Because thou hast had horror to shed and spill the blood
   of innocents, our Lord Jesu Christ hath had pity on thee, and
   commandeth thee to send unto such a mountain where Silvester is hid
   with his clerks, and say to him that thou comest for to be baptized of
   him and thou shalt be healed of thy malady. And when he was awaked he
   did do call his knights and commanded them to go to that mountain and
   bring the Pope Silvester to him courteously and fair, for to speak with
   him. When S. Silvester saw from far the knights come to him, he
   supposed they sought him for to be martyred, and began to say to his
   clerks that they should be firm and stable in the faith for to suffer
   martyrdom. When the knights came to him they said to him much
   courteously that Constantine sent for him, and prayed him that he would
   come and speak with him. And forthwith he came, and when they had
   intersaluted each other, Constantine told to him his vision. And when
   Silvester demanded of him what men they were that so appeared to him,
   the emperor wist not ne could not name them. S. Silvester opened a book
   wherein the images of S. Peter and S. Paul were pourtrayed, and
   demanded of him if th bishop. The seventh, that the dime and tenth part
   of the possessions should be given to the church. After this the
   emperor came to S. Peter's church and confessed meekly all his sins
   tofore all people, and what wrong he had done to christian men, and
   made to dig and cast out to make the foundements for the churches, and
   bare on his shoulders twelve hods or baskets full of earth. When Helen,
   the mother of Constantine, dwelling in Bethany, heard say that the
   emperor was become christian, she sent to him a letter, in which she
   praised much her son of this that he had renounced the false idols, but
   she blamed him much that he had renounced the law of the Jews, and
   worshipped a man crucified. Then Constantine remanded to his mother
   that she should assemble the greatest masters of the Jews, and he
   should assemble the greatest masters of the christian men, to the end
   that they might dispute and know which was the truest law. Then Helen
   assembled twelve masters which she brought with her, which were the
   wisest that they might find in that law, and S. Silvester and his
   clerks were of that other party. Then the emperor ordained two paynims,
   gentiles, to be their judges, of whom that one was named Crato, and
   that other Zenophilus, which were proved wise and expert, and they to
   give the sentence, and be judge of the disputation. Then began one of
   the masters of the Jews for to maintain and dispute his law, and S.
   Silvester and his clerks answered to his disputation, and to them all,
   always concluding them by scripture. The judges which were true and
   just, held more of the party of S. Silvester than of the Jews. Then
   said one of the masters of the Jews named Zambry, I marvel, said he,
   that ye be so wise and incline you to their words, let us leave all
   these words and go we to the effect of the deeds. Then he did do come a
   cruel bull, and said a word in his ear, and anon the bull died. Then
   the people were all against Silvester. Then said Silvester, believe not
   thou that he hath named in the ear the name of Jesu Christ, but the
   name of some devil, know ye verily it is no great strength to slay a
   bull, for a man, or a lion, or a serpent may well slay him, but it is
   great virtue to raise him again to life, then if he may not raise him
   it is by the devil. And if he may raise him again to life, I shall
   believe that he is dead by the power of God. And when the judges heard
   this, they said to Zambry, that had slain the bull, that he should
   raise him again. Then he answered that if Sylvester might raise him in
   the name of Jesus of Galilee his master, then he would believe in him,
   and thereto bound them all the Jews that were there. And S. Silvester
   first made his orisons and prayers to our Lord, and sith came to the
   bull and said to him in his ear: Thou cursed creature that art entered
   into this bull and hast slain him, go out in the name of Jesu Christ,
   in whose name I command thee bull, arise thou up and go thou with the
   other beasts debonairly, and anon the bull arose and went forth softly.
   Then the queen and the judges, which were paynims, were converted to
   the faith.

   In this time it happed that there was at Rome a dragon in a pit, which
   every day slew with his breath more than three hundred men. Then came
   the bishops of the idols unto the emperor and said unto him: O thou
   most holy emperor, sith the time that thou hast received christian
   faith the dragon which is in yonder fosse or pit slayeth every day with
   his breath more than three hundred men. Then sent the emperor for S.
   Silvester and asked counsel of him of this matter. S. Silvester
   answered that by the might of God he promised to make him cease of his
   hurt and blessure of this people. Then S Silvester put himself to
   prayer, and S. Peter appeared to him and said: Go surely to the dragon
   and the two priests that be with thee take in thy company, and when
   thou shalt come to him thou shalt say to him in this manner: Our Lord
   Jesu Christ which was born of the Virgin Mary, crucified, buried and
   arose, and now sitteth on the right side of the Father, this is he that
   shall come to deem and judge the living and the dead, I commend thee
   Sathanas that thou abide him in this place till he come. Then thou
   shalt bind his mouth with a thread, and seal it with thy seal , wherein
   is the imprint of the cross. Then thou and the two priests shall come
   to me whole and safe, and such bread as I shall make ready for you ye
   shall eat. Thus as S. Peter had said, S. Silvester did. And when he
   came to the pit, he descended down one hundred and fifty steps, bearing
   with him two lanterns, and found the dragon, and said the words that S.
   Peter had said to him, and bound his mouth with the thread, and sealed
   it, and after returned, and as he came upward again he met with two
   enchanters which followed him for to see if he descended, which were
   almost dead of the stench of the dragon, whom he brought with him whole
   and sound, which anon were baptized, with a great multitude of people
   with them. Thus was the city of Rome delivered from double death, that
   was from the culture and worshipping of false idols, and from the venom
   of the dragon. At the last when S. Silvester approached towards his
   death, he called to him the clergy and admonished them to have charity,
   and that they should diligently govern their churches, and keep their
   flock from the wolves. And after the year of the incarnation of our
   Lord three hundred and twenty, he departed out of this world and slept
   in our Lord, etc.
     __________________________________________________________________

             Here followeth, the Life of S. Paul the first Hermit.

   S. Paul which was the first hermit as S. Jerome writeth, was in the
   time of Decius and Valerianus, emperors, the year of the incarnation of
   our Lord two hundred and fifty-six. This holy man, S. Paul, saw men for
   christian faith cruelly tormented, wherefore he fled into the desert.
   Among whom he saw two cruelly tormented. The first for that he abode
   firmly in his faith, the judge did do anoint all his body with honey
   and did do bind his hands behind him on his back, and so did him be set
   in the heat of the sun for to be bitten and stung of flies and wasps;
   that other that was young he made him to be in a right soft bed between
   two sheets, among flowers and delectable roses and herbs sweet
   smelling, and therein he was bounden so that he might not move him.
   After, he made an harlot, a ribald, come to him alone for to touch his
   members and his body, to move to lechery. Finally, when the
   voluptuosity of his flesh surmounted him, and he might not defend
   himself ne his members, he bit off a piece of his tongue and spit it in
   her visage, which always enticed him to lechery by touching and by
   kissings, and so he voided the temptation fleshly, and the ribauld
   also, and deserved to have laud and victory. In this time S. Paul,
   tofore said, was young, about sixteen years of age, and dwelt in
   Thebaid which is a part of Egypt, with his sister Maurice. And when he
   saw the persecutions of christian men, he departed and became an hermit
   so long and so many years, that he was old one hundred and thirteen
   years. In this time S. Anthony was a hermit in another desert and was
   then ninety years of age. And on a time he thought in himself that in
   the world was none so good ne so great an hermit as he was himself.
   Hereupon came to him a revelation as he slept that, beneath all, low
   down in that desert was an hermit better than he, a all. And whiles
   they were thus talking a crow came flying and brought to them two
   loaves of bread ; and when the crow was gone S. Paul said: Be thou glad
   and joyful, for our Lord is debonair and merciful, he hath sent us
   bread for to eat. It is forty years passed that every day he hath sent
   me half a loaf, but now at thy coming he hath sent two whole loaves,
   and double provender. And they had question together until evensong
   time which of them both should entame or begin to take of the bread. At
   the last the bread departed even between their hands, and then they
   ate, and drank of the well or fountain. After graces said they had all
   that night collation together. On the morn said S. Paul: Brother, it is
   long sith that I knew that thou dwelledst in this region and in this
   country, and God had promised to me thy company, I shall now shortly
   die and shall go to Jesu Christ for to receive the crown to me
   promised, thou art come hither for to bury my body. When S. Anthony
   heard that, anon he began tenderly to weep, and wailed, praying that he
   might die with him and go in his company. S. Paul said: It is need yet
   that thou live for thy brethren, to the end that they by the ensample
   of thee be made firm and taught; wherefore I pray thee return to thine
   abbey and bring to me the mantle which Athanasius the bishop gave to
   thee for to wrap in my body. Then S. Anthony marvelled of this, that he
   knew of this bishop and of this mantle, and after durst nothing say,
   but did to him reverence, like as God had spoken to him, and weeping
   kissed his feet and his hands and came again to his abbey with great
   travail and labour, for he had from that one part to that other many
   journeys and foul way, through hayes and hedges, woods, stones, hills
   and valleys, and S. Anthony of great age and feeble of fasting, and not
   strong ne mighty.

   When he was come to his abbey, two of his disciples, to him most
   secret, demanded of him saying: Fair father, where have ye been so
   long? And he answered: Alas! I, wretched sinner, which bear falsely the
   name to be a monk, I have seen Eli the prophet, I have seen John the
   Baptist in desert, and certes I have seen S. Paul in Paradise. Thus
   speaking and beating his breast he brought the mantle out of his cell,
   and all stilly without more words, he went again the long way all alone
   through the desert unto S. Paul the hermit, having great desire to see
   him, for he was afeard lest he should die ere he might come again to
   him. It happed in the second journey, where S. Anthony went through the
   desert the third hour of the day, he saw the soul of S. Paul, shining,
   ascend into heaven among a great company of angels, of prophets, and
   also of apostles, and anon he fell down to the earth weeping and
   wailing, and crying with a high voice: Alas, Paul! wherefore leavest
   thou me so soon, which have so little seen thee? Then he had so great
   desire to see the corpse or body that he passed all the remnant of his
   way as soon as a bird flying, like as he was wont to tell and rehearse,
   and when he came to the cell of S. Paul he found that the body was
   right up on his knees and the visage and hands addressed towards heaven
   and supposed he had been alive and had made his prayers, but when he
   had advised it, he knew well that he was passed out of this world. What
   weepings and what wailings he made upon the body it were a piteous
   thing to hear; among all other he said: O holy soul, thy body showeth
   in death this that thou didst in thy life. After this he was much
   abashed how he should bury the body, for he had no instrument to make
   his sepulchre; then came two lions which much debonairly made a pit
   after the quantity of his body, and S. Anthony buried his body therein.
   And he took with him the coat of S. Paul which was made and and
   afterward, for great reverence, S. Anthony ware this coat and clad him
   withal in great and solemn feasts. Thus this holy man S. Paul died in
   the year of the incarnation of our Lord two hundred and eighty-eight.
   Let us then pray to him that he impetre and get us remission of our
   sins, that after this life we may come to everlasting joy and bliss in
   heaven. Amen.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Here followeth of S. Remigius, and first the interpretation of his name.

   Remigius is said of remi, that is to say feeding, and geos, that is
   earth, as who saith feeding the earthly people with doctrine. Or of
   geon, that is a wrestler, for he was a pastor and a wrestler he fed his
   flock with the word of preaching, with suffrages of praying, and with
   example of conversation. There is three manner of armour that is for
   the defence, the shield, for to fight, the sword, for his salvation and
   health, the habergeon and helm. He wrestled against the devil with the
   shield of faith, with the sword of the word of God, and with the helmet
   of hope. Ignatius Archbishop of Rheims wrote his life.

Of the Life of S. Remigius.

   Remigius, an holy doctor, and confessor glorious of our Lord, was
   tofore his birth provided of our Lord, and foreseen of a holy hermit.
   When the persecution of the Vandals had almost wasted and destroyed
   nigh all France, there was a man recluse, holy and virtuous, which had
   lost his sight, which oft prayed to our Lord for peace and welfare of
   the church of France. He had on a time a vision, and him seemed an
   angel came to him and said: Know thou that the woman that thou knowest
   named Aline shall bring forth a son that shall be named Remigius, which
   shall deliver all the country from this persecution. And when he awoke
   he came to the house of this Aline and told to her his vision, and she
   would not believe it because of her age. The recluse said: It shall be
   so as I have said, and when thou hast given thy child suck, thou shalt
   give to me of thy milk, to put upon mine eyes, and therewith I shall be
   whole and recover my sight again. And like as he said all these things
   happened. And the woman had a child named Remigius, which when he came
   to the age of discretion, he fled the world, and entered into a
   reclusage. And sith after, for the great renown of his holy life, when
   he had been twenty-two years therein he was elect and chosen to be
   Archbishop of Rheims. He was so debonair that little birds came and ate
   on his table and took meat at his hand. It happed on a day that he was
   lodged in an house of a good woman which had but a little wine in her
   tonnel or vessel, and S. Remigius went in to the cellar and made the
   sign of the cross upon the ton, and prayed a while. Anon the ton was so
   full that it leapt over, by the merits of the good saint.

   Now it happed that Clodovius the king of France, which was a paynim,
   might not be converted for any preaching that his wife might do, which
   was a christian woman, unto the time that a great host of Alemans came
   into France. Then by the admonishment of his wife he made a vow that if
   the God that his wife worshipped would give him victory, he would be
   baptized at his returning from the battle. Thus, as he demanded, he
   vanquished the battle, and after came to Rheims to S. Remigius and
   prayed him that he would christen him. And when S. Remigius baptized
   him he had no chrisom ready, then a dove descended from heaven which
   brought the chrisom in an ampull of which the king was anointed and
   this ampull is kept in the church of S. Remigius at Rheims, of which
   the kings of France be anointed when they be crowned. S. Remigius had a
   niece which was married to a clerk named Genebaldus, which by devotion
   left his wife for to enter into religion. Then S. Remigius saw that the
   see of Rheims was over great, and ordained a see of a bishopric at Laon
   and made Genebald first bishop of that place. When Genebald was bishop
   his wife came thither to see him, and he remembered of the privily that
   they were wont to have together, and lay on a night with her, and
   engendered on her a child. When his wife knew that she was great and
   let him have knowledge thereof, and when he wist that it was a son, he
   commanded that it should be named Thief, because he had engendered it
   by theft. After for to quench the suspicion and the words of the
   people, he suffered that his wife should come to him as she did tofore,
   and anon after she conceived a daughter, whom he commanded to name a
   fox's whelp, and after came to S. Remigius and confessed him of his
   sin, and took the stole off his neck and would leave his bishopric, but
   S. Remigius, after he had confessed him, comforted him, and gave him
   penance, and shut him in a little cell seven years long, and gave to
   him bread and water, and in the meanwhile he governed the church
   himself. At the end of seven years an angel came to the prison, and
   said to him that he had done well his penance, and bade him go out of
   the prison. To whom he said: I may not go out, for my lord S. Remigius
   hath closed the door and sealed it. And the angel said to him: Know
   thou that the door of heaven is opened to thee; I shall open this door
   without breaking of the seal which S. Remigius hath sealed. And anon
   the door was opened. Then Genebald fell down in the midst of the door
   in manner of a cross, and said: If our Lord Jesu Christ came hither I
   shall not go out but if S. Remigius, which shut and closed me herein,
   come and bring me out. And then the angel went anon and fetched S.
   Remigius and brought him to Laon, and he delivered him out of prison,
   and remised him and set him again in his see there, where he lived
   after, all the days of his life, holily. After his death, Thief his son
   was made bishop after him, which is also a saint in heaven, and at the
   last S. Remigius, after that God had shown many miracles for him, he
   departed out of this life unto everlasting joy the year of the
   incarnation of our Lord five hundred.
     __________________________________________________________________

     Here followeth the Life of S. Hilary. The interpretation of his name.

   Hilary is said of joyousness, for he was joyous in the service of God.
   Or Hilary is said virtuous and high, for he was high and strong in
   science, and virtuous in his life. Or Hilary is said of hilum, which is
   to say dark matter, for he had in his dictes great obscurity and
   profoundness.

Of the Life of S. Hilary.

   S. Hilary, which was Bishop of Poictiers, was born in the country of
   Guienne. He had a wife wedded, and a daughter, and whereas he was in
   habit secular he lived after the life of a monk. He profited so much in
   holy life and sciences that he was chosen Archbishop of Poictiers. A
   manner of an heresy reigned in his country and through all France,
   which was the sect of the Arians, the which he destroyed to his power.
   Nevertheless by the commandment of the emperor, which was of the party
   of the heretics, by the suggestion of two bishops of that sect he was
   exiled, with which two bishops he disputed, and overcame them.
   Afterward, for they might not gainsay the truth of the matter, ne could
   not bear ne answer to his eloquence, so that he was constrained to come
   again to Poictiers. And as he passed by an isle of the sea, which was
   full of serpents, he chased them away by the virtue of his commandment,
   and by his sight only, and pight a staff in the middle of the isle and
   gave to the serpents liberty to come to that staff and not to pass
   farther, and the serpents obeyed him, which part is no land now but
   sea.

   When S. Hilary came to Poictiers he met a child dead, borne for to be
   buried, and the child was not baptized; which child by virtue of his
   prayer he raised to life, for he lay long in the dust in prayer, and
   when he arose out of his prayer the child arose from death to life.

   S. Hilary had a daughter named Apia and she would have been married,
   but S. Hilary preached to her so much of the estate of virginity that
   she changed her purpose. And when she was confirmed in this will and
   purpose S. Hilary doubted that she should change, and prayed our Lord
   for to take her while she was in good purpose, and anon she died, and
   S. Hilary buried her. And when her mother the wife of S. Hilary saw
   that her daughter was dead, she prayed to her husband, that he should
   impetre and get for her like as he had done for his daughter. And anon
   as S. Hilary had made his orison, she died, and by this manner he sent
   tofore him his wife and his daughter.

   In this time the pope Leo, which favoured heresy, called a counsel of
   bishops, but he sent not for S. Hilary that he should come thereto,
   notwithstanding S. Hilary came thither. When the pope saw him come, he
   commanded that no man should arise against him, ne give him no place.
   Then said the pope to him: Thou art Hilary the cock, and not the son of
   an hen. And Hilary answered: I am Hilary and no cock, but a bishop in
   Gallia that is in France. Then said the pope, Thou art Hilary Gallus,
   and I am Leo of the Papal See, Judge. To whom Hilary said: If thou be
   Leo yet art thou not of the Tribe of Judah. Then the pope had great
   indignation and said to him: Abide thou a little, and I shall pay to
   thee thine hire; and S. Hilary answered: And if thou come not again who
   shall pay me for thee? And the pope answered: I shall come again and
   shall beat down thy pride. Then the pope went down into the low chamber
   for to ease him, and by the conduit of his nether part voided out all
   the entrails of his body, and so died suddenly. Thus then as he abode
   the pope S. Hilary found no place to sit on, ne none would remove to
   make him place, and when he saw that, he said: Domini est terra, the
   earth longeth to our Lord, and sat down upon the earth, and the earth
   arose up by miracle by the will of our Lord, in such wise that he sat
   as high as the other, and anon after, word came that the pope was dead.
   Then S. Hilary confirmed all the other bishops that were there in the
   faith, and so confirmed, each went in to his country.

   In the end, when S. Hilary had impetred of God many miracles to be
   showed by his prayer, he became sick, and saw his death approach. Then
   he called to him one of his chaplains whom he much loved and said to
   him: Go thou out and bring to me word what thou hearest. When he had
   been long without, he came in and told to S. Hilary that he had heard a
   great noise in the city; and when it was midnight he sent his chaplain
   again to hearken as he had done tofore; and when he came again in to
   the chamber for to tell that he had heard nothing, a great clear light
   entered in, that the priest might not behold it. And when the light
   departed S. Hilary died, that was the year of grace three hundred and
   forty, let us pray to him that he pray for us. Amen
     __________________________________________________________________

                 And next followeth the Invention of S. Firmin.

   In the time of the invention of S Firmin the martyr, was S. Savin,
   bishop of Amiens, and saw that tofore him in the time of S. Honor, our
   Lord had done take up the bodies of S. Fulcian, S. Victorice, and S.
   Gentian, and thought all an whole night upon the body of S. Firmin the
   martyr. And when it was day this holy man S. Savin summoned the clergy
   and the people to fast and make prayers through the city of Amiens, to
   the end that our Lord would show them the place where the body of S.
   Firmin the martyr lay. And on the third day our Lord sent such a
   miracle that he sent a ray of the sun, which pierced the wall of the
   monastery on the same place where the body lay. Then they began to dig
   and delve there, and when they came nigh the body, there issued out so
   great a sweetness out of the pit, that all they that were there weened
   they had been in Paradise. And it seemed that if all the spices of the
   world had been stamped together it should not have smelled so well ne
   so sweet, and this sweet odour spread through the city of Amiens and
   divers cities about, that is to wit Therouanne, Cambray and Noyon. And
   the people of these cities moved them each from his place with candles
   and offerings, without sayer or commander, but for the odour that so
   spread, and came unto this glorious saint. And as the body was borne in
   the city of Amiens, there were showed such miracles that never none
   were like found ne seen tofore of any saint, for the elements moved
   them by the miracle of this saint; the snow that was that time great on
   the earth was turned into powder and dust by the heat that was then,
   and the ice that hung on the trees became flowers and leaves, and the
   meadows about Amiens flowered and became green, and the sun which by
   his nature should go low, that day ascended as high as she is on S.
   John's day at noon in the summer. And as men bare the body of this
   saint the trees inclined and worshipped the body, and all manner sick
   men, of what malady they had, they received health in the invention of
   the blessed body of S. Firmin. And the burgesses that were in their
   gowns and mantles had so great heat that they called their servants and
   bond men, of whom there were many that day in Amiens, and affranchised
   them for to bear their clothes into the city of Amiens. Our Lord did do
   show such miracles, and so far sent the odour that the lord of
   Beaugency which was at a window and was sick of lazary, smelled the
   odour and was anon guerished and whole. And he took his gold and came
   and did homage unto the body of S. Firmin in the city of Amiens. Our
   Lord hath showed many miracles for this glorious saint, and much he
   ought to be honoured in this world, and then pray we unto this blessed
   saint, S. Firmin, that he pray for us to our Lord that he will pardon
   us our sins, and octroy and grant to us the glory of heaven. Amen.
     __________________________________________________________________

  Here followeth the Life of S. Macarias, and. first the interpretation of his
                                     name.

   Macarius is said of macha, which is as much to say as engine, and of
   ares, which is to say virtue. Or Macarius is said of macha, that is to
   say smiting, and of rio, that is to say master, for he was ingenious
   against the fallacy of the devil, virtuous of life, smiting in
   chastening his body, and master in the governance of prelacy.

   S. Macarius was in a desert, and entered in to a pit or sepulchre,
   whereas had been buried many bodies of paynims, for to sleep, and he
   drew out one of these bodies and laid it under his head instead of a
   pillow. Then came thither devils for to make him aghast and afeard, and
   said one to another: Come with me to bathe thee. And the body that lay
   under his head said: I may not come, for I have a pilgrim upon me
   Iying, that I may not move. For all this S. Macarius was not afeard,
   but he beat the body with his fist, and said: Arise and go if thou
   mayst. When the devils saw that they might not make him afeard they
   cried with a great voice: Macarius, thou hast vanquished and overcome
   us twice. On a time as Macarius was nigh his house, the devil came with
   a great scythe on his neck, and would have smitten therewith S.
   Macarius, and the devil said to him: Thou dost to me great violence and
   force for I may not prevail against thee. Lo! what thou doest I do,
   thou fastest and I eat not, thou wakest and I never sleep, but there is
   one thing in which thou overcomest me, and Macarius said: What is that?
   To whom the devil said: That is humility, and thy meekness by which I
   may not prevail against thee.

   It happed on a time that a great temptation came upon S. Macarius, and
   much tempted him, and anon he filled a sack full of stones, and laid it
   on his neck and bare it many journeys together through the desert. Then
   another hermit met him and demanded him why he bare so great a burden,
   and he answered: I travail my body because it suffereth not me in
   peace, and thus I vex him that vexed me. This holy abbot S. Macarius
   saw passing tofore him a devil in the habit of a man, which was the
   clothing of a herald, all linen full of holes, and in every hole hung a
   phial, and he demanded him whither he went. The devil answered him, I
   go for to give drink unto these hermits, then demanded him, S.
   Macarius, wherefore he bare so many phials. And he answered: I shall
   offer to them one, and if he may not drink of that one, I shall proffer
   him another, and so the third, and of all the other, each after other,
   until they may find something pleasant to them for to fall into
   temptation. And when he came again, S. Macarius called him, and
   demanded him what he had found, and he answered that he had evil sped,
   for they were all so holy and blessed that they recked not of his
   drink, save one only which is named Theodistus. Then S. Macarius arose
   and came to these hermits, and found them all in good point save him
   whom the devil had tempted. Then S. Macarius did so much by his
   exhortation that he brought him again in the right way. Another time S.
   Macarius met the devil and demanded him whence he came, and the devil
   answered: I come from visiting thy brethren, then said S. Macarius: How
   do they? The devil answered: Evil. And he asked wherefore, and the
   devil said: For they all holy, and that worst is, there was on that was
   mine and I have lost him, for he is now made holier than the others.
   When S. Macarius heard this he gave laudings and thankings to God. It
   happed on a time S. Macarius found in his way the head of a dead man,
   and he demanded of it whose head it was, and the head answered: Of a
   paynim, and Macarius said to him: Where is thy soul? He answered: In
   hell; and he demanded if it were deep in hell, and he said: Deeper than
   is from heaven to earth. And after he demanded if there were any
   beneath him, and he said the Jews be lower than he was; he asked if
   there were any lower or beneath the Jews; to whom he said that the
   false christian men be yet lower and deeper in hell than the Jews, for
   as much as they have despited and villained the blood of Jesu Christ of
   which they were redeemed, so much the more be they tormented.

   On a time S. Macarius went in a desert and at the end of every mile he
   set a reed in the earth for to have knowledge thereby to turn again,
   and went forth nine days' journey, and after, he slept. And the devil
   took all these reeds and bound them and laid them at his head,
   wherefore he had great labour for to come again into his house. An
   hermit which was in desert was much tempted for to go again to the
   world, and he thought in his heart that he should do more good to be
   among the people than he should do in his hermitage. Then he told all
   this to S. Macarius, and S. Macarius said to him: Thus shalt thou say
   to thy thoughts, that for the love of Jesu Christ I keep the walls of
   this cell.

   It happed on a time that S. Macarius killed fly that bit him, and when
   he saw the blood of this fly, he repented him, and so, repentant of
   that, would revenge it, and anon unclothed him and went naked in the
   desert six months, and suffered himself to be bitten of the flies.
   After this S. Macarius when he had long lived, and God had showed many
   miracles for him, and had flowered in many virtues, he died and
   rendered his soul unto our Lord Jesu Christ, qui est benedictus in
   secula seculorum. Amen.
     __________________________________________________________________

               Here beginneth the Life of S. Felix, said Inpincis

   Felix was surnamed Inpincis, and is said of the place where he resteth,
   or of the pointelles of greffes. A greffe is properly called a pointel
   to write in tables of wax, by which he suffered death. And some say
   that he was a schoolmaster and taught children, and was to them much
   rigorous. After he was known of the paynims, and because he confessed
   plainly that he was christian and believed in Jesu Christ he was
   delivered to be tormented into the hands of the children his scholars,
   whom he had taught and learned, which scholars slew him with their
   pointelles, pricks, and greffes, and yet the church holdeth him for no
   martyr but for a confessor. And the paynims said to him that he should
   do sacrifice to the idols, but he blew on them and anon they fell to
   the earth. It is read in a legend that when Maximus, bishop of Nola,
   and Valerian, fled the persecution of the paynims, the bishop was
   tormented with hunger and thirst so much that he fell down to the
   ground, wherefore Felix was sent of an angel to him, and he bare
   nothing with him for to give to him, and he saw by him a cluster of
   raisins hanging on a tree, which he laid on his shoulders hastily, and
   bare it with him. And when the bishop was dead. Felix was elected and
   chosen to be bishop. And as he preached on a time the persecutors
   sought him, and he hid him in the clefts of a broken wall, and
   incontinent by the will of God came spincops and made their work and
   nets before him that they might not find him. And when the tyrants
   could not find him they went their way, and he went thence and came to
   the house of a widow, and took there his refection of her three months,
   and yet he saw her never in the visage. And at last when the peace was
   made he went him in to his church and there died and rested in our Lord
   and was buried by the city in a place that was called Pincis.

   And this Felix had a brother which was in likewise named Felix, and
   when this Felix was constrained to adore the idols he said: Ye be
   enemies unto your gods, for if ye bring me to them like as my brother
   did, and they shall fall to the earth and break.

   On a time this Felix did do labour his garden where he had set coles
   and worts for his use, and some of his neighbours would have stolen
   away these coles and worts, and hoed in the garden all the night and
   digged, and on the morning S. Felix saluted them, and anon they
   confessed their sin, and he pardoned them and then they went their way.

   And a little while after the paynims came for to take S. Felix, and
   anon so great dolour and pain took them that they began to howl as
   dogs. And he said to them: Believe ye in God and say ye that Jesu
   Christ is very God, and do you to be baptized, and ye shall be whole,
   and your pain shall cease, and so they did, and anon they were all
   whole. And after, the bishop of the idols came to him and said: Sire,
   as soon as our God saw thee he fled, and when I said Why fleest thou?
   he said: I may not suffer the virtue of Felix, and when my God doubteth
   thee, much more I ought to doubt thee, and when Felix had confirmed him
   in the faith he baptized him. And Felix said to them that adored
   Apollo: If Apollo be very God, let him say to me what I hold in my
   hand. And he had in his hand a schedule wherein was written the orison
   of our Lord, that is the Paternoster. And he might not answer,
   wherefore the paynims were converted to our Lord. And at last when he
   had sung his mass and the peace given to the people, he fell down in
   prayer upon the pavement of the church and passed out of this life unto
   our Lord.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Here followeth the Life of S. Marcel and the interpretation of his name.

   Marcel is as much to say as denying to do evil, or it is said as
   smiting the seas, that is to say the adversities of the world, for the
   world resembleth the sea. For like as Chrysostom saith upon Matthew:
   Continual dread is his confuse, and always in the sea is continual
   dread, the image of death and perpetual disordinance without ceasing.

Of S. Marcel.

   S. Marcel was chief bishop and pope of Rome. He went to chastise and
   reprove Maximian the emperor of this, that he was over cruel to
   christian people. And the emperor had of him so great despite that he
   made of the house of a good woman, of which S. Marcel had made a
   church, the said emperor made it a stable for horses, and in the place
   where S. Marcel had sung mass, the emperor made him to keep his horse,
   in which service S. Marcel was all his life after, and in that service
   S. Marcel died holily the year of the incarnation of our Lord two
   hundred and four score and seven.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Here followeth of S. Anthony, and first the interpretation of his name.

   Anthony is said of Ana, which is as much to say as high, and tenens
   that is holding, which is as much as to say as holding high things and
   despising the world. He despised the world and said: It is deceiving,
   transitory and bitter, and Athanasius wrote his life.

Of the Life of S. Anthony.

   S. Anthony was born in Egypt of good and religious father and mother,
   and when he was but twenty years old, he heard on a time in the church
   read in the gospel, that said: If thou wilt be perfect go sell all that
   thou hast and give it to poor men; and then according thereto he sold
   all that he had, and gave it to the poor people and became an hermit.
   He had overmany temptations of the devil. Then on a time when he had
   overcome the spirit of fornication which tempted him therein by the
   virtue of his faith, the devil came to him in the form of a little
   child all black, and fell down at his feet and confessed that he was
   the devil of fornication, which S. Anthony had desired and prayed to
   see him, for to know him that so tempted young people. Then said S.
   Anthony: Sith I have perceived that thou art so foul a thing I shall
   never doubt thee.

   After, he went into a hole or cave to hide him, and anon he found there
   a great multitude of devils, that so much beat him that his servant
   bare him upon his shoulders in to his house as he had been dead. When
   the other hermits were assembled and wept his death, and would have
   done his service, suddenly S. Anthony revived and made his servant to
   bear him into the pit again where the devils had so evil beaten him,
   and began to summon the devils again, which had beaten him, to battles.
   And anon they came in form of divers beasts wild and savage, of whom
   that one howled, another siffled, and another cried, and another brayed
   and assailed S. Anthony, that one with the horns, the others with their
   teeth, and the others with their paws and ongles, and disturned, and
   all to-rent his body that he supposed well to die. Then came a clear
   brightness, and all the beasts fled away, and S. Anthony understood
   that in this great light our Lord came, and he said twice: Who art
   thou? The good Jesu answered: I am here, Anthony. Then said S. Anthony:
   O good Jesu! where hast thou been so long? why wert thou not here with
   me at the beginning to help me and to heal my wounds? Then our Lord
   said: I was here but I would see and abide to see thy battle, and
   because thou hast manly fought and well maintained thy battle, I shall
   make thy name to be spread through all the world. S. Anthony was of so
   great fervour and burning love to God, that when Maximus, the emperor,
   slew and martyred christian men, he followed the martyrs that he might
   be a martyr with them and deserve it, and was sorry that martyrdom was
   not given to him.

   After this, as S. Anthony went in desert he found a platter of silver
   in his way; then he thought whence this platter should come, seeing it
   was in no way for any man to pass, and also if it had fallen from any
   man he should have heard it sound in the falling. Then said he well
   that the devil had laid it there for to tempt him, and said: Ha! devil,
   thou weenest to tempt me and deceive me, but it shall not be in thy
   power. Then the platter vanished away as a little smoke. And in
   likewise it happed him of a mass of gold that he found in this way,
   which the devil had cast for to deceive him, which he took and cast it
   into the fire and anon it vanished away. After, it happed that S.
   Anthony on a time was in prayer, and saw in a vision all the world full
   of snares and gins. Then cried S. Anthony and said: O good Lord, who
   may escape from these snares? And a voice said to him: Very humility
   shall escape them without more.

   When S. Anthony on a time was left in the air, the devils came against
   him and laid to him all the evils that he had done from his childhood,
   tofore the angels. Then said the angels: Thou oughtest not to tell the
   evils that have been defeated, but say if thou know any evil sith he
   was made a monk, then the devils contrived many evils, and when they
   might not prove them, the angels bare him higher than tofore, and after
   set him again in his place. S. Anthony recordeth of himself that he had
   seen a man so great and so high that he vaunted himself to be the
   virtue and the providence of God, and said to me: Demand of me what
   thou wilt and I shall give it to thee. And I spit in the midst of his
   visage, and anon I armed me with the sign of the cross, and ran upon
   him, and anon he vanished away. And after this the devil appeared to
   him in so great a stature that he touched the heaven, and when S.
   Anthony had demanded him what he was, he answered: I am the devil and
   demand thee why these monks and these cursed christian men do me thus
   much shame? S. Anthony said: They do it by good right, for thou dost to
   them the worst thou canst, and the devil answered: I do to them none
   harm, but they trouble each other, I am destroyed and come to naught
   because that Jesu Christ reigneth over all.

   A young man passed by S. Anthony and his bow in his hand, and beheld
   how S. Anthony played with his fellows, and was evil apaid. Then S.
   Anthony said to him that he should bend his bow, and so he did, and
   shot two or three shots tofore him, and anon he unbent his bow. Then
   demanded him S. Anthony why he held not his bow bent. And he answered
   that it should then be over weak and feeble; then said to him S.
   Anthony: In likewise play the monks, for to be after more strong to
   serve God.

   A man demanded of S. Anthony what he might do to please God, and he
   answered: Over all where thou shalt be or shalt go, have God tofore
   thine eyes, and the holy scripture, and hold thee in one place all
   still, and walk not ne royle not about in the country, do these three
   things and thou shalt be safe.

   An abbot came to S. Anthony for to be counselled of him what he might
   do for to be saved. S. Anthony answered to him: Have none affiance in
   the good that thou hast done, ne that thou hast kept thy belly and thy
   tongue well soberly, and repent thee not of penance that thou hast done
   I say, for like as fishes that have been long in the water when they
   come in to dry land they must die, in like wise the monks that go out
   of their cloister or cells, if they converse long with seculars they
   must needs lose their holiness and leave their good life. It behoveth
   the monks that they be solitary, and that they have three battles, that
   is of hearing, of speaking, and of seeing, and if they have but one of
   these battles, that is of the heart, yet they have overmuch.

   Some hermits came to S. Anthony for to visit him, and their abbot was
   with them; then said S. Anthony to the hermits: Ye have a good wise man
   with you, and after he said to the abbot: Thou hast founden good
   brethren. Then answered the abbot: Truly I have good brethren, but
   there is no door on their house, each body may enter that will, and go
   into the stable and unbind the ass of within. And this said he because
   that the brethren had overmuch their mouths open to speak, for anon as
   they have thought on a thing is it come to the mouth. Then S. Anthony
   said: Ye ought to know that there be three bodily movings, that one is
   of nature, another of overmuch plenty of meats, and the third of the
   devil.

   There was an hermit that had renounced the world, but not perfectly,
   for he had somewhat proper to himself, whom S. Anthony sent to the
   market to buy flesh, and as he was coming and brought the flesh, the
   dogs assailed him, and all totare him, and took the flesh from him; and
   when he came to S. Anthony he told him what was happed to him; and then
   said S. Anthony to him: Thus as the hounds have done to thee, so do the
   devils to monks that keep money and have some proper to themselves.

   On a time as S. Anthony was in the wilderness in his prayer and was
   weary, he said to our Lord, Lord, I have great desire to be saved, but
   my thoughts let me. Then appeared an angel to him and said: Do as I do,
   and thou shalt be safe, and he went out and saw him one while labour
   and another while pray, do thus and thou shalt be saved.

   On a time when the brethren hermits were assembled tofore S. Anthony,
   they demanded of him of the state of souls when they be departed from
   the body, and the next night after a voice called S. Anthony and said:
   Arise, and go out and see up on high. When S. Anthony beheld upward on
   high he saw one long and terrible, whose head touched the clouds, which
   kept people having wings that would have fled to heaven, and this great
   man retained and caught some, and others he might not retain ne let for
   they flew forth up. Then he heard a noise full of joy, and another full
   of sorrow, and he understood that this was the devil that retained some
   souls that went not to heaven, and the other he might not hold ne
   retain, wherefore he made sorrow, and for the other he made joy, and so
   he heard the sorrow and the joy meddled together.

   It happed on a time that S. Anthony laboured with his brethren the
   hermits, and he saw a vision much sorrowful, and therefore he kneeled
   down on his knees and prayed our Lord that he would empesh the great
   sorrow that was to come. Then the other hermits demanded what thing it
   was, and he said that it was a great sorrow, for I have seen of great
   plenty of beasts which environed me, which feared all the country, and
   I wot well that this is to say that there shall come a great trouble of
   men like unto beasts, that shall defoul the sacraments of holy church.
   Then came a voice from heaven to S. Anthony that said that great
   abomination shall come to mine altar. And anon after, the heresy of
   Arius began, and much troubled holy church, and did many evils. They
   beat monks and other all naked tofore the people, and slew christian
   men like sheep upon the altars, and in especial one Balachyn did great
   persecution to whom S. Anthony wrote a letter which said: I see the ire
   and mal talent of our Lord coming upon thee if thou suffer not the
   christians to live in peace. Then I command thee that thou do to them
   no more villainy or thou shalt have a mischance hastily. The unhappy
   man received this letter and began to mock S. Anthony, and spit on it,
   and beat well him that brought the letter, and sent again to S. Anthony
   these words: If thou hast so great charge of thy monks come to me and I
   shall give to thee my discipline: but it happed that the fifteenth day
   after he mounted upon a horse over debonair, and nevertheless when the
   horse felt him upon him he bit him on the legs and thighs that he died
   on the third day.

   It happed another time that the hermits were come to S. Anthony and
   demanded of him a collation. Then said S. Anthony: Do ye this that is
   written in the gospel, if one give to the other a stroke on that one
   cheek show him that other? And they made answer: We may not do so; then
   said he: Suffer ye it once debonairly; they answered: We may not. Then
   said S. Anthony to his servant: Give them to drink good wine, for these
   monks be over delicious. Fair brethren, put yourselves to prayer, for
   ye have much great need. At the last S. Anthony assembled the hermits
   and gave to them the peace, and died and departed out of this world
   holily when he was of the age of an hundred and five years. Pray we to
   him that he pray for us.
     __________________________________________________________________

            Of S. Fabian, and the interpretation of his name first.

   Fabian is as much to say as making sovereign beatitude or blessedness,
   that is to wit in getting in three manner wises or manners. First by
   right and reason of adoption of being in achate, and by victory.

Of S. Fabian the Martyr.

   S. Fabian was a citizen and burgess of Rome, and it happed when the
   pope was dead that the people assembled for to choose another pope. And
   S. Fabian came to the election for to know who should be elect and
   chosen to that dignity. And anon a white dove descended from heaven and
   rested upon his head, and when the people saw that they marvelled much,
   and all they by common accord chose him for to be pope. This holy man
   Fabian, after when he was pope, he ordained throughout all the
   countries, seven deacons, and to them seven subdeacons, for to write
   the lives of martyrs.

   There was an emperor in his time named Philip, which was much sinful,
   and came boldly in the vigil of Easter in to the church for to be
   houseled and communed, whom the pope drove away and denied to him the
   communion, until he had gone and shriven him of his sins, and let him
   stand among the seculars. This holy pope also ordained the chrism in
   the church. Then at the last when he had been pope thirteen years
   Decius the emperor commanded to smite off his head, and so he was
   crowned with the crown of martyrdom the year of our Lord two hundred
   and fifty-three.
     __________________________________________________________________

           Of S. Sebastian, and first the interpretation of his name.

   Sebastian is said of sequens and beatitudo, and astim and ana, that is
   to say following the blessedness of the heavenly city, and this he gat
   five manner wises, after S. Austin, that is to say he gat by poverty
   the kingdom, with sorrow joy, with labour rest, with trouble glory, and
   with death life. Or Sebastianus is said of basto, for by the help of
   Christ he flourished in the church, and had a custom to comfort the
   martyrs in their torments.

Of S. Sebastian.

   S. Sebastian was a man of great faith, a good christian man, and was
   born in Narbonne, and after taught and endoctrined in the city of
   Milan, and was so well beloved of Diocletian and Maximian, emperors of
   Rome, that they made him master and duke of their meiny and power, and
   always would have him in their presence. And he was always with them in
   habit of a knight, and was girded with a girdle of gold above like as
   was used. And all this did he not for jollity, ne for cause that he
   dreaded death, or to die for the love of Jesu Christ, but he did it for
   to comfort the christian men in their belief when they were in distress
   for to reny the faith for dread of tormenting their body.

   It happed that two brethren german, very christian men and noble of
   lineage named Marcus and Marcellianus, were taken and constrained by
   the emperor for to worship and do sacrifice unto the idols, and there
   was given to them thirty days to be in prison without to receive death
   for their christian faith, within which time they might counsel and
   advise themselves whether they would do sacrifice to the idols or to
   leave, and their friends were suffered in this time of respite to come
   to them in prison, for to entreat and revoke them from their faith for
   to save their lives. Then came their parents and friends to them, and
   began to say: Whence cometh this hardness of heart that ye despise the
   old age of your father and mother which be now old? Ye get unto them
   new sorrows, the great pain that they had in your birth was not so
   great as the sorrow that they have now, and the sorrow that your mother
   suffereth is not to rehearse, wherefore right dear friends we pray you
   that ye will to these sorrows put some remedy, and depart you and leave
   the error of the christian men. And anon, after these words, their
   mother came, and entered in, in crying and tearing the hair of her head
   and in showing her paps, and said all weeping: Alas! I am mechant and
   unhappy that lose my two sons that I have given suck and nourished so
   sweetly; thou fair son, thou wert sweet and debonair to me. And to that
   other she said: Thou wert like and semblest well thy father. Alas! to
   what mischief and sorrow am I delivered for you my fair sons; I lose my
   sons which by their own will go for to die. My most dear children, have
   ye mercy on your sorrowful mother, that am in so great misease and in
   so great weepings for you; O poor caitiff that I am, what shall I do
   that lose my two sons? and to the death I see them go by their free
   will. Alas! this is a new manner of death, for to desire the death
   tofore it come. The mother had unnethe said her complaint but that
   their father was brought between two servants, which at the entry
   showed to his sons dust upon the poverty of his hoar head and cried:
   Alas I sorrowful caitiff come to the death of my two sons, which by
   their own agreement will die. O my over dearest sons that were the
   sustenance and staff of mine old age, sweetly nourished and taught and
   learned in science, what is this open foolishness and rage that is come
   on you and causeth you to love and desire so the death? There was never
   such a folly ne rage seen in the world. O ye my friends come forth and
   help me to beweep my children, ye that have hearts of pity, and ye old
   and young, weep ye, and I will weep so much that I see not the death of
   my sons. In the while that the father thus wept and said, came the two
   wives of these two sons, which bare in their arms their children, which
   weeping and crying said: Say ye now that be our dear husbands, in what
   ward leave ye us and your children! Alas, what shall become of us, our
   children, and our goods, that for your sake shall be lost? Alas
   caitiffs that we be, what thing is to us happened? how have ye hearts
   of iron? in what manner may ye so be hardened, so out of nature, and so
   cruel, that also despise your father and mother and refuse all your
   friends, chase away your wives, and reny and forsake your children, and
   with your will deliver yourselves for to die shamefully? Of these
   lamentable words tofore written, the two said sons Marcus and
   Marcellianus were so abashed and their hearts mollified, that almost
   they were returned from the christian faith, and would for the favour
   of their parents and friends have done sacrifice unto the idols. But at
   these words was S. Sebastian as a knight; when he saw them thus
   travailed, and so amollished anon came to them and said: O right noble
   knights of Jesu Christ, wise and hardy, which be come to the victory
   and now go aback, and for a few blandishing words vain and miserable,
   ye will lose the victory permanable, lose ye not the everlasting life
   for the blandishing words of women, be ye example to other christian
   men for to be strong in the faith, address ye your hearts above the
   world, and lose ye not your crown for the weepings of your wives and
   your children. They that now weep, certes should this day be glad and
   joyous if they knew that ye know. They ween that there be none other
   life but this which they see tofore their eyes, which after this shall
   come to nought: if they knew what is that other life without death and
   without heaviness, in which is joy permanable and everlasting, without
   doubt they would haste them for to go with you unto that life and
   should repute this life as vain. For it is full of misery and also
   false, and sith the beginning of the world hath deceived all his
   friends and conquered all them that have affiance in him, for she hath
   lied in her promise, yet doth she daily in this life more harm, for she
   maketh gluttons, and other she maketh lecherous, she maketh thieves for
   to slay, and the angry cruel, and the liars false and deceivable; she
   putteth discord among wedded and married people, and debate among the
   peaceable, by the world cometh all malice and also felony. This evil do
   they that in this life put their desires and ween long to live therein,
   and when they that thus serve the world have used their life in doing
   this evil aforesaid, then giveth she to them her daughter, that is the
   death perpetual; that is the reward that the life of this world giveth
   to her servants that depart from this world dispurveyed, and bear
   nothing with them but their sins. After this S. Sebastian turned him to
   their parents and friends and said to them in this manner: O ye my
   friends, lo, here the life of this world which deceiveth you in such
   wise that ye discounsel your friends from the everlasting life, ye
   distrouble your children that they should not come to the company of
   heaven, and to the honour permanable and to the amity of the emperor
   celestial, by your foolish words and your false weepings; if they
   should assent to your repeal, they should but a while dwell with you,
   and after should depart from your company where ye should see them in
   torments that should never end, whereas cruel flame devoureth the souls
   of miscreants and worshippers of idols, and the dragons eat the lips of
   cursed men, and the serpents destroy them that be evil; there where is
   heard nothing but wailings, weepings, and horrible cries of souls which
   burn continually in the fire of hell, and ever shall burn without
   dying. Suffer ye that your sons escape these torments, and think how ye
   may escape and let them suffer death for the love of Jesu Christ. Think
   not but they, when they shall be thus departed from you, go for to make
   ready your place and your mansion in heaven, where ye and your children
   may be in joy perpetual. In this hour and time that S. Sebastian, that
   was in habit of a knight clad with a mantle and girt with a girdle of
   gold, and had said these words, anon came a great light, in the which
   appeared a youngling clad with a white mantle among seven angels, and
   gave to S. Sebastian the peace saying: Thou shalt be alway with me.
   This saw the wife of Nicostratus named Zoe in whose house Marcus and
   Marcellianus were in prison, which had been mute and dumb six years by
   a sickness that she had; but she had understood that which S. Sebastian
   had said and had seen the light about him, and she fell down to his
   feet, and by signs of her hands made prayers to him. And after when S.
   Sebastian knew that she had lost her speech, anon he said to her: If I
   be the servant of Jesu Christ and if all that I have said be true, then
   I pray him that he will render to thee thy speech again that opened the
   mouth of Zacharias the prophet. And anon escried this woman much high,
   and said: The word that thou hast said is very true, and blessed be
   thou and the word of thy mouth, and blessed be all they that by thee
   believe in Jesu Christ the son of God, for I have seen certainly seven
   angels tofore thee holding a book, in which was written all that which
   thou hast said, and cursed be they that believe thee not. And
   Nicostratus husband of this woman, and the father and mother, and all
   the friends of Marcellianus and Marcus received the christian faith and
   were all baptized by Polycarpus the priest unto the number of
   seventy-eight persons, men, women, and children. And ten days during
   they abode together in orisons and prayers, and thanked God of his
   benefits. Among them was Tranquillinus, father unto the holy martyrs
   aforesaid, which had eleven year during, the gout in his feet and
   hands, and as soon as Polycarp had baptized him he became as whole and
   sound in his feet and hands as a child. After the ten days, Agrestin
   and Chromatius, provosts of Rome, made Tranquillinus their father to
   come tofore them, and demanded of him how his sons were advised and
   counselled, and he answered: Much well did ye when ye gave to them
   respite, for in the meantime they that should have died have found life
   and joy. And the provost supposed that his sons had been turned, and
   said: To-morn I shall see how thy sons shall make sacrifice to the
   idols, by whom thou and they may dwell in peace. And Tranquillinus
   said: Gentle man, if thou wilt justly adore and work about me and my
   sons thou shalt find that the name of christian men is of great virtue.
   And the provost said: Tranquillinus, art thou wood? And he answered: I
   have been out of my wit, but as soon as I believed in Jesu Christ I
   received health of body and of soul. The provost said: I see well that
   the respite of thy sons hath brought thee in error. Tranquillinus said:
   Know you of what works come error? The provost bade him say, and he
   said: The first error is to leave the way of life and go by the way of
   death for to dispute that men which be dead for to be gods, and to
   adore their images, made of wood or of stone. The provost said: Then
   they be no gods that we adore? Tranquillinus said: It is read in our
   books what men they were that ye adore for gods, how evil they lived,
   and how mechantly they died. Saturnus whom ye worship for god was lord
   of Crete, and ate the flesh of his children, how? is not he one of your
   gods? And Jupiter his son, whom ye adore, which slew his father, and
   took his sister to his wife, what evil was this? how art thou in great
   error that adorest this cursed man, and sayest to the image of stone:
   Thou art my god, and to the stock of tree: Help me. The provost said:
   If there be none but one God invisible that ye adore, wherefore then
   adore ye Jesu Christ whom the Jews crucified? Tranquillinus answered:
   If thou knewest of a ring of gold in which were a precious stone, Iying
   in the mire of a valley, thou wouldst send thy servants for to take up
   this ring and if they might not lift it up, thou wouldst unclothe
   thyself of thy clothes of silk and do on a coarse coat and wouldst help
   to take up this ring and make a great feast. The provost said:
   Wherefore hast thou put forth this proposition now? Tranquillinus
   answered: For to show to thee that we adore one only God. The provost
   said: What understandest thou by this ring? Tranquillinus said. the
   gold of the ring is the body human, and the precious stone signifieth
   the soul which is enclosed in the body, the body and the soul make a
   man, like as the gold and the precious stone make a ring, and much more
   precious is the man to Jesu Christ than the ring is to thee. Thou
   sendest thy servants for to take up this ring out of the dirt or mire,
   and they may not. Thus sent God into this world the prophets for to
   draw the human lineage out of the ordure of sins, and they might not do
   it. And like as thou shouldst leave thy rich clothes and clothe thee
   with a coarse coat, and wouldst descend into the privy, and put thy
   hands into foul ordure to take up the ring, right so the majesty of God
   hid the light of his divinity by a carnal vestment, which he took of
   our nature human, and clad him therewith and descended from heaven, and
   came here beneath into the privy of this world, and put his hands in
   the ordure of our miseries in suffering hunger and thirst, and took us
   up out of the filth and washed us from our sins by the water of
   baptism. And thus he which despiseth thee because thou shouldst descend
   in a foul habit to take up the ring, thou mightest well put him to
   death. Thus all they that reny or despise Jesu Christ because he
   humbled himself for to save man, may in no wise escape from the death
   of hell. The provost said: I see well that these be but fables; thou
   hast taken respite for thy sons, knowest thou not well that the emperor
   our lord is cruel against christian men? Tranquillinus said: It is
   folly to doubt more human puissance than the puissance divine, they
   that be cruel against us may well torment our bodies but they may not
   take from our heart Jesu Christ. Then the provost put Tranquillinus in
   the hands of the sergeants saying: Show to me the medicine by which
   thou art healed of thy gout, and I shall give to thee gold without
   number. Tranquillinus said: Know thou that much evil shall come to them
   that sell and buy the grace of God, but if thou wilt be whole of the
   malady of the gout, believe in Jesu Christ and thou shalt be whole as I
   am. The provost said: Bring him to me that hath healed thee.
   Tranquillinus went to Polycarp and said to him all this, and brought
   him with S. Sebastian unto the provost and informed him in the faith,
   and he prayed them that he might have his health, and S. Sebastian said
   that he should first reny his idols and give him licence to break them,
   and then he should have his health. Then Chromatius the provost said
   that his servants should break them . S. Sebastian said: They be
   afeared and dare not break them, and if the fiends hurt any of them by
   any occasion, the misbelievers would say that they were hurt because
   they brake their gods. And then Polycarp and S. Sebastian destroyed
   more than two hundred idols. Then said they to the provost: Why hast
   thou not received the health whilst we brake the idols? Thou keepest
   yet thy misbelief or else keepest yet some idols. Then he showed them a
   chamber which was light as had been of stars, whereupon his father had
   dispended two hundred pods of gold, by which he knew things for to
   come. Then said S. Sebastian: As long as thou keepest this whole thou
   mayst never have health, and then he agreed it should be broken.
   Tiburtius, his son, which was a noble young man, said plainly that so
   noble a work should not be destroyed: How well I will not be against my
   father's health, this will I well, that there be ordained two furnaces
   of fire burning, and then I will that ye destroy this work, and if my
   father have his health I shall be content, and if he receive not his
   health, then I will that ye two shall be burnt in these two furnaces of
   fire all quick. And S. Sebastian said: Be it as thou hast said: And
   forthwith they went and brake the chamber. And in the meanwhile the
   angel of our Lord appeared to the provost and said his health was given
   to him, and anon he was all whole, and ran after him for to have kissed
   his feet, but he denied him for he had not received baptism. And then
   he and Tiburtius his son with one thousand four hundred of their family
   were baptized. Then Zoe was taken of the miscreants and tormented so
   long that she gave up the spirit. And when Tranquillinus heard that, he
   came forth and said: Alas! why live we so long? Women go tofore us to
   the crown of martyrdom; and within a few days after he was stoned to
   death. And Tiburtius was commanded that he should go barefoot upon
   burning coals or else do sacrifice to the idols, and then he made the
   sign of the cross upon the coals and went on them barefoot, and he
   said: Me thinketh I go upon rose flowers in the name of our Lord Jesu
   Christ. To whom Fabian the provost said: It is not unknown to us that
   your Jesu Christ is a teacher of sorcery. To whom Tiburtius said: Hold
   thy peace thou cursed wretch, for thou art not worthy to name so
   worthy, so holy ne so sweet a name. Then the provost was wroth and
   commanded to smite off his head, and so he was martyred. And then
   Marcellianus and Marcus were sore tormented and bound to a pillar, and
   as they were so bound they said: Lo! how good and joyful it is brethren
   to dwell together. To whom the provost said: Ye wretches, do away your
   madness and deliver yourselves, and they said: We were never so well
   fed, we would that thou wouldest let us stand here till that the
   spirits should depart out of our bodies. And then the provost commanded
   that they should be pierced through the body with spears, and so they
   fulfilled their martyrdom. After this S. Sebastian was acccused to the
   emperor that he was christian, wherefore Diocletian, the emperor of
   Rome, made him come tofore him, and said to him: I have always loved
   thee well, and have made thee master of my palace; how then hast thou
   been christian privily against my health, and in despite of our gods?
   S. Sebastian said: Always I have worshipped Jesu Christ for thy health
   and for the state of Rome, and I think for to pray and demand help of
   the idols of stone is a great folly. With these words Diocletian was
   much angry and wroth, and commanded him to be led to the field and
   there to be bounden to a stake for to be shot at. And the archers shot
   at him till he was as full of arrows as an urchin is full of pricks,
   and thus left him there for dead. The night after came a christian
   woman for to take his body and to bury it, but she found him alive and
   brought him to her house, and took charge of him till he was all whole.
   Many christian men came to him which counselled him to void the place,
   but he was comforted and stood upon a step where the emperor should
   pass by, and said to him: The bishops of the idols deceive you evilly
   which accuse the christian men to be contrary to the common profit of
   the city, that pray for your estate and for the health of Rome.
   Diocletian said: Art thou not Sebastian whom we commanded to be shot to
   death. And S. Sebastian said: Therefore our Lord hath rendered to me
   life to the end that I should tell you that evilly and cruelly ye do
   persecutions unto christian men. Then Diocletian made him to be brought
   into prison into his palace, and to beat him so sore with stones till
   he died. And the tyrants threw his body into a great privy, because the
   christian men should make no feast to bury his body, ne of his
   martyrdom. But S. Sebastian appeared after to S. Lucy, a glorious
   widow, and said to her: In such a privy shalt thou find my body hanging
   at an hook, which is not defouled with none ordure, when thou hast
   washed it thou shalt bury it at the catacombs by the apostles. And the
   same night she and her servants accomplished all that Sebastian had
   commanded her. He was martyred the year of our Lord two hundred and
   eighty seven.

   And S. Gregory telleth in the first book of his Dialogues that a woman
   of Tuscany which was new wedded was prayed for to go with other women
   to the dedication of the church of Sebastian, and the night tofore she
   was so moved in her flesh that she might not abstain from her husband,
   and on the morn, she having greater shame of men than of God, went
   thither, and anon as she was entered into the oratory where the relics
   of S. Sebastian were, the fiend took her and tormented her before all
   the people. And then the priest took the coverture of the altar and
   covered her, and then the devil assailed the priest. Her friends led
   her to the enchanters that they should enchant the fiend, but as soon
   as they began the enchantment, by the judgment of God a legion of
   devils entered into her, that is six thousand six hundred and sixty
   six, and vexed her more sharply than tofore, and an holy man named
   Fortunatus by his prayers healed her. It is read in the gestes of the
   Lombards that, in the time of King Gumbert all Italy was smitten with
   so great a pestilence that unnethe they that were alive might bury the
   dead, and this pestilence was most at Rome and Pavia. Then the good
   angel was seen visibly of many, and an evil angel following bearing a
   staff whom he bade smite and slay, and as many strokes as he smote an
   house, so many dead persons were borne out of it. Then at last it was
   shewed to one by God's grace that this pestilence should not cease till
   that they had made an altar to S. Sebastian at Pavia, which then was
   made in the church of S. Peter, and anon the pestilence ceased, and
   thither from Rome relics of S. Sebastian were brought. And S. Ambrose
   in his preface saith thus: O Lord, the blood of thy blessed martyr S.
   Sebastian was shed for the confession of thy name, he hath showed thy
   marvels that they profit in infirmity virtue, and giveth to our studies
   profit, and to them not steadfast to thee it giveth aid and help. Then
   let us pray to this holy martyr S. Sebastian that he pray unto our Lord
   that we may be delivered from all pestilence and from sudden death, and
   so depart advisedly hence, that we may come to everlasting joy and
   glory in heaven.
     __________________________________________________________________

   And next followeth of S. Agnes, and first the interpretation of her name.

   Agnes is said of agna a lamb, for she was humble and debonair as a
   lamb, or of agnos in Greek, which is to say debonair and piteous, for
   she was debonair and merciful. Or Agnes of agnoscendo, for she knew the
   way of truth, and after this S. Austin saith, truth is opposed against
   vanity, falseness, and doubleness, for these three things were taken
   from her for the truth that she had.

Of S. Agnes.

   The blessed virgin S. Agnes was much wise, and well taught, as S.
   Ambrose witnesseth, and wrote her passion. She was fair of visage, but
   much fairer in the christian faith, she was young of age, and aged in
   wit, for in the thirteenth year of her age she lost the death that the
   world giveth, and found life in Jesu Christ, which when she came from
   school the son of the prefect of Rome, for the emperor, loved her, and
   when his father and mother knew it, they offered to give much riches
   with him if he might have her in marriage, and offered to S. Agnes
   precious gems and jewels, which she refused to take, whereof it happed
   that the young man was ardently esprised in the love of S. Agnes, and
   came again and took with him more precious and richer adornments, made
   with all manner of precious stones, and as well by his parents as by
   himself offered to S. Agnes rich gifts and possessions, and all the
   delights and deduits of the world, and all to the end to have her in
   marriage. But S. Agnes answered to him in this matter: Go from me thou
   fardel of sin, nourishing of evils and morsel of death, and depart, and
   know thou that I am prevented and am loved of another lover, which hath
   given to me many better jewels, which hath fianced me by his faith, and
   is much more noble of lineage than thou art, and of estate. He hath
   clad me with precious stones and with jewels of gold, he hath set in my
   visage a sign that I receive none other espouse but him, and hath
   showed me over-great treasures which he must give me if I abide with
   him. I will have none other spouse but him, I will seek none other, in
   no manner may I leave him, with him am I firm and fastened in love,
   which is more noble, more puissant and fairer than any other, whose
   love is much sweet and gracious, of whom the chamber is now for to
   receive me where the virgins sing merrily. I am now embraced of him of
   whom the mother is a virgin, and his father knew never woman, to whom
   the angels serve. The sun and the moon marvel them of his beauty, whose
   works never fail, whose riches never minish, by whose odour dead men
   rise again to life, by whose touching the sick men be comforted, whose
   love is chastity. To him I have given my faith, to him I have commanded
   my heart; when I love him then am I chaste, and when I touch him then
   am I pure and clean, and when I take him then am I a virgin, this is
   the love of my God. When the young man had heard all this he was
   despaired, as he that was taken in blind love, and was over sore
   tormented, in so much that he lay down sick in his bed for the great
   sorrow that he had. Then came the physicians and anon knew his malady,
   and said to his father that he languished of carnal love that he had to
   some woman. Then the father enquired and knew that it was this woman,
   and did do speak to S. Agnes for his son, and said to her how his son
   languished for her love. S. Agnes answered that in no wise she would
   break the faith of her first husband. Upon that the provost demanded
   who was her first husband, of whom she so much avaunted, and in his
   power so much trusted. Then one of her servants said she was christian,
   and that she was so enchanted that she said Jesu Christ was her
   espouse. And when the provost heard that she was christian the provost
   was much glad because to have power on her, for then the christian
   people were in the will of the lord, and if they would not reny their
   God and their belief all their goods should be forfeited. Wherefore
   then the provost made S. Agnes to come in justice and he examined her
   sweetly, and after cruelly by menaces. S. Agnes, well comforted, said
   to him: Do what thou wilt, for my purpose shalt thou never change. And
   when she saw him now flattering and now terribly angry she scorned him.
   And the provost said to her, being all angry: One of two things thou
   shalt choose, either do sacrifice to our gods with the virgins of the
   goddess Vesta, or go to the bordel to be abandoned to all that thither
   come, to the great shame and blame of all thy lineage. S. Agnes
   answered: If thou knewest who is my God thou wouldst not say to me such
   words, but for as much as I know the virtue of my God, I set nothing by
   thy menaces, for I have his angel which is keeper of my body. Then the
   judge all araged made to take off her clothes, and all naked to be led
   to the bordel. And thus S. Agnes that refused to do sacrifice to the
   idols, was delivered naked to go to the bordel, but anon as she was
   unclothed God gave to her such grace that the hairs of her head became
   so long that they covered all her body to her feet, so that her body
   was not seen. And when S. Agnes entered into the bordel anon she found
   the angel of God ready for to defend her, and environed S. Agnes with a
   bright clearness in such wise that no man might see her ne come to her.
   Then made she of the bordel her oratory, and in making her prayers to
   God she saw tofore her a white vesture, and anon therewith she clad her
   and said: I thank thee Jesu Christ which accountest me with thy virgins
   and hast sent me this vesture. All they that entered made honour and
   reverence to the great clearness that they saw about S. Agnes, and came
   out more devout and more clean than they entered. At last came the son
   of the provost with a great company for to accomplish his foul desires
   and lusts. And when he saw his fellows come out and issue all abashed,
   he mocked them and called them cowards. And then he, all araged,
   entered for to accomplish his evil will. And when he came to the
   clearness, he advanced him for to take the virgin, and anon the devil
   took him by the throat and strangled him that he fell down dead.

   And when the provost heard these tidings of his son he ran weeping to
   the bordel, and began crying, to say to S. Agnes: O thou cruel woman,
   why hast thou showed thy enchantment on my son? and demanded of her how
   his son was dead, and by what cause. To whom S. Agnes answered: He took
   him into his power to whom he had abandoned his will. Why be not all
   they dead, said he, that entered here tofore him? For his fellows saw
   the miracle of the great clearness and were afeard and went their way
   unhurt, for they did honour to my God which hath clad me with this
   vestment and hath kept my body, but your villainous son, as soon as he
   entered into this house began to bray and cry, and when he would have
   laid hand upon me, anon the devil slew him as thou seest. If thou mayst
   raise him, said he, it may well appear that thou hast not put him to
   death. And S. Agnes answered: How well that thy creance is not worthy
   to impetre ne get that of our Lord, nevertheless because it is time
   that the virtue of God be showed, go ye all out that I may make my
   prayer to God. And when she was on her prayers the angel came and
   raised him to life, and anon he went out and began to cry, with a loud
   voice, that the God of christian men was very God in heaven, and in
   earth, and in the sea, and that the idols were vain that they
   worshipped, which might not help them ne none other.

   Then the bishops of the idols made a great discord among the people, so
   that all they cried: Take away this sorceress and witch that turned
   men's minds and alieneth their wits. When the provost saw these marvels
   he would gladly have delivered S. Agnes because she had raised his son,
   but he doubted to be banished, and set in his place a lieutenant named
   Aspasius for to satisfy the people, and because he could not deliver
   her he departed sorrowfully. This Aspasius did do make a great fire
   among all the people and did do cast S. Agnes therein. Anon as this was
   done the flame departed in two parts, and burnt them that made the
   discords, and she abode all whole without feeling the fire. The people
   weened that she had done all by enchantment. Then made S. Agnes her
   orison to God thanking him that she was escaped from the peril to lose
   her virginity, and also from the burning of the flame. And when she had
   made her orison the fire lost all his heat, and quenched it. Aspasius,
   for the doubtance of the people, commanded to put a sword in her body,
   and so she was martyred. Anon came the christian men and the parents of
   S. Agnes and buried the body, but the heathen defended it, and cast so
   stones at them, that unnethe they escaped. She suffered martyrdom in
   the time of Constantine the great, which began to reign the year of our
   Lord three hundred and nine.

   Among them that buried her body was one Emerentiana which had been
   fellow to S. Agnes, how be it she was not yet christened, but an holy
   virgin, she came also to the sepulchre of S. Agnes, which constantly
   reproved the gentiles, and of them she was stoned to death and slain.
   Anon there came an earthquaver, lightning and thunder, that many of the
   paynims perished, so that forthon the christian people might surely
   come to the sepulchre unhurt, and the body of Emerentiana was buried by
   the body of S. Agnes. It happed that when the friends of S. Agnes
   watched at her sepulchre on a night, they saw a great multitude of
   virgins clad in vestments of gold and silver, and a great light shone
   tofore them, and on the right side was a lamb more white than snow, and
   saw also S. Agnes among the virgins which said to her parents: Take
   heed and see that ye bewail me no more as dead, but be ye joyful with
   me, for with all these virgins Jesu Christ hath given me most brightest
   habitation and dwelling, and am with him joined in heaven whom in earth
   I loved with I my thought. And this was the eighth day after her
   passion. And because of this vision holy church maketh memory of her
   the eight days of the feast after, which is called Agnetis secundo.

   Of her we read an example that in the church of S. Agnes was a priest
   which was named Paulus and always served in that church, and had right
   great temptation of his flesh, but because he doubted to anger our Lord
   he kept him from sin, and prayed to the pope that he would give him
   leave for to marry. The pope considered his simpleness, and for his
   bounty he gave him a ring in which was an emerald, and commanded that
   he should go to the image of S. Agnes which was in his church, and pray
   her that she would be his wife. This simple man did so, and the image
   put forth her finger and he set the ring thereon, and then she drew her
   finger again and kept the ring fast. And then anon all his temptation
   carnal was quenched and taken away from him, and yet as it is said the
   ring is on the finger of the image.

   Constance the daughter of Constantine was smitten with a sore and foul
   leprosy. When she had heard of the vision of S. Agnes, at her tomb
   showed to her friends, she came to the sepulchre of S. Agnes, and when
   she was in her prayers she fell asleep, and she saw in her sleep, S.
   Agnes saying to her: Constance, work constantly, and if thou wilt
   believe in Christ, thou shalt anon be delivered of thy sickness,
   wherewith she awoke

   and found herself perfectly whole, and anon she received baptism, and
   founded a church upon the body of the virgin and there abode in her
   virginity, and assembled there many virgins, because of her good
   example. In another place it is read that when the church of S. Agnes
   was void, the pope said to a priest that he would give to him a wife
   for to nourish and keep, and he meant to commit the church of S. Agnes
   to his cure. And he delivered to him a ring and bade him to wed the
   image, and the image put forth her finger and he set on it a ring and
   anon she closed the finger to her hand and kept the ring, and so he
   espoused her. Of this virgin saith S. Ambrose in the book of virgins:
   This virgin, young men, old men and children praise, there is none more
   to be praised than that may be praised of all. S. Ambrose saith in his
   preface that this blessed S. Agnes despised the delights of noblesse,
   and deserved heavenly dignity, she left the desires of man's
   fellowship, and she found the fellowship of the everlasting King. And
   she, receiving a precious death for the confession of Jesu Christ, is
   made conformable to him everlastingly, to reign in joy in heaven, to
   the which he bring us for whose glorious name and faith this glorious
   virgin S. Agnes suffered martyrdom of death.
     __________________________________________________________________

 Here beginneth the life of S. Vincent. And first of the interpretation of his
                                     name.

   Vincent is as much to say as burning vices, or overcoming burnings and
   keeping victory, for he burnt and destroyed vices by mortification of
   his flesh, he vanquished the burnings of torments by stedfast
   sufferance, he held the victory of the world by despising of the same.
   He vanquished three things in the world, that is to wit, false errors,
   foul loves, and worldly dreads, which things he overcame by wisdom, by
   cleanness, and by constancy. Of whom S. Austin saith that the
   martyrdoms of saints have enseigned that the world is overcome with all
   errors, loves and dreads. And some affirm that S. Austin wrote and
   compiled his passion, which Prudentius set right clearly in verses.

   Vincent was noble of lineage, but he was more noble by faith and
   religion, and was deacon to S. Valerian bishop. He was in his childhood
   set to study, where by divine providence he flowered in double science
   most profoundly, that is to say in divinity and humanity; to whom S.
   Valerian, because he was empeshed in his tongue, committed to him the
   faits and works of charge, and himself entended to prayer and
   contemplation. And by the commandment of Dacian the provost, Vincent
   and Valerian were drawn to Valence and there cast in prison. And when
   the provost had supposed they had been almost perished for hunger and
   pain, he commanded them to come tofore him. And when he saw them whole
   and joyful he, being wroth, began to cry much strongly and said: What
   sayest thou Valerian which under the name of thy religion dost against
   the decrees of princes? And as the blessed Valerian answered lightly,
   S. Vincent said to him: Worshipful father answer him not so with a
   timorous heart, but put out thy voice and escry him freely, and father,
   if thou wilt command me, I shall go answer to the judge. To whom
   Valerian said: Right dear son, it is long since I hare committed to
   thee the charge of speaking, and now it behoveth thee to answer for the
   faith for which we be here. Then S. Vincent turned to the judge, and
   said to Dacian: Thou hast holden unto now words to reny our faith, but
   know thou that it is great felony to the wisdom of christian men to
   blame and reny our christian faith. Then Dacian, being wroth, commanded
   that the bishop should be put in exile, and Vincent as a man
   presumptuous and despitous should be put to be tormented in the place
   named eculeus. And it was made like a cross thwart of which the two
   ends were fixed in the earth, and that his members should thereon be
   broken, for to fear the other. And when he was all thus tobroken,
   Dacian said to him: Say Vincent now seest thou thy body unhappy? And
   Vincent smiling said to him: This is all that I have desired. Then the
   provost being wroth began to say and menace with many torments, and
   Vincent said to him: O unhappy man, how weenest thou to anger me? the
   more grievously that thou tormentest me, so much more pity shall God
   have on me. Arise up thou unhappy man and cursed, and by thy wicked
   spirit thou shalt be vanquished, for thou shalt find me more stronger
   by the virtue of God to suffer thy torments, than thou hast power to
   torment me. Then the provost was angry and began to cry, and the
   butchers took scourges and rods, and began to smite and beat him with
   rods of iron. And S. Vincent said: What sayest thou, Dacian? thou
   thyself avengest me of my torments. Then the provost was wood, and said
   to the butchers: Ye wretches what do ye, why fail and wax faint your
   hands? Ye have overcome murderers and adulterers, so that they could
   hide nothing among your torments, and this Vincent only shall more
   surmount your torments. Then the butchers took combs of iron, and began
   to comb him on the sides within the flesh, that the blood ran down over
   all his body and that the entrails and guts appeared by the jointures
   of his sides. And Dacian said to him: Vincent have pity on thyself in
   such wise that thou mayst recover thy fair youth, and win to spare the
   torments that be yet to come. And Vincent said to him: O venomous
   tongue of the devil, I doubt nothing of thy torments, but I fear sore
   that thou wilt fain to have mercy on me, for so much more as I see thee
   angry, so much more am I rejoiced, I will that thou in no wise minish
   ne lessen thy torments, so that thou know that thou be vanquished in
   all things. Then was he taken out of the torment, and was brought into
   a torment of fire, and he blamed and reproved the butchers of their
   long tarrying. Then with his goodwill he mounted upon the gridiron and
   there was roasted, broiled and burnt in all his members, and was
   slicked with small nails of Iron, and pricked with burning poinlers of
   iron. And when the blood ran into the fire and made wounds upon wounds,
   then they cast salt into the fire, that it should sparkle and spring in
   the wounds of his body, on all parts of the wounds that it should more
   cruelly burn, and do him more pain on his body by the flames, in such
   wise that the pricks of iron might not hold on his members, but on his
   entrails which hung out of his body, so that he might not move him. And
   for all this he was unmovable, but he prayed our Lord Jesu Christ with
   joined hands up to heaven. And when the ministers had said this to
   Dacian, he said: Alas! we be all vanquished; and he liveth yet, and
   because he may yet live longer, shut ye him in a much dark prison, and
   gather together all the sharp shells and prick them in his feet, and
   let him be stretched on them without any human comfort, and when he
   shall be dead come and tell me. And these right cruel ministers obeyed
   him as to their lord right cruel, but the king for whom he suffered the
   pain so inhuman, changed to him all this into joy, for the darknesses
   were all chased away out of the prison by great light, and the
   sharpness of the shells were turned into softness and sweetness of all
   manner of flowers, his feet were unbound, and he used the comfort of
   the honour of angels, and like as he had gone on the flowers singing
   with angels, the sweet sound of the song, and the sweetness and odour
   of the flowers, which was marvellous, was smelled out of the prison.
   And when the keepers had seen through the crevices of the prison this
   that they saw within, they were converted and turned to the faith. And
   when Dacian heard this he was wood, and said: What shall we do to him
   more? we be overcome. Now then let him be borne into a right soft bed,
   with soft clothes, so that he be not made more glorious, and to the end
   that he die not yet, but that he be made strong again, and be kempt
   again in new torments. And when he was brought in a soft bed, and had
   therein rested a while he rendered and gave up his spirit unto God in
   the year of our Lord two hundred and eighty eight under Diocletian and
   Maximian Emperors. And when Dacian heard say that he was dead, he was
   much sorrowful, and said that in that wise he was also vanquished: But
   sith I might not overcome him living I shall punish him dead, and if I
   may not have victory I shall be fulfilled of the pain. Then the body of
   S. Vincent was cast in a field for to be devoured of the beasts and
   fowls, by the commandment of Dacian, but it was kept by angels from
   touching of any beasts, and after came a raven which drove away all
   other birds and fowls, greater than he was, and chased away also a wolf
   with his bill and beak, and then turned his head towards the body as he
   that marvelled of the keeping of the angels. And when Dacian heard this
   thing: I trow, said he, that I may not surmount him when he is dead.
   Then commanded he that he should be cast into the sea with a mill stone
   bound to his neck, to the end that he that might not be destroyed upon
   the earth of beasts, should be devoured in the sea of belues and great
   fishes. Then the mariners that led the body in to the sea, cast it
   therein, but the body was sooner arrived aland than the mariners were,
   and was found of a lady and of some others by the revelation of Jesu
   Christ, and was honourably buried of them. And S. Austin saith of this
   holy blessed martyr, S. Vincent, that he vanquished so in words, he
   vanquished in pains, he vanquished in confession, he vanquished in
   tribulation, he overcame the fire, he overcame the water, he vanquished
   death and vanquished life. This Vincent was tormented for to dwell with
   God, he was scourged for to be introduced, he was beaten for to be
   enstrengthened, he burnt to be purged, he was gladder of the dread of
   God than of the world, and had liefer die to the world than to God.
   Also S. Austin saith in another place that a marvellous thing is set
   tofore our eyes, that is: a wicked judge, a cruel tormentor, and a
   martyr not overcome. And Prudentius wrote of cruelty and pity, saying
   that Vincent said to Dacian: The torments of the prison, the nails, the
   ongles, the straining combs of iron, with the flames of fire, and death
   which is last end of the pains, all these be plays and japes to
   christian men. Then Dacian said as overcome: Bind him and draw his arms
   out of their joints, and break ye all the bones in such wise that all
   the members be departed, to the end that the breath of him spring out
   by the holes of his members so torn. And the knight of God laughed at
   these things, and blamed the bloody hands because they put not the
   hooks and nails deeper in his members. And when he was in the prison
   the angel of God said to him: Arise up noble martyr, surely arise up,
   for thou shalt be our fellow, and be accompanied with saints. O knight
   invincible, strongest of all strong, now these aspre torments and
   cruel, doubt thee now a vanquisher. And Prudentius saith: Thou art only
   noble of the world, thou bearest only the victory of double battle,
   thou hast deserved two crowns together. Pray we then to him that he
   impetre grace of our Lord Jesu Christ that we may deserve to come unto
   his bliss and joy in heaven where he reigneth. Amen.
     __________________________________________________________________

Here followeth the Life of S. Basil, Bishop. And first of the interpretation of
                                   his name.

   Basil is said of basis in Greek, which is as much to say as a
   foundement, and leos, that is people, for he was foundement of them
   that would go to their maker. Or else it is said of basilico a serpent,
   for he overcame the serpent, enemy of mankind.

   S. Basil was a venerable bishop and a solemn doctor, of whom
   Amphilochius, bishop of Iconium wrote the life. And it was showed in a
   vision to an hermit, named Effrem how much holy he was. On a time as
   the said Effrem was in a trance he saw a pillar of fire, whose head
   reached heaven and a voice thereupon saying: Such is Basil, like unto
   this pillar that thou seest. And after this the hermit came to the city
   for to see at the day of Epiphany so noble a man, and when he saw him,
   he was clad with a white vesture going honourably with the clergy, then
   the hermit said to himself; I see well that I have laboured in vain,
   and for nought, he that is set in such honour may not be such as I have
   seen, we that have borne the burden and labour of the heat of the day
   in great pain, we had never such thing, and he here which is set in
   such honour, and also thus accompanied, is a column of fire, now I have
   great marvel what this may be. And S. Basil that saw this in spirit,
   made him to be brought to him, and when he was come he saw a tongue of
   fire speaking in his mouth. Then said Effrem: Truly Basil is great,
   truly Basil is the pillar of fire, and verily the Holy Ghost speaketh
   in his mouth. And Effrem said to S. Basil: Sire, I pray thee that thou
   impetre of God that I may speak Greek, to whom S. Basil said: Thou hast
   demanded a hard thing, nevertheless he prayed for him, and he spake
   Greek. Another hermit saw S. Basil, how he went in the habit of a
   bishop and deemed evilly in his thought, how he delighted in this
   estate in vain glory, and anon there came a voice that said to him:
   Thou delightest thee more in playing with and handling thy cat, than
   Basil doth in all his array and adornments.

   Valens the emperor which sustained the Arian heretics, took away a
   church from the christian men, and gave it to the Arians, to whom S.
   Basil said: O thou emperor, it is written: Honor regis judicium
   diligit. The honour of the king requireth true judgment, and the doom
   of a king is justice, and wherefore then hast thou commanded that the
   catholic christian men be put out of holy church? And the emperor said
   to him: Yet returnest thou to say villainy to me? it appertaineth not
   to thee. To whom S. Basil said: It appertaineth well to me, and also to
   die for justice. Then Demosthenes, provost of the meats of the emperor,
   upholder of the Arians, spake for them, and made an answer corrupted in
   language for to make satisfaction. And S. Basil said to him: It
   appertaineth to thee to ordain for the meats of the emperor and not to
   enquire of the teachings divine; the which, as confused, held him
   still, and said not. And the emperor said to S. Basil: Now go thou
   forth and judge thou between them, and not for favour ne over great
   love that thou hast to that one party, ne for hate that thou hast to
   that other.

   Then S. Basil went to them and said tofore the Arians and to the
   Catholics that the doors of the church should be shut fast, and sealed
   with the seals of either party, and that every one should pray to God
   for his right, and that the church should be delivered to them at whose
   prayer it should open. And thus they accorded. The Arians put them to
   prayer three days and three nights, and when they came to the doors
   they opened not. Then S. Basil ordained a procession, and came to the
   church, and knocked a stroke with his crook, saying: Attollite portas
   principes vestras, etc., and anon as he had said the verse the doors
   opened, and they entered in and gave laud and praisings to God, and so
   was their church rendered to them again. And after, the emperor did
   promise to S. Basil much good and honour if he would consent to him.
   And S. Basil said that was a demand to make to children, for they that
   be fulfilled with divine words will not suffer that one only syllable
   of the divine science be corrupted. Then the emperor had great
   indignation of him, and took a pen for to write the sentence on him
   that he should be exiled, and the first pen brake, and the second, and
   also the third, and his hand began to tremble for fear; then in great
   indignation he all to-rent the schedule.

   There was an honest worshipful man named Heradius which had but one
   daughter, whom he disposed to consecrate to God, but the fiend, enemy
   to mankind, inflamed and made one of the servants of the same to burn
   in the love of this maid. And when he remembered that he was but a
   servant, him thought it not possible, that ever he should attain to
   come to his desire of so noble a virgin. He went to an enchanter to
   whom he promised great quantity of money if he would help him, to whom
   the enchanter answered that he could not do it; But I shall send thee
   to the devil which is my master and lord, and if thou do that he shall
   say to thee, thou shalt have thy desire; and the young man said he
   would so do. And this enchanter sent a letter by him to the devil, this
   containing:

   My lord and master, because that I must hastily and busily draw all
   them that I may from the religion of christendom, and bring them to thy
   will, to the end that thy party alway grow and multiply, I send to thee
   this young man, esprised in the love of the maid, and demandeth that
   his desires may be acomplished, that herein I have glory and honour,
   and that from now forthon I may gather to thee and draw more. Then he
   gave him his letter, and bad him go, and at midnight stand upon the
   tomb of a paynim, and call the devil, and hold up this letter in the
   air, and anon he shall come to thee. And he anon went forth and did as
   he was bidden, and held the letter in the air, and forthwith came the
   prince of darkness fellowshipped with a great multitude of fiends, and
   when he had read the schedule he said to the young man: Wilt thou
   believe in me if I accomplish thy desire? And he answered that he would
   so do. Then the devil said to him: Reny then Jesu Christ, which said: I
   reny him. And the devil said to him: Ye christian men, ye be all false
   and untrue, for when ye have to do ye come to me, and when ye have that
   ye demand, anon after ye reny me, and return to your Jesu Christ, and
   he receiveth you because he is right debonair; but if thou wilt that I
   do thy will, make a bond of thine own handwriting and deliver it to me,
   and let it contain that thou hast forsaken Jesu Christ, thy baptism,
   and the profession of christian religion, and that thou be my servant
   and with me at the judgment to be damned; and anon all this he wrote
   and took it to the devil, and put him in his servitude; and anon the
   devil took with him fiends that served for fornication, and commanded
   them that they should go and inflame the heart of that maid in the love
   of that young man. The which came to her and so inflamed her in the
   love of that young man that she fell down to the ground tofore her
   father crying piteously and saying: Father have pity on me, for cruelly
   I am tormented for the love of your servant; have mercy on me, and show
   to me your fatherly love that ye owe to me, that ye give to me in
   marriage the young man that I desire, and if ye do not, ye shall see
   anon that I shall die, and thereof shall ye answer at the day of doom.
   And the father weeping said: Alas! wretched that I am; what is to me
   befallen, God have mercy on my daughter that thus taketh away my
   treasure and quencheth the light of mine eyes, I would have given thee
   to the spouse of heaven, and weened to have saved thee, and thou art
   demeasured in worldly love and fleshly. Abide daughter and tarry that I
   may marry thee to him that I had purposed, and bring not me my last
   days in sorrow. And she cried and said: Father, do as I have said, or
   anon thou shalt see me dead. And so as she wept bitterly as out of her
   wit, the father in great desolation of heart moved by the counsel of
   his friends, and deceived, did her pleasure and married her to the
   young man and gave to her all his substance, saying: Go forth my
   daughter, very caitiff that thou art, and forth she went and took him
   to her husband and they dwelled together. The husband went not to
   church, ne he blessed him not, ne recommended him not to God, whereof
   many of the neighbours noted it, and said to the wife: This young man
   that thou hast taken is not christened, ne he goeth not to the church.
   And when she heard that she was much abashed, and for sorrow fell down
   to the ground, and with her nails began to scratch her face, and beat
   her breast and said: Alas! most miserable wretch that I am, whereto was
   I born? I would I had perished in my birth. And then she told her
   husband what she had heard of him. and he answered that it was nothing
   so; then said she: If thou wilt that I believe thee, thou and I shall
   to-morn go to church, and then shall I know if it be true that thou
   sayest. Then he yielded him, confused, and saw well that he might not
   deny but it was so, and told to her all that he had done. And when she
   had heard all the case how he had done, she began to wail and to weep
   strongly, and forthwith went to S. Basil and rehearsed to him all that
   she had heard of her husband. And S. Basil sent for the husband and
   said to him: My son, wilt thou return again to God? Sire, said he, yea,
   but I may not, for I have bound myself to the devil, and renied Jesu
   Christ, and thereof I have made a writing of my hand and delivered it
   to him. And S. Basil said to him: Thereof no force; our Lord is
   debonair and merciful, and shall receive thee if thou repentest thee.
   And anon took the young man and made the sign of the cross on his
   forehead, and shut him in a chamber three days. After, he went to see
   him, and demanded saying: My son, how is it with thee? And he answered:
   Sire, I am in great pain, and in great anguish, in such ways that I may
   not bear the clamours, the terrors, and the lapidiments that the fiends
   do to me, for they hold in their hands my writing in accusing me, and
   saying I came to them and not they to me. Then said Basil: My son, be
   not afeard, but put firmly thy belief in Jesu Christ. And S. Basil gave
   to him a little meat for to comfort him and marked him with the sign of
   the cross, and closed him again, and he went and prayed for him. After
   certain days passed, he went and visited him again, and asked how it
   was with him, and he answered much better than tofore. I hear their
   clamours and their menaces, but I see them not. S. Basil gave him meat
   and closed the door and blessed him, and went and prayed God for him,
   and forty days after he returned and said to him: My son, how is it
   with thee? He answered: Holy father, it is well with me this day for I
   have seen thee fight for me, and overcome the devil. Then he took him
   out, and called all the clergy, the religiouses, and the people, and
   warned them that they should pray all for him, and led the young man by
   the hand to the church. And anon the devil with a great multitude of
   fiends, without seeing of any man, took the young man and pained them
   to take him out of the hand of S. Basil. And the young man began to
   cry; Holy saint of God, help me. And the fiends enforced them so
   greatly that they made S. Basil to move in holding the young man. S.
   Basil said: Thou cursed and cruel fiend, sufficeth not to thee enough
   thy perdition proper, but thou must tempt the creatures of my God for
   to have them lost? The devil then said, hearing many, O Basil, thou
   grievest and annoyest me much. Then all the people cried, Kyrie
   eleison, and S. Basil said to the devil: Our Lord God blame and reprove
   thee, cursed fiend. And the devil said to him, Basil, thou grieves and
   annoyest me much; I went not to him, but he came to me, he hath renied
   his God and hath confessed me to be his lord, lo! here in my hand the
   writing that he gave to me. And S. Basil said to him: We shall not
   cease to pray for him unto the time that thou shalt deliver his
   writing. And thus as S. Basil prayed holding the hand of the young man,
   the schedule which he had made was brought in the air in the sight of
   all, and was laid in the hand of S. Basil, the which received it and
   said to the child; Brother, knowest thou these letters? And he answered
   him: I know them well, for they were written with my hand. Then S.
   Basil brake them, and led the child to the church, and so ordained and
   disposed him, that he was worthy to receive the holy sacrament and
   after, he being enseigned and taught, delivered to him a rule how he
   should keep him, and delivered him to his wife.

   Also there was a woman that had committed many sins, the which she all
   wrote, and at the end there was one more grievous than the other, which
   in the writing she delivered to S. Basil, praying him to pray for her,
   and that by his prayers her sins might be forgiven. And then he prayed
   for her, and the woman opened the bill, wherein she found all the sins
   defaced and put out except the grievous sin. And she came to S. Basil
   and said: Thou holy saint of God, have mercy on me, and get me
   forgiveness for this, like as thou hast done for the other, and S.
   Basil said to the woman: Leave and go from me, woman, for I am a man,
   sinful as thou art, which have need of pardon as much as thou. And as
   that she was busy and grievous to him, he said to her: Go unto the holy
   man that is named Effrem, and demand of him that he may get pardon for
   thee. And when she came to the holy man Effrem, and had told to him
   where fore she was sent to him from S. Basil, he said to her: Go from
   me, for I am a sinful man, but go again to S. Basil, and it is he that
   may get thee forgiveness for this sin like as he did for the other; and
   haste thee to the end that thou mayst find him alive. And when she came
   into the city, S. Basil was borne to the church for to be buried, and
   she began to cry, saying: God be judge between me and thee, for thou
   mayst well appease God for me, and thou hast sent me to another, and
   anon she threw the bill upon the covering of the bier. And anon after
   she took it again, and opened it, and found it all plain, and out clean
   of the bill, and then with others she gave thankings to God. Tofore or
   S. Basil died, he being in the malady that he died, he did do come a
   Jew to him which was much expert in physic, and he loved him because he
   saw that he should be converted to the faith. And when he was come, he
   felt his pulse, and saw that he was nigh his end, and said to his
   meiny: Make ye ready such thing as behoveth for his sepulture, for he
   shall die anon. Which word S. Basil heard and said to him: Thou wottest
   not what thou sayest; and the Jew, named Joseph, said to him: This day
   shalt thou die when the sun shall go down in the west. To whom S. Basil
   said : What shalt thou say if I die not this day? To whom Joseph said:
   Sire, it is not otherwise possible. Then said S. Basil: if I live unto
   the morrow noon what shalt thou do? And Joseph said: If thou live until
   the morrow that hour I shall die; and S. Basil said: thou sayst truth,
   thou shalt die, that is, sin shall die in thee to the end that thou
   shalt live in Jesu Christ. And Joseph said: I wot well what thou
   sayest, and if thou live unto that time I shall do that thou sayest.
   Then S. Basil said, how well that by nature he should have died anon
   forthwith, yet he gat and impetred of God space that he should not then
   die, and lived unto the morn at noon, which thing seeing, Joseph
   marvelled much and believed in Jesu Christ.

   S. Basil then took heart. and overcame the feebleness of the body, and
   arose out of his bed, and went to the church, and with his proper hands
   baptized the Jew, and after returned to his bed, and anon gave up his
   spirit, and rendered his soul unto God about the year of our Lord three
   hundred and seventy. Then let us pray to him that he get us grace of
   our Lord Jesu Christ, that he will forgive us all our sins.
     __________________________________________________________________

                Here followeth the Life of S. John the Almoner.

   S. John the Almoner was patriarch of Jerusalem. He saw on a time, in a
   vision, a much fair maid, which had on her head a crown of olive, and
   when he saw her he was greatly abashed and demanded her what she was?
   This maid answered to him: I am Mercy which brought from heaven the son
   of God, if thou wilt wed me, thou shalt fare the better. Then he,
   understanding that the olive betokeneth mercy, began that same day to
   be merciful in such wise that he was called Almoner or amener, and he
   called alway the poor people his lords. Then he called his servants and
   said to them: Go through the city and write ye all the names of my
   lords, and when he saw that they understood not his words, he said to
   them: They be they that ye call poor and mendicants, I call them my
   lords, and I say they be my helpers, and trust it well that they mow
   help and get me the kingdom of heaven. And because he would stir the
   people to do alms, he said that when the poor men were once together
   warming them against the sun, they began to tell who were good almsmen,
   and them would they praise, and blame them that were evil. Among all
   other he told this narration.

   There was sometime a toller named Peter in a city, and was a much rich
   man, but he was not piteous, but cruel to poor people, for he would
   hunt and chase away poor people and beggars from his house with
   indignation and anger. Thus would no poor man come to him for alms.
   Then was there one poor man said to his fellows: What will ye give me
   if I get of him an alms this day? And they made a wager with him that
   he should not, which done, he went to this toller's house and stood at
   the gate, and demanded alms. And when this rich man came and saw this
   poor man at his gate he was much angry and would have cast somewhat at
   his head, but he could find nothing, till at last came one of his
   servants bearing a basket full of bread of rye, and in a great anger,
   he took a rye loaf, and threw it at his head, as he that might not hear
   the cry of the poor man. And he took up the loaf and ran to his fellows
   and said truly that he had received that loaf of Peter's own hand. And
   then within two days after, this rich man was sick, and like for to
   die, and as he lay he was ravished in spirit, in which he saw that he
   was set in judgment, and black men bringing forth his wicked deeds, and
   laid them in a balance on that one side, and on that other side he saw
   some clothed in white, mourning and sorrowful, but they had nothing to
   leave against them in that other balance, and one of them said: Truly
   we have nothing but a rye Ioaf which he gave to God against his will
   but two days gone. And then they put that loaf into that balance, and
   him seemed the balances were like even. Then they said to him: Increase
   and multiply this rye loaf, or else thou must be delivered to these
   black moors or fiends. And when he awoke he said. Alas! if a rye loaf
   have so much availed me which I gave in despite, how much should it
   have availed me if I had given all my goods to poor men with a good
   will. As this rich man went on a day clothed with his best clothes, a
   poor shipman came to him all naked and demanded of him some clothing,
   for the love of God, to cover him withal, and he anon despoiled
   himself, and gave to him his rich clothing, that he ware, and anon the
   poor man sold it; and when he knew that the poor man had sold it, he
   was so sorry that he would eat no meat, but he said: Alas! I am not
   worthy that the poor man think upon me. And the night following when he
   slept, he saw one brighter than the sun, having a cross on his head
   wearing the same cloth that he had given to the poor man, and he said
   to him: Why weepest thou Tollener? And when he had told him the cause
   of his sorrow, he said to him: Knowest thou this cloth? And he said:
   Yea, Sire; and then our Lord said: I have been clothed therewith sith
   thou gavest it to me, and I thank thee of thy good will that thou hadst
   pity of my nakedness, for when I was a cold thou coveredst me. And when
   he awoke he blessed the poor people, and said: By the living God! if I
   live I will be one of his poor men. And when he had given all his good
   to poor men, he called one of his secret men whom he trusted well and
   said to him: I have a secret counsel to tell thee, and if thou keep it
   not secret and do as I bid thee, I shall sell thee to the heathen men.
   And he took him ten pound in gold and had him go into the holy city,
   and buy some necessary ware, and when thou hast so done, take me and
   sell me to some christian man, and take that money that thou shalt
   receive for me and give it to poor people. And the servant refused it,
   and he said: Truly if thou sell me not, I shall sell thee to the
   barbaries. And then he took this Peter the tollener as he had commanded
   him, which was his master, clad in vile clothing, and led him to the
   market and sold him to an argenter for thirty besants, which he took
   and dealt it among poor men. This Peter then thus sold was bound and
   put into a kitchen for to do all foul works, in such wise that he was
   despised of every man of the servants. And some oft smote him and
   knocked him about the head, and called him fool. Christ appeared oft to
   him and showed him his clothing and the besants and comforted him. And
   the Emperor and other people were sorry for Peter the tollener. And it
   happed that noble men of Constantinople came unto the place whereas
   Peter was for to visit holy places, whom the master of Peter bade to
   dinner, and as they sat and ate at their dinner, Peter served and
   passed by them, and they, beholding him, said to each other in their
   ears, how like is this young man to Peter the tollener, and as they
   well saw and advised him they said: Verily it is my lord Peter; I shall
   arise and hold him, and when Peter understood that he fled away
   privily.

   There was a porter which was both deaf and dumb, and by signs he opened
   the gates, and Peter bade him by words to open the gates; and he anon
   heard him and receiving speech answered him, and Peter went his way.
   And the porter returned into the house speaking and hearing, whereof
   all they marvelled, to whom he said: He that was in the kitchen is gone
   out and fleeth away, but know ye for certain that he is the servant of
   God, for as he spake and bade me open the gate, there issued out of his
   mouth a flame of fire, which touched my tongue and mine ears, and anon
   I received hearing and speaking. And anon they all went out and ran
   after him, but they might not find him. Then all they of the house
   repented them, and did penance, because they had so foul entreated him.

   There was a monk named Vital which would assay if he might raise any
   slander against S. John. And S. John came in to a city and went unto
   all the bordels of common women and said to each of them by order: Give
   me this night and do no fornication. Then he entered into the house of
   one and was in a corner all the night on his knees in prayer and prayed
   for her. And on the morn he went and commanded to each of them that
   they should tell it to no man, yet one of them manifested his life. And
   anon as S. John had prayed she began to be tormented with a devil, and
   anon the other women said to her: God hath given to thee that that thou
   hast deserved, because she entered for to do fornication and not for
   none other cause. And when it was even, the foresaid monk Vital said
   tofore them all: I will go thither, for that woman abideth me, then
   many blamed him, and he answered and said: Am I not a man as another
   is? I have a body as other men have, is God only wrath with monks? they
   be men as other be. Then some of them said to him: Take to thee a wife,
   and change thine habit so that thou scandal not others. He feigning
   himself wroth said: Verily I shall not hear you, who that will be
   slandered let him be slandered, and let him smite his forehead against
   the wall, be ye ordained to be my judges of God? Go ye and take heed of
   yourselves, for ye shall give none accounts for me; and this he said
   with a loud voice. And then they complained to S. John of his
   governance, but our Lord harded so his heart that he gave no credence
   to their words, but he prayed God that he would show his works to some
   creature after his death, and that it should not turn to his blame that
   defamed him. By this means he brought many for to be converted, and set
   of them many for to be closed in religion. In a morning, as he went
   from them one of these common women met with a man that entered in for
   to do fornication, who gave to him a buffet and said: Thou wicked man,
   why amendest thou not thy wicked living? And he said to him: Believe me
   right well that thou shalt have such a buffet that all Alexandria shall
   assemble to wonder on thee. And after that the fiend came in likeness
   of a man, and gave him a buffet, and said to him: This is the buffet
   that the abbot Vital promised thee, and anon he was ravished with the
   fiend, and tormented so that all the people drew to him and wondered on
   him; but at the last he was repentant and was healed by the prayers of
   S. Vital. And when the servant of God was nigh his end he left in
   writing to his disciples: Judge ye never before the time; and when he
   was dead the women confessed what he had done, and all they glorified
   God, and namely S. John, saying: Would God that ilke buffet that he
   took I had taken.

   There was a poor man in the habit of a pilgrim came to S. John and
   demanded alms, and he called his dispenser and bade him to give to him
   sixpence, which he received, and went his way, and changed his
   clothing, and came to the patriarch and asked alms, and he called his
   dispenser and bade him to give him sixpence of gold, and when he had
   given to him and was departed, the dispenser said to his lord: Father,
   at your request this man hath received twice alms this day, and hath
   changed his habit twice; S. John feigned as he had not heard it. And
   the poor man changed his clothing the third time, and came again to S.
   John, and asked yet the third time alms, and then the dispenser told
   his lord privily that he was the same beggar, to whom S. John said:
   Give to him twelve besants, lest it be my Lord Jesu Christ that will
   prove me whether he might more take or I give.

   On a time it happed that one Patricius had certain money of the church
   which he would put in merchandise, but the patriarch would in no wise
   consent thereto, but would it should be given to poor people, and they
   could not accord but departed all wroth. And after evensong time the
   patriarch sent to the archpriest Patricius, saying: Sir, the sun is
   nigh gone down, and he hearing that anon he wept, and came to him and
   asked for forgiveness. On a time the nephew of the patriarch suffered
   wrong of a taverner, and complained lamentably to the patriarch and
   could not be comforted, and the patriarch said to him: Who is so hardy
   that dare say against thee or open his mouth against thee? Believe me,
   son, that I shall this day do for thee such a thing that all Alexandria
   shall wonder on it. And when he heard that he was well comforted,
   weening that the taverner should have been sore beaten. And S. John
   seeing that he was comforted kissed his breast and said: Son, if thou
   be verily the nephew of mine humility, make thee ready to be scourged
   and to suffer of every man beatings, chidings and wrongs, for very
   affinity is not only of flesh and blood, but it is known by the
   strength of virtue: and anon he sent for that man and made him free of
   all pension and tribute. And all they that heard this wondered greatly,
   and then understood they that he had said before, that he would so do
   that all Alexandria should wonder thereof.

   The patriarch hearing of the custom that is when the emperor is
   crowned, there shall come to him the makers of sepultures and bring
   stones of marble of divers colours, and demand the emperor of what
   stones he will have his grave made, or of what metal. S. John
   remembering this, commanded to make his sepulture, but yet he did not
   do make it all but left it imperfect unto his end. And he ordained that
   at every feast, when he was with the clergy, some should come to him
   and say: Sire, thy monument or sepulture is not all made, but
   imperfect, command that it may be made, for thou wotest not what hour
   thou shalt die, ne when the thief cometh.

   There was a rich man which saw S. John, having in his bed but vile
   clothes and not rich, for he had given all his goods to poor men. He
   bought for him a much rich coverture for his bed and gave it to S.
   John. And in a night, as it lay upon him, he could not sleep, for he
   thought three hundred of his lords might well have been covered withal,
   and made all that night lamentation saying: Ah Lord, how many be there
   of my lords now in the mire, how many in the rain, how many so cold
   that their teeth beat together, and how many that sleep in the market
   place; and said to himself. And thou wretch devourest the great fishes,
   and restest in thy chamber with thy wickedness under a coverture of
   twenty-six pounds to warm thy carrion. And after he would never be
   covered therewith, but on the morn he did do sell it and gave the money
   thereof to poor people. And when the rich man saw it he bought it again
   and took it to the blessed S. John and desired him no more to sell it,
   but keep it for himself. And anon after S. John sold it again and gave
   the money of it to poor people. And when the rich man wist it, yet he
   bought it again and brought it to S. John full goodly, and said to him:
   We shall see who shall fail of us, or thou in the selling or I in the
   buying; and thus it was oft bought and sold, the rich man seeing well
   that he might well minish his riches in this manner without sin, to the
   intent to give it to poor people. And they both should win in this
   manner, that one in saving of their souls, and that other in getting
   reward. And S. John would draw men to do alms in this manner; he was
   accustomed to tell of S. Serapion, when he had given his mantle to a
   poor man and after met with another that had cold, he gave him his
   coat, and himself sat all naked. And one demanded of him: Father, who
   hath despoiled thee? And he had in his hand the book of the evangelists
   and said: This hath despoiled me. And anon he saw another poor man, and
   then he sold the book of gospels and gave the price thereof to poor
   men, and when he was demanded where his book of the gospels was, he
   answered and said: That the gospel commandeth and saith: Go and sell
   all that thou hast, and give it to the poor, I had this gospel and I
   have sold it like as he commanded.

   On a time he gave to a poor man five besants, and the poor man had
   disdain thereof and began to chide and despise him in his visage
   because he had no more alms, and when his servants saw that, they would
   have beaten him, and then the blessed John defended them saying: Suffer
   ye him brethren and let him curse me, lo! I have these thirty years
   blasphemed by my works Christ, and may not I bear one blame or vice of
   this man? And he commanded that a sack of money full should be brought
   tofore this poor man, that he should take as much as he would.

   On a time, after that the gospel was read in the church, the people
   went out and talked idle tales, and this holy patriarch apperceived
   them and followed after and sat down among them, and said to them:
   Sons, there as the sheep be, there must be the shepherd also, and
   therefore, either ye must enter with me into the church or else I must
   abide with you here, and thus he did twice and thereby he taught the
   people to abide and stand in the church.

   Another time there was a young man had ravished a nun, and the clerks
   reproved the young man thereof tofore S. John, and said he ought to be
   cursed therefor, because he had lost two souls, his own and the nun's.
   Then S. John withstood their sentence saying: Not so my sons, not so, I
   shall show that ye commit two sins: first, ye do against the
   commandment of God which saith: Judge ye not, and ye shall not be
   judged. Secondly, ye wit not for certain whether they have sinned into
   this day, and have not been penitent and have repented them. It fell
   many times that S. John was ravished in his prayers, and was in a
   trance, and he was heard dispute with our Lord in these words: So, good
   Lord Jesu Christ, so; I in parting and thou in ministering, let us see
   who shall overcome.

   On a time when he was sick and vexed with the fevers, and saw that he
   approached his end, he said: I yield to thee thankings for thou hast
   heard my wretchedness praying thy goodness that at my death should be
   found with me but one besant or one piece of money, and that yet I
   command to be given to the poor. And then he yielded his soul unto
   Almighty God. And his venerable body was put in a sepulchre where the
   bodies of two bishops were buried, and the two bodies by miracle gave
   room and place to the body of S. John, for they removed each from other
   and left the middle void for his body.

   A little time tofore his death there was a woman had committed a great
   and horrible sin, and durst not be shriven thereof ne show it to no
   man. S. John bade her write it and seal it, and bring it to him, and he
   would pray for her. She assented thereto; she wrote her sin, and
   diligently closed and sealed it and delivered it to S. John. And anon
   after S. John waxed sick and died, and when she heard that he was dead
   she supposed herself confused and shamed, for she weened that he had
   delivered it to some other man, and she came to his tomb, and there
   wept and cried much lamentably, saying: Alas! alas! I supposed to have
   eschewed my confusion and now I am made confusion unto all others, and
   wept bitterly praying S. John that he would show to her where he had
   left her writing. And suddenly S. John came and appeared to her in the
   habit of a bishop, on either side of him a bishop, and said to the
   woman: Why troubles thou me so much, and these saints with me, and
   sufferest not us to have rest? Lo, here our clothes be all wet of thy
   tears, and then delivered to her her scroll again, sealed as it was
   tofore, saying to her: See here thy seal, open thy writing and read it;
   which anon she opened and all her sin was defaced and clean out, and
   she found therein written: All thy sin is forgiven and put away by the
   prayer of John, my servant. And then she rendered thankings to our Lord
   God and to S. John, and then S. John with the two bishops returned into
   their sepulture. This holy man S. John flourished in the year of our
   Lord six hundred and five, in the time of Phocas the emperor.
     __________________________________________________________________

           Of the Conversion of S. Paul and of the name of conversion

   Conversion is said of convertor, I am turned, or is as much as together
   turned from sins and evils. He is not converted that shriveth him to
   the priest of one sin and hideth another. It is said conversion, for S.
   Paul this day was converted to the faith leaving his vices. Why he is
   said Paul, it shall be said afterward.

Of the Conversion of S. Paul.

   The conversion of S. Paul was made the same year that Christ suffered
   his passion, and S. Stephen was stoned also, not in the year natural,
   but appearing. For our Lord suffered death the eighth calends of April,
   and S. Stephen suffered death the same year, the third day of August
   and was stoned. And S. Paul was converted the eighth calends of
   February. And three reasons been assigned wherefore the conversion of
   S. Paul is hallowed more than of other saints.

   First for the ensample, because that no sinner, whatsomever he be,
   should despair of pardon when he seeth him that was in so great sin to
   be in so great joy. Secondly for the joy, for like as the church had
   great sorrow in this persecution, so had she great joy in his
   conversion. Thirdly, for the miracle that our Lord showed when of one
   so cruel a persecutor was made so true a preacher. The conversion of
   him was marvellous by reason of him that made him, and of him that
   ordained him, and of the patient that suffered it. By reason of him
   that made him to be converted, that was Jesu Christ, which showed there
   his marvellous puissance in that he said: It is hard for thee to strive
   against the alle or pricks; and in that he changed him so suddenly, for
   anon as he was changed he said: Lord what wilt thou that I do? Upon
   this word saith S. Austin: The lambs slain of the wolves have made of a
   wolf a lamb, for he was ready for to obey, that tofore was wood for to
   persecute. Secondly, he showed his marvellous wisdom. His marvellous
   wisdom was in that he took from him the swelling of pride in offering
   to him the inward things of humility and not the height of majesty. For
   he said I am Jesus of Nazareth, and he called not himself God ne the
   son of God, but he said to him, take thine infirmities of humanity and
   cast away the squames of pride. Thirdly, he showed his pitiful
   debonairty and mercy, which is signified in that that he that was in
   deed and in will to persecute, he converted, how be it he had evil
   will, as he that desired all the menaces and threatenings, and had evil
   purpose; as he that went to the prince of priests; as he that had a joy
   in his evil works that he led the christian men bound to Jerusalem. And
   therefore his journey and voyage was right evil, and yet nevertheless
   by the mercy of God was he converted. Secondly the conversion was
   marvellous of him that ordained it, that is of the light that he
   ordained in his conversion. And it is said that this light was
   dispositive, sudden, and celestial, and this light of heaven advironed
   him suddenly. Paul had in him these vices. The first was hardiness,
   which is noted when it is said that he went to the prince of the
   priests, and as the gloss saith, not called, but by his own will and
   envy that enticed him. The second was pride, and that is signified by
   that he desired and sighed the menaces and threatenings. The third was
   the intent carnal, and the understanding that he had in the law,
   whereof the gloss saith upon that word: I am Jesus, etc. I God of
   heaven speak, the which thou supposest to be dead by the consent of the
   Jews. And this light divine was sudden, it was great, and out of
   measure, for to throw down him that was high and proud, into the ditch
   or pit of humanity; it was celestial, because it turned and changed his
   fleshly understanding into celestial, or it may be said that this
   ordinance or disposition was in three things; that is to wit in the
   voice crying, in the light shining, and in the virtue of puissance.
   Thirdly, it was marvellous by the virtue of the suffering of the
   patient, that is of Paul in whom the conversion was made. For these
   three things were made in him withoutforth marvellously, that it is to
   wit, that he was beaten to the earth, he was blind and fasted three
   days, and was smitten down to the ground for to be raised. And S.
   Austin saith that he was smitten down for to be blind, for to be
   changed, and for to be sent; he was sent to suffer death for truth. And
   yet saith S. Austin, he that was out of the faith was hurt for to be
   made believe, the persecutor was hurt for to be made a preacher, the
   son of perdition was hurt for to be made the vessel of election, and
   was made blind for to be illumined, and this was as touching his dark
   understanding.

   Then in the three days that he abode thus blind, he was learned and
   informed in the gospel, for he learned it never of man ne by man, as he
   himself witnesseth, but by the revelation of Jesu Christ. And S. Austin
   saith thus: I say that S. Paul was the very champion of Jesu Christ,
   taught of him, redressed of him, crucified with him, and glorious in
   him. He was made lean in his flesh that his flesh should be disposed to
   the effect of good operation, and from forthon his body was established
   and disposed to all good. He could well suffer hunger and abundance,
   and was informed and instructed in all things, and all adversities he
   gladly suffered. Chrysostom saith: He overcame tormentors, tyrants, and
   people full of woodness, like as flies; and the death, the torments and
   all the pains that might be done to him, he counted them but as the
   play of children. All them he embraced with a good will, and he was
   ennobled in himself to be bound in a strong chain more than to be
   crowned with a crown, and received more gladly strokes and wounds than
   other gifts. And it is read that in him were three things against the
   three that were in our foremost father Adam, for Adam erected and
   addressed him against God our Lord. and in S. Paul was contrary for he
   was thrown down to the earth. In Adam was the opening of his eyes, and
   Paul was on the contrary made blind, and Adam ate of the fruit
   defended, and S. Paul contrary was abstinent of convenable meat.
     __________________________________________________________________

                                    GLOSSARY

   achate, n., purchase. adjousted, pp., Fr. ajouter, added. argenter,
   n.b. money changer. aspre, adj., Fr. apre, cruel. awaits, n., snares.

   bained, pp., Fr. baigner, bathed. belues, n., whales, or sea monsters.
   blessure, n. (Fr.), a wound. blyven, pp. of beleave,' remained.
   broches, n, pointed rods. bubals, n., wild oxen. bynomen, pp. of
   benim,' to take away.

   caricares, n., figs. cautelously, adv., craftily. chevisshed, v.,
   achieved his purpose. chore (for cor'), n., a Hebrew measure of about
   eight bushels. coarted, pp., constrained or coerced. coles, n.,
   cabbages. colestaff, n., a pole for carrying a burden between two
   persons. conveying, pr. p., guidance.

   deduit, n. (Fr.), pleasure, comfort. demene, v., exhibit. did do make =
   caused to be made. dilection, n, love. dime, n., a tithe. direption,
   n., pillage. disperipled, pp., scattered.

   empesh, v., Fr. empecher, to hinder.

   fardel, n,. a burden.

   habergeon, n., coat of scale armour. hallows, n., saints or chosen
   people. havoir, n., worldly goods. houseled, v., administered the
   eucharist.

   impetre, v., beseech.

   japes, n., jests or scoffs.

   kele, v., cool.

   maleurte, n., misery. mechant, adj. (Fr.), wicked. meiny, n., company
   or retinue. muyes, n., Fr. muids, measures of about five quarters.

   octroy, v. (Fr.), to bestow. ongles, n. (Fr.), claws. ouches, n.,
   jewels.

   phitoness, n., witch. piscine, n., a pool. pois, n., weight. prestly,
   adv., quickly. prise, n., capture

   quarfox, n., four meeting ways.

   releved, v., Fr. relever, to raise up. righter, n., executioner.
   routed, v., snored.

   sacre, v., Fr. sacrer, to consecrate. siffled, v., Fr. siffler,
   whistled. sikerness, n., surety. smaragdos, n., emeralds, spere, v.,
   inquire or search. spincops, n., spiders. squames, n., scales. stagne,
   n., Fr. etang, lake. sweven, n., a dream.

   toller, tollener, n., tax-farmer.

   unguentaries, n., makers of perfumes. unnethe, adv., scarcely. urchin,
   n., a hedgehog.

   wood, woodness, n., mad, madness.
     __________________________________________________________________

            This document is from the Christian Classics Ethereal
               Library at Calvin College, http://www.ccel.org,
                   generated on demand from ThML source.
