     __________________________________________________________________

        Title: Touching Incidents and Remarkable Answers to Prayer
   Creator(s): Shaw, S. B.
CCEL Subjects: All;
   LC Call no: BV220
  LC Subjects:

               Practical theology

               Worship (Public and Private) Including the church year, Christian
               symbols, liturgy, prayer, hymnology

               Prayer
     __________________________________________________________________

   TOUCHING INCIDENTS

   AND

   REMARKABLE

   ANSWERS TO PRAYER,

   AS RELATED BY

   John B. Gough,

                           D. L. Moody,

   Bishop Bowman, LL.D

                           A. B. Earle, D.D.

   Mrs. Mary Grant Cramer

                           Charles G. Finney,

   James H. Potts, D.D.

                           S. A. Keene, D.D.

   Mathew Hale Smith

                           S. I. Prime, D.D.

   John Wesley,

                           C. H. Spurgeon, D.D.

   T. De Witt Talmage, D.D.

                           Mrs. Maggie Van Cott,

   George Muller,

                           B. Fay Mills,

   Bishop Simpson, D.D.

                           Edward Payson, D.D.

   William Carvosso,

                           George Fox,

   John Knox,

                           Mark Guy Pearce,

   Martin Luther,

                           H. L. Hastings,

   And Many Others.

   By S. B. SHAW.

   Grand Rapids, Mich.:

   S.B. SHAW, PUBLISHER,

   1188 S. Division St.

   COPYRIGHTED

   BY THE AUTHOR

   1893
     __________________________________________________________________

                                PREFATORY NOTE.

   It is needless to say much by way of preface to this book. It will
   speak for itself. From the writer's stand-point, none but those "given
   over to hardness of heart" can read these "Touching Incidents" without
   having their souls wondrously stirred within them; and none but the
   willfully unbelieving can say, in view of the "Remarkable Answers to
   Prayer" herein recorded, that God does not hear and regard the cries of
   his faithful children.

   But let it be remembered, that "prayer rises far above a mere form of
   good words. These, of themselves, are nothing, and may be much worse
   than nothing. The soul of the reader or utterer must be in them to give
   them life and power. God hears not my words, He hears me. I rise to Him
   upon the wings of prayer. I might recite good words forever, but unless
   my spirit is in them, they are nothing." Yea, nothing but idle words,
   and mockery before God. The prayer of faith is always prompted by the
   Holy Spirit, and always receives an answer from the living Father whose
   Spirit moved its utterance in harmony with His own blessed will.

   In these pages no place is given to anything that did not appear to be
   reliable, as well as calculated to do good. Some of the accounts
   narrated have come within our personal knowledge. Others have been
   written or furnished expressly for this work. Still others have been
   selected from the works of well-known authors, or gleaned from the
   large number of periodicals which came regularly to our office in
   connection with the periodical that was under our control. Nor has the
   supply of material by any means been exhausted. We have felt, rather,
   as did Paul, when, after referring to many of the mighty works wrought
   through faith in olden times, he said: "And what shall I say more? for
   the time would fail to tell me of Gedeon, and of Barak, and of Samson,
   and of Jephthae; of David also, and Samuel, and of the prophets; who
   through faith subdued kingdoms, wrought righteousness, obtained
   promises, stopped the mouths of lions," etc.

   We pray that through the perusal of these pages, precious souls may be
   led to the cross and the Savior, and God's children encouraged to trust
   Him in every hour of need.

   Your brother, true to God and man,

   S. B. SHAW.
     __________________________________________________________________

                                 INTRODUCTION.

   True prayer is the language of an earnest soul breathing after God, and
   a knowledge of his will. The praying spirit is a search for the
   presence of God, and a continued craving for a conscious blessing from
   Him. " Give ear to my prayer, O God, and hide not thyself from my
   supplication." "O Lord God of my salvation, I have cried day and night
   before thee; let my prayer come before thee; incline thine ear unto my
   cry; for my soul is full of troubles." "Hear me when I call, O God of
   my righteousness; thou hast enlarged me when I was in distress; have
   mercy upon me, and hear my prayer." These are the cries of a dependent,
   trusting, and enriched heart. They show the natural disposition of
   troubled man to fly to God for succor and relief.

   Man has always prayed. He cannot help it. He is made so. His prayers
   may not always be prompted by the right motive, nor couched in
   acceptable phraseology, nor offered in the proper spirit. "Ye ask and
   receive not because ye ask amiss." But man will pray. He must pray. The
   very nature of his earthly life demands prayer. He may rebel against
   his environments, scoff at the necessity for supplication, for years
   neglect his duty, yet sooner or later, secretly or openly, he will call
   upon a higher power for that aid which earthly help can not render.

   There is no substitute for prayer. Praise is excellent, and good works
   are noble, but prayer is indispensable. "Ask and ye shall receive," has
   its counterpart in, Ask not and ye shall receive not. The prayerless
   life is a barren life. Jesus said: "Men ought always to pray." He set a
   glorious example " Sit ye here while I go and pray yonder." His human
   life was the grandest life ever lived, yet It was a life of conscious
   dependence upon God, and constant supplication for His aid and
   blessing.

   Prayer is successful when offered in faith and with obedience. No man
   can expect God to bless him while conscious of willful and unrepented
   sin. "He that turneth away his ear from hearing the law, even his
   prayer shall be abomination." "If I regard (cherish) iniquity in my
   heart, the Lord will not hear me." Man knows that his heart must be
   emptied of Satan, if it is to be filled with God. Just in proportion as
   his life is straight and pure, will his trust take hold upon the
   Infinite. "The effectual, fervent prayer of a righteous man availeth
   much." Mark you, "a righteous man." An unrighteous man may pray much
   and avail little.

   Whatever tends to encourage the praying habit, should be itself
   encouraged. That a carefully selected list of incidents and statements,
   showing the beauty, power and success of prayer, will in itself
   encourage further devotion, we most candidly believe. Such a list is to
   be found in the following pages. Every incident may not be in complete
   harmony with the exact facts. Scientific accuracy is impossible, in
   gleaning so large a fund of matter from so many and varied sources. Yet
   the collection as a whole is both creditable and credible. It shows
   diligence and painstaking care on the part of the author, and
   illustrates unmistakably the efficacy and utility of true prayer. Let
   the book be widely read, and let us hope that every reader may receive
   an abundant blessing while he peruses these attractive pages.

   JAMES H. POTTS.

   Editorial Rooms of the

   "Michigan Christian Advocate," Detroit, Mich.
     __________________________________________________________________

   TOUCHING INCIDENTS

   AND

   REMARKABLE

   ANSWERS TO PRAYER,

                      THE CHILD-HEROINE OF NEW BRUNSWICK.

   We have read a touching incident about three little children, who, last
   autumn, late in the season, wandered alone in a dreary region of New
   Brunswick. The sun had already sunk in the west, and the gloom of
   evening was spreading itself over the surrounding country.

   The night came on fast; and feeling sure that they could not get home
   before daybreak, the eldest (a girl of only six years) quietly placed
   the two little ones in a sheltered nook on the sea-beach; and fearing
   the cold, chilly night for the younger children, Mary stripped off most
   of her own clothes to keep them warm.

   She then started off to gather dry sea-weed, and whatever else she
   could find, to cover them with. Having tenderly in this way wrought for
   some time to make them a nest, she at last fell down exhausted with the
   cold, and half bare to the cold inclement night.

   That evening the loving father and tender mother sat up wondering at
   their children's long absence; the hours dragged slowly past with
   anxious watching, and silent listening for the well-known little
   pattering feet. In vain the fond parents' eyes pierced through the
   darkness. At length they roused the neighbors with their anxious
   inquiries after their lost ones. All that night was passed in searching
   and in tears, till early in the morning, lying fast asleep, and same- -
   -what numbed with cold, were found little Johnny and Lizzie. But, oh I
   a touching spectacle lay near them; their young savior was stiff, cold
   and dead on the sea-weed which the poor little child-heroine had not
   strength to drag into the nook, where those she so deeply loved, and
   died to save, were sleeping. Thus this little New Brunswick girl died
   in her successful and self-sacrificing endeavor to save her brother and
   sister.

   Does not this recall the love of the Lord Jesus Christ to you who read?
   Mary went to the full extent of human love in dying for her little
   brother and sister. "Greater love hath no man than this, that a man lay
   down his life for his friends." Yet the Lord Jesus laid down his life
   for his enemies; for "scarcely for a righteous man will one die; yet
   peradventure for a good man some would even dare to die; but God
   commendeth His love toward us," etc. He makes no mistakes. Yet how many
   listen to this story with more emotion and interest than they do to the
   story of the cross, where the love of Jesus, the Son of God, is told in
   letters of blood! - Dawn of the Morning.

                      THE INFLUENCE OF A MOTHER'S PRAYERS.

   More than thirty years ago, one lovely Sabbath morning, about eight
   young men, students in a law school, were walking along the banks of a
   stream that flows into the Potomac river, not far from the city of
   Washington. They were going to a grove, in a retired place, to spend
   the hours of that holy day in playing cards. Each of them had a flask
   of wine in his pocket. They were the sons of praying mothers. As they
   were walking along amusing each other with idle jests, the bell of a
   church in a little village not two miles off began to ring. It sounded
   in the ears of those thoughtless young men as plainly as though it were
   only on the other side of the little stream along which they were
   walking.

   Presently one of their number, whose name was George, stopped, and said
   to the friend nearest him that he would go no farther, but would return
   to the village and go to church His friend called out to their
   companions, who were a little ahead of them Boys! Boys! Come back here;
   George is getting religious; we must help him. Come on, and let us
   baptize him by immersion in the water." In a moment they formed a
   circle around him. They told him that the only way he could save
   himself from having a cold bath was by going with them. In a calm,
   quiet, but earnest way, he said:

   "I know very well that you have power enough to put me in the water,
   and hold me there till I am drowned; and, if you choose, you can do so,
   and I will make no resistance; but listen to what I have to say, and
   then do as you think best.

   "You all know that I am two hundred miles away from home; but you do
   not know that my mother is a helpless, bed-ridden invalid. I never
   remember seeing her out of bed. I am her youngest child. My father
   could not afford to pay for my schooling; but our teacher is a warm
   friend of my father, and offered to take me without any charge. He was
   very anxious for me to come; but mother would not consent. The struggle
   almost cost her what little life was left to her. At length, after many
   prayers on the subject, she yielded and said I might go. The
   preparations for my leaving home were soon made. My mother never said a
   word to me on the subject till the morning when I was about to leave.
   After I had eaten my breakfast she sent for me, and asked me if
   every-thing was ready. I told her all was ready, and I was only waiting
   for the stage. At her request I kneeled beside her bed. With her loving
   hand upon my head, she prayed for her youngest child. Many and many a
   night I have dreamed that whole scene over. It is the happiest
   recollection of my life. I believe, till the day of my death, I shall
   be able to repeat every word of that prayer. Then she spoke to me thus:

   "My precious boy, you do not know, you never can know, the agony of a
   mother's heart, in parting, for the last time, from her youngest child.
   When you leave home, you will have looked, for the last time, this side
   of the grave, on the face of her who loves you as no other mortal does
   or can. Your father cannot afford the expense of your making us visits
   during the two years that your studies will occupy. I cannot possibly
   live as long as that. The sand in the hourglass of my life has nearly
   run out. In the far off strange place to which you are going, there
   will be no loving mother to give counsel in time of trouble. Seek
   counsel and help from God. Every Sabbath morning, from ten to eleven
   o'clock, I will spend the hour in prayer for you. Wherever you may be
   during this sacred hour, when you hear the church bells ringing, let
   your thoughts come back to this chamber, where your dying mother will
   be agonizing in prayer for you. But I heart he stage coming. Kiss
   me-farewell!"

   Boys, I never expect to see my mother again on earth. But by God's
   help, I mean to meet her in heaven."

   As George stopped speaking the tears were streaming down his cheeks. He
   looked at his companions. Their eyes were filled with tears.

   In a moment the ring which they had formed about him was opened. He
   passed out and went to church. He had stood up for the right against
   great odds.

   They admired him for doing what they had not the courage to do. They
   all followed him to church. On their way there, each of them quietly
   threw away his cards and his wine-flask Never again did these young men
   play cards on the Sabbath

   From that day they all became changed men. Six of them died Christians,
   and are now in heaven. George is an able Christian lawyer in Iowa; and
   his friend, who wrote this account, has been for many years an earnest,
   active member of the church. Here were eight men converted by the
   prayers of that good Christian woman. And, if we only knew all the
   results of their examples and their labors, we should have a good
   illustration of a mother's prayers--Bible Models

                            DEATH OF A SOUL-SLEEPER.

   Mrs. Mattie Campbell relates the happy death of her sister, a
   soul-sleeper, which occurred last May. It seems that her views were
   changed just before she entered heaven.

   In Sabbath-school this afternoon a message came: "Emma is dying. Come
   quickly if you want to see her alive." My dear sister. We had played
   together, and more than all, we dreamed dreams of the fairy future,
   wherein we saw everything but care and temptation crowning the golden
   pathway for our jubilant feet. She was plump amid rosy, full of
   laughter and frolic, which life's stern realities had not subdued.
   Strong and well I had seen her, but five days before. Yet, ah! In such
   an hour as ye think not the Son of Man cometh. On our way the sad face
   of our family physician confirmed the truth. She may linger until
   sundown,' he said; and all the way I prayed, and felt it would be
   answered Lord, dear Lord, only let me have one word to know how it is
   with her soul.' Mother met me at the door. This was a heavy grief. Ask
   how it is with her soul,' said she. I entered the room filled with
   weeping friends. I pressed the damp, damp, cold brow. She knew me, and
   spoke in the old sweet way. Soon I commenced slow and low the hymn we
   used to sing together: Jesus, lover of my soul,' while I anxiously
   watched to catch a mark of grace upon her fast changing features. A
   happy, peaceful smile broke over her face. I bent down and she spoke:
   God was always good to us, sister. He has not given me one harsh word
   since I came down to my bed.' How the praise rushed to my lips. He
   giveth and upbraideth not.' Glory be to His name!

   "Divinely assured that she was dying, she spoke of a long, sweet sleep,
   the sleep of the soul and body, until the general resurrection-for this
   was her belief. She called for one and another of her friends and
   neighbors, and exhorted them in burning words to meet her in heaven,
   charging them to bring their families for whom they were also
   responsible. "With mind clear and composed, she then lay, waiting to
   pass into an unconscious slumber, only to awaken at the last trump.
   Hark,' said she, listening intently I hear music; don't you hear it?
   And mother, I see a door.' Is it open?' asked her mother. And we held
   our breath as she answered. Yes, it is open.' Do you see inside?' Hex
   face grew radiant as she answered: Yes, I see inside. It is a beautiful
   place. It is heaven. I see forms clothed in white, many, yes, a
   multitude of beautiful beings, their hands upraised, while they are
   waving something in their hands.'

   And then in wonder and astonishment Why, there's Pa!' Then she very
   intelligently gave orders for her burial. Good-bye's were said, and in
   childlike pleading tones she called Come, dear Lord, I am ready; come
   now, and take my breath, it hurts me so.' An effort on her part to
   close the dear eyes and mouth, a few more agonizing moments, and the
   open door received her gentle spirit. We led the bereaved mother from
   the room, all that was left of my happy childhood days." - Earnest
   Christian.

                        A MAN WHO LACKED MORAL COURAGE.

   A few years ago I went to close a meeting, and said: "Are there any
   here who would like to have me remember them in prayer? I would like to
   have them rise!" And there was a man rose, and when I saw him stand up,
   my heart leaped in me with joy. I had been anxious for him a long time.
   I went to him as soon as the meeting was over, and took him by the
   hand, and said: "You are coming out for God, are you not?" He said: " I
   want to, and have made up my mind to be a Christian; only there is one
   thing standing in my way." "What is that?" I asked. "Well," he replied,
   "I lack moral courage." Naming a friend of his, he added: " If he had
   been here tonight I should not have risen; I am afraid when he hears I
   have risen for prayer he will begin to laugh at me, and I won't have
   moral courage to stand up for Christ." I said: "If Christ is what he is
   rep-resented in the Bible, he is worth standing up for; and if heaven
   is what we are told it is in the Bible, it is worth living for." "I
   lack moral courage," he answered; and the man was trembling from head
   to foot. I thought he was just at the very threshold of heaven, and
   that one step more was going to take him in, and that he world take the
   step that night. I talked and prayed with him, and the Spirit seemed to
   be striving mightily with him; but he did not get the light. Night
   after night he came, and the Spirit strove with him; but just one thing
   kept him back - he lacked moral courage. At last the Spirit of
   God--which had striven so mightily with him, seemed to leave him, and
   there were no more strivings, he left off coming to church, was off
   among his old companions, and would not meet me in the street; he was
   ashamed to do so. About six months afterward I got a message from him,
   and found him on what he thought was his dying bed, he wanted to know
   if there was hope for him at the eleventh hour. I tried to tell that
   there was hope for any man that would accept Christ. I prayed for him,
   and day after day I visited him.

   Contrary to all expectations, he began to recover; and when he was
   convalescent, finding him one day sitting in front of his house, I sat
   by his side, and said: "You will soon be well enough to come up to the
   church, and when you are, you will come up; and you are just going to
   confess Christ boldly, are you not?" "Well," says he, "I promised God
   when I was on what I thought to be my dying bed I would serve Him, and
   I made up my mind to be a Christian; but I am not going to be one just
   now. Next spring I am going over to Lake Michigan, and I am going to
   buy a farm and settle down, and then I am going to be a Christian." I
   said, "How dare you talk that way! How do you know that you are going
   to live till next spring? Have you a lease of your life?" "I was never
   better than I am now; I am a little weak, but I will soon have my
   strength. I have a fresh lease of my life, and will be well for a good
   many years yet," he answered. I said: "It seems to me you are tempting
   God;" and I pleaded with him to come out boldly. "No," he said; "the
   fact is I have not the courage to face my old companions, and I cannot
   serve God in Chicago." I said "If God has not grace enough to keep you
   in Chicago, He has not in Michigan." I urged him then and there to
   surrender his soul and body to the Lord Jesus; but the more I urged him
   the more irritated he got, till at last he said "Well, you need not
   trouble yourself any more about my soul; I will attend to that. If I am
   lost it will be my own fault. I will take the risk."

   I left him, and in about a week I got a message from his wife. Going to
   the house, I met her at the door weeping. I said: "What is the
   trouble?" "Oh, sir! I have just had a council of physicians here, and
   they have all given my husband up to die; they say he cannot live." I
   said: "Does he want to see me?" She replied: "No." "Why did you send?"
   "Why," she said, "I cannot bear to see him die in this terrible state
   of mind." "What is his state of mind?" "Why, he says that his damnation
   is sealed, and he will be in hell in a little while."

   I went into the room, but he turned his head away. I said: "How is it
   with you?" Not a word; he was as silent as death. I spoke the second
   time, hut he made no response. I looked him in the face, and called him
   by name, and said "Will you not tell me how it is with you?" he turned,
   and fixed that awful, deathly look upon me, and, pointing to the stove,
   he said: "My heart is as hard as the iron in that stove; it is too
   late, my damnation is sealed, and I shall be in hell in a little
   while." I said: "Don't talk so; you can be saved now if you will." He
   replied: "Don't mock me I know better." I talked with him, and quoted
   promise after promise, but he said not one was for him. "Christ has
   come knocking at time door of my heart many a time, and the last time
   he came I promised to let Him in; and when I got well I turned away
   again, and now I have to perish without Him. "I talked, but I saw I was
   doing no good, and so I threw myself on my knees. He said: "You can
   pray for my wife and children, you need not pray for me; it is a waste
   of your time, it is too late. "I tried to pray, but it seemed as if
   what he said was true - it seemed as if the heavens were brass over me.
   I rose and took his hand, amid it seemed to me as if I were bidding
   farewell to a friend that I never was to see again in time or eternity.
   He lingered till the sun went down. His wife told me that his end was
   terrible. All that he was heard to say were these fearful words: "The
   harvest is past, the summer is ended, and I am not saved. "There he
   lay, and every little while he would take up the awful lamentation:
   "The harvest is past, the summer is ended, and I am not saved." And
   just as the sun was sinking behind those western prairies he was going
   into the arms of death. As he was expiring, his wife noticed that his
   lips were quivering, he was trying to say something, and she reached
   over her ear, and all she could hear was " The harvest is past, the
   summer is ended, and I am not saved;" and the angels bore him to the
   judgment. He lived a Christless life, he died a Christless death, we
   wrapped him in a Christless shroud, nailed him in a Christhess coffin,
   and bore him to a Christless grave. Oh, how dark! Oh, how sad! I may be
   speaking to some one today, and the harvest may be passing with you,
   the summer may be ending. Oh, be wise now, and accept the Lord Jesus
   Christ l May God's blessing rest upon us all, and may we meet in glory,
   is the prayer of my heart! - D.L. Moody.

                           A RICH MAN'S DEATH SCENE.

   A striking incident was communicated to the New York Press a few years
   ago, by a deeply humble minister. One of the leading members of his
   church was greatly distressed in his last sickness, on reviewing his
   mode of living and reflecting upon his family and the comparatively
   small sum he had given to the Lord's cause. In every way the pastor
   endeavored to comfort him. He spoke of his having given cheerfully, and
   as much as others did. He reminded him that the best of us are
   unprofitable servants, and must look to the, mercy of God in Christ as
   our only hope. The troubled man found no peace or comfort, but grew
   more and more uneasy, distressed and agonized as his end drew near. At
   last, taking the hand of his pastor, he said:

   "Brother, I am going to the Judge unprepared to meet because you have
   been unfaithful to me. For years I lived, and taught my family to live
   largely for this world, have denied ourselves nothing, but spent
   thousands on comforts. When I gave hundreds to Christ and church it
   should have been thousands. My business energy and time and money have
   been mostly devoted to self--pleasing and gratification, and how can I
   meet my Judge and an account of my stewardship? I am beyond recovery.
   Do what you can to save other professors who are in the cur-rent of
   worldly self-indulgence and extravagance, which is sweeping them to
   destruction. - Matlock.

       THE WIDOW'S WOOD AND FLOUR--THE UNBELIEVING ONES MADE SPEECHLESS.

   The following instance is known to The Christian as true, and to a
   remarkable degree indicates how thoroughly God knows our minutest
   needs, and how effectively He makes those who ever reproach His name
   ashamed of their unbelief.

   "A friend and relative of the one who was "a widow indeed," one who
   trusted in God, and continued in supplications and prayers day and
   night, was once brought unto circumstances of peculiar straightness and
   trial. She had two daughters, who exerted themselves with their needles
   to earn a livelihood; and at that time they were so busily engaged in
   trying to finish some work that had long been on their hands, they had
   neglected to make provision for their ordinary wants, until they found
   themselves one winter's day in the midst of a New England snow-storm,
   with food and fuel almost exhausted, at a distance from neighbors, and
   without any means of procuring needful sustenance.

   "The daughters began to be alarmed, and were full of anxiety at the
   dismal prospect; but the good old mother said: Don't worry, girls, the
   Lord will provide; we have enough for today, and tomorrow may be
   pleasant;' and in this hope the girls settled down again to their
   labor.

   "Another morning came, and with it no sunshine, but wind and snow in
   abundance. The storm still raged, but no one came near the house, and
   all was dark and dismal without.

   Noon came, and the last morsel of food was eaten, the wood was almost
   gone, and there was no token of any relief for their necessities. The
   girls became much distressed, and talked anxiously of their condition,
   but the good mother said: Don't worry, the Lord will provide.'

   "But they had heard that story the day before, and they knew not the
   strong foundation upon which that mother's trust was builded, and could
   not share the confidence she felt.

   If we get anything today the Lord will have to bring it Himself, for
   nobody can get here if he tries,' said one of the daughters,
   impatiently; but the mother said: Don't worry.' And so they sat down
   again to their sewing, the daughters to muse upon their necessitous
   condition, and the mother to roll her burden on the Everlasting Arms.

   "Now mark the way in which time Lord came to their rescue, and just at
   this moment of extremity, put it into the heart of one of His children
   to go and carry relief. Human nature at such a time would never have
   ventured out in such a storm, but waited for a pleasant day. But Divine
   Wisdom and power made him carry just what was needed, in the face of
   adverse circumstances, and just at the time it was needed.

   "Mr. M. sat at his fireside, about a mile away, surrounded by every
   bounty and comfort needed to cheer his heart, with his only daughter
   sitting by his side.

   "For a long time not a word had been spoken, and he had seemed lost in
   silent meditation, till at length he said: "Mary, I want you to go and
   order the cattle yoked, and then get me a bag. I must go and carry some
   wood and flour to Sister C.'

   "Why, father, it is impossible for you to go. There is no track, and it
   is all of a mile up there. You would almost perish.'

   "The old man sat in silence a few moments, and said: "I must go.' She
   knew her father too well to suppose that words would detain him, and so
   complied with his wishes. While she held the bag for him, she felt
   perhaps a little uneasiness to see the flour so liberally disposed of,
   and said: I wish you would remember that I want to give a poor woman
   some flour if it ever clears off.' The old man under-stood the
   intimation, and said: Mary, give all you feel it ditty to, and when the
   Lord says stop, I will do so.'

   "Soon all things were ready, and the patient oxen took their way to the
   widow's home, wallowing through the drifted snow, and dragging the sled
   with its load of wood and flour. About 4 o'clock in the afternoon, the
   mother had arisen from her work to fix the fire, and looking out of the
   window, she saw the oxen at the door, and she knew that the Lord had
   heard her cry.

   She said not a word-----why should she? She was not surprised - but,
   presently, a heavy step at the threshold caused the daughters to look
   up with astonishment, as Mr. M. strode unceremoniously into the room,
   saying The Lord told me, Sister C., that you wanted some wood and
   flour.'

   "He told you the truth," said the widow, "and I will praise Him
   forever."

   "What think you now, girls?" she continued, as she turned in solemn joy
   to her unbelieving daughters.

   They were speechless; not a word escaped their lips but they pondered
   that new revelation of the providential mercy of the Lord, until it
   made upon their minds an impression never to be effaced.

   " From that hour they learned to trust in Him who cares for His needy
   in the hour of distress, and who, from His boundless stores, supplies
   the wants of those who trust in Him. " - Answers to Prayer.

                         "THEY WHO TRUST THE LORD SHALL
                                   NOT WANT."

   Mrs. Mary Grant Cramer, whose husband is a member of the Cincinnati
   Conference of the Methodist Episcopal Church, who was for many years U.
   S. Minister to Denmark, and afterwards to Switzerland, and has also
   filled the chair of Systematic Theology in Boston University, has
   related for us, by letter, several accounts of answers to prayer, among
   which are the following;

   "When Dr. George E. Shipman and wife, of Chicago, came to see us in
   Copenhagen, I was much impressed with the striking and interesting
   incidents Mrs. S. told us, in connection with their faith-work in the
   Foundlings' Home. For instance, when they had put all they had in the
   Home, and there was a payment of six hundred dollars to be made, and it
   could no longer be postponed, for the man to whom it was glue said:
   Business is business, and I must have my money, and I will send my son
   for it in the morning;' they betook themselves to prayer, hoping the
   postman would bring them a letter containing the required amount; but
   he did not. Soon after he passed, a man rang the bell, and left an
   envelope containing a check for six hundred dollars, as a present from
   the mayor of the city, who was not a religious man; but his wife, who
   was then in Europe, was interested in the Home, and he sent the money
   on her account. Directly after it came they handed the check for the
   amount to the man who was expected to call for it. In a similar way,
   Dr. Shipman on another occasion received four hundred dollars a little
   while before it was needed, and often got smaller sums in answer to
   prayer.

   "Mrs. Shipman told me of Mrs. Pithey, an invalid saint she knew in
   Chicago, who was supported by voluntary gifts in answer to prayer. This
   made the closing years of her life a marvelous proof of God's care for
   His helpless children who trust Him.

   "I might add another incident: Recently a saintly woman, who has
   consecrated all she has to the Lord, and who lives by faith, giving her
   services gratuitously to His 1cause, felt that after the fatiguing
   labors of the summer, a change would be beneficial to her; she kept
   this to herself. Soon after a lady sent for her to call upon her, her
   object being to inform Miss M. that she felt impressed that she ought
   to go away from home for awhile, and gave her fifty dollars. One day a
   co-worker of this good sister, told me that she asked a token of the
   Lord in money, and the same day she found it in an envelope in the
   table, directed to her, from one who had never before made her a
   present, and who at first intended this sum for some one else.

   "I am acquainted with a minister in New York city, who gave up his
   church and a salary of five thousand a year, to establish a church
   where he could reach the masses, he met with much opposition, but has
   met also with great success in his work. He said that on various
   occasions he felt it his duty to give all he had away, and before he
   could reach his home it would be replaced fourfold. His wife was
   greatly opposed to his giving up a certainty for what she thought an
   uncertainty, especially as they had five children; but he told me that
   since they depend upon the Lord for their support, his wife has less
   solicitude about how they will be provided for, than she had when his
   salary was five thousand dollars a year.

   "Truly they who trust the Lord shall not want."

                      ANNIE AND VANIE'S FIRST REAL PRAYER.

   Two sisters, one about five years of age, the other next older, were
   accustomed to go each Saturday morning, some distance from home, to get
   chips and shavings from a cooper shop.

   One morning, with basket well filled, they were returning home; when
   the elder one was taken suddenly sick with cramps or cholera. She was
   in great pain, and unable to proceed, much less to bear the basket
   home. She sat down on the basket, and the younger one held her from
   falling.

   The street was a lonely one, occupied by workshops, factories, etc.
   Everyone was busy within; not a person was seen on the street.

   The little girls were at a loss what to do. Too timid to go into any
   workshop, they sat a while, as silent and quiet as the distressing
   pains would allow.

   Soon the elder girl said: "You know, Annie, that a good while ago
   mother told us that if we ever got into trouble, we should pray, and
   God would help us. Now you help me to get down upon my knees, and hold
   me up, and we will pray."

   There, on the sidewalk, did these two little children ask God to send
   some one to help them home.

   The simple and brief prayer being ended, the sick girl was again helped
   up, and sat on the basket, waiting the answer to their prayers.
   Presently Annie saw, far down the street on the opposite side, a man
   come out from a factory, look around him, up and down the street, and
   go back into the factory.

   "O sister, he has gone in again, " said Annie. "Well," said Vanie,
   "perhaps he is not the one God is going to send. If he is, he will come
   back again.

   "There he comes again," said Annie. He walks this way. He seems looking
   for something. He walks slow, and without his hat. He puts his hand to
   his head, as if he did not know what to do. O sister, he has gone in
   again; what shall we do?

   "That may not be the one whom God will send to help us," said Vanie.
   "If he is, he will come out again."

   "Oh yes, there he is; this time with his hat on, " said Annie. "He
   comes this way; he walks slowly, looking around on every side. He does
   not see us; perhaps the trees hide us. Now he sees us, and is coming
   quickly. "

   A brawny German in broken accents, asks "O children, what is the
   matter?"

   "O sir," said Annie, "sister here is so sick she cannot walk, and we
   cannot get home."

   "Where do you live, my dear?"

   "At the end of this street; you can see the house from here."

   "Never mind, " said the man, "I takes you home."

   So the strong man gathered the sick child in his arms, and with her
   head pillowed upon his shoulder, carried her to the place pointed out
   by the younger girl. Annie ran round the house to tell her mother that
   there was a man at the front door wishing to see her. The astonished
   mother, with a mixture of surprise and joy, took charge of the precious
   burden, and the child was laid upon a bed.

   After thanking the man, she expected him to withdraw, but instead, he
   stood turning his hat in his hands, as one who wishes to say something,
   but knows loot how to begin.

   The mother, observing this, repeated her thanks, and finally said:
   "Would you like me to pay you for bringing my child home?"

   "O no," said he with tears, "God pays me! God pays me! I would like to
   tell you something, but I speak English so poorly that I fear you will
   not understand."

   The mother assured him that she was used to the German, and could
   understand him very well.

   "I am the proprietor of an ink factory, " said he. "My men work by the
   piece. I have to keep separate accounts with each. I pay them every
   Saturday. At twelve o'clock they will be at my desk, for their money.
   This week I have had many hindrances, and was behind with my books. I
   was working hard at them with the sweat on my face, in my great anxiety
   to be ready in time. Suddenly I could not see the figures; the words in
   the book all ran together, and I had a plain impression on my mind that
   some one in the street wished to see me. I went out, looked up and down
   the street, but seeing no one, went back to my desk, and wrote a
   little. Presently the darkness was greater than before, and the
   impression stronger than before, that some one in the street needed me.

   "Again I went out, looked up and down the street, walked a little way,
   puzzled to know what it meant. Was my hard work, and were the cares of
   business driving me out of my wits? Unable to solve the mystery, I
   turned again into my shop and to my desk.

   "This time my fingers refused to grasp the pen. I found myself unable
   to write a word, or make a figure; but the impression was stronger than
   ever on my mind, that some one needed my hell). A voice seemed to say:
   "Why don't you go out as I tell you? There is need of your help."

   This time I took my hat on going out, resolved to stay till I found out
   whether I was losing my senses, or there was a duty for me to do. I
   walked some distance without seeing any one, and was more and more
   puzzled, till I came opposite the children, and found that there was
   indeed need of my help. I cannot understand it, madam."

   As the noble German was about leaving the house, the younger girl had
   the courage to say: "O mother, we prayed."

   Thus the mystery was solved, and with tear-stained cheeks, a heaving
   breast, and a humble, grateful heart, the kind man went back to his
   accounts.

   I have enjoyed many a happy hour in conversation with Annie in her own
   house since she has a home of her own.

   The last I knew of Annie and Vanie, they were living in the same city,
   earnest Christian women. Their children were growing up around them,
   who, I hope, will have like confidence in mother, and faith in God.
   JEIGH ARRH

   Annie was the wife of James A. Clayton, of San Jose, California. I have
   enjoyed their hospitality, and esteem both very highly.

   JAMES ROGERS,

   Of Alabama Conference, M. E. Church.

                          "SHE WAS A GOOD WIFE TO ME."

   "She-was-a-good-wife-to-me. A good wife, God bless her!" The words were
   spoken in trembling accents over a coffin-lid. The woman asleep there
   had borne the heat and burden of life's long day, and no one had ever
   heard her murmur, her hand was quick to reach out a helping grasp to
   those who fell by the wayside; and her feet were swift on errands of
   mercy; the heart of her husband had trusted in her; he had left her to
   long hours of solitude, while he amused himself in scenes in which she
   had no part. When boon companions deserted him, when fickle affect
   selfishly departed, when pleasure palled, he went home and found her
   waiting for him.

   "Come from your long, long roving,

   On life's sea so bleak and rough;

   Come to me tender and loving,

   And I shall be blessed enough."

   That had been her love-song - always on her lips or in her heart.
   Children had been born to them. She had reared them almost alone - they
   were gone! Her hand had led them to the uttermost edge of the morning
   that had no noon. The she had comforted hom, sent him out strong and
   whole-hearted, while she stayed at home and - cried. What can a woman
   do but cry - and trust? Well, she is at rest now. But she could not die
   until he had promised to "bear up;" not to fret but to remember how
   happy they had been. They? Yes, it is even so. For she was blest in
   giving and he in receiving. It was an equal partnership after all! "She
   - was - a - good - wife - to - me." O man! Man! Why not have told her
   so, when her ears were not dulled by death? Why wait to say these words
   over a coffin wherein lies a wasted, weary, gray-haired woman, whose
   eyes have so long held that pathetic story of loss and suffering and
   patient yearning which so many women's eyes reveal - to those who read.
   Why not have made the wilderness in her heart blossom like the rose
   with the prodigality of your love? Now you would give worlds - were
   they yours to give - to see the tears of joy your words would have once
   caused, bejeweling the closed windows of her soul. It is too late.

   "We have careful thoughts for the stranger,

   And smiles for the sometimes guest;

   But oft for our own, the bitter tone,

   Though we love our own the best." - Sel.

                        PREVAILING PRAYER FOR A REVIVAL,

   We knew a preacher, still living, who was appointed to the charge of a
   church in Springfield, Ill. The church seemed very much depressed. It's
   life was at a low ebb. It was in the midst of the harvest, in the hot
   weather, when things seemed most depressed. The pastor, a holy man of
   God, announced on Sabbath evening to a small congregation of a score or
   two of persons, "There will be a prayer-meeting in this church
   to-morrow morning at sunrise for the revival of the work of God and for
   the conversion of sinners." The people wondered at the notice, and went
   home. The pastor went up into his study, which was in the parsonage by
   the side of the church, and gave that night to prayer. Just as the East
   began to lighten up a little with the coming day he had the assurance
   that his prayer was answered, and casts himself down on a sofa for a
   little rest. Presently he awoke suddenly to see the sun shining on the
   wall over his head. He sprang up and hooked out of the window to see
   how late it was, when he saw the sun just rising above the horizon.
   Looking down into the yard by the church, he was overjoyed to see the
   church crowded with people, and the yard foul, and teams crowding into
   the street for a long distance. God had heard his prayer, and had sent
   out his Spirit into the community, and there had been no sleeping in
   Springfield that night. People in the country who knew nothing of the
   appointment got up in the night, hitched up their teams, and drove into
   town and to the church to find out what the matter was. A good man had
   taken hold of God. The prayer-meeting began, and was closed that night
   at eleven o'clock. Several souls were converted. A gracious work broke
   out, and the community was greatly blessed. The foregoing we certify to
   on the highest authority, having it from the lips of the man himself,
   whom every body knowing him believes as soon as any thing outside of
   the Bible. We greatly need earnest, persevering, believing prayer. One
   night of such prayer kept by all the Church would startle the nation.
   We sorely need a mighty baptism of power. We have all the other
   elements of success. We lack no machinery. We have truth, and the
   experience of its saving power and the appliances. What we now need is
   the outpouring of the Spirit upon us as a people. We must rekindle our
   fires. We must make our churches centers of saving power. One hour a
   day spent by the church in earnest prayer for the revival of God's work
   would make the coming year the most memorable in the history of the
   church. If you do not feel burdened, ask for the spirit of prayer, and
   that shall be given you. Forsake your sins and leave yourself with Cod,
   and give yourself to prayer, and all over the land God will hear and
   answer, and pour out his Spirit, and bestow his power, and make this
   year a revival year. - Bishop C.H. Fowler

                         "AND DYING IS BUT GOING HOME."

   Wending her way every Sabbath to a school in the west end of London,
   might have been seen a young girl, named Mary Jane Howes. Attached in
   no common degree to both her teachers and fellow scholars, nothing but
   sickness ever kept her away from school. Naturally of an obedient and
   kind disposition, she was never known to tell a lie; but with all this
   natural amiability, the great change which alone fits the soul for an
   entrance into the kingdom of heaven had never taken place in that young
   heart. She had often been touched, awakened by the Holy Spirit to feel
   her need of this great salvation, but had neglected to seek it with all
   her heart. Her last sickness was brought on by what appeared at first
   to be only a slight cold. As other symptoms followed, her mother took
   her to a doctor who pronounced her case to be dangerous, advising that
   she should keep her bed. She became rapidly worse, and being alarmed,
   her parents sent for one of the agents of the Mission, Mr. Garland. By
   her bedside he prayed for her with great fervor, and early on the
   following morning repeated his visit. At night she had become so much
   worse that they had sent for him, for they feared she was dying. No one
   had told her of her danger, and Mr. Garland requested all except her
   mother to leave the room.

   He then asked her if she thought her end was near, and if she felt
   prepared to meet her God. When the awful danger of her case dawned upon
   her, she exclaimed: "No, I am not prepared to meet my God; but I am not
   dying. I hope soon to recover, and be a help to my dear mother." Mr.
   Garland then told her that to all appearance, she would be in the world
   of spirits before many hours had passed, and urged her to seek the
   mercy of God through Jesus Christ our Lord. "Oh!" she exclaimed, "I am
   not fit to die; l am not converted; I can't die!"

   Seeing her great distress, her visitor kept pointing her to Jesus,
   praying with her most earnestly, the expression all the time deepening
   of her awful danger, repeating to her the gracious invitation: " Him
   that cometh unto Me, I will in no wise cast out." He left her for a
   little while. When he departed sloe looked at him with a look of agony
   and despair, and exclaimed: "O Mr. Garland my soul! My poor soul! I am
   unprepared for death and judgment."

   Despair seemed to have settled on her soul, and was depicted on her
   countenance. It was heart-rending to hear her groans, and see her
   tears. After a while she asked those present to sing the hymn
   beginning:

   "Rescue the perishing, care for the dying,

   Snatch them in pity from sin and the grave

   Weep over the erring one, hilt up the fallen,

   Tell them of Jesus the mighty to save."

   When they had sung the whole through she said:

   "O sing it again!" While they were singing the second verse:

   "Though they were slighting Him still He is waiting,

   Waiting the penitent child to receive;

   Plead with them earnestly; plead with thee, gently,

   He will forgive if they only believe," despair yielded to faith, and
   with a joyful smile she exclaimed: " Jesus loves me; I can believe; I
   am saved l saved through the blood of the Lamb! My burden is all gone,
   my sins are all forgiven. I can die now. Jesus is mine, I am his.
   Hallelujah!'

   She now desired all present to join in singing:

   "Safe in the arms of Jesus,

   Safe on His gentle breast;

   There by His love o'ershaded,

   Sweetly my soul shall rest.

   Hark, tis the voice of angels,

   Borne in a song to me,

   Over the fields of glory

   Over the jasper sea."

   Each of her family, father, mother and two brothers were called, and
   with tears and earnest entreaties she plead with them to meet her in
   heaven. Being now quite exhausted she laid down for a few minutes, and
   appeared to be in a calm sleep, when suddenly starting up she said;
   "Sing another hymn, for I feel so happy I must sing." A friend
   commenced singing: "Jesus of Nazareth passeth by."

   "No! No! Not that " she exclaimed, "Jesus is not passing by; he is here
   in my room - in my soul. Sing: "Ring the bells of heaven, O there is
   joy today." And on she talked, breathing forth words of rapturous joy
   and thanksgiving. After a while her mother said: "Are you not tired, my
   dear Mary?"

   "Oh no!" she replied. "I am crossing the river, but the water is not
   deep. I can feel the bottom, and like David, I can walk through the
   valley of the shadow of death. It is the way home to my Father's house
   above."

   A little while after, she said to her mother: "Hark, mother! Hark!
   They're singing. Oh l such singing! I see angels. They all have long
   white robes, and golden crowns on their heads. Dear mother, this must
   be the valley of death. It seems dark and long, but I do not fear.
   Jesus is holding my hand, and I see a light at the other end, and the
   angels with outstretched arms to receive me, and I shall have a harp, a
   golden harp and, oh! Won't I strike it loud when I reach the other
   side!

   The enemy was suffered to tempt and distress her for a little while,
   and when he was overcome, with a sweet smile she cried out: "He is gone
   now; I only see Jesus"

   Her sight now began to fail, but she was conscious to the last. "Can
   you see me, Mary?" said her mother.

   "No," she replied, " I cannot see you, but I do see Jesus. I am nearly
   home now. All sing:

   Who, who are these beside the chilly wave,

   Just on the borders of the silent grave,

   Shouting Jesus' power to save,

   Washed in the blood of the Lamb?'"

   She joined in the singing, and when it was all over said:

   "Mother, one more kiss." Shortly after she exclaimed: "Jesus! Jesus! My
   - precious--Jesus." Her last words, and in a few moments another soul
   had joined the innumerable company around the throne. - Selected by
   Sarah A. Cooke.

             "I'LL NEVER STEAL AGAIN - IF FATHER KILLS ME FOR IT."

   A friend of mine, seeking for objects of charity, got into the room of
   a tenement house. It was vacant. He saw a ladder pushed through the
   coiling. Thinking that perhaps some poor creature had crept up there,
   he climbed the ladder, drew himself up through the hole, and found
   himself under the rafters. There was no light but that which came
   through a bull's-eye in the place of a tile. Soon he saw a heap of
   chips and shavings, and on top a boy about ten years old.

   "Boy, what are you doing there?"

   "Please don't tell anybody--- please, sir."

   "What are you doing here?"

   "Don't tell anybody, sir; I'm hiding." "What are you hiding from?"

   "Don't tell anybody, if you please, sir."

   "Where's your mother?"

   "Mother is dead"

   "Where's your father?"

   "Hush don't tell him dont tell him! but look here!"

   He turned himself on his face, and through the rags of his jacket and
   shirt, my friend saw the boy's flesh was bruised, and the skin broken.

   "Why, my boy, who beat you like that?"

   "Father did, sir."

   "What did your father beat you like that for?"

   "Father got drunk, sir, and beat me cos I wouldn't steal."

   "Did you ever steal?"

   "Yes, sir. I was a street thief once."

   "And why don't you steal anymore?"

   "Please, sir, I went to the mission school, and they told me there of
   God, and of heaven, and of Jesus; and they taught me, Thou shalt not
   steal; and I'll never steal again, if father kills me for it. But,
   please, sir, don't tell him."

   "My boy, you must not stay here; you will die. Now, you wait patiently
   here for a little time; I'm going away to see a lady. We will get a
   better place for you than this." Thank you, sir; but please, sir, would
   you like to hear me sing a little hymn?

   Bruised, battered, forlorn, friendless, motherless, hiding away from an
   infuriated father, he had a little hymn to sing.

   "Yes, I will hear you sing your little hymn."

   He raised himself on his elbow and then sang:

   "Gentle Jesus, meek and mild,

   Look upon a little child;

   Suffer me to come to Thee.

   Fain would I to Thee be brought,

   Gracious Lord, forbid it not;

   In the kingdom of thy grace

   Give a little child a place."

   "That's the little hymn, sir. Good-bye."

   The gentleman went away, came back again in less than two hours, and
   climbed the ladder. There were the chips, and there was the little boy
   with one hand by his side, and the other tucked in his bosom,
   underneath the little ragged shirt dead.--John B. Cough.

                   CHARLIE COULSON, THE CHRISTIAN DRUMMER BOY

   Two or three times in my life God in His mercy touched my heart, and
   twice before my conversion I was under deep conviction.

   During the American war, I was surgeon in the United States army, and
   after the battle of Gettysburg there were many hundred wounded soldiers
   in my hospital, amongst whom were twenty-eight who had been wounded so
   severely that they required my service at once. Some whose legs had to
   be amputated, some their arms, and others both their arm and leg. One
   of the latter was a boy who had been but three months in the service,
   and being too young for a soldier. He enlisted as a drummer. When my
   assistant surgeon and one of my stewards wished to administer
   chloroform, previous to the amputation, he turned his head aside and
   positively refused to receive it. When the steward told him that it was
   the doctor's orders, he said: "Send the doctor to me."

   When I came to his bedside, I said: "Young man, why do you refuse
   chloroform? When I found you on the battlefield you were so far gone
   that I thought it hardly worth while to pick you up; but when you
   opened those large blue eyes I thought you had a mother somewhere who
   might, at that moment, be thinking of her boy. I did not want you to
   die on the field, so ordered you to be brought here; but you have now
   lost so much blood that you are too weak to endure an operation without
   chloroform, therefore you had better let me give you some." He laid his
   hand on mine, and looking me in the face, said: "Doctor, one Sunday
   afternoon, in the Sabbath-school, when I was nine and a half years old,
   I gave my heart to Christ. I learned to trust Him then; I have been
   trusting him ever since, and I can trust Him now. He is my strength and
   my stimulant. He will support me while you amputate my arm and leg." I
   then asked him if he would allow me to give him a little brandy. Again
   he looked me in the face saying: " Doctor, when I was about five years
   old my mother knelt by my side, with her arm around my neck, and said:
   Charlie, I am now praying to Jesus that you may never know the taste of
   strong drink your papa died a drunkard, and went down to a drunkard's
   grave, and I promised God, if it were His will that you should grow up,
   that you should warn young men against the bitter cup.' I am now
   seventeen years old, but I have never tasted anything stronger than tea
   and coffee, and as I am, in all probability, about to go into the
   presence of my God, would you send me there with brandy on my stomach?"

   The look that boy gave me I shall never forget. At that time I hated
   Jesus, but I respected that boy's loyalty to his Savior; and when I saw
   how he loved and trusted Him to the last, there was something that
   touched my heart, and I did for that boy what I had never done for any
   other soldier

   I asked him if he wanted to see his chaplain. "Oh! Yes, sir," was the
   answer.

   When Chaplain R. came, he at once knew the boy from having often met
   him at the tent prayer-meetings, and taking his hand said: "Well,
   Charlie, I am sorry to see you in this sad condition." "Oh, I am all
   right, sir," he answered. "The doctor offered me chloroform, but I
   declined it; then he wished to give me brandy, which I also declined;
   and now, if my Savior calls me, I can go to Him in my right mind." "You
   may not die, Charlie," said the chaplain but if the Lord should call
   you away, is there anything I can do for you after you are gone? "
   "Chaplain, please put your hand under my pillow and take my little
   Bible; in it you will find my mother's address; please send it to her,
   and write a letter, and tell her that since the day I left home I have
   never let a day pass without reading a portion of God's word, and daily
   praying that God would bless my dear mother; no matter whether on the
   march, on the battle-field, or in the hospital." "Is there anything
   else I can do for you, my lad?" asked the chaplain. " Yes; please write
   a letter to the superintendent of the Sands-street Sunday-school,
   Brooklyn, N.Y., and tell him that the kind words, many prayers, and
   good advice he gave me I have never forgotten; they have followed me
   through all the dangers of battle; and now, in my dying hour, I ask my
   dear Savior to bless my dear old superintendent. That is all."

   Turning towards me he said: "Now, doctor, I ant ready; and I promise
   you that I will not even groan while you take off my arm and leg, if
   you will not offer me chloroform." I promised, but I had not the
   courage to take the knife in my hand to perform the operation without
   first going into the next room and taking a little stimulant myself to
   perform my duty.

   While cutting through the flesh, Charlie Coulson never groaned; but
   when I took the saw to separate the bone, the lad took the corner of
   his pillow in his mouth, and all that I could hear him utter was: "O
   Jesus, blessed Jesus! Stand by me now." He kept his promise, and never
   groaned.

   That night I could not sleep, for whichever way I turned I saw those
   soft blue eyes, and when I closed mine the words, "Blessed Jesus, stand
   by me now," kept ringing in my ears. Between twelve and one o'clock I
   left my bed and visited the hospital; a thing I had never done before
   unless specially called, but such was my desire to see that boy. Upon
   my arrival there I was informed by the night steward that sixteen of
   the hopeless cases had dies, and been carried down to the dead-house.
   "How is Charlie Coulson, is he among the dead?" "I asked. "No, sir,"
   answered the steward, "he is sleeping as sweetly as a babe." When I
   came up to the bed which he lay, one of the nurses informed me that,
   about nine o clock, two member of the Y.M.C.A. came through the
   hospital to read and sing a hymn. They were accompanied by Chaplain R.,
   who knelt by Charlie Coulson's bed, and offered up a fervent and
   soul-stirring prayer; after which they sang, while still upon their
   knees, the sweetest of all hymns, "Jesus, lover of my soul,: in which
   Charlie joined. I could not understand how that boy, who had undergone
   such excruciating pain, could sing.

   Five days after I had amputated that dear boy's arm and leg, he sent
   for me, and it was from him on that day I heard the first gospel
   sermon. "Doctor," he said, "my time has come; I do not expect to see
   another sun rise; but thank God, I am ready to go; and before I die I
   desire to thank you with all my heart for your kindness to me. Doctor,
   you are a Jew, you do not believe in Jesus; will you please stand here
   and see me die, trusting my Savior to the last moment of my life?" I
   tried to stay, but I could not; for I had not the courage to stand by
   and see a Christian boy die rejoicing in the love of a Jesus whom I had
   been taught to hate, so I hurriedly left the room. About twenty minutes
   later a steward, who found me sitting in my private office covering my
   face with my hand, said: "Doctor, Charlie Coulson wishes to see you."
   "I have just seen him," I answered, "and I cannot see him again." "But,
   doctor, he says he must see you once more before hoe dies." I now made
   up my mind to see him, say an endearing word, and let him die; but I
   was determined that no word of his should influence me in the least so
   far as his Jesus was concerned. When I entered the hospital I saw he
   was sinking fast, so I sat down by his bed. Asking me to take his hand,
   he said, " Doctor, I hove you because you are a Jew; the best friend I
   have found in this world was a Jew." I asked him who that was. He
   answered: "Jesus Christ, to whom I want to introduce you before I die;
   and will you promise me, doctor, that what I am about to say to you,
   you will never forget?" I promised; and he said: "Five days ago, while
   you amputated my arm and leg, I prayed to the Lord Jesus Christ to
   convert your soul."

   These words went deep into my heart. I could not understand how, when I
   was causing him the most intense pain, he could forget all about
   himself and think of nothing but his Savior and my unconverted soul.
   All I could say to him was: "Well, my dear boy, you will soon be all
   right." With these words I left him, and twelve minutes later he fell
   asleep, "safe in the arms of Jesus."

   Hundreds of soldiers died in ray hospital during the war; but I only
   followed one to the grave, and that one was Charlie Coulson, the
   drummer boy; and I rode three miles to see him buried. I had him
   dressed in a new uniform, and placed in an officer's coffin, with a
   United States flag over it.

   That boy's dying words made a deep impression upon me. I was rich at
   that time so far as money is concerned, but I would have given every
   penny I possessed if I could have felt towards Christ as Charlie did;
   but that feeling cannot be bought with money. Alas! I soon forgot all
   about my Christian soldier's little sermon, but I could not forget the
   boy himself. I now know that at that time I was under deep conviction
   of sin; but I fought against Christ with all the hatred of an orthodox
   Jew for nearly ten years, until, finally, the dear boy's prayer was
   answered, and God converted my soul.

   About eighteen months after my conversion, I attended a prayer-meeting
   one evening in time city of Brooklyn. It was one of those meetings when
   Christians testify to the loving kindness of their Savior. After
   several of them had spoken, an elderly lady arose and said "Dear
   friends, this may be the last time that it is my privilege to testify
   for Christ. My family physician told me yesterday that my right lung is
   nearly gone, and my left bong is very much affected; so at the best I
   have boot a short time to be with you but what is left of it belongs to
   Jesus. Oh! it is a great joy to know that I shall meet my boy with
   Jesus in heaven.

   My son was not only a soldier for this country, but also a soldier for
   Christ. He was wounded at the battle of Gettysburg, and fell into the
   hands of a Jewish doctor, who amputated his arm and leg, but he lived
   five days after the operation. The chaplain of the regiment wrote me a
   letter, and sent me my boy's Bible. In that letter I was informed that
   my Charlie in his dying hour sent for that Jewish doctor, and said to
   him "Doctor, before I die I wish to tell you that five days ago, while
   you amputated my arm and leg, I prayed to the Lord Jesus Christ to
   convert your soul.

   When I heard this body's testimony, I could sit still no longer. I left
   my seat, crossed the room and taking her hand, said "God bless you, my
   dear sister; your boy's prayer has been heard and answered. I am the
   Jewish doctor for whom your Charlie prayed, and his Savior is now my
   Savior." --Dr. M.L.R.

                     GOD'S CARE FOR THE WIDOW AND ORPHANS.

   At one of our children's meetings last summer, I invited the conductor
   of the train running to Cincinnati (who was a Christian man) to talk to
   the children. After speaking of his work among the prisoners of the
   Cincinnati jail, he proceeded to relate an instance from his own life,
   proving God's willingness to supply temporal needs in answer to the
   prayer of faith. When he was a very young boy, his mother was left a
   widow, with six children dependent upon her for the supply of their
   temporal wants.

   It was a cold winter's day when all their provisions were exhausted;
   and as there was no human source to which to look, they took their
   needs to the dear heavenly Father, who promises to hear the cry of the
   widow and fatherless. They had perfect confidence that He would hear
   and answer prayer.

   After eating their last morsel, they all went to bed and slept as
   sweetly as though they had an abundance at hand. In the morning the
   mother, with great cheerfulness, went about her work, setting the
   table, and making arrangements for breakfast, when there came a rap.
   She went to the door, and found a perfect stranger, who said the Lord
   had sent him to supply their present wants, and he came in, bringing
   provisions enough to last them a long time.

   The stranger said he was awakened at midnight, and something told him
   of the situation of this poor family. Not withstanding he lived several
   miles distant, he and his good wife arose, prepared their charities,
   and the husband set out, finding the place in time for their breakfast.
   How blessed to have parents teach by precept and example such beautiful
   lessons of trust!--Lily Blake Blakeney Howe.

                      A WOULD-BE MURDERER'S ARM PARALYZED.

   A prominent minister in Canada relates the following remarkable
   instance of God's miraculous care over His people: "I am frequently
   impressed by the Spirit, to perform actions, at the time unaccountable
   to myself. These impressions are so vivid that I dare not disobey them.

   "Some time ago, on a stormy night, I was suddenly impressed to go to
   the distant house of an aged couple, and there to pray. So imperative
   was the call, that I harnessed the horse and drove to the spot,
   fastened the horse to the shed, and entered the house unperceived by a
   door, which had been left open. There, kneeling down, I poured out my
   petitions to God, in an audible voice, for the divine protection over
   the inmates; after which I departed and returned home. Months after, I
   was visiting one of the principle prisons in Canada, and moving amongst
   the prisoners, was accosted by one of them, who claimed to know me. I
   had no recollection of the convict, and was fairly startled when the
   latter said: "Do you remember going to such a house one night, and
   offering prayer for the inmates?" I told him I did, and asked how he
   came to know anything about it. He said: "I had gone to that house to
   steal a sum of money, known to be in the possession of the old man.
   When you drove into the yard, I though you were he, and intended to
   kill you while you were hitching your horses. I saw when you spoke to
   the horse that you were a stranger. I followed you into the house, and
   heard your prayer. You prayed God to protect the old people from
   violence of any kind and especially from murder; and if there was any
   hand uplifted to strike them, that it ought be paralyzed." Then time
   prisoner pointed to his right arm, which hung lifeless by his side,
   saying: Do you see that arm? It was paralyzed on the spot, and I have
   never moved it since. Of course I left the place without doing any
   harm, but am here now, for other offenses."--Reported by Lily Blake
   Blakeney Howe.

                            DYING CHILDREN AND YOUTH

   The grasp of the mind of childhood upon the great truths of religion is
   frequently felt most perceptibly when the little sufferers are near
   their end. When a boy we heard the narration of a three or four-year
   old daughter of good parents living in the Southern country. She
   sickened, and medical skill proved unavailing to restore her. The tiny
   creature suspected the truth herself, and asked her father if the
   doctor had not said she must die. Being answered affirmatively, she was
   silent for a moment, and then said: "Papa, the grave is dark; oh, it is
   so dark! Won't you go down with me into it?" The stricken parent
   explained the impossibility, whereupon she said: "Papa, let mamma go
   with me, then." All who stood around the little creature were in tears,
   and she began in her own simple way to pray to God. Before expiring her
   face brightened, as she said: "Pa, the grave is not dark now. I know
   that you and mamma can't go with me, but Jesus will go with me into the
   grave."

   "I went once," says Rev. C.H. Fowler, D.D., " to see a dying girl whom
   the world had roughly treated. She never had a father, she never knew
   her mother. Her home had been the poor-house, her couch a hospital-cot;
   and yet, as she had staggered in her weakness there, she had picked up
   a little of the alphabet, enough to spell out the New Testament, and
   she had touched the hem of the Master's garment, and had learned the
   new song. And I never trembled in the presence of such majesty as I did
   in the majesty of her presence as she came near the crossing. Oh, sir!'
   she said, God sends his angels. I have read in his word " Are they not
   ministering spirits, sent forth to minister to them who shall be heirs
   of salvation? " And when I am lying in my cot, they stand about me on
   this floor; and when the heavy darkness comes, and this poor side aches
   so severely, he comes, for he says: "Lo, I am with you," and he slips
   his soft hand under my aching side, and I sleep, I rest.'

   The instances of heavenly ministries at the bedside of dying children
   are not rare. "Good-bye, papa; good-bye, mamma," said a sweet
   eight-year-old, dying in Baltimore "the angels have come to carry me to
   heaven! " And, sure enough, in a few moments, the heavenly convoy were
   bearing his freed spirit upwards to the skies.

   A contributor to the National Era, who was an eye witness to the scene,
   narrates how a little girl--a lovely and intelligent child-who had lost
   her mother too early to fix the loved features in remembrance, began to
   fade away early. As she reclined on the lap of the friend who took a
   mother's care of her, she would throw her wasted arm around her neck,
   and say: "Now tell me about mamma." And when the oft-told story had
   been repeated, she would ask, softly: "Take me into the parlor I want
   to see my mamma." The request was never refused, and the affectionate
   sick child would lie for hours gazing on her mother's portrait. But the
   hour came at last, and weeping neighbors assembled to see the little
   child die. "Do you know me darling?" sobbed close to the ear the voice
   that was dearest but it awoke no answer. All at once a brightness, as
   if flashed from the throne, beamed upon the colorless face. The eyelids
   opened, and the lips parted; the little hands were waved upwards, as,
   in the last impulsive effort, she looked piercingly into the far above.
   " Ah John " she cried, with surprise and transport in her tone-and
   passed with that breath to her mother's bosom. Said a distinguished
   divine, who witnessed the scene " If I had never believed in the
   ministration of departed ones before, I could not doubt it now."

   Bearing upon the same point is the story which history brings of the
   little son of Maria Antoinette, nine years of age, who was fastened in
   a cell, and his food thrust through a hole in the upper part of the
   door. Brought out after a year's confinement, during which period that
   door never once opened, he was brought out to die. "O," said he, "the
   music, the music, how fine" "Where?" "Why, up there, up there!"

   And again he repeated the exclamation: "O, the music, how fine I wish
   my sister could hear it" "Music? Where?" again asked his attendants.
   "Up there, up there" said the dying dauphin. "O, how fine I hear my
   mother's voice among them." And, with these words, he went to join her,
   whom at that time he did not know to be dead! " --J.H. Potts, in the
   Golden Dawn.

                      "DOES THIS RAILROAD LEAD TO HEAVEN?"

   In traveling we often meet with persons of different nationalities and
   languages; we also meet with incidents of various character, some
   sorrowful, and others joyful and instinctive. One of the latter
   character I witnessed recently while traveling upon the cars. The train
   was going west, and the time was evening. At a station a little girl
   about eight years old came aboard, carrying a little budget under her
   arm. She came into the car and deliberately took a seat. She then
   commenced an eager scrutiny of faces, but all were strange to her. She
   appeared weary, and placing her budget or a pillow, she prepared to try
   and secure a little sleep. Soon the conductor came along collecting
   tickets and fare. Observing him, she asked him if she might lie there.
   The gentlemanly conductor replied that she might, and then kindly asked
   for her ticket. She informed him that she had none, when the following
   conversation ensued. Said the conductor:

   "Where are you going?"

   "l am going to heaven," she answered.

   "Who pays your fare?" he asked again.

   She then said: "Mister, does this railroad lead to heaven, and does
   Jesus travel on it?"

   "I think not," he answered. "Why did you think so?"

   "Why, sir, before my ma died she used to sing to me of a heavenly
   railroad, and you looked so nice and kind that I thought this was the
   road. My ma used to sing of Jesus on the heavenly railroad, and that He
   paid the fare for everybody, and that the train stopped at every
   station to take people on board; but my ma don't sing to me any mere.
   Nobody sings to me now; and I thought I'd take the cars and go to ma.
   Mister, do you sing to your little girl about the railroad that goes to
   heaven? You have a little girl haven't you?"

   He replied, weeping: "No, my little dear, I have no little girl now. I
   had one once, but she died some time ago, and went to heaven." "Did she
   go over this railroad, and are you going to see her now? " she asked.

   By this time every person in the coach was upon their feet, and most of
   them were weeping. An attempt to describe what I witnessed is almost
   futile. Some said: " God bless the little girl." Hearing some person
   say that she was an angel, the little girl earnestly replied: "Yes, my
   ma used to say that I would be an angel some time.

   Addressing herself once more to the conductor, she asked him: "Do you
   love Jesus? I do; and if you love him, he will let you ride to heaven
   on His railroad. I am going there, and I wish you would go with me. I
   know Jesus will let me into heaven when I get there, and he will let
   you in too, and everybody that will ride on his railroad--yes, all
   these people. Wouldn't you like to see heaven, and Jesus, and your
   little girl?"

   These words, so pathetically and innocently uttered, brought a great
   gush of tears from all eyes, hut most profusely from those of the
   conductor. Some who were traveling on the heavenly railroad shouted
   aloud for joy.

   She now asked the conductor: "Mister, may I lie here until we get to
   heaven?

   "Yes, dear, yes," he answered. "Will you wake me up then, So that I may
   see my ma, and your little girl, and Jesus?" she asked, "for I do so
   much want to see them all. "The answer came in broken accents, but in
   words very tenderly spoken: "Yes, dear angel, yes. God bless you."
   "Amen" was sobbed by more than a score of voices. Turning her eyes
   again upon the conductor, she interrogated him again: "What shall I
   tell your little girl when I see her? Shall I tell her that I saw her
   pa on Jesus' railroad? Shall I?"

   This brought a fresh flood of tears from all present, and the conductor
   knelt by her side, and, embracing her, wept the reply he could not
   utter. At this juncture the brakeman called out "H-------" The
   conductor arose and requested him to attend to his (the conductor's)
   duty at the station, for he was engaged. That was a precious place. I
   thank God that I was a witness to this scene, but I was sorry that at
   this point I was obliged to leave the train.

   We learn from this incident that out of the mouths of even babes God
   hath ordained strength, and that we ought to be willing to represent
   the cause of our blessed Jesus even in a railroad coach.

                                   THE SEQUEL

   Rev. Dosh I wish to relieve my heart by writing to you, and saying that
   that angel visit on the cars was a blessing to me, although I did not
   realize it in its fullness until some hours after. But blessed be the
   Redeemer, I know now that I am His, and He is mine. I no longer wonder
   why Christians are happy. Oh, my joy, my joy! The instrument of my
   salvation has gone to God. I had purposed adopting her in the place of
   my little daughter, who is now in heaven. With this intention I took
   her to C----b and on my return trip I took her back to S----n, where
   she left the cars. In consultation with my wife in regard to adopting
   her, she replied " Yes, certainly, and immediately too, for there is a
   Divine providence in this. Oh," said she, "I never could refuse to take
   under my charge the instrument of my husband's salvation."

   I made inquiry for the child at S----n, and learned that in three days
   after her return she died suddenly, without any apparent disease, and
   her happy soul had gone to dwell with her ma, my little girl, and the
   angels in heaven I was sorry to hear of her death, but my sorrow is
   turned to joy when I think my angel-daughter received intelligence from
   earth concerning her pa, and that he is on the heavenly railway. Oh
   sir, methinks I see her near the Redeemer. I think I hear her sing "I'm
   safe at home, and pa and ma are coming;" and I find myself sending back
   the reply: "Yes, my darling, we are coming, and will soon be there."
   Oh, my dear sir, I am glad that I ever formed your acquaintance may the
   blessing of the great God rest upon you. Please write to me, and be
   assured, I would he most happy to meet you again.-- Rev. J.M. Dosh, in
   Christian Expositor.

                                  FOR HIS SAKE

   You ask me "How did you come into these new notions of giving?"

   Well, it was this way A year ago this winter our house took fire. It
   was in the middle of the night, and we were all asleep. The flames were
   first discovered by a poor neighbor, who at once gave the alarm, and
   then burst in the door. The house was full of smoke, and the fire had
   already attacked the staircase which led to the rooms in which we were
   still sleeping. It seems almost a miracle that we were got out alive.
   We were dazed and suffocated, and it was only the heroic courage and
   strength of our neighbor that brought us down the blazing stairway into
   the open air. But it nearly cost him his life. Indeed, we thought the
   man, gasping there for breath, would die on the spot. Intent on
   protecting us, he had exposed himself so that he was terribly burned
   about the arms and chest. lie had, too, drawn into his lungs the almost
   furnace-like air. As he stumbled out of the door with the last child in
   his arms, he fell down, utterly spent. I shall never forget the anguish
   of that hour. He had saved us, but himself seemed dying--dying for our
   sakes. All thought of our misfortune at once left us. The best
   physicians were summoned, and we bore him tenderly to his own house.
   When the immediate danger had been averted, it became plain that it
   would take careful nursing of many months to bring him back to his
   ordinary health, if, indeed, he had not become disabled for life.

   And now it was our turn. He was a laborer, and his family were wholly
   dependent on his daily earnings. It did not take us long to decide upon
   our course. In fact, there was no debate or counseling about it. The
   immediate and common thought of each of us, down to the youngest child,
   was, that we should at once take the whole care of this family upon
   ourselves. They were now allied to us by a tie stronger than any bond
   of kindred, and we did not for a moment hesitate what to do.

   I had a business that gave us a comfortable support, though we had
   followed the custom of our acquaintances generally, of living in a
   liberal way, quite up to the extent of our means. But we did not stay
   to ask whether we could afford it or not. We just settled it at once
   that this should be done first, and then we would somehow contrive to
   live on what remained.

   We arranged that the women of our family should relieve the
   heart-broken wife of the poor man from all household cares, that she
   might devote herself wholly to him. They were very tenderly attached,
   and no one could care for him as she could.

   "It was just like Jo," she said, as she patiently sat by his bedside;
   "he never thinks of himself." But a happy smile flitted across her wan
   face, as she added, " I wouldn't have him different."

   My oldest daughter soon secured a class in music, and the next one
   found a place in a kindergarten. It was a great, delight to me, and a
   stimulus to my own efforts, to see how intent the younger children
   were, each one of them, to earn or save something for the great purpose
   which had now come into our hearts. It sometimes brought the tears to
   see especially how Charlie, the last one saved, took wholly upon
   himself to look after one of the children of our brave friend, a boy
   about a year younger than himself, he could enjoy nothing, neither
   garment, schoolbook nor plaything, until he had seen to it that his
   little mate was fitted out as he himself was. And often this was done
   at a real sacrifice by the little fellow.

   Indeed, this was the way with us all. It did not occur to us to ask
   whether we could do what we had undertaken without feeling it. We
   wanted to feel it. We could not take upon ourselves any of the bodily
   anguish of this poor suffering man; suffering for our sakes. But it was
   a genuine satisfaction to be doing something for him, at some cost to
   ourselves, some real self-denial, that should be as constant as was the
   pain he was enduring. We somehow felt that it was the only way we could
   emphasize to our own hearts our great obligation, and show to him our
   gratitude; the only way in which we could in some small measure - it
   seemed very small to us sometimes-suffer with him in his great
   sufferings for us. I do not say that there was no conflict in doing
   this.

   After the excitement of the first few days was passed, it was often
   necessary to reinforce our variable impulses by calling up to our minds
   a sense of duty. The close quarters into which we had moved were
   inconvenient. Our former tastes and luxurious indulgences now and then
   stoutly asserted themselves. They had grown into headstrong habits, and
   it sometimes cost a real conflict to put them down.

   There was one untidy and expensive habit, which, it seems to me, I
   never could have broken off, had it not been for this new power that
   had come into my life. Upon a little calculation I found that it cost
   me more than a hundred dollars a year. This might be saved. It was a
   defiling and unwholesome thing, and I could not but feel a loss of
   self-respect every time I gave way to its use. But I had no idea it had
   gained such a mastery over me; and when the intense craving for my
   daily indulgence came on, the battle would certainly have gone against
   me had I not been wont to say to myself: "It is for his sake--for his
   sake!" That one word gave me the victory, and it was a real
   deliverance.

   There was another stout fight I had to make.

   One day a business friend of mine drove up with his well-matched span,
   and took me to see the new house he was building. I was glad to look it
   over, for I had planned that, some day, I would build such a house for
   myself. The rooms were spacious and many. The outlook from the bay
   windows was delightful. No modern convenience or appliance for comfort
   had been omitted. It was not strange that for a time my former desire
   for such a mansion-like residence came upon me with almost overpowering
   strength. It was a moment of weakness. The spirit of self-indulgence
   came back to its old home, and before I was aware, the chafing and
   impatience of my heart at the new expenses laid on me grew into a
   tumult; but it was only for a moment. As I walked away, and began to
   come to myself, and to see what I was really thinking about, what do
   you suppose I did?

  Just stood still and hated myself for about half an hour!

   Oh, what indignation! What clearing of myself! Yea, what revenge! To
   make sure that I had utterly rid myself of meanness of this
   contemptible thought, I immediately went with my wife and bargained for
   a neat cottage in the next block, arranging easy terms which I could
   meet in the year to come; and then directed that the deed should be
   given to my brave, suffering deliverer, the first day he should be able
   to walk out. I felt as if I had grievously wronged him, and that
   nothing short of this would satisfy the demands of the case.

   As our friend began to he able to walk, we found that there was
   something weighing upon his mind. It soon came out that he was the
   superintendent of a little Mission School which he had gathered in a
   neglected part of the town. Somehow it had come to him that in his
   absence it had sadly run down. You may be sure the whole teaching-force
   of our family was turned into that school the very next Sunday. I am
   ashamed to say that it was new business to us; but for his sake we were
   there, and we threw our whole souls into it.

   And it was a great satisfaction to see how like medicine it was to the
   poor man, to hear our weekly report of the growing interest and
   numbers. And when in the winter there came a blessed revival, his joy
   knew no bounds. It was noticeable that from that time on, he showed a
   marked improvement. There was a natural, but unlooked for result from
   the self-denials and solicitudes of this year. We were drawn, not only
   to this man, who was making a brave fight for life in at the next
   door-for we were continually running in and out- but we were also drawn
   to each other as we had never been before. A new tenderness and
   patience came into our lives. Somehow the common service and sacrifice
   upon which all our hearts were set, softened us and brought us together
   in a sympathy and oneness of feeling which was altogether new; and thus
   it proved to be the happiest period of our domestic life.

   It is a year now since that terrible night. Our neighbor, to our great
   joy, has so far recovered that he has moved to the new house, and will
   soon be back again to his accustomed work.

   Yesterday, as I looked over the footings of my inventory found, to my
   surprise, that after all, it had been one of my most successful years.
   Indeed, I had scarcely ever had so large a balance in hand. This was
   altogether unexpected. There had been no marked successes, or special
   interpositions.

   But I could see, on looking back, that my own business habits had been
   toned up by the necessities which faced us; that needless expenses had
   been cut off; that my business men had steadily improved, and that I
   had been somehow kept from mistakes and bad adventures, and misplaced
   credits. Indeed, we have a settled and sweet consciousness that the
   hand of a good Providence had been constantly with us.

   Last evening, as it was the anniversary of the fire, we gave up the
   accustomed hour of family worship to a review of the experiences. It
   was a delightful and precious season. We felt with humble gratitude,
   that we had come up to a higher plane of life, and no one of us desires
   to go back to the old way of self-indulgence. There had been quietly
   growing in our hearts for some months, the thought: If for this man's
   sake, why not even more for Christ's sake?

   When we had read at our morning worship such passages as the 53rd of
   Isaiah, or the closing scenes of our Lord's life in the Gospels, and
   many expressions in the Epistles, the sufferings, sometimes the intense
   anguish in at the next door of which we were often the witness, and
   which were almost never out of our thoughts seemed to make very real to
   us our Lord's sacrifice and sufferings for us. We were also much moved
   by the beautiful patience of our neighbor, and by his joy in what he
   had done. He seemed to feel, with all his lowliness, a sense of having
   somehow gained an ownership in us, and in a quiet way, he rejoiced over
   us as if we were the trophies of a great victory. We were, indeed, as
   "brands plucked from the burning;" and this often led us to turn to the
   Lord Jesus, with much yearning and tenderness of soul. And there would
   sometimes appear to us, with the vividness of a new revelation, the
   words: "Ye are bought with a great price;" "Ye are not your own." And
   so, at the close of our review, there came out, in a formal covenant,
   the purpose which had thus been quietly growing in all our hearts, that
   we would never, any more, live unto ourselves; that we would keep right
   on doing for our Lord, just what we bad been doing for this man. It
   seemed easy and natural, and the most reasonable thing in the world,
   that for the next year, and for all the years, we would make Christ's
   business our business; that we would take to our hearts the things that
   were nearest to His heart; that henceforth His Church, His poor, His
   little ones, and the salvation of the world, for which His soul is
   still in travail, should be the chief care of our lives.

   Our daughters have wrought and hung on the walls of our rooms a motto.
   It is only a faint reflection of that which is deeply, and we believe,
   permanently graven on our hearts:

   FOR HIS SAKE-FOR HIS SAKE!

   And so I have answered your question: How did you come into these new
   notions of giving?--S.J. Humphrey.

                EXPERIENCE OF A MINISTER'S WIFE ON THE FRONTIER.

   I remember a day during one winter that stands out like a boulder in my
   life. The weather was unusually cold, our salary had not been regularly
   paid, and it did not meet on needs when it was. My husband was away
   traveling from one district to another much of the time. Our boys were
   well, but my little Ruth was ailing, and at best none of us were
   decently clothed. I patched and repatched, with spirits sinking to
   their lowest ebb. The water gave out in the well, and the wind blew
   through the cracks in the floor.

   The people in the parish were kind, and generous, too, but the
   settlement was new, and each family was struggling for itself. Little
   by little, at the time I needed it most, my faith began to waver. Early
   in life I was taught to take God at His word, and I thought my lesson
   was well learned. I had lived upon the promises in dark times, until I
   knew, as David did, "who was my Fortress and Deliverer." Now a daily
   prayer for forgiveness was all that I could offer. My husband's
   overcoat was hardly thick enough for October, and he was often obliged
   to ride miles to attend some meeting or funeral. Many times our
   breakfast was Indian cake, and a cup of tea without sugar. Christmas
   was coming; the children always expected their presents. I remember the
   ice was thick and smooth, and the boys were each craving a pair of
   skates. Ruth, in some unaccountable way, had taken a fancy that the
   dolls I had made were no longer suitable; she wanted -a nice large one,
   and insisted in praying for it. I knew it was impossible; but, oh! How
   I wanted to give each child its present. It seemed as if God had
   deserted us, but I did not tell my husband all this. He worked so
   earnestly and heartily, I supposed him to be as hopeful as ever. I kept
   the sitting-room cheerful with an open fire, and tried to serve our
   scanty meals as invitingly as I could.

   The morning before Christmas, James was called to see a sick man. I put
   up a piece of bread for his lunch--it was the best I could do-- wrapped
   my plaid shawl around his neck, and then tried to whisper a promise, as
   I often had, but the words died away upon my lips. I let him go without
   it. That was a dark, hopeless day. I coaxed the children to bed early,
   for I could not bear their talk. When Ruth went, I listened to her
   prayer; she asked for the last time most explicitly for her doll, and
   for skates for her brothers. Her bright face looked so lovely when she
   whispered tome: "You know I think they'll be here early tomorrow
   morning, mamma," that I thought I could move heaven and earth to save
   her from disappointment. I sat down alone, and gave way to the most
   bitter tears.

   Before long James returned, chilled and exhausted. He drew off his
   boots; the thin stockings slipped off with them, and his feet were red
   with cold. "I wouldn't treat a dog that way; let alone a faithful
   servant," I said. Then, as I glanced up and saw the hard lines in his
   face and the look of despair, it flashed across me, James had let go,
   too. I brought him a cup of tea, feeling sick and dizzy at the very
   thought. He took my hand, and we sat for an hour without a word. I
   wanted to die and meet God, and tell Him his promise wasn't true; my
   soul was so full of rebellious despair.

   There came a sound of bells, a quick stop, and a loud knock at the
   door. James sprang up to open it. There stood Deacon White. "A box came
   for you by express just before dark. I brought it around as soon as I
   could get away. Reckoned it might be for Christmas; at any rate, they
   shall have it tonight. Here is a turkey my wife asked me to fetch
   along, and these other things I believe belong to you. There was a
   basket of potatoes and a bag of flour. Talking all the time, he hurried
   in the box, and then with a hearty good-night rode away. Still, without
   speaking, James found a chisel and opened the box. He drew out first a
   thick red blanket, and we saw that beneath was full of clothing. It
   seemed at that moment as if Christ fastened upon me a look of reproach.
   James sat down and covered his face with his hands. "I can't touch
   them," he exclaimed; "I haven't been true, just when God was trying me
   to see if I could hold out. Do you think I could not see how you were
   suffering? And I had no word of comfort to offer. I know now how to
   preach the awfulness of turning away from God." "James," I said,
   clinging to him, "don't take it to heart like this; I am to blame, I
   ought to have helped you. We will ask Him together to forgive us."
   "Wait a moment dear, I cannot talk now;" then he went into another
   room. I knelt down, and my heart broke; in an instant all the
   dark-ness, all the stubbornness rolled away. Jesus came again and stood
   before me, but now with the loving word: "Daughter!" Sweet promises of
   tenderness and joy flooded my soul. I was so lost in praise and
   gratitude that I forgot everything else. I don't know how long it was
   before James came back, but I knew he too had found peace. "Now, my
   dear wife," said he, "let us thank God together;" and then he poured
   out words of praise; Bible words, for nothing else could express our
   thanksgiving. It was eleven o'clock, the fire was low, and there was
   the great box, and nothing touched but the warm blanket we needed. We
   piled on some fresh logs, lighted two candles, and began to examine our
   treasures. We drew out an overcoat; I made James try it on; just the
   right size, and I danced around him; for all my light heartedness had
   returned. Then there was a cloak, and he insisted in seeing me in it.
   My spirits always infected him, and we both laughed like foolish
   children. There was a warm suit of clothes also, and three pair of
   woolen hose. There was a dress for me, and yards of flannel, a pair of
   arctic overshoes for each of us, and in mine was a slip of paper. I
   have it now, and mean to hand it down to my children. It was Jacob's
   blessing to Asher: "Thy shoes shall be iron and brass, and as thy days
   so shall thy strength be." In the gloves, evidently for James, the same
   dear hand had written: "I, the Lord thy God, will hold thy right hand,
   saying unto thee: Fear not, I will help thee." It was a wonderful box,
   and packed with thoughtful care. There was a suit of clothes for each
   of the boys, and a little red gown for Ruth. There were mittens,
   scarfs, and hoods; down in the center, a box; we opened it, and there
   was a great wax doll.

   I burst into tears again; James wept with me for joy. It was too much;
   and then we both exclaimed again, for close behind it came two pair of
   skates. There were books for us to read; some of them I had wished to
   see; stories for the children to read, aprons and underclothing, knots
   of ribbon, a gay little tidy; a lovely photograph, needles, buttons,
   and thread; actually a muff, and an envelope containing a ten-dollar
   gold piece. At last we cried over everything we took up. It was past
   midnight, and we were faint and exhausted even with happiness. I made a
   cup of tea, cut a fresh loaf of bread, and James boiled some eggs. We
   drew up the table before the fire; how we enjoyed our supper! And then
   we sat talking over our life, and how sure a help God always proved.
   You should have seen the children the next morning; the boys raised a
   shout at the sight of their skates. Ruth caught up her doll, and hugged
   it tightly without a word; then she went into her room and knelt by her
   bed. When she came back she whispered to me: "I knew it would be here,
   mamma, but I wanted to thank God just the same, you know." "Look here,
   wife, see the difference." We went to the window, and there were the
   boys out of the house already, and skating on the crust with all their
   might. My husband and I both tried to return thanks to the church in
   the East that sent us the box, and have tried to return thanks unto God
   every day since.

   Hard times have come again and again, but we have trusted in Him;
   dreading nothing so much as a doubt of His protecting care. Over and
   over again we have proved that, "They that seek the Lord shall not want
   any good thing."--Christian Witness.

                           SUPERHUMAN CONTROL OF THE
                        LOCOMOTIVE IN ANSWER TO PRAYER.

   The following instance is given in the experience of a correspondent of
   The Christian, which occurred in the latter part of November 1864,
   while traveling with her aged father and two small girls

   "We started from New Hampshire on Thursday morning, expecting to have
   ample time to get through to Indiana be-fore Saturday night; but, after
   we crossed the St. Lawrence River, the next day, I think, there was a
   smash-up on a freight train which hindered our train about two hours. I
   began to feel anxious, as I knew our limited means would not permit us
   to stop long on the way. After the cars had started again I inquired of
   the conductor what time we should get to Toledo, fearing we should not
   reach there in time for the down train. He said it would be impossible
   to gain the time:

   Soon they changed conductors, and I made a similar inquiry, getting
   about the same answer. Still I hoped, till we reached the Detroit
   River. Here I found that, though they had put on all the steam they
   dared to, they were almost an hour be-hind time, so I should have to
   stay over till Sunday night.

   "After getting seated in the cars on the other side, I ventured to ask
   the conductor if we should get to Toledo in time for the down train. He
   readily said: No, madam; impossible! If we put on all the steam we dare
   to, we shall be more than half an hour behind time. If we were on some
   trains, we might hope they would wait; but on his, never! He is the
   most exact conductor you ever saw. He was never known to wait a second,
   say nothing about a minute, beyond the time.' I then inquired if we
   could not stay at the depot. Me said: No; you would all freeze to
   death, for the fire is out till Sunday evening.'

   "A gentleman sitting in front of us said he would show us a good hotel
   near by, as he was acquainted there. I thanked him, but sunk back on my
   seat. Covering my eyes with my hand, and raising my heart to God, I
   said: O God, if thou art my Father, and I am thy child, put it into the
   heart of that conductor to wait till we get there.'

   "Soon I became calm, and fell asleep, not realizing that God would
   answer my poor prayer; but, when we reached Toledo, to the astonishment
   of us all, there stood the conductor, wanting to know the reason why he
   had to wait; when our conductor told him there was a lady with her
   crippled father and two little daughters, who were going down on that
   train.

   Soon as all were out of the car, both conductors came with their
   lanterns, and gave their aid in helping my father to the other train,
   where they had reserved seats by keeping the door locked. All was hurry
   and confusion to me, as had my eye on father, fearing he might fall, it
   being very slippery, when the baggage master said: "Your checks,
   madam!" I handed them to him, and rushed into the car; but, before I
   got seated, the car started, and I had no checks for my baggage. Again
   my heart cried out: "O Thou that hearest prayer, take care of my
   baggage!" believing He could do that as well as make the conductor
   wait. In a few moments the conductor came to me with a face radiant
   with smiles, saying: "Madam, I waited a whole half hour for you; a
   thing I never did before since I was a conductor, so much as to wait
   one minute after my time." He said: "I know it was your father that I
   was waiting for, because there was nothing else on the train for which
   I could have waited." I exclaimed, in a half-suppressed tone, "Praise
   the Lord!" I could not help it; it gushed out. Then he said: "At the
   very moment all were on board, and I was ready to start, such a feeling
   came over me as I had never had in my life before. I could not start.
   Something kept saying to me, you must wait; for there is something
   pending on that train you must wait for. I waited, and here you are,
   all safe." Again my heart said, Praise the Lord! And he started to
   leave me, when I said: "But there is one thing." "What is it?" was his
   quick reply. "I gave the baggage-master my checks, and have none in
   return." "What were the numbers?" I told him. "I have them," he said,
   handing them to me; "but your baggage will not be there till Monday
   morning. We had no time to put it on, we had waited so long." --
   Selected.

                             MARRIED TO A DRUNKARD.

   She arose suddenly in the meeting, and spoke as follows:

   "Married to a drunkard! Yes, I was married to a drunkard.-- Look at me!
   I am talking to the girls."

   We all turned and looked at her. She was a wan woman, with dark, sad
   eyes, and white hair, placed smoothly over a brow that denoted
   intellect.

   "When I married a drunkard, I reached the acme of misery," she
   continued. "I was young, and oh, so happy! I married the man I loved,
   and who professed to love me. He was a drunkard, and I knew it knew it,
   but did not understand it. There is not a young girl in this building
   that does understand it, unless she has a drunkard in her family; then,
   perhaps, she knows how deeply the iron enters the soul of a woman, when
   she loves, and is allied to a drunkard; whether father, husband,
   brother or son. Girls, believe me, when I tell you, that to marry a
   drunkard, to love a drunkard, is the crown of all misery. I have gone
   through the deep waters, and know. I have gained that fearful knowledge
   at the expense of happiness, sanity, almost life itself.

   Do you wonder my hair is white? It turned white in a night, bleached by
   sorrow,' as Marie Antoinette said of her hair. I am not forty years
   old, yet the snows of seventy rest upon my head; and upon my heart-ah!
   I cannot begin to count the winters resting there," she said, with
   unutterable pathos in her voice.

   "My husband was a professional man. His calling took him from home
   frequently at night, and when he returned, he returned drunk. Gradually
   he gave way to temptation in the day, until he was rarely sober. I had
   two lovely little girls and a boy." Here her voice faltered, and we sat
   in deep silence listening to her story. "My husband had been drinking
   deeply. I had not seen him for two days. He had kept away from his
   home. One night I was seated beside my sick boy; the two little girls
   were in bed in the next room, while beyond was another room, into which
   I heard my husband go, as he entered the house. The room communicated
   with the one in which my little girls were sleeping. I do not know why,
   but a feeling of terror took possession of me, and I felt that my
   little girls were in danger. I arose and went to the room. The door was
   locked. I knocked on it frantically, but no answer came. I seemed to be
   endowed with superhuman strength, and, throwing myself with all my
   force against the door, the lock gave way and the door flew open. Oh,
   the sight! The terrible sight! " She wailed out in a voice that haunts
   me now; and she covered her face with her hands, and when she removed
   them it was whiter and sadder than ever.

   "Delirium tremens! You have never seen it, girls; God grant that you
   never may. My husband stood beside the bed, his eyes glaring with
   insanity, and in his hand a large knife. "Take them away!" he screamed.
   "The horrible things, they are crawling all over me. Take them away, I
   say!" and he flourished the knife in the air. Regardless of danger, I
   rushed up to the bed, and my heart seemed suddenly to cease beating.
   There lay my children, covered with their life-blood, slain by their
   own father! For a moment I could not utter a sound. I was literally
   dumb in the presence of this terrible sorrow. I scarcely heeded the
   maniac at my side--the man who had wrought me all this woe. Then I
   uttered a loud scream, and my wailings filled the air. The servants
   heard me and hastened to the room, and when my husband saw them, he
   suddenly drew the knife across his own throat. I knew nothing more. I
   was borne senseless from the room that contained the bodies of my
   slaughtered children, and the body of my husband. The next day my hair
   was white, and my mind so shattered that I knew no one."

   She ceased! Our eyes were riveted upon her wan face.

   Some of the women present sobbed aloud, while there was scarcely a dry
   eye in that temperance meeting. We saw that she had not done speaking,
   and was only waiting to subdue her emotion to resume her story.

   "Two years," she continued, "I was a mental wreck; then I recovered
   from the shock, and absorbed myself in the care of my boy. But the sin
   of the father was visited upon the child, and six months ago my boy of
   eighteen was placed in a drunkard's grave; and as I, his loving mother,
   stood and saw the sod heaped over him, I said: "Thank God! I'd rather
   see him there than have him live a drunkard;" and I turned unto my
   desolate home a childless woman--one on whom the hand of God had rested
   heavily.

   "Girls, it is you I wish to rescue from the fate that overtook me. Do
   not blast your life as I blasted mine; do not be drawn into the madness
   of marrying a drunkard. You love him! So much the worse for you; for
   married to him, the greater will be your misery because of your love.
   You will marry and then reform him, so you say. Ah! A woman sadly
   overrates her strength when she undertakes to do this. You are no match
   for the giant demon drink,' when he possesses a man's body and soul.
   You are no match for him, I say. What is your puny strength beside his
   gigantic force? He will crush you, too. It is to save you, girls, from
   the sorrows that wrecked my happiness, that I have unfolded my history
   to you. I am a stranger in this great city. I am merely passing through
   it; and I have a message to bear to every girl in America never marry a
   drunkard!

   I can see her now, as she stood there amid the hushed audience, her
   dark eyes glowing, and her frame quivering with emotion, as she uttered
   her impassioned appeal. Then she hurried out, and we never saw her
   again. Her words, "fitly spoken," were not without effect, however, and
   because of them there is one girl single now. --Selected.

                           KICKED FOR CHRIST'S SAKE.

   An evangelist said: "A little girl of eight years was sent on an errand
   by her parents. While on her way, she was attracted by the singing of a
   gospel meeting in the open air, and drew near. The conductor of the
   meeting was so struck with the child's earnestness that he spoke to
   her, and told her about Jesus. She being the child of Roman Catholics,
   did not know much about Him, but the gentleman told her of His love to
   her. On returning home her father asked her what had detained her. She
   told him, and he cruelly beat her, forbidding her to go to any such
   meeting again. About a fortnight afterwards, she was so taken up with
   what she had previously heard of Jesus, that she forgot all about her
   message. She saw the same gentleman, who again told her more about the
   Savior. On her return home, she again told her father, as before, where
   she had been, and that she had not brought what she had been sent for,
   but that she had brought Jesus. Her father was enraged, and kicked the
   poor little creature until the blood came. She never recovered from
   this brutal treatment. Just before she breathed her last, she called
   her mother and said: "Mother, I have been praying to Jesus to save you
   and father." Then pointing to her little dress, she said: "Mother, cut
   me a bit out of the blood-stained piece of my dress." The mother,
   wondering, did so. "Now," said the dying child, "Christ shed His blood
   for my sake, and l am going to take this to Jesus to show Him that I
   shed my blood for His sake." Thus she died, holding firmly the piece of
   her dress, stained with her own blood. The testimony of that dear child
   was the means of leading both father and mother to Christ.--Selected.

                              AN EFFECTUAL PRAYER.

   "No," said the lawyer, "I shan't press your claim against that man; you
   can get some one else to take your case, or you can withdraw it, just
   as you please."

   "Think there isn't any money in it?"

   "There would probably he some money in it, but it would, as you know,
   come from the sale of the little house the man occupies and calls home;
   but I don't want to meddle with the matter, anyhow."

   "Got frightened out of it, eh?"

   "No, I wasn't frightened out of it."

   "I suppose likely the old fellow begged hard to be let off?"

   "Well, yes, he did."

   "And you caved, likely?"

   "No, I didn't speak a word to him."

   "Oh, he did all the talking, did he?"

   "Yes."

   "And you never said a word?"

   "Not a word."

   "What in creation did you do?"

   "I believe I shed a few tears."

   "And the old fellow begged you hard, you say?"

   "No, I didn't say so; he didn't speak a word to me"

   "Well, may I respectfully enquire whom he did address in your hearing?"

   "God Almighty."

   "Ah, he took to praying, did he?"

   "Not for my benefit, in the least. You see" and the lawyer crossed his
   right foot over his left knee, and began stroking his lower leg up and
   down, as if to state his case concisely; "you see, I found the little
   house easily enough, and knocked at the outer door, which stood ajar;
   but nobody heard me, so I slipped into the hall, and saw, through the
   crack of another door, just as cozy a sitting-room as there ever was.
   There on a bed, with her silver head way up high on the pillows, was an
   old lady, who looked for all the world just as my mother did the last
   time I ever saw her on earth.

   Well, I was right on the point of knocking, when she said as clearly as
   could be: "Come, father, begin; I'm ready." And down on his knees by
   her side went an old, white-haired man, still older than his wife, I
   should judge; and I could not have knocked then for the life of me.
   Well, he began; first he reminded God they were still His submissive
   children, mother and he; and no matter what He saw fit to bring upon
   them they shouldn't rebel at His will! Of course, twas going to be
   terrible hard for them to go out homeless in their old age, especially
   with poor mother so sick and helpless; but still they'd seen sadder
   things than ever that would be. He reminded God, in the next place, how
   different all might have been if only one of their boys might have been
   spared them; then his voice kind of broke, and a thin, white hand stole
   from under the coverlet, and moved softly over his snowy hair; then he
   went on to repeat, that nothing could be so sharp as the parting with
   those three sons unless mother and he should be separated. But at last
   he fell to comforting himself with the fact that the dear Lord knew it
   was through no fault of his own, that mother and he were threatened
   with the loss of their dear little home, which meant beggary and the
   alms-house; a place they prayed to be delivered from entering, if it
   could be consistent with God's will. And then he fell to quoting a
   multitude of promises concerning the safety of those who put their
   trust in the Lord; yes, I should say he begged hard; in fact it was the
   most thrilling plea to which I ever listened. And at last he prayed for
   God's blessing on those who were about to demand justice"--The lawyer
   stroked his lower limb in silence for a moment or two, then continued
   more slowly than before: "And, I believe, I'd rather go to the
   poor-house myself, tonight, than to stain my heart and hands with the
   blood of such a prosecution as that."

   "Little afraid to defeat the old man's prayer, eh?" queried the client.

   "Bless your soul, man, you could not defeat it!" roared the lawyer. "It
   doesn't admit of defeat! I tell you, he left it all subject to the will
   of God; but he left no doubt as to his wishes in the matter; claimed
   that we were told to make known our desires unto God; but of all the
   pleading I ever heard that beat all. You see, I was taught that kind of
   thing myself in my childhood; and why I was sent to hear that prayer
   I'm sure I don't know, but I hand the case over."

   "I wish," said the client, twisting uneasily, "you hadn't told me about
   the old fellow's prayer."

   "Why so?"

   "Well, I greatly want the money the place would bring, but was taught
   the Bible all straight when I was a youngster; and I'd hate to run
   counter to such a harangue as that you tell about. I wish you hadn't
   heard a word of it; and another time I wouldn't listen to petitions not
   intended for your ears."

   The lawyer smiled.

   "My dear fellow," he said, "you're wrong again; it was intended for my
   ears, and yours, too, and God Almighty intended it. My old mother used
   to sing about God's moving in a mysterious way, I remember."

   "Well, my mother used to sing it, too," said the claimant, as he
   twisted his claim-papers in his fingers. "You can call in, in the
   morning, if you like, and tell mother and him the claim has been met."

   "In a mysterious way," added the lawyer, smiling.--Selected by Mrs. E.
   C. Best.

                           BISHOP SIMPSON'S RECOVERY.

   Bishop Bowman, of the M.E. Church, gives the following instance from
   his own experience:

   " In the fall of 1858, whilst visiting Indiana, I was at an annual
   conference where Bishop Janes presided. We received a telegram that
   Bishop Simpson was dying. Said Bishop Janes: "Let us spend a few
   moments in earnest prayer for the recovery of Bishop Simpson." We
   kneeled to pray. William Taylor, the great California street-preacher,
   was called to pray; and such a prayer I never heard since.

   The impression seized upon me irresistibly, Bishop Simpson will not
   die. I rose from my knees perfectly quiet. Said I:

   "Bishop Simpson will not die." "Why do you think so?" "Because I have
   had an irresistible impression made upon my mind during this prayer."'
   Another said: "I have the same impression." We passed it along from
   bench to bench, until we found that a very large proportion of the
   conference had the same impression. I made a minute of the time of day,
   and when I next saw Simpson, he was attending to his daily labor. I
   inquired of the bishop: "How did you recover from your sickness?" He
   replied: "I cannot tell." "What did your physician say?" "He said it
   was a miracle." I then said to the bishop: "Give me the time and
   circumstances under which the change occurred.' He fixed upon the day,
   and the very hour, making allowance for the distance a thousand miles
   away that the preachers were engaged in prayer at this conference. The
   physician left his room and said to his wife: "It is useless to do
   anything further; the bishop must die." In about an hour he returned,
   and started back, inquiring: "What have you done?" "Nothing," was the
   reply. "He is recovering rapidly," said the physician; "a change has
   occurred in the disease within the last hour beyond anything I have
   ever seen; the crisis is past, and the bishop will recover." And he
   did."

   The doctor was puzzled; it was beyond all the course and probabilities
   of nature, and the laws of science. What was it that made those
   ministers so sure--what was it that made the patient recover, at the
   exact hour that they prayed? There is only one answer: "The ever-living
   power of a Superior Spirit which rules the world."--Wonders of Prayer.

                             HEALED OF DIPHTHERIA.

   In the fall of 1885, our oldest boy, then two and one-half years old,
   was taken very ill. Diphtheria had for some time been raging to a
   considerable extent in the city of Grand Rapids, where we then resided.
   But a short time before, friends, who had just buried a little
   daughter, who had died of that disease, had visited at our home. Our
   little Rolin's throat was badly cankered, he could no longer lie down
   without strangling; and we felt that by naught but the power and mercy
   of God, could he be spared to us. With a sad, aching heart, I laid away
   his little playthings, thinking I might never see him use them again;
   and as I looked over to the cemetery on the hill beyond us, a great
   yearning cry of anguish went up from my soul, as I thought that, in all
   human probability, I might be called within a few days, to there lay
   away the form of my darling.

   More from a sense of regard for the feelings and convictions of others,
   than because of any confidence in the power of human remedies to meet
   the demands of the case, husband sent for a physician. As the one sent
   for was not in his office; the friend who went for him brought another,
   prominent for skill and experience. After careful examination, he
   pronounced the child dangerously ill of diphtheria, and said to the
   friend who brought him: "They do not realize how sick that child is;
   whatever is done for him must be done quickly." He would leave no
   medicine, unless we gave him entire charge of the case, and this we did
   not feel ready to do.

   After his departure, husband said to me: "If you wish me to send for
   the other physician, I will do so; but for myself, I can as easily
   exercise faith in God to heal Rolin as to trust Him for means to pay a
   doctor."

   Then, while I sat with Rolin in my arms, he knelt and prayed. As he
   plead with God that, if it were according to His will and for His
   glory, He would spare and heal the child He had given us, I knew he was
   wonderfully helped of the Spirit.

   When he arose he told me that he had the positive assurance that his
   prayer was heard, and that Rolin would recover.

   For hours previous, the sick one had been suffering greatly; but he
   immediately appeared very much better, and soon dropped into a sweet
   sleep. We laid him down among the pillows, and soon after retired, and
   that night we all slept well. The next morning, Rolin was up, dressed,
   and playing as usual about the house, and there was no more sign of
   diphtheria in his case.

   In a short time a sister in the Lord, who had been with the previous
   afternoon, but who left at about the time we sent for the physician,
   and who knew nothing of what had transpired in her absence, came to the
   door. As I met her she said: "I have good news for you. Rolin is going
   to get well." And upon careful inquiry we found that at very nearly, if
   not exactly, the same time that husband said to me that God had assured
   him that Rolin would recover, this sister, then a mile and a half away,
   had testified the very same thing to those that were with her.

   A few weeks later, husband was just as miraculously healed of the same
   disease, and the very next day rode over twenty miles in a cutter; and
   though it was a very cold, raw, windy November day, his throat did not
   trouble him in the least.

   Yours in the love of Jesus.

   - Mrs. S. B. Shaw

                        A WIDOW'S WONDERFUL DELIVERANCE

   In the winter of 1855, in the state of Iowa, the snow fell early in
   November to the depth of two feet. The storm was such that man nor
   beast could move against it. In a log cabin, six miles from her nearest
   relative, lived a woman with five children, ranging from one to eleven
   years.

   The supply of food and fuel was but scant when the snow began falling;
   and day after day the small store melted away, until the fourth
   evening, when the last provisions were cooked for supper, and barely
   enough fuel remained to last one day more. That night, as washer
   custom, the little ones were called around her knee to hear the
   Scripture lesson read, before commending them to the Heavenly Father's
   care. Then, bowing in prayer, she pleaded as only those in like
   condition can plead, that help from God might be sent.

   While wrestling with God in prayer, the Spirit took the words of the
   Psalmist and impressed them on her heart: "I have been young, and now
   am old, yet have I not seen the righteous forsaken, nor his seed
   begging bread." And again, these words came as if spoken audibly: "The
   young lions do lack and suffer hunger, but they that wait on the Lord
   shall want no good thing." Faith took God at His word; and with an
   assurance that help would come, she prayed God who heareth prayer, and
   retired to rest without a care or fear for the morrow When again the
   morning broke, that mother arose, kindled her fire and put on the
   kettle as she had done on other days before the food was all gone. Just
   as the sun arose, a man in a sleigh drove up to the house, and
   hastening in inquired how they were getting along. Her heart at first
   was too full for utterance; but in a short time he was told something
   of their destitution, and of her cry to God for help. He replied: "Last
   night about nine o'clock, wife and I were both impressed that you were
   in need. Spending almost a sleepless night, I hastened at early dawn,
   to come and inquire about the case."

   Then returning to his sleigh he took into the house breadstuff, meat
   and groceries, so that mother had abundance to prepare a breakfast for
   the little ones, who had eaten the last bread the night before. And as
   if to make the case above-mentioned a special providence, without a
   doubt remaining, the individual who was thus impressed and that at the
   very hour that mother was crying to God-was a stranger to the
   circumstances and surroundings of this family. Indeed, he had never
   been in that house before, nor had ever showed any interest in the
   person referred to; but he ever afterwards proved a friend indeed. Now,
   after years have rolled around, and these children are all married and
   settled in homes of their own, that mother's heart is still
   strengthened to bear hardships and trust in God, by the recollections
   of that hour, when faith in God was so tested, and yet was so
   triumphant.

   Let skeptics ridicule the idea of a special providence, or lightly
   speak of prayer. One heart will ever believe God's ear in mercy is open
   to the cry of the feeblest of His children, when in distress their cry
   goes up for help to Him.--E.M. Dodson, of Orworth, Kan., in Michigan
   Holiness Record.

                        THE CONVERSION OF HUDSON TAYLOR.

   Hudson Taylor, founder of China Inland Mission, says that about 1830
   his father became so interested in the spiritual condition of China,
   that he was led to pray that if God ever gave him a son, he might be
   privileged to labor as a missionary there; a prayer unknown to the son
   until after seven years of service in that mission field. Though
   carefully trained to the study of God's word and a life of devotion,
   yet at the age of fifteen the lad was a skeptic.

   Of his conversion he says: "One day, which I shall never forget, when I
   was about fifteen years old, my dear mother being absent from home some
   eighty miles away, I had a holiday. I searched through the library for
   a book to while away time. I selected a gospel tract which looked
   unattractive, saying, there will be an interesting story at the
   commencement, and a sermon or moral at the end; I will take the former,
   and leave the latter for those who like it. I little knew what was
   going on in the heart of my dear mother. She arose from the
   dinner-table with an intense yearning for the conversion of her boy,
   and feeling that, being from home, and having more leisure than she
   otherwise would, there was a special opportunity afforded her of
   pleading with God for me. She went to her bedroom, and turned the key
   in the door, and resolved not to leave the room until her prayers were
   answered. Hour after hour did that dear mother plead for me, until she
   could only praise God for the conversion of her son. In the meantime,
   as I was reading the tract, The Finished Work of Christ,' a light was
   flashed into my soul by the Holy Spirit, that there was nothing to be
   done, but to fall on my knees and accept this Savior and his salvation,
   and praise God forevermore. While my mother was praising God in her
   closet, I was praising Him in the old warehouse where I had retired to
   read my book. When I met mother the door on her return with the glad
   news, she said: "I know, my boy; I have been rejoicing for a fortnight
   in the glad tidings you have to tell me!"

   Many souls are lost for want of persistent pleading with God in their
   behalf. Time that might be used in prayer is consumed in other ways,
   and souls and opportunities pass forever from our reach. For those
   hours of pleading with God, this faithful mother received not only her
   son for God, but the great work God put into his hands-China Inland
   Mission. Hudson Taylor has led out into the heart of China more than
   one hundred and seventy apostolic missionaries, none of whom receive
   support except through faith in God. -- Anna Abrams, in Vanguard.

                               AWFUL PROVIDENCES.

   The following are selected from a list of incidents recorded by Thomas
   Graham, the noted revivalist preacher, of the Erie Conference of the
   M.B. church. After his death they were found entered, under the above
   heading, in a small pass-book, as facts worthy of preservation, from an
   experience of almost fifty years in the ministry: When the Rev. Mr.
   Knapp, a regular Baptist minister, was holding a protracted meeting in
   Erie, he was interrupted by one Gifford, a Universalist preacher. Mr.
   Knapp felt his patience tried. At the conclusion of his sermon he
   prayed publicly that if said Gifford was within reach of salvation that
   God would have mercy upon him; but if not that God would take away his
   speech, so that he might deceive the people no longer. And Mr. Gifford
   went out of the house that night a perfect mute, nor did he speak
   another word for more than four years. He said himself he believed he
   could speak if he could will to do it. He carried a slate about with
   him all the time, on which he wrote what he wished to say. All
   physicians who examined him said there was no disease of the organs of
   speech. It was a direct visitation in answer to prayer. He went to New
   York, Boston, and other. places, to consult the best physicians; but it
   was of no use. [1]

   When Rev. George Howe was holding a protracted meeting, at which many
   were converted, the family of a noted infidel experienced religion,
   which affected him much. Returning home one evening from meeting, he
   seemed more than usually melancholy; and after going to bed, he began
   to abuse his wife for letting the children have a certain rope to play
   with that day, for they had now lost it. She remarked to him that it
   was not lost, that she knew it was in a certain place which she
   designated. Apparently he became satisfied, and she fell asleep. That
   night one of the members of the Methodist society in the neighborhood
   came to two others of the brethren, stating to them that he was
   impressed with the idea of going to this infidel's house, and wanted
   them to go along with him. They all started off immediately. They came
   to the infidel's door and rapped, but received no answer. After waiting
   some time, they opened the door, and coming in, found the man of the
   house with the said rope around his neck, and in the act of putting it
   over a beam to hang himself. Immediately he dropped on his knees, and
   cried for mercy, and before they left him he was happily converted to
   God. His name was John James. Ten minutes more and he would have been
   in eternity. When Revs. William Swazy and John Chandler were holding a
   quarterly meeting in Greenville, Mercer Co., Pa., they gave an
   opportunity for seekers of religion to come to the altar on Saturday
   evening. Many came. One young man, who was almost induced to go, held
   back. The thought, however, that it "was now or never" haunted him, so
   that at last he arose and went part way down the aisle, with the
   intention of going forward; he stopped, however, and going back resumed
   his seat. Still this idea troubled him. He arose and went part way a
   second time. A third time he arose and went down, but instead of
   kneeling down at the altar, he went out of the house, intending to go
   home; but being impressed with the idea that it was "now or never," he
   turned about and came back, and stood at the altar, and looked on the
   scene for a short time; then clinching his fist, and shaking it in the
   air, he shouted: "God Almighty, I will not! " and left the house. From
   that moment he said his feelings left him. He walked on home; but as he
   stepped on his own doorstep and put his hand to the door to open it, he
   said a light shone around him, and a voice distinctly said: "He is
   joined to his idols, let him alone;" and, shrieking aloud, he fell on
   the pavement. His neighbors came and carried him in. They sent for
   Swazy and Chandler, who came and offered him the consolation of the
   gospel, but without avail. His reply was: "It is too late! Too late!
   Too late! " And continued thus to exclaim until about sunrise the next
   morning, when his spirit took its flight to God, whom he had refused
   and insulted.

                         JOHN BYERS' PREVAILING PRAYER.

   Maggie, an Irish girl of about twenty years, burned herself by lighting
   the morning fire with kerosene. Dr. Benjamin, the leader of the infidel
   club here, was called, who bound her up in cotton and oil.

   A neighbor sent for John Byers, an old Scotch shoemaker, to pray with
   her. As he came into the house, the doctor was coming out, and ordered
   him away, saying, he didn't want any praying done about any of his
   patients. But Brother Byers paid him no heed, and taking the girl's
   hand, asked her: "Maggie, are you in great pain?" "Oh! Awful, sir," was
   her answer. "Well, we will ask God to take it away," he said; and
   falling upon his knees at her bedside paying no more attention to the
   room full of women that stood about, than if they had been so many
   flies, he asked the Lord to take all the pain away, so that he could
   talk to her about her soul; and very soon he got the perfect assurance
   that his prayer was heard. So he arose and said:

   "Do you feel any pain now, Maggie?"

   "No, sir, it has all gone away."

   Then he presented a Savior to her mind, as dying for dying Maggie, so
   that she, by believing on Him, might live forever; and soon she
   accepted Him as her Redeemer. After a little while she opened her eyes,
   and looking around, said to the women: "Don't you hear it?"

   "No, we don't hear anything, Maggie," they replied.

   "Oh, I never heard such singing before! And the music! I can't tell you
   how fine it is" And then she lay, listening till starting up, she sat
   up in bed, and pointing upward, said: " Don't you see them? Oh, how
   beautiful they are! What are they?"

   "They are the angels, coming to take you home, Maggie," said Brother
   Byers.

   Then she laid back again on her pillow perfectly quiet, as if fearing
   to lose sight of the beautiful vision.

   Brother Byers turned to go home, but had not got a hundred steps from
   the house, when one of the women called out to him: " She's gone, sir."

   But the case of the doctor lay heavily on John Byers' mind; and that
   night, he did not go to bed until he had made the case a subject of
   earnest prayer, and had received the assurance that he should be
   converted, Seeing the doctor a few days after that, he told him of his
   answer to prayer for him. But the doctor laughed at the idea of such a
   fool getting any such a promise from the Maker of the universe.

   But the next fall the doctor went to Florida for his health, and within
   two months, the news came back that Benjamin had knelt at a Methodist
   mourner's bench, and was converted.

   The next spring he died, rejoicing in the faith.--Dr. H. Durham.

                              A VISION OF HEAVEN.

   That heaven is real there can be no doubt. That others beside St. Paul
   have been allowed a view of Paradise, is evident from the testimony of
   the most reliable witnesses, such as Dr. Tennent, of New Jersey, Dr.
   Coke, and many others. One of the most interesting and touching
   incidents of this character is related by Rev. James B. Finley, in his
   "Autobiography." It occurred in 1842, when he was presiding elder of
   the Lebanon District, Ohio Conference.

   He tells us that he was "winding up the labors of a very toilsome year.
   I had scarcely finished my work till I was most violently attacked with
   bilious fever, and it was with great difficulty I reached my home." He
   sank rapidly. The best medical skill failed to arrest the disease, and
   life was utterly despaired of. " On the seventh night," he says, "in a
   state of entire insensibility to all around me, when the last ray of
   hope had departed, and my weeping family and friends were standing
   around my couch, waiting to see me breathe my last, it seemed to me
   that a heavenly visitant entered my room. It came to my side, and in
   the softest nd most silvery tones, which fell like rich music on my
   ear, it said: I have come to conduct you to another state and place of
   existence.' In an instant I seemed to rise, and gently borne by my
   angel guide, I floated out upon the ambient air. Soon earth was lost in
   the distance, and around us on every side were worlds of light and
   glory. On, on, away, away, from world to luminous worlds afar, we sped
   with the velocity of thought. At length we reached the gates of
   Paradise; and oh, the transporting scenes that fell upon my vision, as
   the emerald portals, wide and high, rolled back upon their golden
   hinges! Then in its fullest extent, did O realize the invocation of the
   poet:

   "'Burst, ye emerald gates, and bring

   To my raptured vision,

   All the ecstatic joys that spring

   Round the bright Elysian.'

   "Language, however, is inadequate to describe what then, with unveiled
   eyes, I saw. The vision is indelibly pictured on my heart. Before me,
   spread out in beauty, was a broad sheet of water, clear as crystal, not
   a single ripple on its surface, and its purity and clearness
   indescribable.

   "While I stood gazing with joy and rapture at the scene, a convoy of
   angels was seen floating in the pure ether of that world. They all had
   long wings, and although they went with the greatest rapidity, yet
   their wings were folded close to their sides. While gazing, I asked my
   guide who these were, and what their mission. To this he responded:
   "They are angels, dispatched to the world from whence you came, on an
   errand of mercy." I could hear strains of the most entrancing melodies
   all around me, but no one was discoverable but my guide. At length I
   said: "Will it be possible for me to have a sight of some of the just
   made perfect in glory?" Just then there came before us three persons;
   one had the appearance of a male, the other of a female and the third
   an infant. The appearance of the first two was somewhat similar to the
   angels I saw, with the exception that they had crowns upon their heads
   of the purest yellow, and harps in their hands. Their robes, which were
   full and flowing, were of the purest white. Their countenances were
   lighted up with heavenly radiance, and they smiled upon me with
   ineffable sweetness.

   "There was nothing with which the blessed babe could be compared. Its
   wings, which were the most beautiful, were tinged with all the colors
   of the rainbow. Its dress seemed to be of the whitest silk, covered
   with the softest white down. The driven snow could not exceed it for
   whiteness or purity. Its face was all-radiant with glory; its very
   smile now plays around my heart. I gazed and gazed with wonder upon
   this heavenly child. At length I said: If I have to return to earth,
   from whence I came, I should love to take this child with me, and show
   it to the weeping mothers' of earth. Methinks when they see it, they
   will never shed another tear over their children when they die.' So
   anxious was I to carry out the desire of my heart, that I made a grasp
   at the bright and beautiful one, desiring to clasp it in my arms; but
   it eluded my grasp and plunged into the river of life. Soon it rose up
   from the water; and, as the drops fell from its expanding wings, they
   seemed like diamonds, so brightly did they sparkle. Directing its
   course to the other shore, it flew up to one of the topmost branches of
   one of life's fair trees. With a look of most seraphic sweetness it
   gazed upon me, and then commenced singing in heaven's own strain: To
   Him that hath loved me, and washed me from my sins in His own blood, to
   Him be glory, both now and forever. Amen.'

   "At that moment, the power of the eternal God came upon me, and I began
   to shout; and clapping my hands, I sprang from my bed, and was healed
   as instantly as the lame man in the beautiful porch of the temple, who
   went walking, and leaping, and praising God.' Overwhelmed with the
   glory I saw and felt, I could not cease praising God.

   "The next Sabbath, I went to camp-meeting, filled with the love and
   power of God. There I told the listening thousands what I saw and felt,
   and what God had done for me; and loud were the shouts of glory that
   reverberated through the forest."

   This is a most remarkable case. Father Adams, a member of the Ohio
   Conference, now residing at Orange, South Carolina, told us that he was
   present at the camp-meeting, and heard Mr. Finley relate the
   circumstances, when such power fell on the people that not less than
   five hundred sinners were crying to God for mercy, while the saints of
   God shouted for joy.

   The healing was divine--done by the power of God.

   The man was made whole in a moment, after all hope of life had fled. --
   Christian Witness.

                              MIRACLE OF HEALING.

   From "Remarkable Answers to Prayer," by Patton, the following extract
   is made

   The author has received a letter from James H. Black-man of Sharon,
   Mass., (P. O. address at Canton, Mass.,) which is of extraordinary
   interest. Some of the facts have been given before, but never so fully
   as now. Slightly abridged, it is as follows, under date of Oct. 23,
   1875:

   "In the spring of 1870, my wife was taken sick with kidney-complaint.
   She continued to grow worse during the summer. I took a bottle of urine
   to Dr. Erasmus D. Miller, a celebrated physician of Boston, to be
   tested. He sent me a note saying: "Her disease is Bright's disease of
   the kidneys, in a far advanced stage, and incurable.' The water was
   afterward tested by several physicians, who coincided with Dr. Miller.
   An increase of albumen was apparent at every test, and the last, (a 2
   oz. bottle,) tested by Dr. A. A. Holmes, of Canton, contained nothing
   but albumen. The water gradually decreased in quantity, and finally
   stopped altogether, and for two years nothing passed. It is well known
   that physicians do not profess to cure this disease.During my wife's
   illness her left limb became completely paralyzed, and withered away to
   the size of a man's wrist in the largest place, without any feeling
   even to pins and boiling water. She tipped a milk pan of boiling water
   upon her feet, but did not know that this limb was scalded till she
   began to dress her well foot. For three years and two months she did
   not walk; for two years she crept upon her knees, drawing the lame leg
   after her; and for the last year she moved herself around in a wheeled
   invalid chair. During these three years she was taken out of her bed in
   the morning and put in to it again at night. For the two years and four
   months no physician had been in the house, and she had taken no
   medicine, resorted to no bathing or rubber. She ate but once a day, and
   immediately vomit.

   "During her sickness, God gave me a new heart, and I prayed for her
   conversion, which occurred in January 1874; and then for that of our
   daughter, which took place in February. Previously I was a Unitarian,
   unacquainted with evangelical doctrines. Not knowing that the Christian
   world had decided that the day of miracles had passed, in my ignorance
   and simplicity, I went to praying with faith in Christ's promise, that
   my wife might be healed-my wife and daughter joining after their
   conversion. God gave me the assurance that our prayers were accepted,
   and I became bold to say to others that she would soon walk. I made
   this declaration to James Jennison, Congregational minister at Canton,
   and he replied: "Why, you can't expect God to do a miracle!

   My assurance grew stronger and stronger, and filled me with joy and
   gratitude. Just then the water came back in large quantity, and on
   being tested by Dr. Holmes, proved free of albumen. On the morning of
   February 25, 1873, I prayed earnestly in secret, and then placed my
   wife on her knees at the family altar, and again prayed earnestly that
   she might walk. At the close of the prayer she was unconscious, and
   apparently dead. She remained thus about three minutes, when she
   exclaimed: I can walk! I know I can walk! Praise God, I can walk!' She
   got up off her knees, and walked twice around the room, exclaiming:
   Praise God, I can walk! Why don't you praise God that I can walk?" Then
   we commenced shouting: Glory to God!' Oh, the rapture of that moment!
   We bowed before God and thanked Him for the great miracle He had
   performed.

   "I opened the door, and she walked out upon the piazza; and about an
   hour afterward she walked out and shook hands with a neighbor, who was
   so surprised that he lost all power of speech. The paralyzed limb
   became immediately enlarged, and in a few days was plump and round, and
   stronger than the other. The appetite came back, the vomiting ceased,
   and Bright's disease, with all its attendant pains, passed away. She is
   in better health than ever before, and, like the impotent man at the
   Beautiful Gate, goes about leaping and praising God, often walking
   eight and ten miles a day without limping or fatigue.

   "We got our faith by prayer and reading the promises. How could we,
   after having been born again, refuse to accept those promises as true?
   Our hearts had been given to Him, and we prayed for her recovery, that
   each might be enabled to go out into the world and make known the
   wonderful things God had done for us, in giving us clean hearts; and by
   the grace of God, so we will ever do."

                             REMARKABLE HEALING OF
                             MRS. SUSAN E. MILLER.

   When I was twelve years of age I felt the need of a new heart. I asked
   God for it, and He gave it to me. I am now forty-six years old, and oh,
   how wonderfully the Lord has led me! I must say, there is nothing so
   grand and glorious as to know that we are of God's chosen ones. When I
   came to Grand Rapids five years ago I became acquainted with S. B. Shaw
   (President of the Michigan Holiness Association), and his very worthy
   wife. I saw them live by faith alone for all things, both spiritual and
   temporal.; and of them I learned how to consecrate myself wholly unto
   the Lord.

   I had been afflicted with rheumatism from a child; and had spent large
   sums of money for my recovery, but could only find relief for a few
   weeks at a time. I was sick and helpless in bed with inflammatory
   rheumatism, when I heard through Mrs. Shaw of Mrs. Dora Griffin. I sent
   for her to anoint me. After she had done so, and while she was praying
   for my recovery, the Lord touched my body, and I was healed that very
   same hour, and have never been troubled with rheumatism since; praise
   God!

   One year after this, the piles came upon me, and I suffered greatly.
   After trying many remedies and doctors without relief, I said: "The
   Lord has healed me, and He will heal me again; " so I went to the
   "Beulah" rest, and after prayer and anointing, I was healed, and went
   home happy, healed and saved in both soul and body; praise His name
   forever!

   Dear friends, you who are sick of sin and sick in body, come to Jesus,
   and be healed, soul and body. --Mrs. Susan E. Miller.

                          INSTANTLY HEALED OF RUPTURE.

   During the fall of 1888 we witnessed the remarkable healing of Brother
   J.S. Whiting, then a pastor at Hilliards, Mich. The night of his cure
   we were wonderfully led out in prayer. We give the circumstances in his
   own words, as published in the Holiness Record a short time afterwards.

   He says: "About three weeks after my conversion the Lord told me to go
   preach His gospel. I obeyed the call the best I could, but have been
   trying to believe that I could work in the mill through the week and
   just preach on Sunday; but found that the Lord wanted me to give up all
   and work for Him. Still I hesitated. About one year ago, while about my
   work, I fell, and ruptured myself very badly was so that I could not
   stand on my feet without a truss, and sometimes even that was not
   sufficient, and I had to lie on my back.

   "Last Thursday night, while I was preaching, my rupture began to pain
   me so badly that I had to stop and let Brother Shaw finish. That night
   we went to stay with one of the members. I suffered a great deal of
   pain all the next day. When night came, it rained so hard we could not
   have any meeting, so remained where we were. During the evening I lay
   on the couch, as I was unable to be on my feet, or even sit up with any
   comfort. Finally Brother Shaw said: Let us pray' At first I thought I
   could not get on my knees, but with the Lord's help I got down, and
   began to pray for God to heal my body. Then I thought something said:

   Get up, and take off your truss.' So I got up, and took it off, and
   went to the stove, opened the door, and threw it into the fire, as I
   felt clearly directed to do. Then God came and made a sound man of me.
   I can jump and praise Him now, and all is right."

   From what he told us, we think the Lord has done more for him than
   would be inferred from his words. We were with him one week before his
   healing, and a few days after, and certainly God wrought a most
   wonderful cure in his case. When we met him months afterward, we found
   him still well and sound. May God use this and other similar cases to
   inspire faith in others.

                               THE YOUNG MARTYR.

   On the afternoon of August 9, 1853, a little Norwegian boy, named Kund
   Iverson, who lived in the city of Chicago, Ill., was going to the
   pastures for his cow, as light-hearted, I suppose, as boys usually are
   when going to the pasture on a summer afternoon. He came at length to a
   stream of water, where there was a gang of idle, ill-looking, big boys,
   who, when they saw Kund, came up to him, and said they wanted him to go
   into Mr. Elston's garden and steal some apples."

   "No," said Kund promptly; "I cannot steal, I am sure."

   "Well, but you've got to," they cried!

   They threatened to duck him, for these wicked big boys had often
   frightened little boys into robbing gardens for them. Little boys, they
   thought, were less likely to get found out.

   The threat did not frighten Kund, so, to make their words good, they
   seized him and dragged him into the river, and, in spite of his cries
   and struggles, plunged him in. But the heroic boy, even with the water
   gurgling and choking in his throat, never flinched, for he knew that
   God had said; "Thou shalt not steal," and God's law he had made his
   law; and no cursing, or threats, or cruelty of the big boys would make
   him give up. Provoked by his firmness, I suppose, they determined to
   see if they could not conquer. So they ducked him again, but still it
   was, "No, no; " and they kept him under water. Was there no one near to
   hear his distressing cries, and rescue the poor child from their cruel
   grip?

   No; there was none to rescue him; and gradually the cries of the
   drowning child grew fainter and fainter, and his struggles less and
   less, and the boy was drowned. He could die, but would not steal.

   A German boy who had stood near, much frightened by what he saw, ran
   home to tell the news. The agonized parents hastened to the spot, and
   all night they searched for the lifeless body of their lost darling. It
   was found the next morning; and who shall describe their feelings as
   they clasped the little form to their bosoms? Early piety had blossomed
   in his little life. He loved his Bible and his Savior. His seat was
   never vacant at Sunday-school, and so intelligent, conscientious and
   steadfast had he been, that it was expected that he would soon be
   received into the church of his parents.

   Perhaps the little boy used often to think how when he grew up, be
   would like to be a preacher or a missionary, and do something for his
   Lord and Master. He did not know what post he might be called to
   occupy, even as a little child; and, as he left home that afternoon and
   looked his last look in his mother's face, he thought he was only going
   after his cow; and other boys, and the neighbors, if they saw him,
   thought so too. They did not then know that instead of going to the
   pasture, he was going to preach one of the most powerful sermons of
   Bible law and Bible principles the country ever heard. They did not
   know that he was going to give an example of steadfastness of purpose
   and of unflinching integrity, such as should thrill the heart of this
   nation with wonder and admiration. He was then only a Norwegian boy,
   Kund Iverson, only thirteen years old, but his name was soon to be
   reckoned with martyrs and heroes. And as the story of his moral heroism
   winged its way from state to state, and city to city, and village to
   village, how many mothers cried, with full hearts: "May his spirit rest
   upon my boy! "And strong men have wept over it and exclaimed: "God be
   praised for the lad! " And rich men put their hands in their pockets,
   and said: "Let us build him a monument let his name be perpetuated, for
   his memory is blessed." May there be a generation of Kund Iverson's,
   strong in their integrity, true to their Bibles, ready to die rather
   than do wrong. --The Cynosure.

                     REVIVALS VS. FAIRS-WONDERS OF PRAYER.

   The Methodist Preachers' Meeting of Boston was well attended last
   Monday, and Rev. W.N. Brodbeck, D.D., the pastor of the Tremont-street
   Church of this city thrilled the brethren with an address on "The
   relation of the ministers to revivals," during which he pointedly
   referred to church fairs and festivals as barriers to revivals.

   He declared that some ministers and churches would never have a
   revival, because they would not do the hard work, and make the
   sacrifice essential to secure said results

   At Urbana, Ohio, he began revival services, but at first only doubtful
   characters came to the altar, in whom the public had no confidence.
   Many were offended, and some said: "Do you know those people that are
   coming to the altar?

   He replied: "Yes, I know them; they are immortal souls for whom Christ
   died." When the meetings had run three weeks, one of his leading
   members came to him and said : " I think it is time these meetings were
   stopped we have held them three weeks, and we want to hold a fair, and
   have some entertainments "

   The pastor firmly and promptly replied: "You may do as you please, but
   these meetings will not stop."

   His heart was broken, and so was the heart of one of the devout women
   members. They expressed their feelings to each other and parted. They
   both spent the night in prayer, and at 10 o'clock the next morning, the
   pastor gained the evidence that his prayers were answered. After dinner
   he went out, and met the devout lady on the street, her face shining
   with the glory of God. She said: "The victory is coming."

   "How do you know?"

   "I got the evidence at 10 o'clock this morning, after spending a whole
   night in prayer."

   This was the very time that the pastor gained the evidence. That very
   night, while the pastor was preaching, a young man arose and came to
   the altar; others followed, so that the pastor had to stop preaching.
   God was among the people in power; the church was quickened,
   backsliders were reclaimed, hundreds of sinners were converted. Places
   of amusement and saloons were closed. The face of the community was
   changed, and 275 converts joined that one church, and the fair was not
   held. All because they refused to have the fair. Oh, for more nights of
   prayer! Oh, for more agony of soul for perishing sinners! Oh! For more
   of the mind of Christ! Then would revivals prevail, and thousands would
   be converted to God. --Christian Witness.

                        AN ARMY MIRACULOUSLY DELIVERED.

   We clip the following from an epistle of the Roman Emperor, Marcus
   Aurelius, who was born in the year 121, and died in the year 180, as
   found in Vol. 2, of the "Anti-Nicene Christian Library." --Editor.

   The Emperor Ceasar Marcus Aurelius Antonius, to the people of Rome, and
   to the sacred senate, greeting: I explained to you my grand design, and
   what advantages I gained, on the confines of Germany, with much labor
   and suffering, in consequence of the circumstance that I was surrounded
   by the enemy; I myself being shut up in Carauntum by seventy-four
   cohorts, nine miles off. And the enemy being at hand, the scouts
   pointed out to us, and our general Pompeianus showed us, that there was
   close on us a mass of a mixed multitude of 977,000 men, which, indeed,
   we saw; and I was shut up by this vast host, having with me only a
   battalion composed of the first, tenth, double and marine legions.

   Having then examined my own position, and my host, with respect to the
   vast mass of barbarians and of the enemy, I quickly betook myself to
   prayer to the gods of my country. But being disregarded by them, I
   summoned those who among us go by the name of Christians. And having
   made inquiry, I discovered a great number and vast host of them, and
   raged against them, which was by no means becoming; for afterwards I
   learned their power. Wherefore they began the battle, not by preparing
   weapons, nor arms, nor bugles; for such preparation is hateful to them,
   on account of the God they bear about in their conscience. Therefore it
   is probable that those whom we suppose to be atheists, have God as
   their ruling power entrenched in their conscience. For having cast
   themselves on the ground, they prayed not only for me, but also for the
   whole army as it stood, that they might be delivered from the present
   thirst and famine. For during five days we had got no water, because
   there was none; for we were in the heart of Germany and in the enemy's
   territory. And simultaneously with their casting themselves on The
   ground, and praying to God (a God of whom I am ignorant), water poured
   from heaven upon us, most refreshingly cool, but upon the enemies of
   Rome a withering hail. And immediately we recognized the presence of
   God following on the prayer-a God unconquerable and indestructible.
   Founding upon this, then, let us pardon such as are Christians, lest
   they pray for and obtain such a weapon against ourselves. And I counsel
   that no such person be accused on the ground of his being a Christian.
   But if any one be found laying to the charge of a Christian that he is
   a Christian, I desire that it be made manifest that he who is accused
   as a Christian, and acknowledges that he is one, is accused of nothing
   else than only this, that he is a Christian; but that he who arraigns
   him be burned alive. And I further desire, that he who is entrusted
   with the government of the province shall not compel the Christian, who
   confesses and certifies such a matter, to retract; neither shall he
   commit him. And I desire that these things be confirmed by a degree of
   the senate. And I command this my edict to be published in the Forum of
   Trajan, in order that it may be read. The prefect Vitrasius Pollio will
   see that it be transmitted to all the provinces round about, and that
   no one who wishes to make use of or to possess it be hindered from
   obtaining a copy from the document I now publish.

                                "LITTLE MOTHER."

   She was a clear-eyed, fresh-cheeked little maiden, living on the banks
   of the great Mississippi, the oldest of four children and mother's
   little woman' always. They called her so because of her quiet, matronly
   care of the younger Mayfields--that was the father's name. Her own name
   was the beautiful one of Elizabeth, but they shortened it to Bess. She
   was thirteen when one day Mr. Mayfield and his wife were called to the
   nearest town, six miles away. "Be mother's little woman, dear," said
   Mrs. Mayfield, as she kissed the rosy face. Her husband added: "I leave
   the children in your care, Bess; be a little mother to them."

   Bess waved her old sun-bonnet vigorously, and held up the baby Rose,
   that she might watch them to the last. Old Daddy Jim and Mammy had been
   detailed by Mr. Mayfield to keep an unsuspected watch on the little
   nestlings, and were to sleep at the house. Thus two days went by, when
   Daddy Jim and Mammy begged to be allowed to go to the quarters--where
   the negroes lived, to see their daughter "Jinnie, who was pow'ful bad
   wid the toothache." They declared they would be back by evening, so
   Bess was willing. She put the little girls to bed, and persuaded Rob to
   go; then seated herself by the table with her mother's work-basket, in
   quaint imitation of Mrs. Mayfield's industry in the evening time. But
   what was this? Her feet touched something cold! She bent down and felt
   around with her hand. A pool of water was spreading over the floor. She
   knew what it was; the Mississippi had broken through the levee. What
   should she do? Mammy's stories of how houses had been washed away and
   broken in pieces, were in her mind. "Oh, if I had a boat! " she
   exclaimed, "but there isn't anything of the sort on the place." She ran
   wildly out to look for Mammy; and stumbled over something sitting near
   the edge of the porch.

   A sudden inspiration took her. Here was her boat! a very large,
   old-fashioned, oblong tub. The water was now several inches deep on the
   porch, and she contrived to half-float, half-roll the tub into the
   room.

   Without frightening the children she got them dressed in the warmest
   clothes they had. She lined the oblong tub with a blanket, and made
   ready bread and cold meat left from supper. With Rob's assistance she
   dragged the tub up stairs. There was a single large window in the room,
   and they set the directly by it, so that when the water rose the tub
   would float out. There was no way for the children to reach the roof,
   which was a very steep, inclined one. It did not seem long before the
   water had very nearly risen to the top of the stairs leading from
   below. Bess flung the window open, and made Rob get into their novel
   boat; then she lifted in Kate, and finally baby Rose, who began to cry,
   was given into Rob's arms, and now the little mother, taking the basket
   of food, made ready to enter too, but lo! There was no room for her
   with safety to the rest. Bess paused a moment, drew a long breath, and
   kissed the children quietly. She explained to Rob that he must guard
   the basket, and that they must sit still. "Good-bye, dears. Say a
   prayer for sister, Rob. If you ever see father and mother, tell them I
   took care of you." Then the water seized the insecure vessel, and out
   into the dark night it floated.

   The next day Mr. Mayfield, who, with his neighbors, scoured the broad
   lake of eddying water that represented the Mississippi, discovered the
   tub lodged in the branches of a sycamore with the children weeping and
   chilled, but safe.

   And Bess? Ah, where was Bess, the "little mother," who in that brief
   moment resigned herself to death? They found her later, floating on the
   water with her brave childish face turned to the sky; and as strong
   arms lifted her into the boat, the tears from every eye paid worthy
   tribute to the "little mother." --Detroit Free Press.

                        THE QUAKER WHO REFUSED TO FIGHT.

   We clip the following from Lossing's Pictorial Field Book of the Civil
   War, Vol. 3, p. 79. It is certainly a remarkable evidence of God's
   power to deliver them that put their trust in him. --Editor.

   There were some Friends or Quakers from South Carolina in the battle at
   Gettysburg, who were forced into the ranks, but who, from the beginning
   to the end, refused to fight. They were from Guilford county, which was
   mostly settled by their sect, and as the writer can testify by personal
   observation, presented the only region in that state where the
   evidences of thrift, which free labor gave in a land cursed by slavery,
   might be seen. These excellent 4 people were robbed and plundered by
   the Confederates without mercy. About a dozen of them were in Lee's
   army at Gettysburg and were among the prisoners captured there. They
   had steadily borne practical testimony to the strength of their
   principles in opposing war. They were subjected to great cruelties. One
   of them who re-fused to fight was ordered by his colonel to be shot. A
   squad of twelve men were drawn up to shoot him. They loved him as a
   brother because of his goodness, and when ordered to fire every man
   refused. The remainder of the company was called up and ordered to
   shoot the first twelve if they did not execute the order. The intended
   victim folded his hands, and raised his eyes, and said: "Father,
   forgive them, for they know not what they do." The entire company threw
   down their muskets and refused to obey the order. Their exasperated
   captain, with a horrid oath, tried to shoot him with his pistol. The
   cap would not explode. Then he dashed upon him with his horse, but the
   meek conscript was unharmed. Just then a charge of some of Mead's
   troops drove the Confederates from their position, and the Quaker
   became a prisoner. He and his co-religionists were sent to Fort
   Delaware, when the fact was made known to some of their sect in
   Philadelphia. It was laid before the President, and he ordered their
   release.

                           A CHILD'S PRAYER ANSWERED.

   The following touching incident, which drew tears from eyes, was
   related to me a short time since, by a dear friend who had it from an
   eye-witness of the same. It occurred in the great city of New York, on
   one of the coldest days in February.

   A little boy about ten years old was standing before a shoe-store in
   Broadway, barefooted, peering through the window, and shivering with
   cold.

   A lady riding up the street in a beautiful carriage, drawn by horses
   finely caparisoned, observed the little fellow in his forlorn
   condition, and immediately ordered the driver to draw up and stop in
   front of the store. The lady, richly dressed in silk, alighted from her
   carriage, went quickly to the boy, and said: " My little fellow, why
   are you looking so earnestly in that window?"

   "I was asking God to give me a pair of shoes," was the reply. The lady
   took him by the hand and went into the store, and asked the proprietor
   if he would allow one of his clerks to go and buy half a dozen pair of
   stockings for the boy. He readily assented. She then asked him if he
   could give her a basin of water and a towel, and he replied:
   "Certainly," and quickly brought them to her.

   She took the little fellow to the back part of the store, and, removing
   her gloves, knelt down, washed those little-feet and dried them with
   the towel.

   By this time the young man had returned with the stockings. Placing a
   pair upon his feet, she purchased and gave him a pair of shoes, and
   tying up the remaining pairs of stockings, gave them to him, and
   patting him on the head said: "I hope, my little fellow, that you now
   feel more comfortable."

   As she turned to go, the astonished lad caught her hand, and looking up
   in her face, with tears in his eyes, answered her question with these
   words: "Are you God's wife? "--Parish Register.

                              "SEND FOOD TO JOHN"

   On the summit of Washington mountain, overlooking the Housatonic
   valley, stood a hut, the home of John Barry, a poor charcoal-burner,
   whose family consisted of his wife and himself. His occupation brought
   him in but a few dollars, and when cold weather came he had managed to
   get together only a small provision for the winter. The fall of 1874,
   after a summer of hard work, he fell sick and was unable to keep his
   fires going. So, when the snow of December, 1874, fell, and the drifts
   had shut off communication with the village at the foot of the
   mountain, John and his wife were in great straits.

   Their entire stock of food consisted of only a few pounds of salt pork
   and a bushel of potatoes; sugar, flour, coffee and tea had, early in
   December, given out; and the chances for replenishing the larder were
   slim indeed. The snow-storms came again, and the drifts deepened. All
   the roads, even in the valley, were impassable, and no one thought of
   trying to open the mountain highways, which, even in summer, were only
   occasionally traveled; and none gave the old man and his wife a
   thought.

   December 15th came, and with it the heaviest fall of snow experienced
   in Berkshire County in many years. The food of the old couple was now
   reduced to a day's supply, but John did not yet despair. He was a
   Christian and a God-fearing man, and His promises were remembered; and
   so, when evening came, and the north-east gale was blowing, and the
   fierce snow-storm was raging, John and his wife were praying and asking
   for help.

   In Sheffield village, ten miles away, lived Deacon Brown, a well-to-do
   farmer fifty years old, who was known for his piety and consistent
   deportment, both as a man and a Christian. The deacon and his wife had
   gone to early, and, in spite of the storm without, were sleeping
   soundly, when with a start the deacon awoke, and said to his wife: "Who
   spoke? Who's there?" "Why," said his wife, "no one is here but you and
   me; what is the matter with you?" "I heard a voice," said the deacon,
   "saying, Send food to John." " Nonsense," replied Mrs. Brown; "go to
   sleep. You have been dreaming." The deacon laid his head on his pillow,
   and was asleep in a minute. Soon he started up again, and waking his
   wife, said "There, I heard that voice again, Send food to John.'"

   "Well, well! " said Mrs. Brown. "Deacon, you are not well; your supper
   has not agreed with you. Lie down and try to sleep." Again the deacon
   closed his eyes, and again the voice was heard: "Send food to John."
   This time the deacon was thoroughly awake. "Wife," said he, "whom do we
   know named John who needs food?" "No one I remember," replied Mrs.
   Brown, "unless it be John Barry, the old charcoal-burner on the
   mountain."

   "That's it," exclaimed the deacon. "Now I remember, when I was at the
   store in Sheffield the other day, Clark, the merchant, speaking of John
   Barry, said: I wonder if the old man is alive, for it is six weeks
   since I saw him, and he has not yet laid in his winter stock of
   groceries. It must be old John is sick and wanting food."

   So saying, the good deacon arose and proceeded to dress himself. "Come,
   wife," said he, "waken our boy Willie and tell him to feed the horses,
   and get ready to go with me; and do you pack up in the two largest
   baskets you have, a good supply of food, and get us an early breakfast;
   for ram going up the mountain to carry the food I know John Barry
   needs."

   Mrs. Brown, accustomed to the sudden impulses of her good husband, and
   believing him to be always in the right, cheerfully complied; and after
   a hot breakfast, Deacon Brown and his son Willie, a boy of nineteen,
   hitched up the horses to the double sleigh, and then, with a month's
   supply of food, and a "Good-bye, mother," started at five o'clock on
   that cold December morning for a journey, that almost any other than
   Deacon Brown and his son Willie would not have dared to undertake.

   The north-east storm was still raging, and the snow falling and
   drifting fast; but on, on went the stout, well-fed team on its errand
   of mercy, while the occupants of the sleigh, wrapped up in blankets and
   extra buffalo robes, urged the horses through the drifts and in the
   face of the storm. That ten mile's ride, which required in the summer
   hardly an hour or two, was not finished until the deacon's watch showed
   that five hours had passed.

   At last they drew up in front of the hut where the poor, trusting
   Christian man and woman were on their knees pray-ing for help to Him
   who is the "hearer and answerer of prayer;" and as the deacon reached
   the door, he heard the voice of supplication, and then he knew that the
   message which awakened him from sleep was sent from heaven. He knocked
   at the door, it was opened, and we can imagine the joy of the old
   couple, when the generous supply of food was carried in, and the
   thanksgivings that were uttered by the starving tenants of that
   mountain hut. --Albany Journal.

                               "KISS ME, MAMMA."

   The child was so sensitive, so like that little shrinking plant that
   curls at the breath, and shuts its heart from the light.

   The only beauties she possessed were an exceedingly transparent skin,
   and the most mournful, large blue eyes. I had been trained by a very
   stern, strict, conscientious mother, but I was a hard plant, rebounding
   after every shock; misfortune could not daunt, though discipline tamed
   me. I fancied, alas! that I must go through the same routine with this
   delicate creature; so one day, when she had displeased me exceedingly
   by repeating an offense, I was determined to punish her severely. I was
   very serious all day, and upon sending her to her little couch I said:
   "Now, my daughter, to punish you, and show you how very, very naughty
   you have been, I shall not kiss you tonight."

   She stood looking at me, astonishment personified, with her great
   mournful eyes wide open-I suppose she had forgotten her misconduct till
   then; and I left her with big tears dropping down her cheeks, and her
   little red lips quivering. Presently I was sent for "Oh, mamma! You
   will kiss me; I can't go to sleep if you don't!" she sobbed, every tone
   of her voice trembling, and she held out her little hands.

   Now came the struggle between love and what I falsely termed duty. My
   heart said give her a kiss of peace; my stern nature urged me to
   persist in my correction, that I might impress the fault upon her mind.
   This was the way I had been trained, till I was a most submissive child
   ; and I remembered how I had often thanked my mother since for her
   straightforward course.

   I knelt by the bedside. "Mother can't kiss you, Ellen,"

   I whispered, though every word choked me. Her hand touched mine; it was
   very hot, but I attributed it to her excitement. She turned her little
   grieving face to the wall; I blamed myself as the fragile form shook
   with self-suppressed sobs, and saying: "Mother hopes little Ellen will
   learn to mind her after this," left the room for the night. Alas! in my
   desire to be severe I forgot to be forgiving.

   It must have been twelve o'clock when I was awakened by my nurse.
   Apprehensive, I ran eagerly to the child's chamber; I had had a fearful
   dream. "Ellen did not know me. She was sitting up, crimsoned from the
   forehead to the throat, her eyes so bright that I almost drew back
   aghast at their glances.

   From that night a raging fever drank up her life; and what think you
   was the incessant plaint that poured into my anguished heart? "Oh! Kiss
   me, mamma, do kiss me; I can't go to sleep. I won't be naughty if
   you'll only kiss me! Oh! Kiss me, dear mamma; I can't go to sleep."

   Little angel! She did go to sleep one gray morning, and she never woke
   again, never! Her hand was locked in mine, and all my veins grew icy
   with its gradual chill. Faintly the light faded out of the beautiful
   eyes; whiter and whiter grew the tremulous lips. She never knew me; but
   with her last breath she whispered: "I will be good, mamma, if you'll
   only kiss me."

   Kiss her! God knows how passionate but unavailing were my kisses upon
   her cheek and lips after that fatal night. God knows how wild were my
   prayers that she might know, if but only once, that I kissed her. God
   knows how I would have yielded up my very life, could I have asked
   forgiveness of that sweet child.

   Grief is unavailing now! She lies in her little tomb. There is a marble
   urn at the head, and a rose bush at her feet; there grow sweet summer
   flowers; there waves the grass there birds sing their matins and their
   vespers; there the blue sky smiles down to-day, and there lies buried
   the freshness of my heart. --Ladies' Home Journal.

                             THE CONVERTED INFIDEL.

   Some two miles from the village of C., on a road that wound in among
   the hills, stood a great white house. It was beautifully situated upon
   a gentle slope facing the south, and overlooking a most charming
   landscape. Away in the distance a mountain lifted itself against the
   clear blue sky. At its base rolled a broad, deep river. Nestling down
   in the beautiful valley that intervened, reposed the charming little
   village, with its neat cottages, white church, little red school-
   house, and one or two mansions that told of wealth. Here and there in
   the distance a pond was visible, while farmhouses and humbler dwellings
   dotted the picture in every direction.

   Such was the home of three promising children, who, for the last three
   months, had been constant members of the village Sabbath-school. The
   eldest was a girl of some fourteen years. John, the second, was a
   bright, amiable lad of eleven. The other, the little rosy cheeked
   laughing Ella, with her golden curls and sunny smile, had just gathered
   the roses of her ninth summer.

   The father of these interesting children was the rich Captain Lowe. He
   was a man of mark, such, in many respects, as are often found in rural
   districts. Strictly moral, intelligent and well read, kind-hearted and,
   naturally benevolent, he attracted all classes of community to himself,
   and wielded great influence in his town.

   But, not withstanding all these excellences, Mr. Lowe was an infidel.
   He ridiculed, in his good-natured way, the idea of prayer, looked upon
   conversion as a solemn farce, and believed the most of professing
   Christians were well-meaning but deluded people. He was well-versed in
   all the subtle arguments of infidel writers, had studied the Bible
   quite carefully, and could argue against it in the most plausible
   manner. Courteous and kind to all, few could be offended at his frank
   avowal of infidel principles, or resent his keen, half-jovial sarcasms
   upon the peculiarities of some weak-minded, though sincere members of
   the church.

   But Mr. Lowe saw and acknowledged the saving influence of the morality
   of Christianity. He had, especially, good sense enough to confess that
   the Sabbath-school was a noble moral enterprise. He was not blind to
   the fact, abundantly proved by all our criminal records, that few
   children trained under her influences ever grow up to vice and crime.
   Hence his permission for his children to attend the Sabbath-school.

   Among the many children who kneeled as penitents at the altar in the
   little vestry, one bright, beautiful Sabbath, were Sarah Lowe and her
   brother and sister. It was a moving sight to see that gentle girl, with
   a mature thoughtfulness far beyond her years, take that younger brother
   and sister by the hand, and kneel with them at the mercy-seat-a sight
   to heighten the joy of angels.

   When the children had told their mother what they had done, and
   expressed a determination to try and be Christians, she, too, was
   greatly moved She had been early trained in the principles and belief
   of Christianity, and had never renounced her early faith. Naturally
   confiding, with a yield-ing, conciliatory spirit, she had never
   obtruded her sentiments upon the notice of her husband, nor openly
   opposed any of his peculiar views. But now, when her little ones
   gathered around her and spoke of their new love for the Savior, their
   joy, and peace, and hope, she wept. All the holy influences of her own
   childhood and youth seemed breathing upon her heart. She remembered the
   faithful sermons of the old pastor whose hands had baptized her.

   She remembered, too, the family altar, and the prayers which were
   offered morning and evening by her now sainted father. She remembered
   the councils of her good mother, now in heaven. All these memories came
   crowding back upon her, and under their softening influence she almost
   felt herself a child again. When Mr. Lowe first became aware of the
   change in his children, he was sorely puzzled to know what to do. He
   had given his consent for them to attend the Sabbath-school, and should
   he now be offended because they had yielded to its influence? Ought he
   not rather to have expected this? And, after all, would what they
   called religion make them any worse children? Though at first quite
   disturbed in his feelings, he finally concluded upon second thought to
   say nothing to them upon the subject, but to let things go on as usual.
   But not so those happy young converts! They could not long hold their
   peace. They must tell their father also what they had experienced. Mr.
   Lowe heard them, but he made no attempt to ridicule their simple faith,
   as had been his usual course with others. They were his children, and
   none could boast of better. Still, he professed to see in their present
   state of mind nothing but youthful feeling, ex-cited by the peculiar
   circumstances of the last few weeks. But when they began in their
   childish ardor to exhort him also to seek the Lord, he checked their
   simple earnestness with a peculiar sternness which said to them " The
   act must not be repeated."

   The next Sabbath the father could not prevent a feeling of loneliness
   as he saw his household leave for church. The three children, with
   their mother, and Joseph, the hired boy, to drive and to take care of
   the horse, all packed into the old commodious carriage, and started
   off. Never before had he such peculiar feelings as when he watched them
   slowly descending the hill.

   To dissipate these emotions he took a dish of salt and started up the
   hill to a "mountain pasture," where his young cattle were enclosed for
   the season. It was a beautiful day in October, that queen month of the
   year. A soft melancholy breathed in the mild air of the mellow "Indian
   summer," and the varying hues of the surrounding forests, and the signs
   of decay seen upon every side, all combined to deepen the emotions
   which the circumstances of the morning had awakened.

   His sadness increased; and as his path opened out into a bright, sunny
   spot far up on the steep hillside, he seated himself upon a mossy
   knoll, and thought. Before him lay the beautiful valley, guarded on
   either side by its lofty hills, and watered by its placid river. It was
   a lovely picture; and as his eye rested upon the village, nestling down
   among its now gorgeous shade-trees and scarlet shrubbery, he could not
   help thinking of that company who were then gathered in the little
   church, with its spire pointing heavenward, nor of asking himself the
   question "Why are they there?"

   While thus engaged, his attention was attracted by the peculiar
   chirping of a ground-sparrow near by. He turned, and but a few feet
   from him saw a large black snake, with its head raised about a foot
   above its body, which lay coiled upon the ground. Its jaws were
   distended, its forked tongue playing around its open mouth, flashing in
   the sunlight like a small lambent flame, while its eyes were intently
   fixed upon the bird. There was a clear, sparkling light about those
   eyes that was fearful to behold--they fairly flashed with their
   peculiar bending fascination. The poor sparrow was fluttering around a
   circle of some few feet in diameter, the circle becoming smaller at
   each gyration of the infatuated bird. She appeared conscious of her
   danger, and yet unable to break the spell that bound her. Nearer and
   still nearer she fluttered her little wings to those open jaws; smaller
   and smaller grew the circle, till at last, with a quick, convulsive
   cry, she fell into the mouth of the snake.

   As Mr. Lowe watched the bird, he became deeply interested in her fate.
   He started a number of times to destroy the reptile, and thus liberate
   the sparrow from her danger, but an unconquerable curiosity to see the
   end restrained him. All day long the scene just described was before
   him. He could not forget it or dismiss it from his mind. The last cry
   of that poor little bird sinking into the jaws of death was constantly
   ringing in his ears, and the sadness of the morning increased.

   Returning to his house, he seated himself in his library and attempted
   to read. What could be the matter? Usually he could command his
   thoughts at will, but now he could think of nothing but the scene on
   the mountain, or the little company in the house of God. Slowly passed
   the hours, and many times did he find himself, in spite of his
   resolution not to do so, looking down the road for the head of his
   dapple gray to emerge from the valley. It seemed a long time before the
   rumbling of the wheels was at length heard upon the bridge which
   crossed the mountain stream, followed in a few moments by the old
   carry-all creeping slowly up the hill.

   The return of the family somewhat changed the course of his thoughts.
   They did not say anything to him about the good meeting they had
   enjoyed, and who had been converted since the last Sabbath; but they
   talked it all over among themselves, and how could he help hearing? He
   learned all about "how good farmer Haskell talked," and "how humble and
   devoted Esquire Wiseman appeared," and "how happy Benjamin and Samuel
   were;" though he seemed busy with his book, and pretended to take no
   notice of what was said.

   It was, indeed, true then that the old lawyer had become pious. He had
   heard the news before, but did not believe it. Now he had learned it as
   a fact. That strong-minded man, who had been a skeptic all his days,
   had ridiculed and opposed religion, was now a subject of "the
   children's revival." What could it mean? Was there something in
   religion, after all? Could it be that what these poor fanatics, as he
   had always called them, said about the future world was correct? Was
   there a heaven, and a hell, and a God of justice? Were his darling
   children right, and was he alone wrong? Such were the thoughts of the
   boasted infidel, as he sat there listening to the half-whispered
   conversation of his happy children.

   Little Ella came and climbed to her long-accustomed place upon her
   father's knee, and throwing her arms around his neck, laid her glowing
   cheek, half hidden by the clustering curls, against his own. He knew by
   her appearance she had something to say, but did not dare to say it. To
   remove this fear, he began to question her about her Sabbath-school. He
   inquired after her teacher, and who were her classmates, what she
   learned, etc. Gradually the shyness wore away, and the heart of the
   innocent, praying child came gushing forth. She told him all that had
   been done that day-what her teacher had said of the prayer-meeting at
   noon, and who spoke, and how many went forward for prayers. Then
   folding her arms more closely around his neck, and kissing him
   tenderly, she added:

   "O father, I do wish you had been there!"

   "Why do you wish I had been there, Ella?"

   "O, just to see how happy Nellie Winslow looked while her grandfather
   was telling us children how much he loved the Savior, and how sorry he
   was that he did not give his heart to his heavenly Father when he was
   young. Then he laid his hand on Nellie's head, who was sitting by his
   side, and said: "I thank God that he ever gave me a little praying
   granddaughter to lead me to the Savior." And, father, I never in all my
   life saw any one look so happy as Nellie did."

   Mr. Lowe made no reply-how could he? Could he not see where the heart
   of his darling Ella was? Could he not see that by what she had told him
   about Esquire Wiseman and his pet Nellie, she meant he should
   understand how happy she should be if her father was a Christian? Ella
   had not said so in words - that was a forbidden subject - but the
   language of her earnest, loving look and manner was not to be mistaken;
   and the heart of the infidel father was deeply stirred. He kissed the
   rosy cheek of the lovely girl, and taking his hat left the house. He
   walked out into the field. He felt strangely. Before he was aware of
   the fact, he found his infidelity leaving him, and the simple, artless
   religion of childhood winning its way to his heart. Try as hard as he
   might, he could not help believing that his little Ella was a
   Christian. There was a reality about her simple faith and ardent love
   that was truly "the evidence of things not seen." What should he do?
   Should he yield to this influence, and be led by his children to
   Christ? What I, Captain Lowe, the boasted infidel overcome by the
   weakness of excited childhood! The thought roused his pride and with an
   exclamation of impatience at his folly, he suddenly wheeled about, and
   retracing his steps, with altered appearance, he re-entered his house.

   His wife was alone, with an open Bible before her. As he entered he saw
   her hastily wipe away a tear. In passing her, he glanced upon the open
   page, and his eye caught the words: "YE MUST BE BORN AGAIN! " They went
   like an arrow to his heart "TRUTH," said a voice within, with such
   fearful distinctness that he started at the fancied sound and the
   influence which he had just supposed banished from his heart returned
   with tenfold power. The strong man trembled. Leaving the sitting-room,
   he ascended the stairs leading to his chamber. Passing Sarah's room, a
   voice attracted his attention. It was the voice of prayer. He heard his
   own name pronounced, and he paused to listen.

   "O Lord, save my dear father. Lead him to the Savior. Let him see that
   he must be born again. O, let not the serpent charm him! Save, O, save
   my dear father!

   He could listen no longer. "Let not the serpent charm him!" And was he
   then like that helpless little bird, who, fluttering around the head of
   the serpent, fell at last into the jaws of death? The thought shot a
   wild torrent of newly awakened terror through his throbbing heart.

   Hastening to his chamber he threw himself into a chair. He started! The
   voice of prayer again fell upon his ear. lie listened. Yes, it was the
   clear, sweet accents of his little pet. Ella was praying-was praying
   for him.

   "O Lord, bless my dear father. Make him a Christian, and may he and
   dear mother be prepared for heaven."

   Deeply moved, the father left the house and hastened to the barn. He
   would fain escape from those words of piercing power. They were like
   daggers in his heart. He entered the barn. Again he hears a voice. It
   comes stealing down from the hay-loft, in the rich silvery tones of his
   own noble boy. John had climbed up the ladder, and kneeling down upon
   the hay was praying for his father.

   "O Lord, save my father!"

   It was too much for the poor convicted man, and, rushing to the house,
   he fell, sobbing, upon his knees by the side of his wife and cried "O
   Mary, I am a poor, lost sinner! Our children are going to heaven, and I
   am going down to hell! O wife, is there mercy for a wretch like me?"

   Poor Mrs. Lowe was completely overcome. She wept for joy. That her
   husband would ever be her companion in the way of holiness, she had
   never dared to hope. Yes, there was mercy for even them. "Come unto me,
   and find rest." Christ had said it, and her heart told her it was true.
   Together they would go to this loving Savior, and their little ones
   should show them the way.

   The children were called in. They came from their places of prayer,
   where they had lifted up their hearts to that God who had said:
   "Whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my name he will give it to you."
   They had asked the Spirit's influence upon the hearts of their parents,
   and it had been granted. They gathered around their weeping, broken
   hearted father and penitent mother, and pointed them to the cross of
   Jesus. Long and earnestly they prayed, and wept, and agonized. With
   undoubting trust in the promises, they waited at the mercy-seat, and
   their prayers were heard.

   Faith conquered. The Spirit came, and touched those penitent hearts
   with the finger of love; and then sorrow was turned to joy-their night,
   dark, and cheerless, and gloomy, was changed to a blessed day.

   They arose from their knees, and Ella sprang to the arms of her father,
   and together they rejoiced in God.--Rev. H.P. Andrews, in Christian
   Advocate

   .

                                  THE STOWAWAY

   On board an English steamer, a little ragged boy, aged nine years, was
   discovered on the fourth day of the voyage out from Liverpool to New
   York, and carried before the first mate, whose duty it was to deal with
   such cases. When questioned as to his object in being stowed away, and
   who had brought him on board, the boy, who had a beautiful sunny face,
   that looked like the very mirror of truth, replied that his step-father
   did it, because he could not afford to keep him, nor pay his passage
   out to Halifax, where he had an aunt who was well off, and to whose
   house he was going.

   The mate did not believe the story, in spite of the winning face and
   truthful accents of the boy. He had seen too much of stowaways to be
   easily deceived by them, he said and it was his firm conviction that
   the boy had been brought on board and provided with food by the
   sailors.

   The little fellow was very roughly handled in consequence. Day by day
   he was questioned and requestioned, but always with the same result. He
   did not know a sailor on board, and his father alone had secreted and
   given him the food which he ate. At last the mate, wearied by the boy's
   persistence in the same story, and perhaps a little anxious to
   inculpate the sailors, seized him one day by the collar, and dragging
   him to the fore, told him that unless he told the truth, in ten minutes
   from that time he would hang from the yard-arm. He then made him sit
   down under it on the deck.

   All around him were the passengers and sailors of the midday watch, and
   in front of him stood the inexorable mate, with chronometer in his
   hand, and the other officers of the ship by his side. It was a touching
   sight to see the pale, proud, scornful face of that noble boy; his head
   erect, his beautiful eyes, bright through the tears that suffused them.

   When eight minutes had fled, the mate told him he had but two minutes
   to live, and advised him to speak the truth and save his life. But he
   replied with the utmost simplicity and sincerity, by asking the mate if
   he might pray. The mate said nothing, but nodded his head, and turned
   as pale as a ghost, and shook with trembling like a reed in the wind.
   And then all eyes turned on him, the brave and noble fellow this poor
   boy whom society owned not, and whose own step-father could not care
   for knelt with clasped hands and eyes upturned to heaven. There then
   occurred a scene as of Pentecost. Sobs broke from strong, hard hearts,
   as the mate sprang forward and clasped the boy to his bosom, and kissed
   him, and blessed him, and told him how sincerely he now believed his
   story, and how glad he was that he had been brave enough to face death,
   and be willing to sacrifice his life for the truth of his word.
   --Illustrated Weekly Telegraph.

                             THE MIDNIGHT CONFLICT.

   Shall I repeat a true story told me by the sufferer himself a few weeks
   ago? And may I repeat it, so far as memory serves me, in his own
   language? I can never forget the passionate energy of my friend, as he
   walked again in the darkened chambers of a wrecked life, and recalled
   the scene when alone he met the tempter. But to the story

   "I left my New England home in boyhood. As I kissed my mother good-bye,
   she put her hand on either side of my cheeks, and said: "You are pure
   now, my son. Ever keep your soul sweet and clean, and never touch a
   glass of intoxicating liquor.' The pledge I then made to her I kept
   under strong temptations, and in circumstances that severely tried my
   good resolutions. Serving through the war, I came out with a cough that
   threatened quick-consumption. My physician recommended cod-liver oil
   and whiskey. I took his prescription. The former cured me of one
   disease; the latter brought on one of deeper and deadlier nature.

   Yet I was not conscious of it, till one day a friend roused me with the
   words: "Major, you must be careful. You are bringing disgrace to your
   family." I was shocked, and resolved that this should never be said of
   me again; but I still pursued the vile way.

   "A little later, my brother repeated the warning, and I pledged him
   that I would heed his kindly words. That pledge was broken. I had a
   delightful home, was blessed with wife and children, and to her wifely
   pleading I again said: "I'll drink no more," and went on to disgrace
   the name she bore.

   "One morning as I passed the open door of my daughter's room, I saw her
   on her bended knees, and heard her sweet voice crying out: "O God,
   spare my father, and save him from a drunkard's grave." Then and there,
   I vowed before God that I would never drink again. I was drunk before
   night! A little later I was summoned to see a loving sister that was
   sick. I hastened to her bedside only to find in a darkened room her
   dead body. As I leaned over that marble form, and my tears fell on her
   cold cheeks, there, with clasped hands, alone with the dead, I told my
   God that the cup should never again soil my lips. In three days I was
   as bad as ever! At last, in a fit of desperation, I sent for my father
   and mother to visit my home, securing for them a palace-car, making
   their long journey as pleasant as possible.

   They came to my charming home to meet their drunkard-son. The dear
   mother begged and prayed with and for me, that my purity might be
   restored. "After their return, with the echo of her agonizing petition
   sounding in my ears, I said: "I will once more take the pledge, and if
   broken now, I will go to the Pacific coast, leaving wife and children,
   to hide myself where they shall never hear of me again. "With this came
   the resolve to invite in a few friends to take one more social glass
   together, and then to sign the pledge. I sent to Boston for the
   choicest liquors, and one night when I had been left alone in the
   house, invited them in. For an hour I waited, and no one came. I paced
   the floor, and looked out into the moonlight, longing for their
   presence, that I might satisfy the appetite that began to clamor.

   "And the clock struck nine, and no friends came. Then rushed into my
   soul visions of my childhood, and the voice of my mother sounded out:
   "Keep your soul pure and clean, my son;" and her words of tenderness
   awakened memories that had long been sealed. I opened the Bible, and
   read: No drunkard shall inherit the kingdom of God." Ah! Does that mean
   me? Closing the book I paced the room, and longed for companionship,
   that these busy thoughts might be dispelled, and the clock struck ten.
   I listened for voices, but there was quiet everywhere save in my own
   tempest-tossed soul. Then it flashed upon me that alone I must meet the
   tempter, and alone take the promised pledge. I reached out my hand to
   unseal the bottle that never looked so attractive, when a voice seemed
   to sound. "Let it remain untouched-now is the decisive hour;" and again
   I paced the room, and again with greater force, appetite begged for
   satisfaction. The struggle began to be more bitter, the tempter made a
   heavier assault, the hour dragged wearily along, and the clock struck
   eleven. Then I felt that the next hour must be the point on which my
   destiny for eternity was poised. For I was impressed by the thought
   that if I could resist the tempter until midnight, in some way, I knew
   not how, God would bring to me a way of escape. Oh, how I longed to
   break the bottle, the contents of which were more attractive than
   anything on earth; and yet that voice sounded out: "Touch but a single
   glass, and you are lost."' Then said the tempter: "Why not drink just
   once? You have resolved tonight to take the pledge; it will be all
   right to indulge in a parting farewell to an old friend."

   I again opened the Bible, and read: "God so loved the world, that he
   gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in Him should not
   perish, but have everlasting life." I fell on my knees, and with the
   open Bible before me, and the bottle by my side, implored and prayed
   for strength to hold on till midnight. Oh! how appetite begged and
   clamored; and yet I was conscious that if I yielded it would be fatal,
   and my soul would be lost. The minutes dragged along, oh! so slowly,
   till eleven and a half o'clock, and the voice cried: "Only hold on till
   twelve, and you are safe." Fifteen minutes passed, and then came the
   sorest, bitterest conflict of soul that man ever experienced. I had
   been in the midst of great physical peril on the battlefield many a
   time, when death came on the right and on the left in fearful form, but
   never had been in such deadly danger as now; for it was a conflict with
   heaven on one side and hell on the other. One who has never been under
   the maddening control of a master passion cannot realize the agony that
   can be concentrated, into even a few moments; and so the bitterness of
   that last fifteen minutes seemed prolonged into hours. Can I hold out?
   Will this struggle end in life and peace? Will the tempter vanish, a
   defeated, baffled spirit, and leave me free? Five minutes more and the
   agony increased, as appetite begged and clamored with tenfold power.
   There pealed out on the still hour of the night the stroke of the
   distant clock:
   one-two-three-four-five-six-seven-eight-nine-ten-eleven-twelve! I
   leaped to my feet and shouted, Victory! Saved by the grace of God! The
   burden rolled into the open sepulchre, and I felt that I was saved, and
   saved forever. I went out on my back piazza, and held the bottle up in
   the moonlight, and looked at it as calmly as a mother would look at a
   sleeping child; and then, hurling it upon the pavement, fell upon my
   knees in glad thanksgiving, and then and there yielded my soul, my
   life, my all, to Him who had redeemed me with His precious blood. The
   final stroke of the midnight bell, as it heralded a new day, was the
   dawn of a new life for me. I was made conscious on the instant, my sins
   were washed away. From that hour to this I have had no taste or craving
   for liquor, and my life is devoted to scattering the leaves which shall
   be for the healing of the nations."

   Such is the story of my friend, who, in a Western city, is today doing
   service for the Master. Years have passed since that midnight conflict,
   and his life has been one of consecration, and many a soul has been
   lifted and inspired by his burning, loving words:

   "Touch not, taste not, handle not," even though it is placed to your
   lips under the seductive guise of "only a medicine."
   --Congregationalist.

                             HEALED THROUGH FAITH.

   "I am the Lord that healeth thee."

   With a deep sense of gratitude to my Heavenly Father for my restoration
   to health, I write this testimony. I will begin with extracts from a
   statement of my condition at the time of my restoration, written by the
   attending physician thinking it will be more satisfactory than one of
   my own.

   "Mrs. Claghorn came to me for treatment, first on June 6, 1885, then
   afterwards during August, 1885, and almost continuously thereafter,
   until January 26, 1886--the day of her sudden and marvelous restoration
   to health. Her symptoms were frequent chills, pains in the bones, pains
   in the back, inability to sleep, and at times terrible paroxysms of
   tonic and clonic spasms, strongly marked opisthotones, cramping of
   limbs, coldness of extremities, intense pain at the base of the brain,
   intolerance of light, sometimes complete unconsciousness; the paroxysms
   being frequently followed by partial paralysis of the right side. She
   also suffered from a large cellulitis tumor. At times the case
   responded readily to the treatment given; at other times, she grew
   rapidly worse for several days; the attack culminating in a paroxysm,
   followed by more or less paralysis. Such an attack occurred from the
   21st to the 25th of January, 1886, although not so severe as some she
   had had. The morning of the 26th, she was unable to turn herself in
   bed, and had not stood upon her feet for five months. The details of
   her sudden restoration, which occurred that afternoon, she can best
   give in her own language. She rode about a mile the next evening, in a
   cutter, to prayer-meeting, walked down the aisle like a girl of
   eighteen, and from a condition of emaciation, rapidly gained in flesh
   and appearance. I made an examination March 5, 1886, and found the
   cellulitis tumor gone. More than a year has now passed away, and she is
   and has been apparently in the most perfect health. There has been no
   recurrence of her sufferings during the past year.

   Respectfully,

   A.M. HUTCHINSON, M. D., Waseca, Minn.

   For two weeks before my restoration I was unable to turn myself in bed,
   or to feed myself. All that time my right side was helpless, and I was
   rapidly sinking. On the 25th of January, I was taken with convulsions,
   though not so severe as on some previous occasions.

   My physician was with me until midnight, when I grew easier. On the
   morning of the 26th, I felt better, until about seven o'clock, when I
   commenced to feel much worse. I suffered intensely, and could feel the
   terrible convulsions coming back. While I was in such pain, my husband
   received some statements of "faith-cure," which an unknown friend had
   sent, and he commenced reading one; saying it might make the time pass
   more rapidly if I could bear the reading. I was not at all interested
   at first, for I knew nothing of such things; I had heard of a few
   cases, but they were all so far away, I set them aside as something I
   could not understand. But this was an account of a lady whose disease
   was just enough like mine to hold my attention, and he read it to the
   close. I was too ill to think much, but I could see it was no made up
   story, and wondered if God would really do such things.

   At 12:40 P.M. my husband went out, leaving me in the care of an
   attendant, who was in an adjoining room. I began to wonder if it were
   possible the Lord could have healing for me. I had not, in all my
   sickness, asked Him for health. But now I seemed to be led to make the
   request: "Lord, if thou hast this healing for me, give it to me now and
   instantly a voice said: "In the name of Jesus of Nazareth, arise and
   walk!" and I was thrilled through and through with sensations
   impossible to describe. While I was wondering, the command was repeated
   in the same words. But I did not feel returning strength, and the
   terrible pain still remained. So I said aloud: "But I haven't the
   strength, Lord; give me the strength, and I will get up;" and again the
   same voice said: "In the name of Jesus of Nazareth, arise and walk "
   Then I made an effort to arise; it was more a mental effort than
   anything else; but I rose like a feather, and stood upon my feet. All
   pain ceased the first moment for months. It was just one o'clock. I
   commenced to say: "Lord, I believe; help thou mine unbelief," and
   prayed it continually. Then I sat down on the side of the bed, and
   raising my arms above my head, used the paralyzed side freely.

   A swelling the size of an egg was gone, and everything inside of me
   seemed to be changing position, and recreating sensations impossible to
   describe were felt all through me.

   Then I got up and walked a few steps, and turned and looked at the bed,
   and the medicine beside it, and I commenced to sink to the floor. But I
   asked for more strength, and received it, and went on around the bed to
   the center of the room, when I thought I would have my clothes brought,
   and dress. But when I would have called the nurse, the impression was
   received (not in an audible voice): "It is enough, you have seen the
   power of God, go back to bed;" and I obeyed.

   Upon returning to bed, I reconsecrated myself to God, and begged Him to
   complete His will in me; and if He could better use me as a sufferer,
   to let me suffer, but only glorify Himself in me; and I received the
   assurance that He would. Soon after the nurse brought me some food. I
   surprised her very much by feeding myself, and my stomach, which had
   previously rejected all food, retained it now with ease.

   Now my husband came in, looking so disconsolate, and prepared to find
   me much worse than when he left me. I need not attempt to tell of his
   joy and surprise upon hearing what God had done for me in his absence;
   you can better imagine it. When he had returned thanks, I requested him
   to go for my physician.

   Doctor was not in town, and I did not see him until evening. His first
   words upon entering my room were: "Glory to God!" and he returned
   thanks to God for His marvelous work, as only a thoroughly consecrated
   Christian could; not reserving a particle of credit for the cure, but
   giving all glory and honor to God. He forbade all medicine. That night
   I arose and knelt at the bedside in prayer. I slept that night, as I
   have every night since, like a babe. I never had such refreshing sleep.
   I had had no natural sleep during my sickness.

   The next morning I arose and dressed, unassisted, and walked out to
   breakfast; ate heartily, and in the evening I rode nearly a mile to our
   weekly prayer-meeting, and told how great things the Lord had done for
   me. My strength returned gradually. For days I could not stand upon my
   feet without first asking for strength; and if I were standing, and
   would for aj instant take my mind off Christ, I would commence to sink
   to the floor. All functions were naturally resumed without any pain
   whatever.

   Tumors and all inflammation were all dispelled, and I was a well woman.
   Several times I had severe paroxysms of pain, but I would go right to
   God, and he-would remove them at once.

   My right side was much shrunken, and shorter than the other. When I
   stood upon my left foot, the toes of my right foot touched the floor.
   That, however, stretched out gradually as I used my limbs. It is now
   more than a year since I was restored. I have done all my work since
   the first of June. I ask for strength for a day at a time, and God
   helps me over all the hard places.

   I have not had a sick day since my restoration. I have had severe colds
   several times, but they have been removed by resorting to my new found
   Physician; and I have not taken a drop of medicine since the 26th of
   January, 1886, neither have I done anything for myself in a medicinal
   way. God has done it all.

   Satan has tried many times to tempt me, but the Sword of the Spirit,
   when presented, proves too much for him. I have written this for the
   glory of God, and trust He will bless it. --Mrs. Alice B. Claghorn, in
   Michigan Holiness Record.

                          TRANSLATION OF BISHOP HAVEN.

   On Saturday morning, January 3, 1880, in MaIden, Massachusetts, Bishop
   Gilbert Haven's physician said that his last day had come, and that it
   would do him no harm to see his friends. Many were near at hand. Others
   were summoned by telegram and by messenger, until groups gathered
   around that couch, touched with the light of immortal glory, to muse
   over the transition from death unto life. A physician who was present
   said: "I never saw a person die so before." A clergyman remarks: "To me
   it did not seem that I was in the presence of death. The whole
   atmosphere of the chamber was that of a joyous and festive hour. Only
   the tears of kindred and friends were suggestive of death. I felt that
   I was summoned to see a conquering hero crowned."

   We have preserved some of the Bishop's utterances to different persons,
   as they were reported in the public prints. As Dr. Daniel Steele
   entered his chamber, the Bishop lifted up his hand, exclaiming, in his
   familiar way : "O Dan, Dan, a thousand, thousand blessings on you! The
   Lord has been giving you great blessings, and me little ones, and now
   he has given me a great one. He has called me to heaven before you. "Do
   you find the words of Paul true: "O death, where is thy sting?"
   inquired Dr. Steele. "There is no death, there is no death" interrupted
   the Bishop; "I have been fighting death for six weeks, and today I find
   there is no death." Then he repeated again and again John viii. 51:
   "Shall never see death; Glory! Glory! Glory!" In life he seldom, if
   ever, shouted; he certainly had a right to shout in death. "You have a
   great Savior," was remarked to him.

   "Yes," he answered, "that is the whole of the gospel, the whole of it"
   With difficulty he repeated

   "Happy, if with my latest breath

   I may but gasp His name

   Preach Him to all, and cry in death,

   Behold, behold the Lamb!"

   He had an immediate opportunity to preach Christ by witnessing to his
   saving power, for his counseling physician from Boston had come to bid
   him farewell. Said the dying man, as he took the doctor's hand: "I am
   satisfied with your attentions; you have done all that human skill can
   do to heal me. I die happy. I believe in Jesus Christ. To Dr. Lindsay
   he also remarked: "Good-night, doctor. When we meet again it will be
   good-morning." To his old classmate, Dr. Newhall, he said: "I have got
   the start of you. I thought you would go first. Your mind has been
   clouded a little, but it is all light over there." When Dr. Mallahieu
   approached him he put his aims around his neck and drew him to his
   face, and exclaimed: "My dear old friend, I am glad to see you. You and
   I would not have it so if we had our way, but God knows best. It is all
   right! All right! We have been living in great times, but there are
   greater times coming. You have been my true friend-you never failed me.
   You must stand by the colored man when I am gone. Stand by the colored
   man." Then he spoke of dying, and said: "Oh, but it is so beautiful, so
   pleasant, so delightful! I see no river of death. God lifts me up in
   His arms. There is no darkness; it is all light and brightness. I am
   gliding away into God, floating up into heaven." As the hour drew near,
   and death preyed upon him, his faith failed not. His right hand was
   dead, and black from mortification; but holding up his arm, and gazing
   at the perishing member for a moment, he said, with triumph: "I believe
   in the resurrection of the body!" Thus he trampled death under his
   feet, and Elijah-like, in a flaming chariot of glory, went shouting to
   his home in the skies. --Golden Dawn.

                             JESSIE FINDING JESUS.

   A little girl in a wretched tenement in New York stood by her mother's
   death-bed, and heard her last words: "Jessie, find Jesus."

   When her mother was buried, her father took to drink, and Jessie was
   left to such care as a poor neighbor could give her.

   One day she wandered off unmissed, with a little basket in her hand,
   and tugged through one street after another, not knowing where she
   went. She had started out to find Jesus. At last she stopped, from
   utter weariness, in front of a saloon. A young man staggered out of the
   door, and almost stumbled over her. He uttered passionately the name of
   Him whom she was seeking. " Where is He?" she inquired eagerly.

   He looked at her in amazement.

   "What did you say?" he asked.

   "Will you please tell me where Jesus Christ is? For I must find Him " -
   this time with great earnestness.

   The young man looked at her curiously for a minute without speaking,
   and then his face sobered; and he said in a broken, husky voice,
   hopelessly: "I don't know, child; I don't know where he is." At length
   the little girl's wanderings brought her to the park. A woman,
   evidently a Jewess, was leaning against the railing, looking
   disconsolately at the green grass and the trees.

   Jessie went up to her timidly. "Perhaps she can tell me where he is,"
   was the child's thought. In a low, hesitating voice, she asked the
   woman: "Do you know Jesus Christ?"

   The Jewess turned fiercely to face her questioner, and in a tone of
   suppressed passion, exclaimed: "Jesus Christ is dead!" Poor Jessie
   trudged on, but soon a rude boy jostled against her, and snatching her
   basket from her hand, threw it into the street. Crying, she ran to pick
   it up. The horses of a passing streetcar trampled her under their feet
   and she knew no more till she found herself stretched on a hospital
   bed.

   When the doctors came that night, they knew she could not live until
   morning. In the middle of the night, after she had been lying very
   still for a long time, apparently asleep, she suddenly opened her eyes,
   and the nurse, bending over her, heard her whisper, while her face
   lighted up with a smile that had some of heaven's own gladness in it:
   "O Jesus, I have found you at last!"

   Then the tiny lips were hushed, but the questioning spirit had received
   an answer. --Selected.

                       A MOB QUIETED IN ANSWER TO PRAYER.

   In the early part of the summer of 1882, while we were holding a
   camp-meeting at C----, a drunken mob came on the ground, and disturbed
   the meeting by their profanity and quarreling. They came armed with
   revolvers, and were determined to break up the meeting. Not having
   anticipated any such difficulty, no police force had been provided. Our
   words of expostulation were unheeded, and they went so far as to yell
   and blaspheme, and shake their fists in the faces of the leaders of the
   meeting. So great was the disturbance, that for a time the services
   were entirely suspended, and there was certainly imminent danger that
   the meeting would be completely broken up.

   Realizing that God's help alone could give to His children victory, in
   the midst of the excitement we went to the woods, and in sobs and
   tears, fell upon our face. God gave us great help of the Spirit in
   prayer, and we told Him how we were holding the meeting for His glory
   and the salvation of souls, and unless He came to our rescue, great
   reproach would be brought upon His cause.

   We obtained evidence that God would deliver, and hastened back to the
   camp, called for order, and began to exhort the people in the power of
   the Spirit. A halo of glory came over the meeting. Wicked men turned
   pale, and acknowledged the wonderful change. Many began to weep, while
   some of God's children shouted for joy, and many were prostrate under
   the power of God.

   Defeat was changed to almost unthought of victory, and during all that
   night the workers were kept busy praying with seekers, and many were
   saved. Not until the light of the morning dawned could they find time
   for rest; and the two remaining days of the meeting were days of
   triumph.

   So great was the conviction that some who repeatedly tried to leave
   were constrained to return, and yield themselves to God. One man said
   he was determined not to yield, and for the third time started to leave
   the grounds; but God showed him that this, if rejected, would be his
   last chance for salvation. So, at about two o'clock in the morning, he
   came to the altar, and was gloriously saved. --Editor.

                               SHOW ME THE DOCTOR

   A man, blind from his birth a man of much intellectual vigor, and with
   many engaging social qualities, found a woman who, appreciating his
   worth, was willing to cast in her lot with him, and become his wife.
   Several bright, beautiful children became theirs, who tenderly and
   equally loved both their parents.

   An eminent French surgeon, while in this country, called upon them,
   and, examining the blind man with much interest and care, said to him
   "Your blindness is wholly artificial; your eyes are naturally good; and
   if I could have operated upon them twenty years ago, I think I could
   have given you sight. It is barely possible that I can do it now,
   though it will cause you much pain.

   "I can bear that," was the reply, "so you but enable me to see."

   The surgeon operated upon him, and was gradually successful. First
   there were faint glimmerings of light; then more distinct vision. The
   blind father was handed a rose he had smelled one before but had never
   seen one. Then he looked upon the face of his wife, who had been so
   true and faithful to him; and then his children were brought, whom he
   had so often fondled, and whose charming prattle had so frequently
   fallen upon his ears.

   He then exclaimed: "Oh, why have I seen all of these before inquiring
   for the man by whose skill I have been enabled to behold them! Show me
   the doctor." And when he was pointed out to him, he embraced him, with
   tears of gratitude and joy.

   So, when we reach heaven, and with unclouded eyes look upon its
   glories, we shall not be content with a view of these. No; we shall
   say: "Where is Christ? He to whom I am indebted for what heaven is?
   Show me him, that with all my soul I may adore and praise him through
   endless ages." --Selected.

                               SHE DIED FOR HIM.

   A poor emigrant had gone to Australia to "make his fortune," leaving a
   wife and little son in England. When he had made some money, he wrote
   home to his wife:

   "Come out to me here; I send the money for your passage; I want to see
   you and my boy." The wife took ship as soon as she could, and started
   for her new home. One night, as they were all asleep, there sounded the
   dreaded cry of, "Fire, fire! " Every one rushed on deck, and the boats
   were soon filled. The last one was just pushing off, when a cry of,
   "There are two more on deck," arose. "They were the mother and her son.
   Alas! "Only room for one," the sailors shouted. Which was to go? The
   mother thought of her far-away home, her husband looking out lovingly
   and longingly for his wife. Then she glanced down at the boy, clinging,
   frightened, to her skirts. She could not let him die. There was no time
   to lose. Quick! Quick! The flames were getting round. Snatching the
   child, she held him to her a moment. "Willie, tell father I died for
   you! Then the boy was lowered into the sailors' willing arms. She died
   for him. --Selected.

                               PRAYING FOR WOOD.

   Rev. E. B. Slade tells an interesting instance of answered prayer. One
   cold winter he was forty miles away from home, holding revival
   services, when, in the midst of a terrible snowstorm, during which
   travel was almost wholly impossible, his wife, at home, ran out of
   wood. To save the little that remained, she put her children to bed,
   and wrapped them up in blankets, At last baking must be done, and,
   making a fire of her last wood, she began to pray that help might come,
   and persevered until her faith won the victory. She then went about her
   work in perfect peace of mind, assured that relief would come. In the
   course of a few hours her nearest neighbor, a lady, waded through the
   snow, saying that she had been impressed that she must come over and
   see what was the matter. The facts were stated, and relief promised.
   Hardly had she gone when another lady came in with the same statement,
   and the same offer was made. A little while later a gentleman came in
   expressing a similar feeling; and when he learned the facts, he took
   them all to his home, and cared for them until Mr. Slade returned home.

                              MIRACULOUSLY HEALED.

   We extract the following from the Methodist Magazine for July, 1827,
   being an account of a conversion that occurred in a revival of
   religion, at Lanjeth, in Cornwall, England. The account is given by
   Rev. W. Lawry, preacher on the St. Austell circuit.

   "The first extraordinary conversion which I remarked, was that of old
   William Morkum, of Lanjeth, who had lived just seventy years without
   God in the world. In the month of February, 1826, as he was at work as
   usual on the high roads, and reflecting on his long life spent in the
   neglect of religion, his mind became greatly alarmed at the prospect of
   eternity. Night came on; he sought to be refreshed on his bed by sleep,
   but in vain. His alarm and terror increased so much that his family,
   consisting of his wife and daughter, were kept up all night. On the
   next day he proceeded to his labor, but remarked to his companion, with
   great apparent emotion I believe I am a lost soul.' The next night came
   on, when, such was the horror of his mind that his family, at his
   request, sent for some of their pious neighbors to come and pray with
   him. They spent the whole night in prayer; but he remained without
   hope, under the most fearful apprehensions. The third day was spent as
   the former; but the third night was still more terrible to him than the
   second. The religious friends were again called in, and great was the
   agony of his mind. Hitherto he could not be persuaded that prayers
   would avail; but at this crisis his friends prevailed upon him to join
   them in prayer to God, in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ. He now
   poured forth the cry of the publican: "God be merciful to me, a
   sinner." During the third night his fears subsided, and he had power to
   cast his soul on the atonement of the Lord Jesus Christ, through whom
   he obtained peace with God. For many years he had through infirmity
   been bowed almost double, and had not been able to lift his hand to his
   head. His employment had been to break stones on the roads. The moment,
   however, of his deliverance from his load of guilt and fear, he
   exclaimed in ecstasy

   "I am made whole both in body and soul!"' He accordingly stood
   perfectly erect, and clasped his hands together behind his head. "Now,"
   said he, "I will request the parish to buy me a pair of spectacles,
   that I may learn to read the Bible; and I will myself procure a lantern
   to light me on the winter evenings to the Methodist chapel." He joined
   himself to the society at Lanjeth, and met twice in class. About a
   month after his conversion he became unwell, and said to his family:
   "The time is come that I must die." He lay down for a few days upon his
   peaceful bed, without pain or mental conflict, expressing his trust in
   the adorable Redeemer, and peacefully fell asleep in the Lord.

                           CARLETTA AND THE MERCHANT.

   "If I could have your faith, Hawkins, gladly would I but I was born a
   skeptic. I cannot look upon God and the future as you do."

   So said John Harvey, as he walked with a friend under a dripping
   umbrella. John Harvey was a skeptic of thirty years standing, and
   apparently hardened in his unbelief. Everybody had given him up as
   hopeless. Reasoning ever so calmly made no impression on the rocky soil
   of his heart. It was sad, very sad. But one friend had never given him
   up. When spoken to about him "I will talk with and pray for that man
   until I die," he said; "and I will have faith that he may yet come out
   of darkness into the marvelous light." And thus whenever he met him
   (John Harvey was always ready for a "talk "), Mr. Hawkins pressed home
   the truth. In answer, on that stormy night, he said: "God can change a
   skeptic, John. He has more power over your heart than you, and I mean
   still to pray for you."

   Oh, I've no objections, none in the world, seeing is believing, you
   know. I'm ready for any miracle; but I tell you, it would take nothing
   short of a miracle to convince me. Let's change the subject, I'm
   hungry, and it's too far to go up town to supper this stormy night.
   Here's a restaurant; let us stop here."

   How warm and pleasant it looked in the long, brilliant dining saloon!
   The two merchants had eaten, and were just on the point of rising, when
   a strain of soft music came through an open door a child's sweet voice.

   "`Pon my word, that is pretty," said John Harvey; "what purity in those
   tones"

   "Out of here, you little baggage!" cried a hoarse voice and one of the
   waiters pointed angrily to the door.

   "Let her come in," said John Harvey. "We don't allow them in this
   place, sir," said the waiter ; "but she can go into the reading-room."

   Well, let her go somewhere. I want to hear her," responded the
   gentleman.

   All this time the two had seen the shadow of something hovering
   backwards and forwards on the edge of the door; now they followed a
   slight little figure, wrapped in patched cloak, patched hood, and
   leaving the mark of wet feet as she walked. Curious to see her face,
   she was very small, John Harvey lured her to the farthest part of the
   great room, where there were but few gentlemen, and then motioned her
   to sing. The little one looked timidly up. Her cheek of olive darkness,
   but a flush rested there; and out of the thinnest face, under the arch
   of broad temples, deepened by masses of the blackest hair, looked two
   eyes, whose softness and tender pleading would have touched the hardest
   heart.

   "That little thing is sick, I believe," said John Harvey,
   compassionately. "What do you sing, child?" he added.

   "I sing Italian, or a little English."

   John Harvey looked at her shoes. "Why," he exclaimed, and his lip
   quivered, "her feet are wet to her ankles; she will catch her death of
   cold."

   By this time the child had begun to sing, pushing back her hood, and
   folding before her little thin fingers. Her voice was wonderful; and
   simple and common as were both, air and words, the pathos of the tones
   drew together several of the merchants in the reading-room. The little
   song commenced thus

   "There is a happy land,

   Far, far away."

   Never could the voice, the manner, of that child be forgotten. There
   almost seemed a halo round her head; and when she had finished, her
   great speaking eyes turned towards John Harvey.

   "Look here, child; where did you learn that song?" he asked.

   "At the Sabbath-school, sir."

   "And you don't suppose there is a happy land?" he continued, heedless
   of the many eyes upon him.

   "I know there is; I'm going to sing there," she said, so quietly, so
   decidedly, that the men looked at each other.

   "Going to sing there?"

   "Yes, sir. My mother said so. She used to sing to me until she was
   sick. Then she said she wasn't going to sing any more on earth, but up
   in heaven."

   "Well and what then?"

   "And then she died, sir," said the child; tears brimming down the dark
   cheek, now ominously flushed scarlet.

   John Harvey was silent for a few moments. Presently he said: "Well, if
   she died, my little girl, you may live, you know."

   "Oh, no, sir! No, sir! I'd rather go there, and be with mother.
   Sometimes I have a dreadful pain in my side, and cough as she did.
   There won't be any pain up there, sir it's a beautiful world"

   "How do you know?" faltered on the lips of the skeptic.

   "My mother told me so, sir." Words how impressive! Manner how
   child-like, and yet so wise. John Harvey had had a praying mother. His
   chest labored for a moment, the sobs that struggled for utterance could
   be heard even in their depths and still those large, soft, lustrous
   eyes, like magnets, impelled his glance towards them.

   "Child, you must have a pair of shoes." John Harvey's voice was husky.
   Hands were thrust in pockets, purses pulled out, and the astonished
   child held in her little palm more money than she had ever seen before.
   "Her father is a poor, consumptive organ grinder," whispered one. "I
   suppose he's too sick to be out tonight."

   Along the soggy street went the child, under the protection of John
   Harvey, but not with shoes that drank the water at every step. Warmth
   and comfort were hers now. Down in the deep den-like lanes of the city
   walked the man, a little cold hand in his. At an open door they stopped
   up broken, creaking stairs they climbed. Another doorway was opened,
   and a wheezing voice called out of the dim arch, "Carletta!"

   "O father! Father! See what I have brought you!"

   "Look at me! Look at me! " and down went the silver, and venting her
   joy, the poor child fell, crying and laughing together, into the old
   man's arms.

   Was he a man?

   A face dark and hollow, all overgrown with hair black as night, and
   uncombed-a pair of wild eyes-a body bent nearly double - hands like
   claws.

   "Did he give you all this, my child?"

   "They all did, father; now you shall have soup and oranges."

   "Thank you, sir--I'm sick, you see--all gone, sir had to send the poor
   child out, or we'd starve. God bless you, sir! I wish I was well enough
   to play you a tune;" and he looked wistfully towards the corner where
   stood the old organ, baize-covered, the baize in tatters.

   One month after that, the two men met again as if by agreement, and
   walked slowly down town. Treading innumerable passages they came to the
   gloomy building where lived Carletta's father.

   No--not lived there; for, as they paused a moment, out came two or
   three men bearing a pine coffin. In the coffin slept the old
   organ-grinder.

   "It was very sudden, sir;" said a woman, who recognized his benefactor.
   "Yesterday the little girl was took sick, and it seemed as if he
   drooped right away. He died at six last night."

   The two men went silently up stairs. The room was empty of everything
   save a bed, a chair, and a nurse provided by John Harvey. The child lay
   there, not white, but pale as marble, with a strange polish on her
   brow.

   "Well, my little one, are you better?"

   "Oh, no, sir; father is gone up there, and I am going."

   Up there! John Harvey turned unconsciously towards his friend.

   "Did you ever hear of Jesus?" asked John Harvey's friend.

   "Oh, yes"

   "Do you know who he was"

   "Good Jesus," murmured the child.

   "Hawkins, this breaks me down," said John Harvey; and he placed his
   handkerchief to his eyes.

   "Don't cry, don't cry; I can't cry, I'm so glad! " said the child,
   exultingly.

   "What are you glad for, my dear?" asked John Harvey's friend.

   "To get away from here," she said deliberately. "I used to be so cold
   in the winter, for we didn't have fire sometimes; but mother used to
   hug me close, and sing about heaven. Mother told me never to mind, and
   kissed me, and said if I was His, the Savior would love me, and one of
   these days would give me a better home; and so I gave myself to Him,
   for I wanted a better home. And, oh, I shall sing there, and be so
   happy!

   With a little sigh she closed her eyes.

   "Harvey, are faith and hope nothing?" asked Mr. Hawkins.

   "Don't speak to me, Hawkins; to be as that little child, I would give
   all I have."

   "And to be like her you need give nothing only your stubborn will, your
   skeptical doubts, and the heart that will never know rest till at the
   feet of Christ."

   There was no answer. Presently the hands moved, the arms were raised,
   the eyes opened yet, glazed though they were, they turned still upward.

   "See! " she cried; "Oh, there is mother! And angels and they are all
   singing."

   Her voice faltered, but the celestial brightness lingered yet on her
   face.

   "There is no doubting the soul triumph there," whispered Mr. Hawkins.

   "It is wonderful," replied John Harvey, looking on both with awe and
   tenderness. "Is she gone?"

   He sprang from his chair as if he would detain her; but chest and
   forehead were marble now, the eyes had lost the fire of life; she must
   have died, as she lay looking at them.

   "She was always a sweet little thing," said the nurse, softly.

   John Harvey stood as if spellbound. There was a touch on his arm; he
   started.

   "John," said his friend, with an affectionate look, "shall we pray?"

   For a minute there was no answer-then came tears; the whole frame of
   the subdued skeptic shook as he said it was almost a cry: "Yes, pray,
   pray!"

   And from the side of the dead child went up agonizing pleadings to the
   throne of God. And that prayer was answered the miracle was wrought the
   lion became a lamb the doubter a believer the skeptic a Christian! --A
   tract.

                          THE GOLDEN RULE EXEMPLIFIED.

   Early one morning while it was yet dark, a poor man came to my door and
   informed me that he had an infant child very sick, which he was afraid
   would die. He desired me to go to his home, and, if possible, prescribe
   some medicine to relieve it. "For," said he, "I want to save its life
   if possible." As he spoke thus the tears ran down his face. He then
   added "I am a poor man; but, doctor, I will pay you in work as much as
   you ask if you will go."

   I said: "Yes, I will go with you as soon as I take a little
   refreshment."

   "Oh, sir," said he, "I was going to try to get a bushel of corn, and
   get it ground to carry home, and I am afraid the child will die before
   I get there. I wish you would not wait for me;" and then added: "We
   want to save the child's life if we can."

   It being some miles to his house, I did not arrive there until the sun
   was two hours high in the morning, when I found the mother holding her
   sick child, and six or seven little boys and girls around her, with
   clean hands and faces, looking as their mother did, lean and poor. On
   examining the sick child, I discovered that it was starving to death I
   said to the mother "You don't give milk enough for this child."

   She said: " I suppose I don't."

   "Well," said I, "you must feed it with milk."

   She answered: "I would, sir, but I can't get any to feed it with."

   I then said: "It will be well then for you to make a little water
   gruel, and feed your child."

   To this she replied; "I was thinking I would if my husband brings home
   some Indian meal. He has gone to try to get some, and I am in hopes he
   will make out."

   She said this with a sad countenance. I asked her with surprise: "Why,
   madam, have you not got anything to eat?

   She strove to suppress a tear, and answered sorrowfully, "No, sir we
   have had but little these some days.

   I said: "What are your neighbors, that you should suffer among them?"

   She said; "I suppose they are good people; but we are strangers in this
   place, and don't wish to trouble any of them, if we can get along
   without."

   Wishing to give the child a little manna, I asked for a spoon. The
   little girl went to the table drawer to get one, and her mother said to
   her "Get the longest handled spoon." As she opened the drawer, I saw
   only two spoons, and both with handles broken off, but one handle was a
   little longer than the other. I thought to myself, this is a very poor
   family, but I will do the best I can to relieve them. While I was
   preparing the medicine for the sick child, I heard the oldest boy (who
   was about fourteen), say: "You shall have the biggest piece now,
   because I had the biggest piece before." I turned around to see who it
   was that manifested such a principle of justice, and saw four or five
   children sitting in the corner, where the oldest was dividing a roasted
   potato among them. And he said to one: "You shall have the biggest
   piece now," etc. But the other said "Why, brother, you are the oldest,
   and you ought to have the biggest piece."

   "No," said the other, "I had the biggest piece."

   I turned to the mother, and said " Madam, you have potatoes to eat, I
   suppose?"

   She replied: "We have had, but that is the last one we have left; and
   the children have now roasted that for their breakfast."

   On hearing this, I hastened home, and informed my wife that I had taken
   the wrong medicine with me to the sick family. I then prescribed a
   gallon of milk, two loaves of bread, some butter, meat and potatoes,
   and sent my boy with these; and had the pleasure to hear in a few days
   that they were all well --Selected.

                        HOW THE PRAYER OF FAITH REACHED
                                   A FAMILY.

   A day or two after our conversion, we called at a neighbor's, and while
   there heard the lady of the house say some very hard things against the
   work of God, which was shaking that whole section of country like an
   earthquake. We were deeply grieved, but went away without saying much.
   But scarcely had we reached home before the Holy Spirit spoke to our
   heart, and told us to go back to that neighbor's and pray. We hesitated
   a little, but the burden upon our heart became so heavy that we could
   no longer keep still, and were so strongly drawn to go back to neighbor
   B----s that we decided to go, and asked our stepmother to go with us.
   She wanted to wait to get ready, but our burden was too heavy for
   delay, and she yielded, and started with us at once. It seemed as we
   went that we could hardly keep from running; and as soon as we entered
   the house we fell upon our knees, exclaiming, that God had sent us
   there to pray. We scarcely realized our surroundings, and do not know
   how long or loud we prayed; but when we arose from our knees we could
   see that all in the house were wonderfully affected, aid the one who so
   short a time before was saying bitter things against the Lord and His
   work, was wringing her hands, and weeping, and saying "What have I
   done? I did not know that I was so wicked that anybody needed to pray
   like that for me." We shook hands with all present, and left the house.
   Soon a Christian young lady, who was at Mr.B----s when we were there,
   came over, and in a kind way said that she did not wish to discourage
   us, but she feared our prayer was too abrupt to do any good. But as she
   spoke, the Lord gave us the positive assurance of that family's
   salvation, and we began to praise the Lord. And so it was; for in a
   very short time the entire family were converted. Thus did God so early
   in our Christian experience, literally verify his own word.

   "Likewise the Spirit also helpeth our infirmities for we know not what
   we should pray for as we ought but the Spirit itself maketh
   intercession for us with groanings which cannot be uttered." --Editor.

                                THE STONE CHAIR.

   On Thanksgiving morning, six young men stood in quiet conversation, on
   the corner of Clark and Washington streets, in the great and busy city
   of Chicago.

   "I propose a walk out to Graceland, the beautiful city of the dead."
   Thus spoke the leader of the company; and all agreeing, they journeyed
   forth. There are many beautiful monuments in that quiet city; and many
   a noted one from among the learned and the wealthy, from bank and
   store, from pulpit and bar, from church and state, has been borne there
   to rest; but the visit of these six young men at this time to this land
   of sacred, dust, is not for the purpose of the great and grand
   monuments, or visiting the graves of the rich. They have reached the
   beautiful entrance of Graceland, and, passing under the imposing
   archway through which a stream of sorrow flows day by day and hour by
   hour, they turn to the right; and following the principal drive for
   little more than a block, they reach an elevation where they stop to
   rest and meditate. And for these young men there is no more appropriate
   spot on earth to meditate than just here.

   Reader, even though you are not interested, yet perhaps you would like
   to see and know something of this spot. Then draw near, see the place,
   and hear the words of these young men. It is a small, three-cornered
   lot, forming an almost perfect equilateral triangle, with three oak
   trees, one standing near each of the angles. Near the center of the lot
   is a single grave, that all through the summer months resembled a bed
   of the richest flowers; but today the flowers are gone, and two
   well-wrapped rosebushes are all that remain of the summer beauties.
   When the foliage is full upon the trees, this grave is covered with
   their mellow shadow all the day. At the head of the grave is a plain
   low head-stone of Italian marble. On the south end of the stone are
   these letters, "Sec. W.F.M.S.; " on the top of the stone the letters, "
   S. E. F.," and just beneath these, in large letters, " Dear Mama." On
   the front of this stone arc these words: " Resting in the Everlasting
   Arms." Near the head of the grave and immediately under one of the
   trees, is a rustic chair, cut out of solid stone, that extends its mute
   invitation to every weary, sorrowing pilgrim to stop and rest.

   Reader, do you ask whose dust lies here? Let these young men answer.
   The leader of the company says

   "Here lies the dust of a holy woman, who found me two years ago, a
   stranger in the great city of Chicago-a stranger to all the people, but
   what was much more, a stranger to God. That lady invited me into her
   Bible-class, and though my garments were threadbare, she invited me to
   her home. She talked with me of Jesus and the better life. She pointed
   out to me the way up to a noble manhood, and by her leading I was
   constrained to give my heart to God; and this day Jesus is mine, and l
   am his."

   "And I," says a second of these young men, "well remember the day when
   I landed in Chicago, a perfect stranger, direct from England. On my
   first Sabbath in the city, I was invited by a young man whose
   acquaintance I had made, to visit this lady's Bible-class. I hath no
   sooner entered the church than she had me by the hand, inquired of me
   whence I came, where I lived, and invited me to become a member of her
   class. Her sweet womanliness, her face of sunshine, and the music of
   her voice, charmed me into obedience to her wishes. I was constrained
   first to give my name to the class; afterward I gave my heart to God,
   and my name to the church. Praise God for such a friend"

   A third young man speaks, and says "I came to Chicago from Toronto,
   Canada. I, too, was homeless and friendless. I heard of this lady, and
   her work for young men who were strangers in the city. I went to her
   class, and the first Sabbath took a back seat, and strove to hide
   myself but the eyes of this lady missed no young man who appeared to be
   alone or friendless. At the close of the lesson she came to me, and, as
   if I were her own son, she sat down beside me, and questioned me
   concerning my temporal and spiritual condition. I told her I had once
   been a Christian, and a member of the church, but that I had wandered
   far away into sin. She looked me in the face and said, while the big
   tears stood in her eyes "My Jesus is anxiously hunting and calling for
   his wandering sheep; let me lead you back into the fold." Yes; and she
   did lead me back into the fold, and this day I am one of the Great
   Shepherd's flock."

   "I will tell you how it was with me," said a fourth. "I came from my
   Iowa home, and found myself in Chicago, without friends, without money,
   and without work. After tramping from early one morning until four
   o'clock in the afternoon without finding work, and without anything to
   eat, I called at this lady's home, and asked for something to eat.

   She gave me a little work to do, and while I was doing the work she
   ordered a dinner prepared for me. While I was eating, she questioned me
   as to my home, my purpose in the city, and my religious life. She said
   little at that time about my religious life, but finding me desirous to
   find work, she exerted herself for me; and through her influence, in
   two days I had a situation which I have been able to hold from that
   time to this. After she had found me good work with fair pay, she
   invited me into her class and her home, and afterwards she led me to
   Christ."

   "And I," said the fifth young man, "have more reason to thank God for
   this lady than ye all. Two years ago I was a poor drunkard. This lady
   found me at the Young Men's Christian Association rooms, and asked me
   to call at her home. She prayed with me, she entreated me for Jesus'
   sake, for my dear mother's sake, and for my own sake, to reform. She
   induced me to sign the pledge; placed her hands upon my head, and
   offered, oh such a prayer for me. Then and there new strength came into
   my life; and from that day to this, by the grace of God, I have been
   able to live a sober life. Boys, I tell you, this dear woman was a
   mother to me."

   The sixth young man spoke and said " Under God, all I am today, or hope
   to be in the days to come, I owe to this noble woman. No wonder they
   have cut the name Dear Mamma' on the headstone, for she was a mother to
   us all."

   The leader said : "You see on the head-stone, Resting in the
   Everlasting Arms.' This reminds us that she sang, Safe in the Arms of
   Jesus.' Boys, let us sing that hymn."

   And they did sing it, with the tears streaming down their cheeks; after
   which they kneeled around the silent grave, and in voiceless prayer
   gave themselves anew to God.

   Reader, would you know whose dust lies here? Over the back of the
   rustic chair hangs a scroll; draw near and read: "Born, July, 1838; " "
   Departed, April, 1883." Read on: " Her work for God and humanity is her
   monument." Whose dust lies here? Alt this is the grave of Sara Houghton
   Fawcett. And these young men, whom she had led to Jesus, came hither
   this Thanksgiving day, to offer their tribute of praise and
   thanksgiving to God for the memory they have of the blessed woman whose
   dust rests here by the chair of stone. She is not dead -"not dead, but
   departed."

   "There is no death! What seems so is transition,

   This life of mortal breath

   Is but a suburb of the life Elysian,

   Whose portal we call Death."

  - N.W. Christian Advocate.

                        "THEY ARE NOT STRANGERS, MAMMA."

   Not long ago I stood by the deathbed of a little girl.

   From her birth she had been afraid of death. Every fiber of her body
   and soul recoiled from the thought of it. Don't let me die," she said;
   " don't let me die. Hold me fast.

   "Oh, I can't go!"

   "Jennie," I said, "you have two little brothers in the other world, and
   there are thousands of tender-hearted people over there, who will love
   you and take care of you."

   But she cried out again despairingly " Don't let me go; they are
   strangers over there." She was a little country girl, strong limbed,
   fleet of foot, tanned in the face; she was raised on the frontier, the
   fields were her home. In vain we tried to reconcile her to the death
   that was inevitable. "Hold me fast," she cried; "don't let me go." But
   even as she was pleading, her little hands relaxed their clinging hold
   from my waist, and lifted themselves eagerly aloft; lifted themselves
   with such straining effort, that they lifted the wasted little body
   from its reclining position among the pillows. Her face was turned
   upward, but it was her eyes that told the story. They were filled with
   the light of Divine recognition. They saw something plainly that we
   could not see and they grew brighter and brighter, and her little hand
   quivered in eagerness to go, where strange portals had opened upon her
   astonished vision. But even in that supreme moment she did not forget
   to leave a word of comfort for those who would gladly have died in her
   place: "Mamma," she was saying, "mamma, they are not strangers. I'm not
   afraid." And every instant the light burned more gloriously in her blue
   eyes, till at last it seemed as if her soul leaped forth upon its
   radiant waves; and in that moment her trembling form relapsed among its
   pillows, and she was gone--Chicago Woman's World.

                             A CANCER HEALED, AND A
                             WITHERED ARM RESTORED.

   Brother W. B. Bailey wrote us from Hybrid, Mo., January 7, 1887:

   "I had a cancer in my left breast. It pained me very much; had become
   very bad and tender, and was a running sore. The saints prayed for me,
   and the Lord answered our prayers. Praise His holy name! The pain left
   me instantly, but the cancer healed gradually. It healed up without
   medicine or plaster, or anything but by trusting God alone. Praise the
   Lord for healing me, both soul and body. See Mark xvi:18 and James
   v:13-16."

   His wife wrote at the same time:

   "And all things whatsoever ye shall ask in prayer, believing, ye shall
   receive." Matt. xxi :22. I praise the Lord, prayer was answered for me.
   I was very much afflicted in body. I went to the doctors. They could
   not cure me, I only grew worse. Was taken with a pain in my right
   shoulder. How I suffered none can tell. I could not use my arm without
   great pain. I could not raise my hand to comb my hair. My arm wasted
   away until it was less than the other. My hand was cold most all of the
   time. I was a cripple ten years. The saints prayed for me, and I was
   healed in answer to prayer. I can use my arm now. My hand is like the
   other. I can write and work with my right hand. I also had the
   dyspepsia seventeen years, and am healed in answer to prayer."

                                  ONLY A VOTE.

   A local option contest was going on in W----, and Mrs. Kent was trying
   to influence her husband to vote "No License." Willie Kent, six years
   old, was, of course, on his mamma's side. The night before election,
   Mr. Kent went to see Willie safe in bed, and hushing his prattle, he
   said, "Now, Willie, say your prayers."

   "Papa, I want to say my own words tonight," he replied. "All right, my
   boy, that is the best kind of praying," answered the father.

   Fair was the picture, as Willie, robed in white, knelt at his father's
   knee, and prayed reverently "O dear Jesus, do help papa to vote No
   Whiskey tomorrow. Amen."

   Morning came, the village was alive with excitement.

   Women's hands, made hard by toil, were stretched to God for help in the
   decision.

   The day grew late, and yet Mr. Kent had not been to the polls. Willie's
   prayer sounded in his ears, and troubled conscience said: "Answer your
   boy's petition with your ballot."

   At last he stood at the polling-place with two tickets in his hand -
   one License; the other No License. Sophistry, policy, avarice said:
   "Vote License." Conscience echoed: "No License." After a moment's
   hesitation, he threw from him the No License ticket and put the License
   in the box.

   The next day it was found that the contest was so close it needed but
   one vote to carry the town for prohibition. In the afternoon, Willie
   found a No License ticket, and, having heard only one vote was
   necessary, he started out to find the man who would cast this one
   ballot against wrong, and in his eagerness he flew along the streets.

   The saloon men were having a jubilee, and the highways were filled with
   drunken rowdies. Little Willie rushed on through the unsafe crowd.
   Hark! A random pistol-shot from a drunken quarrel, a pierced heart, and
   sweet Willie Kent had his death wound.

   They carried him home to his mother. His father was quickly summoned,
   and the first swift thought that came to him, as he stood over his
   lifeless boy, was "Willie will never pray again that I may vote No
   Whiskey."

   With a strange, still grief he took in his own the quiet little hand,
   chilling into marble coldness, and there between the fingers, firmly
   clasped, was the No License ballot with which the brave little soul
   thought to change the verdict of yesterday.

   Mr. Kent started back in shame and sorrow. That vote in his hand might
   have answered the prayer so lately on his lips, now dumb, and perhaps
   averted the awful calamity. Fathers, may not the hands of the
   "thousands slain" make mute appeal to you? Your one vote is what God
   requires of you. You are as responsible for it being in harmony with
   His law, as if on it hung the great decision. --The Issue.

                        WAITING FOR THE ANGELIC CONVOY.

   Seldom is the serenely expectant spirit of the dying Christian more
   graphically portrayed than in the beautiful letter of Rev. J.S.C.
   Abbott, written shortly before his death, to J. Dewitt Miller, and
   published in the New York Methodist. It bears date at Fair Haven,
   Conn., March 3, 1877, and reads as follows:

   I am pillowed upon a sick and dying bed, with a little tablet in my
   hands. I can, without much difficulty, pencil lines to my friends. I
   suffer very little pain. My mind, it seems to me, was never more clear
   and joyous. The physicians assure me that I am liable at any moment to
   die. I am happy. I do not see how any one can be more happy out of
   heaven. I am expecting every hour that a group of loving angels will
   come and say to me: "Brother, God has sent us to convey you to
   heaven--the chariot is waiting." All the infirmities of flesh and sin
   will vanish from body and soul. I shall be the congenial companion with
   the angels in that most wonderful of all conceivable journeys from
   earth to heaven. I have several times taken the tour of Europe. And
   there was great joy in seeing the wonders of the old world. But there
   were sorrows, too, the discomforts of travel, the need of economy; the
   mind burdened with those earthly cares which never upon earth can be
   laid aside. But when the angelic summons comes, I shall be an "heir of
   God." He will provide the chariot, and will meet all the expenses. All
   care, imperfection, pain will be gone. The escort will be glorious;
   angels loving me with a brother's love, and God will have made me
   worthy of their love. We shall pass Sirius, the Pleiades, Orion and
   firmaments, or, as Herschel calls them, other universes of unimaginable
   splendor. And then we shall enter heaven! All its glories will burst
   upon our enraptured view. Angels and archangels, cherubim and seraphim,
   will gather around us with their congratulations. We shall see God, his
   throne, the splendor of his court, understand all the mysteries of his
   being, and enter upon blessings inconceivable, forever and forever!

   All this I believe, my dear friend, as fully as I believe in my own
   existence. And I may enter upon this enjoyment before night shall
   darken around me. In the religion of the Son of God, and in the
   atonement He has made for my many' sins, I find all that my soul
   craves. I am indeed happy. But writing these lines has exhausted me. I
   hope to meet you in heaven. There we will clasp bands, and lovingly
   refer to this correspondence.

   Yours, affectionately,

   JOHN S.C. ARBHOR.ZZZ

  --Golden Dawn.

                   HOW A LITTLE GIRL UTILIZED THE TELEPHONE.

   A mother, living not very far from the post-office in this city, tired
   with watching over a sick baby, came down stairs for a moment the other
   day for a few second's rest. She heard the voice of her little
   four-year old girl in the hall by herself, and, curious to know to whom
   she was talking, stopped a moment at the half-open door. She saw that
   the little thing had pulled a chair in front of the telephone, and
   stood upon it, with the piece against the side of her head. The
   earnestness of the child showed that she was in no playful mood, and
   this was the conversation the mother heard, while the tears stood thick
   in her eyes; the little one carrying on both sides, as if she were
   repeating the answers

   "Hello."

   "Well, who's there?"

   "Is God there?

   "Is Jesus there?"

   "Yes."

   "Tell Jesus I want to speak to him."

   "Well?"

   "Is that you, Jesus?"

   "Yes. What is it?

   "Our baby is sick, and want you to let it get well."

   "Won't you now?"

   No answer, and statement and question again repeated, finally answered
   by a "Yes."

   The little one put the ear-piece back on its hook, clambered down from
   the chair, and with a radiant face went for mother, who caught her in
   bet arms.

   The baby, whose life had been despaired of, began to mend that day, and
   got well. --Elmira Free Press.

                               DYING IN DESPAIR.

   The following certified incident from real life we select from
   correspondence of the Canada Christian Advocate: A man who had indulged
   the hope of final salvation, regardless of character, was on his death
   bed. In the prime of life, his cup of pleasure drained to the dregs,
   and exhausted nature refused to recruit her wasted energies. Pale and
   wan, with an awful sense of an uncertain future, the horrors of remorse
   distracting his inmost soul, the bitter cup of despair persistently
   held to his lips be the unrelenting hand of an abused and now fully
   awakened conscience, his hope that all would finally be well with him
   was never swept away. No hope no trust in God; his bed was no bed of
   roses, although surrounded by every comfort wealth could furnish.

   With the dread realities of eternity before his eyes, he cried: "Oh! I
   can't die; there is no mercy now for me--God can't forgive me now. Oh I
   how I wish I had lived differently; if I could only live, I would lead
   a different life." I encouraged him to hope in the mercy of God in
   Christ Jesus, and earnestly besought him to believe on the Lord Jesus
   Christ with all his heart, and he should be saved. "Do you think that
   God will forgive me for Christ's sake, such a sinner as I have been?"

   "Yes; oh! Yes," said I; "He came to seek and save just such ones as
   you; be willing to have Him save you now, just as you are." "Oh! No,"
   said he, "it is too late now while the tears streamed down his young
   face, pallid with disease and suffering. I had never witnessed such a
   scene, before, and I never shall forget the awful express on of that
   dying sinner's face to my dying breath.

   I told him I would pray for him, and that he must pray for himself, and
   left the room ere my senses forsook me. Horror stricken almost, and
   with a feeling as if death's fingers were clutching at my own
   heart-strings, I could not bear to witness such fearful despair. I went
   down the stairs, and soon one of his spasms of pain came on; and unable
   to bear it, with no hope, no peace, no Jesus to sustain him, he gave
   way to the fiends, as it seemed to me, which possessed him.

   With fearful curses, frightful imprecations and horrid oaths, he drove
   his faithful wife from the room; and he lay there alone to battle with
   the raging hand of disease, cursing God, and screaming with rage and
   pain, so that he could be heard in the neighboring houses. I could do
   nothing for him, and the curses and maledictions of that hour ring in
   my ears like the wail of the lost in the dark regions of despair. And
   soon I heard he was dead. Gone to the bar of God, to render up his
   account at the judgment.

   God save us from such a passing away as that; torturing fiends, instead
   of soothing angels round his dying couch. Black despair, in lieu of the
   overshadowing wing of angelic hope. Death and the judgment staring him
   in the face, instead of peace in believing and joy in the Holy Ghost.
   Horrid blasphemies, instead of, "O death, where is thy sting? O grave,
   where is thy victory?" A fearful looking forward to the future, in lieu
   of, "I know that my Redeemer liveth, and because he lives, I shall live
   also." Too late, too late! Instead of, "Come, Lord Jesus, come
   quickly." Such is the fearful end of those who trust in the mercy of
   God out of Christ, for "God out of Christ is a consuming fire."--Golden
   Dawn.

                              A WONDERFUL VSITOR.

   I had had a very busy day, and experienced a very delightful feeling of
   restfulness, as I settled myself in a comfortable arm-chair, after
   having said "Good-night" to my children. Just before going, they had
   sung their evening hymn. As their sweet childish voices had joined with
   that of their mother, one verse had made an impression on my mind.

   I was familiar with it, but it came to me with a new beauty and force.
   It was:

   Not a brief glance I beg, a passing word,

   But as Thou dwell'st with Thy disciples, Lord

   Familiar, condescending, patient, free,

   Come not to sojourn, but abide with me."

   My wife went away with the little ones to see them to bed, and I was
   left alone with this verse of the hymn repeating itself in my memory;
   and the thought came to me, supposing He were to come as He came to his
   disciples, am I altogether prepared to receive Him into my house, to
   abide with me? And as I meditated on the subject, I fell asleep, and
   dreamed, and, lo the door of the room opened, and in walked one whom I
   knew at once to be the Christ. Not the glorified Redeemer, as seen by
   John in the Isle of Patmos. No, he had answered the prayer of our hymn,
   and had come in humble human form:

   "Familiar, condescending, patient, free."

   I knelt before Him, but He laid His hand on me and said: "Arise, for I
   have come to tarry with thee."

   My recollection of my dream here grows somewhat confused; but I
   remember it again when the next morning seemed to have arrived, and I
   was gathering my children around me, and telling them that Jesus had
   come to stay with us in the house. The little ones clapped their hands
   for joy, and my dear wife's face beamed with rapture that seemed to
   transfigure her.

   Just then the Lord Himself entered the room, and we took our seats
   around the breakfast-tablet.gWhat language can I use to describe the
   wondrous peace which filled all our souls, or how our hearts burned
   within us as He talked with us?

   But when the meal was over, and we had family worship, which was that
   day a foretaste of heaven itself. I was ailed with perplexity. What
   should I do with my strange visitor? It seemed disrespectful to leave
   Him behind me at home yet it would mean serious loss to me to stay away
   from my place of business that day. But I could not take him with me,
   that was certain who ever heard of taking Christ to a counting-house?

   The Savior surely knew my thoughts, for he said, "I will go with thee.
   How didst thou ask me? Was it not

   "Come not to sojourn, but abide with me?"

   So whatever thou art doing, henceforth I will be beside thee. Lo, I am
   with you always, even unto the end of the world."

   It seemed rather strange to me, but I could not, of course, question
   what He said, so I started for my office with the dear Lord by my side.

   At my counting-house I found a man waiting my coming with a good deal
   of impatience. He was a stock and share-broker, who transacted
   considerable business for me. To tell the, truth, I was not greatly
   pleased to see him there, as I was afraid that he might bring forward
   matters which I would not feel inclined to go into with Jesus listening
   to our conversation.

   It was as I feared. He had come to tell me of a transaction he had
   arranged, which, whilst perfectly honorable according to the usual code
   of morals of the share-market, meant the saving of myself from the fear
   of loss by placing another person in the danger of it. He laid the
   whole scheme before me, without taking the slightest notice of the
   Lord; I knew not if he even saw Him.

   I cannot tell the bitter shame I felt. I saw how impossible it was to
   square such a transaction with the Golden Rule; but I could not hide
   from myself the fact that the broker told me of it with a manner and
   tone that meant that he had no doubt whatever that I would applaud him
   for his cleverness, and eagerly close with the offer. What must that
   mean to the Christ? Would it not tell him that I was in the habit of
   dealing with one thought in my mind-how I could benefit myself?

   The broker was astonished when I rejected his proposals, on the ground
   that they would be prejudicial to the interest of the other party in
   the transaction; and left me abruptly, apparently thinking I had
   developed a mild species of insanity.

   Humbled, I fell at my Savior's feet, and cried to Him for forgiveness
   for past sinfulness, and strength for time to come.

   "My child," said He, in tender accents, "thou speakest as if my
   presence were something strange to thee. But I have always been with
   thee. I have seen and seen with grief, the way thou hast dealt with thy
   fellows, in business, and marveled at thy unbelief of My promise that I
   would ever be with thee. Have I not said to my servants, Abide in Me,
   and I in thee?

   Just as He said these words, another gentleman entered the office. He
   was a customer whom I could not afford to offend, and I had uniformly
   shown a cordiality to him which I was far from feeling in my heart. He
   was vulgar, profane, and often obscene in his talk.

   He had not been many minutes in my office before he made use of an
   expression which brought a hot blush to my cheek. I had heard him speak
   in a similar way before; and, although I felt repelled by it, I had,
   for fear of offending him, met it with faint laughter. But now I felt
   as I should have had it been uttered in the presence of a lady; only
   this feeling was intensified by the realization of the absolute purity
   of the Divine One who had been a hearer of the speech.

   I gave expression to my feeling in a word of expostulation , and he
   exclaimed: "You seem to have suddenly grown very prudish," and left me
   in a rage.

   Again, I turned to the Christ with a cry for pardon; and again, I
   learned that he had beheld all my former intercourse with this man.

   I was now called into the adjoining office, where my clerks were
   employed, and found that one of them had made a foolish blunder, which
   would mean a considerable complication, and perhaps loss. I am
   naturally irritable, and at once lost my temper, and spoke to the
   delinquent in unmeasured terms. Turning my head, I saw that Jesus had
   followed me out of my private office, and was standing close beside me.

   Again I was humbled, and had to cry for mercy.

   Through all that strange day, similar incidents occurred; and the
   presence of the Master, which I thought would have been a joy, was a
   rebuke to me. It showed me, as I had never dreamed before, that I had
   framed my life on the supposition that He had but little to do with it.

   But, on the other hand, there were times during the day when my soul
   was filled with rapture; times when He smiled on me in loving approval,
   or when He spoke words of pardon and absolution, or when He opened out
   before my wondering gaze some fresh beauty of His character and person.
   Such a time was the moment when, on my return to my home, the children
   came crowding around Him, and wanted to show Him their toys and
   pigeons, and a brood of newly-hatched chickens, and I rebuked them, and
   said to them "Run away, children! Trouble not the Master with such
   trifles."

   And he seated himself and took my curly-headed little boy on His knee,
   and called my two little girls to His side, and said tome: "Suffer
   these little children to come unto me, and forbid them not; for of such
   is the kingdom of heaven."

   I awoke, and lo! It was a dream.--The Ballarat Christian Union.

                                THE LAME HEALED.

   Rev. Charles G. Finney, during his life-time, was familiar with the
   circumstances connected with the remarkable healing of a sick lady in
   Oberlin, O., the wife of Rev. R.D. Miller, and these facts were vouched
   for as unquestionably authentic. Mr. Finney says:

   Mrs. Miller is the wife of a Congregational minister, and a lady of
   unquestionable veracity. However the fact of her healing is to be
   accounted for, her story is no doubt worthy of entire confidence, as we
   have known her for years as a lame, suffering invalid, and now see her
   in our midst in sound health. This instantaneous restoration will be
   accounted for by different persons in different ways. Mrs. Miller and
   those who were present, regard the healing as supernatural, and a
   direct answer to prayer. The facts must speak for themselves. Why
   should not the sick be healed in answer to the prayer of faith?
   Unbelief can discredit them, but faith sees nothing incredible in such
   facts as are stated by Mrs. Miller. Mrs. Miller's own statement is as
   follows, and it is fully endorsed by the most reliable citizens and
   members of the First Church at Oberlin:

   "From my parents I inherited a constitution subject to a chronic form
   of rheumatism. In early life I was attacked with rheumatic weaknesses
   and pains, which affected my whole system. For nearly forty years I was
   subject to more or less suffering from this cause; sometimes unable to
   attend meeting for months at a time. For seven years, until the last
   three months, I have been unable to get about without the aid of crutch
   or staff, generally both. I have used many liniments and remedies, but
   with no permanently good result. I have been a Christian from early
   life, but last Spring, in our revival, I received a spiritual
   refreshing from the Lord, which gave a new impulse to my faith. Since
   then my religion has been a new life to me.

   "Last Summer, several of us Christian sisters were in the habit of
   spending short seasons of prayer together, that the Lord would send us
   a pastor. Some of our number had read the narrative of Dorothea Trudel,
   and had spoken to me on the subject of healing in answer to prayer. My
   faith had not then risen to this elevation. I had in fact accepted what
   I supposed to be the will of God, and made up my mind to be a lame and
   suffering invalid the rest of my life. I had long since ceased to use
   remedies for the restoration of my health; and had not even thought of
   praying in regard to it, for I regarded it as the will of God that I
   should suffer in silent submission.

   "Notwithstanding what had been said to me, I remained in this opinion
   and in this attitude until the 26th of September, 1872, when several
   ladies met at our house, by appointment, for a prayer-meeting. I had
   been growing worse for some time, and was at that time unable to get
   out to attend a meeting. I was suffering much pain that afternoon;
   indeed, I was hardly able to be out of my bed. Up to this time, none of
   the sisters who had conversed with me about the subject of healing by
   faith, had been able to tell me anything from their own experience.
   That afternoon, one lady was present who could speak to me from her own
   experience of being healed in answer to the prayer of faith. She
   related several striking instances in which her prayers had been
   answered in the removal of divers forms of disease to which she was
   subject. She also repeated a number of passages of Scripture, which
   clearly justified the expectation of being healed in answer to the
   prayer of faith. She also said that Jesus had shown her that he was
   just as ready to heal diseases now as he was when on earth; that such
   healing was expressly promised in Scripture, in answer to the prayer of
   faith, and that it was nowhere taken back. These facts, reasonings, and
   passages of Scripture, made a deep impression on my mind, and, for the
   first time, I found myself able to believe that Jesus would heal me in
   answer to prayer. She asked me if I could join my faith with hers, and
   ask for present healing. I told her I felt that I could. We then knelt,
   and called upon the Lord. She offered a mighty prayer to God, and I
   followed. While she was leading in prayer, I felt a quickening in my
   whole being, whereupon my pain subsided; and when we rose from prayer I
   felt that a great change had come over me, that I was cured. I found
   that I could walk without my staff or crutch, or any assistance from
   any one. Since then my pains have never returned; I have more than my
   youthful vigor; I walk with more ease and rapidity than I ever did in
   my life; and I never felt so fresh and young as I now do, at the age of
   fifty-two.

   "Now, the hundred and third psalm is my psalm, and my youth is more
   than renewed, like the eagle's. I cannot express the constant joy of my
   heart for the wonderful healing of my soul and body. I feel as if it
   was every whit made whole."

   The testimony of eye-witnesses to this healing is as follows: "We were
   all present at the time of the healing, and know the facts to be true.
   We are all Christians, and have no interest in deceiving anybody, and
   would by no means dishonor God by stating more than the exact truth.
   Since the healing, Mrs. Miller is still with us, and in excellent
   health. Neither the severe cold of last winter, nor the extreme heat of
   this summer, has at all injured her health. From our first acquaintance
   with her, she had been so lame as to be unable to walk, except by the
   aid of crutches. Since which time she has been able to walk without
   help, and appears perfectly well."

   Her husband, also adding his testimony, says: "She has been unable to
   walk without crutches for a series of years--A long time ago, we tried
   many remedies and physicians, with no lasting good results, and were
   expecting she would remain an invalid. Of late, she had applied no
   remedy, nor taken any medicine. At the time of her cure, she was much
   worse than for a long while before, being in great pain continually,
   until the moment she fully believed; and, in an instant, she was
   restored to perfect soundness. From that moment to this, she has not
   felt a particle of her former complaint.

   "She can now walk for miles as fast as I wish to, without feeling very
   much fatigue, does all her own housework, and attends seven meetings
   during the week. In short, she is stronger, and seems as young and
   spry, as when we were married, thirty-two years ago. The work of the
   dear Savior in her cure seems to be perfect, and she is an astonishment
   to all who knew her before and see her now. To His name all the praise.

   "Another lady, the same week my wife was healed, a member of the First
   Congregational Church, confined to her bed with a complicated disease,
   was prayed for, and restored at once to soundness."--Wonders of Prayer.

                            PRAYER FOR THE PREACHER.

   John Livingston, of Scotland, once spent a whole night in prayer with a
   company of his brethren, for God's blessing, all of them besieging the
   throne; and the next day, under his sermon, five hundred souls were
   saved. All the world has heard how the audience of the elder President
   Edwards was moved by his terrible sermon on "Sinners in the hands of an
   angry God;" some of them even grasping hold of the pillars of the
   sanctuary, from feeling that their feet were actually sliding into the
   pit. But the secret of that sermon's power is known to but few. Some
   Christians in the vicinity (Enfield, Mass.) had become alarmed, lest,
   while God was blessing other places, He should in anger pass them by;
   and so they met on the preceding evening, and spent the whole night in
   agonizing prayer--Foster's Cyclopedia.

                         PREVAILING PRAYER OF A CHILD.

   At the close of a prayer-meeting, the pastor observed a little girl,
   about twelve years of age, remaining upon her knees, when most of the
   congregation had retired. Thinking the child had fallen asleep, he
   touched her, and told her it was time to return home. To his surprise,
   he found that she was engaged in prayer, and he said: "All things
   whatsoever ye ask in prayer, believing, ye shall receive." She looked
   at her pastor earnestly, and inquired: "Is it so? Does God say that?"
   He took up a Bible, and read the passage aloud. She immediately
   commenced praying: "Lord, send my Father here; Lord, send my father to
   the church." Thus she continued for about half an hour, attracting by
   her earnest cry the attention of persons who lingered about the door.
   At last a man rushed into the church, ran up the aisle, and sank upon
   his knees by the side of his child, exclaiming: "What do you want of
   me?" She threw her arms about his neck, and began to pray: "O Lord,
   covert my father!" Soon the man's heart was melted, and he began to
   pray for himself. The child's father was three miles from the church
   when she began praying for him. He was packing goods in a wagon, and
   felt impressed with an irresistible impulse to return to his house, he
   left the goods in the wagon, and hastened to the church, where he found
   his daughter crying mightily to God in his behalf; and he was there led
   to the Savior. - Foster's Cyclopedia

                           VISIONS OF HEAVEN AND HELL

   In the "Life of William Tennent," that zealous, devoted minister, and
   friend and fellow-laborer of Whitefield, the author of his memoirs
   gives an account of Tennent being three days in a trance. He became
   prostrated with a fever, and by degrees sunk under it, until, to
   appearances, he died. In laying him out, one felt a slight tremor under
   the left arm, though the body was cold and stiff. The time for the
   funeral arrived, and the people were assembled. But a physician,
   Tennent's friend, plead that the funeral might be delayed.

   Tennent's brother remarked: "What! A man not dead who is cold and stiff
   as a stake?" The doctor, however, prevailed; another day was appointed
   for the funeral. During the interval, various efforts were made to
   discover signs of life, but none appeared save the slight tremor. For
   three days and nights his friend, the physician, never left him. Again
   the people met to bury him, but could not even then obtain the
   physician's consent. For one hour more he pled; when that was gone, he
   craved half an hour more. That being expired, he implored a stay of
   fifteen minutes, at the expiration of which Tennent opened his eyes.

   The following brief account is given in Mr. Tennent's own language, and
   was related to a brother minister: "As to dying, I found my fever
   increase, and I became weaker and weaker, until all at once, I found
   myself in heaven, as I thought. I saw no shape as to the Diety, but
   glory all unutterable. I can say as Paul did, I heard and saw things
   unutterable. I saw a great multitude before His glory, apparently in
   the height of bliss, singing most melodiously. I was transported with
   my of situation, viewing all my troubles ended, and my rest and glory
   begun, and was about to join the great and happy multitude, when one
   came to me looked me full in the face, laid his hand upon my shoulder,
   and said: "You must go back."

   "These words went through me; nothing could have shocked me more. I
   cried out: "Lord, must I go back?" With this shock, I opened my eyes in
   this world, I fainted, then came to, and fainted again several times,
   as one probably would naturally have done in so weak a situation.

   "For three years the sense of the Divine things continued so great, and
   everything else appeared so completely vain, when compared to heaven,
   that could I have had the world for stooping down for it, I believe I
   should not have thought of doing it."

   To the writer of his memoirs, Mr. Tennent, concerning this experience,
   once said: "I found myself, in an instant, in another state of
   existence, under the direction of a superior being, who offered me to
   follow him. I was accordingly wafted along, I know not how, till I
   beheld, at a distance, an ineffable glory, the impression of which on
   my mind, it is impossible to communicate to mortal man.

   "Such was the effect on my mind of what I had seen and heard, that if
   it be possible for a human being to live entirely above the world, and
   the things of it, for some time afterward I was that person. The
   ravishing sounds of the songs and hallelujahs that I heard, and the
   very words that were uttered, were not out of my ears, when awake, for
   at least three years. All the kingdoms of the earth were in my sight as
   nothing and vanity. So great were my ideas of heavenly glory, that
   nothing which did not in some measure relate to it, could command my
   serious attention.

   Mr. Tennent lived a number of years after this event, and died in the
   triumphs of a living faith, March 8, 1777, aged 71 years; his mortal
   remains being interred at his chapel, in Freehold, N. J. He was an
   able, faithful preacher; and the Divine presence with him was
   frequently manifested in his public and private ministrations. In
   personal appearance, he was tall, erect, and of spare visage, with
   bright, piercing eyes, and grave, solemn countenance.

   The following was related and vouched for by the late Robert Young, the
   missionary. We quote his account of the trance as given in a tract
   entitled, "A Vision of Hell," issued by the Evangelical Publishing
   Company, Chicago:

   "While residing in a British colony as a Christian missionary, I was
   called one evening to visit Miss D----, who was said to be dying. Mrs.
   Young, by whom she was met weekly for religious instruction, feeling a
   deep interest in her spiritual welfare, accompanied me to her
   residence. We found her in the chamber of a neat little cottage,
   exceedingly ill, but confiding in the merits of Jesus; and after
   spending some time with her in conversation and prayer, we commended
   her to God, and took our departure, without the least hope of seeing
   her again in this life. Soon after we left she seemed to die; but as
   the usual signs of death, which so rapidly develop themselves in that
   country, did not appear, her friends anxiously waited to see the end.

   "She was watched with great interest, both night and day; and after
   having been in this state for nearly a week, opened her eyes and said:
   "Mr. C----is dead." Her attendants, thinking that she was under the
   influence of delirium, replied that she was mistaken, as he was not
   only alive but well. "Oh, no!" said she, "he is dead; for a short time
   ago, as I passed the gates of hell, I saw him descend into the pit, and
   the blue flame cover him. Mr. B----is also dead, for he arrived at
   heaven just as I was leaving that happy place, and I saw its beautiful
   gates thrown wide open to receive him, and beard the host of heaven
   shout: "Welcome, weary pilgrim!"

   "Mr. C----was a neighbor, but a very wicked person, and Mr. B----, who
   lived at no great distance, many years had been a member of the Church
   of God. The parties who heard Miss D----'s startling and confident
   statements immediately sent to make inquiries about the two individuals
   alluded to, and found, to their utter astonishment, that the former had
   dropped down dead about half an hour before, whilst in the act of tying
   his shoe; and that about the same time the latter had suddenly passed
   into the eternal world. For the truth of these facts I do solemnly
   vouch. She then went on to tell them where she had been, and what she
   had seen and heard.

   VISIT TO HEAVEN.

   "After being sufficiently recovering to leave the house, she paid us a
   visit, and Mrs. Young, as well as myself, heard from her own lips the
   following account of what she had passed through. She informed us that
   at the time she was supposed to die, a celestial being conducted her
   into the invisible world, and mysteriously unveiled to her the
   realities of eternity. He took her first to heaven, but she was told
   that, as she yet belonged to time, she could not be permitted to enter
   into that glorious place, but only to behold it; which she represented
   as infinitely exceeding in beauty and splendor the most elevated
   conceptions of mortals, and whose glories no language could describe.

   "She told us that she beheld the Savior upon a throne of light and
   glory, surrounded by the four-and-twenty elders, and a great multitude
   which no man could number; among whom she recognized patriarchs,
   prophets, apostles, martyrs, and all the missionaries who had died in
   that colony, besides many others whom she mentioned; and although those
   parties were not named by the angel that attended her, yet she said
   that seeing them was to know them.

   "She described these celestial spirits as being variously employed;
   and, although she felt herself inadequate to convey any definite idea
   of the nature of that employment, yet it appeared to be adapted to
   their respective mental tastes and spiritual attainments. She also
   informed us that she heard sweet and most enrapturing music, such as
   she had never heard before, and made several attempts to give us some
   idea of its melodious character, but found her notes too earthly for
   that purpose.

   While thus favored, the missionaries already referred to, and other
   happy spirits, as they glided past her, sweetly smiled, and said they
   knew whence she came, and, if faithful to the grace of God, she would,
   in a-short time, be admitted into their delightful society. All the
   orders of heaven were in perfect and blessed harmony, and appeared to
   be directed in all their movements by mysterious influence, proceeding
   from the throne of God.

   "She was next conducted to a place whence she had

   A VIEW OF HELL.

   "This she described in the most terrific language, and declared that
   the horrid shrieks of lost spirits still seemed to sound in her ears.
   As she approached the burning pit, a tremendous effort was made to draw
   her into it; but she felt herself safe under the protection of her
   guardian angel. She recognized many in the place of torment whom she
   had known on earth, and even some who had been thought to be
   Christians.

   "There were princes and peasants, learned and un-learned, writhing
   together in one unquenchable fire, where all earthly distinctions and
   titles were forever at an end. Among them she beheld a Miss W----, who
   had occupied a prominent station in society, but had died during the
   illness of this young woman. She said that when Miss W saw her
   approach, her shrieks were appalling, beyond the power of language to
   describe, and that she made a desperate but unsuccessful effort to
   escape.

   "The punishment of lost souls she represented as symbolizing the
   respective sins which had occasioned their condemnation. Miss W----,
   for instance, was condemned for the love of money, which I had every
   reason to believe was her besetting sin; and she seemed robed in a
   garment of gold, all on fire. Mr. O----, whom she saw, was lost through
   intemperance; and he appeared to be punished by devils administering to
   him some boiling liquid.

   "She said there was no sympathy among these unhappy spirits, but that
   unmixed hatred, in all its frightful forms, prevailed in every part of
   the fiery regions. She beheld parents and children, husbands and wives,
   and those who had been companions in sin, exhibiting every mark of deep
   hatred to each other's society; and heard them in fiendish accents
   upbraiding and bitterly cursing each other. She saw nothing in hell but
   misery and despair, and heard nothing there but the most discordant
   sounds, accompanied with weeping, and wailing, and gnashing of teeth.

   "While she gazed upon this revolting scene, many souls arrived from
   earth, and were greedily seized by innumerable devils of monstrous
   shape, amid horrid shouts of hellish triumph, and tortured according to
   their crimes."

   John Wesley, in his Journal of August, 1746, vol. 1, pages 374-375-376,
   concerning one he styles "S.T.," says:

   "About six in the morning she was rising, and inwardly praying to God;
   when on a sudden, she was seized with a violent trembling. Quickly
   after she lost her speech in a few minutes her hearing; then her sight,
   and, at the same time, all sense and motion.

   "Her mother immediately sent for Mrs. Designe, to whom she then went to
   school. At the same time her father sent for Mr. Smith, apothecary, who
   lived near. At first he proposed bleeding her immediately, and applying
   a large blister; but upon examining her further, he said It signifies
   nothing, for the child is dead.' About twelve o'clock she began to
   stir; then opened her eyes, and gave the following account:

   "As soon as I lost my senses, I was in a dismal place, full of briers,
   and pits, and ditches; stumbling up and down, and not knowing where to
   turn, or which way to get either forward or backward; and it was almost
   quite dark, there being but a little faint twilight, so that I could
   scarce see before me. I was crying, ready to break my heart; and a man
   came to me, and said: Child, where are you going?' I said: I could not
   tell.' He said: What do you want?' I answered: I want Christ to be my
   refuge.' He said: You are the child for whom I am sent; you are to go
   with me.' I saw it grew lighter as he spoke. I observed his clothes;
   they reached down to his feet, and were shining and white as snow.

   He brought me through a narrow lane, into a vast, broad road, and told
   me: This leads to hell; but be not afraid; you are not to stay there.'
   At the end of that road a man stood, clothed like the other, in white,
   shining clothes. Turning to the left hand, we went down a very high,
   steep hill. I could scarce bear the stench and smoke of brimstone. I
   saw a vast many people that seemed to be chained down, crying and
   gnashing their teeth. The man told me, the sins they delighted in once
   they are tormented with now. I saw a vast number who stood up, cursing
   and blaspheming God, and spitting at each other; and many were making
   balls of fire, and throwing them at one another. I saw many others, who
   had cups of fire, out of which they were drinking down flames; and
   others, who held cards of fire in their hands, and seemed to be playing
   with them.

   "We stayed here, I thought, about half an hour. Then my guide said:
   Come; I will now show you a glorious place.' I saw the gate of heaven,
   which stood wide open; but it was so bright I could not look at it
   long. We went straight in, and walked through a large place, where I
   saw saints and angels; and another large place, where were abundance
   more. They were all of one height and stature; and when one prayed,
   they all prayed; when one sung, they all sung. And they all sung alike,
   with a smooth, even voice, not one higher or lower than another.

   "We went through this into a third place. There I saw God, sitting upon
   His throne. It was a throne of light, brighter than the sun. I could
   not fix my eyes upon it. I saw three, but all as one. Our Savior had a
   pen in His hand. A great book lay at His right side; another at His
   left; and a third partly behind Him. In the first He set down the
   prayers and good works of His people; in the second He set down all the
   curses, and all the evil works of the wicked. I saw that He discerns
   the whole earth at a glance.

   "Then our Lord took the first book in His hand, and went and said:
   Father, behold the prayers and the works of my people.' And he held up
   His hands and prayed, and interceded to His Father for us. I never
   heard any voice like that; but I cannot tell how to explain it. And His
   Father said: Son, I forgive Thy people; not for their sake, but Thine.'
   Then our Lord wrote it down in the third book, and returned to His
   throne, rejoicing with the hosts of heaven.

   "It seemed to me as if I stayed here several months but I never slept
   all the while. And there was no night; and I saw no sky or sun, but
   clear light everywhere. Then we went back to a large door, which my
   guide opened; and we walked into pleasant gardens, by brooks and
   fountains. As we walked, I said: I did not see my brother here' (who
   died sometime before). He said: Child, thou canst not know thy brother
   yet. Thy spirit is to return to the earth. Thou must watch and pray.
   Thou shalt come again hither, and be joined to these, and know everyone
   as before.' I said: When is that to be?' He said I know not, nor any
   angel in heaven; but God alone.'

   While we were walking, he said: Sing.' I said What shall I sing?' And
   he said: Sing praises unto the King of the place.' I sung several
   verses. Then he said: I must go.' I would have fain gone with him; but
   he said Your time is not yet; you have more work to do on earth.'
   Immediately he was gone; and I came to myself, and began to speak.

   "She received remission of sins when she was nine years old, and was
   very watchful from that time. Since this trance she has continued in
   faith and love."

   Again, Mr. Wesley, in his Journal of August 6, 1759, page 42, says: "I
   talked largely with Ann Thorn, and two others, who had been several
   times in trances. What they all agreed in was, 1. That when they went
   away, as they -termed it, it was always at the time they were fullest
   of the love of God. 2. That it came upon them in a moment, without any
   previous notice, and took away all their senses and strength. 3. That
   there were some exceptions; but in general, from that moment they were
   in another world, knowing nothing of what was done or said by all that
   were round about them.

   "About five in the afternoon I heard them singing hymns. Soon after Mr.
   B. came up and told me that Alice Miller was fallen into a trance. I
   went down immediately, and found her sitting on a stool, and leaning
   against the wall, with her eyes open and fixed upward. I made a motion
   as if going to strike; but they continued immovable Her face showed an
   unspeakable mixture of reverence and love, while silent tears stole
   down her cheeks. Her lips were a little open, and sometimes moved; but
   not enough to cause any sound. I do not know whether I ever saw a human
   face look so beautiful; sometimes it was covered with a smile, as from
   joy, mixing with love and reverence but the tears fell still, though
   not so fast.

   "In about half an hour I observed her countenance change into the form
   of fear, pity, and distress; then she burst into a flood of tears, and
   cried out: Dear Lord, they will be damned! They will all be damned!'
   But in about five minutes her smiles returned, and only love and joy
   appeared in her face. About half an hour after six, I observed distress
   take place again; and soon after she wept bitterly, and cried out: Dear
   Lord, they will go to hell! The world will go to hell! Soon after, she
   said: Cry aloud! Spare not!' And in a few moments her look was composed
   again, and spoke a mixture of reverence, joy, and love. Then she said
   aloud: Give God the glory.' About seven her senses returned. I asked:
   Where have you been?' I have been with my Savior.' In heaven, or on
   earth?' I can-not tell; but I was in glory.' Why then did you cry?' Not
   for myself, but for the world; for I saw they were on the brink of
   hell.' Whom did you desire to give the glory to God?' Ministers, that
   cry aloud to the world; else they will be proud; and then God will
   leave them, and they will lose their own souls.'"--The Plumbline

                      THE WONDERFUL CURE OF MRS. SHERMAN.

   Although there are so many cases of healing in answer to prayer, yet
   the incident of the healing of Mrs. Sherman is 50 minute, and resulted
   in such a radical change of the physical constitution, that it is
   necessary to relate it in full detail. It is too well proven to admit
   the possibility of a doubt.

   " Mrs. Ellen Sherman is the wife of Rev. Moses Sherman, and, at the
   time of this occurrence in 1873, they were residents of Piermont, N.H.
   She had been an invalid for many years. In the winter after she was
   fifteen, she fell on the ice and hurt her left knee, so that it became
   weak and easy to slip out of joint. Six years after, she fell again on
   the same knee, so twisting it and injuring the ligaments that it became
   partially stiff, and, the physician said, incurable.

   "The next summer, by very fast walking, one day, she brought on special
   weakness, which no physician was able to cure. From that moment she was
   subject to severe neuralgia, sick-headaches, at least monthly, and
   sometimes even weekly.

   In December, 1859, while stepping out of doors, she slipped, by reason
   of her stiff joint, and fell, striking near the base of the spine,
   directly across the sharp edge of the stone step. This caused such a
   sickness that she was obliged to leave the school she was attending.

   "Three years after, in January, 1862, she fell at thee top of a
   stairway, striking just as before, and sliding all the way down to the
   foot. This nearly paralyzed the spinal cord, and caused deep and
   permanent spinal-disease After this she was up and down for many years,
   attended by various physicians, yet nothing bettered, but, rat her,
   growing worse. It may be said, for short, that every organ of the lower
   body became chronically diseased, and that the headaches increased in
   violence.

   "In September, 1872, through a severe cold, she took her bed, where she
   lay, except when lifted from it, till the night of August 27, 1873. She
   was unable to walk a step, or even stand. She could sit up only a short
   time without great distress. The best medical skill that could be
   procured gave only temporary relief. The spine grew worse in spite of
   every appliance, and the nervous sensitiveness and prostration were
   increasing. During the two or three weeks immediately preceding her
   cure, she was especially helpless, two persons being required to lift
   her off and on the bed. On the Monday before, one of her severest
   neuralgia sick-headaches came on. During Wednesday she began to be
   relieved, but was still so sick that when, in the evening, she tried to
   have her clothes changed, she could only endure the change of her
   night-dress."

   It will be seen from this, her utter physical helplessness, and not the
   slightest hope of any amelioration. During the night of August 27th,
   she enjoyed a blessed time of communion with her Lord, giving herself,
   in all her helplessness, wholly to Him to do as he wills.

   With feelings beyond all expression, she felt the nearness of her
   mighty Savior, and the sense of receiving a new and most delicious
   pulsation of new life. At last, though she had been bed-ridden for
   twelve months, and incapable of any bodily assistance, she felt an
   uncontrollable impulse to throw off the clothes of the bed with her
   left arm, and sprang out of bed upon her feet, and started to walk
   across the room.

   Her husband's first thought was that she was crazed, and would fall to
   the floor, and he sprang towards her to help her. But she put up her
   hands against him, saying, with great energy: "Don't you touch me!
   Don't you touch me!' and went walking back and forth across the room,
   speaking rapidly, and declaring the work which Jesus had been working
   upon her.

   "Her husband quickly saw that she was in her right mind, and had been
   healed by the Lord, and his soul was filled with unutterable emotion.

   "One of the women of the household was called, also their son, twelve
   years old; and, together, they thanked God for the great and blessed
   wonder he had wrought.

   In the morning, after a sleep of several hours, she further examined
   herself to see if entirely healed, and found both knees perfectly well;
   and though for sixteen years she had not been able to use either, now
   she lifted the left foot and put it upon the right knee, thus proving
   the completeness of her restoration.

   "At the end of two years from her healing, inquiry having been made as
   to how thorough had been the work, Mrs. Sherman gave full and abundant
   evidence. I cannot remember a summer when I have been so healthy and
   strong, and able to work hard. I am a constant wonder to myself, and to
   others, and have been for the two years past. The cure exceeded my
   highest expectations at the time I was cured. I did not look forward to
   such a state of vigor and strength. No words can express my joy and
   gratitude for all this.'

   "The parents of Mrs. Sherman also testify of the wonderful change
   physically which occurred with the cure.

   "Before, her appetite was always disordered, but on the very morning of
   the healing it was wholly changed, and .her food, which distressed her
   formerly,' she ate with a relish and without any pain following; and
   she so continues. For years before a natural action of the bowels was
   rare. From that day since, an unnatural one is equally rare.

   "For fifteen years, with few exceptions, she had had severe neuralgic
   sick-headaches monthly or oftener. Front that time she had been natural
   and without pain, with no return of the headaches, except a
   comparatively slight one once, from overdoing, and a cold taken through
   carelessness.

   "There was also at that time an immediate and radical change in the
   action of the kidneys, which had become a source of great trouble
   before. Moreover, the knee, which had been partially stiff for so many
   years, was made entirely well. In fine, her body, which had been so
   full of pain, became at once free from pain, and full of health.

   "The week after she was healed, she went fifty miles to attend a
   camp-meeting, riding five miles in a carriage, the rest by cars. A near
   neighbor said: She will come back worse than ever.' Though the weather
   was especially bad, she came back better than when she went."

   These are but few out of many expressions respecting her extraordinary
   recovery, which fully satisfy the believing Christian that the Great
   Physician is with us now, "healing the lame," and curing the sick. It
   is faith only, unyielding, which the Lord requires, ere he gives his
   richest blessing.

   The unbelieving one simply sees in it "something strange," which he
   cannot understand; but the faith-keeping Christian knows it is the sign
   of his Precious Lord, in whom he trusts and abides forever.--Wonders of
   Prayer.

                               THE DYING NEWSBOY.

   In a dark alley in the great city of New York, a small, ragged boy
   might be seen. He appeared to be about twelve years old, and had a
   careworn expression on his countenance. The cold air seemed to have no
   pity as it pierced through his ragged clothes, and made the flesh
   beneath blue and almost frozen.

   This poor boy had once a happy home. His parents died a year before,
   and left him without money or friends. He was compelled to face the
   cold, cruel world with but a few cents in his pocket. He tried to earn
   his living by selling newspapers and other such things. This day
   everything seemed to go against him, and in despair he threw himself
   down in the dark alley, with his papers by his side. A few boys
   gathered around the poor lad, and one asked in a kind way (for a street
   Arab): "Say, Johnny, why don't you go to the lodges?" (The lodge was a
   place where almost all the boys staid at night, costing but a few
   cents.) But the poor little lad could only murmur that he could not
   stir, and called the boys about him, saying: "I am dying now, because I
   feel so queer; and I can hardly see you. Gather around me closer, boys.
   I cannot talk so loud. I can kinder see the angels holding out their
   hands for me to come to that beautiful place they call heaven.
   Good-bye, boys. I am to meet father and mother." And, with these last
   words on his lips, the poor boy died.

   Next morning the passers-by saw a sight that would soften the most
   hardened heart. There, lying on the cold stone, with his head against
   the hard wall, and his eyes staring upward, was the poor little frozen
   form of the newsboy. He was taken to the church near by, and was
   interred by kind hands. And those who performed this act will never
   forget the poor forsaken lad.--Golden Dawn.

                                THE DYING BABE.

   The following extract from an anonymous contribution in the New York
   Methodist, tells a story which many parents could adopt as their own.
   Few will read it without tears:

   All that morning I held the baby in my arms-all that long and weary
   morning. How hot was that little cheek l bow piteous the moaning! How
   feeble the cry! How restless! Oh! How sick was my little child! How
   hard to see it suffer, hour after hour, yet not be able to relieve it!
   My eyes grew dim with tears, and I could only faintly pray: "God, be
   merciful, and spare, oh I spare my little, my darling little babe."

   In vain! In vain! Again the doctor came, and then he spoke kindly; but
   we knew there was a depth of meaning in his words.

   "Your child is very, very sick."

   Then turning to my husband he added: "You had better not go down to the
   store this morning."

   Neither John nor I dared ask him any questions, for we felt there was
   something in his tone which bade us hope no longer. Something as sad to
   us as the tolling of the funeral-bell.

   "John," I said, after the doctor had left, "bring the baby to me."

   Tenderly he raised it up and placed it in my lap, and silently we
   watched the flame of life decreasing. No words were spoken. The
   measured ticking of the clock and the restless breathing of the baby
   alone were heard. An hour--it seemed an hour--passed away. I gazed upon
   the face of Willie; the eyes were fixed, the cheek was pale, and the
   breathing, how quick and short it was! Never had I seen a child so sick
   before; but I knew--I knew --the dread change was coming.

   "O John! Our darling babe is dying."

   "Mary," this was all John said, " Mary, the will of God be done."

   "Yes, yes, dear husband," I could hardly speak for weeping; "but it is
   so hard, so very, very hard, to lose a little child."

   No more was said; but we wept together. We saw the eyes gently close
   and open, and close again; the breath came quicker and quicker; then -
   then--more and more slowly--the little stream of life was ebbing fast
   away.

   Friends came into the room, but I heeded them not. Then some one gently
   touched me, and said, "Mary." I knew the voice.

   "O mother! You have come. Willie is dying."

   I can dwell no longer on that scene. Two days after, and John said, "In
   an hour the funeral services will take place. Let us take our last look
   at the child we loved while we are alone together."

   We drew near the coffin. There was the little face we had learned to
   love; but oh! the eyes were closed, the voice was hushed. There lay the
   child so still and quiet, the hands together and a wreath of pure white
   flowers beside them. I kissed the cold face:

   " O Willie! Farewell--farewell--forever"

   "No, Mary, not forever," said John; "there is another and a better
   life."

   Then came the solemn funeral services, the journey to the cemetery, the
   open grave, and all was over. John and I came back to our sad and
   silent cottage on the hill. Only a few weeks ago it was that we visited
   the grave of Willie. We walked through the entrance of Greenwood, along
   the hard, smooth road to the hillside, near the quiet lake, and there,
   under the shadow of a wide-branching tree, we stood beside the little
   mound of earth. I gazed upon the monument which had just been placed
   there, with a rose-bud on a broken stem, engraved upon it the name of
   our lost child, the date of birth and death, and then the words:

   "Safe in the Shepherd's arms."

   We gazed and wept; and at last John said: "Mary, life is short. Here
   beside this grave let us resolve so to live that we shall meet our
   little one in our true home in heaven" There beside that grave we made
   the solemn vow, and we shall try to keep it. I know that I am weak and
   nervous. As I go to and fro in the daily work of the house, I grieve
   for the babe that has gone, for I miss it very much. Be patient, oh, my
   sorrowing spirit, be patient! I think it will not be long--though I
   dare not tell my husband so--before I shall sleep quietly beside my
   little babe; not long before I shall meet that gentle spirit in the
   skies.--Golden Dawn.

                       LITTLE JENNIE'S SICKNESS AND DEATH

   BY HER MOTHER.

   Little Jennie was eight years old, March 30, 1886. The April following
   she was taken very sick, and from that time until June 4, she seemed a
   little suffering angel. Then Jesus, who bad so blessedly sustained her
   during all her sufferings, took her to Himself. She would say, when
   able to talk: "Mamma, I do not care what I suffer, God knows best."
   When she was very low, we would often see her dear lips moving, and,
   listening, hear her praying. She would finish her prayer, and after
   saying "Amen," having noticed that we were listening to her, would look
   up into our faces to see if we wanted anything.

   This patience and devotion characterized her whole life. Often, when
   she was at play with her sister, who was the older by five years, when
   some little trouble would arise, she would take her sister by the hand
   and say: "Kittie, let's tell Jesus." Then bowing her little head, she
   would pour out her whole heart in prayer to her God, with the fervency
   that is always shown by a true Christian.

   About three weeks after she was taken ill, her little body was
   paralyzed, and drawn all out of shape it seemed. Then in a few days her
   little limbs were so we could almost straighten them. What suffering
   she endured all that time, no one knows but those who were with her.

   May 25th, which was Tuesday, while suffering terribly, she said: "
   Mamma, play and sing." I took the guitar, and without stopping to think
   what to sing, began that beautiful song in the Gospel Hymns: " Nearer
   my home, today, than I have been before." I could praise God just then,
   for I was filled with His Spirit. She lay there, looking at ire with
   her little blue eyes, and trying in her weak voice to help me. At last
   she seemed soothed by the music. But we knew that Jesus, in His
   infinite love, had quieted her for the time, because we were willing to
   submit to His will. We had said all the time: "Lord, not my will, but
   thine."

   She rested quite well until about three o'clock in the afternoon; then
   suddenly she spoke, and her voice sounded suite strong as she said: "O
   mamma, see those people, how funny they look! They look like poles."
   She was lying so that she could look out of the window, and as she
   spoke her eyes seemed to rest on some object there. Then she spoke
   louder: "O mamma, come and see the little children! I never saw so many
   in my life." I sat down on the front of the bed and said: "Jennie, is
   there any there that you know?" She looked them over so earnestly, then
   said: "No, not one." I asked her how they looked. She said: " Mamma,
   every one has a gold crown on its head, and they are all dressed in
   white." I thought that Jesus was coming for her then. After telling me
   that there were none there that she knew, she sank back on the pillows
   as though exhausted. But in a few moments she raised up again and said:
   "O mamma, hear that music! Did you ever hear such grand music? Now, do
   not shut the windows tonight, will you?" I told her that I would not.

   The next morning she called Kittie into the room and said: "Kittie, I
   want to tell you what I saw last night. She then proceeded to tell her
   the same as she had told me the evening before. Then she said, "Now,
   Kittie, you will forgive me for ever being cross to you, won't you?"
   Kittie answered: "Little darling, you have never been cross to me. Will
   you forgive me, sister, for being cross to you?" "Darling sister," said
   she, "that is all right."

   Thursday night she was paralyzed in her left side, so that she had no
   use of it. Friday all day she lay unconscious, and that night the same.
   Saturday, about ten o'clock, she commenced to try and whisper. We could
   hear her say:

   "Papa, mamma." We tried to understand her, but at first could not. She
   kept whispering plainer, and finally we heard her say: "Take--
   me--upstairs. I--want--to--lie--on--my--own--bed--once-- more." But of
   course we could not move her. Suddenly she said aloud: "I am going to
   die; kiss me quick, mamma." I bent down and kissed her, and she looked
   so wretched. I said: "Jennie, you will not have to go alone; Jesus will
   take you." She answered: "I know it. I wish that He would come this
   minute. Kiss me again, mamma." I did so; then she wished us to sing.
   Again, without giving one thought, I commenced singing the same words
   that I sang the Tuesday before. She raised her right hand arm's length,
   and began to wave it and bow her head. Oh! She was so happy. Then she
   said: "Play." They brought the guitar, and she continued to wave her
   little hand, while I played and sang the whole piece. One of her aunts,
   standing near the bed, took hold of her band to stop it, but it moved
   just the same, and I said: "Ollie, let go of her hand, that is the
   Lord's doings." After I finished, she kissed her father, mother and
   sister, and bade them good-bye; then called four other, very dear
   friends, and told them good-bye after kissing them. She then called for
   a book and wanted the music-teacher, who was present, to play and sing
   a piece which she dearly loved. Before she was sick, she would have
   little prayer-meetings, and her sweet little face would shine with
   happiness.

   She would say: "O mamma l how the Lord has blessed me. While the dear
   teacher was playing and singing her favorite, she was waving her little
   hand. We sang three or four other pieces around her bed. We all thought
   that Jesus would take her then. Oh, what joy; it was heaven below.
   Jesus was there, and the room was filled with glory on account of His
   presence. Two of her aunts said that it seemed as though they were in
   heaven.

   She never spoke after that, but would try to make us understand by
   motioning when she wanted anything. Some times it would take us a long
   time, but she would be so patient. She was ready and waiting. She had
   peace that the world cannot give, and, praise God! That the world
   cannot take away. The dear little one lived until the next Tuesday
   after-noon, and went to Jesus about three o'clock. That was the time
   she saw the vision the Tuesday before. Tuesday morning before daylight
   she tried to tell me something. I said, "Sing?" She looked so happy and
   bowed her head. I began singing: "I am Jesus' little lamb." She bowed
   her head again. In the forenoon she kept looking at her aunts Ollie and
   Belle, and pointing up. Oh! It meant so much. It seemed to me that she
   was saying, that it meant: "Meet me in heaven." Finally she motioned
   for me to raise the window-curtain. I did so, and she looked out of the
   window so eagerly, as though she was expecting to see the little
   children. Here the little blue eyes closed to open no more in this
   world, but in heaven. --Mrs. Libbie Jones.

                           THERE IS NO REST IN HELL.

   About ninety years ago, there was in Glasgow a club of gentlemen of the
   first rank in that city. They met professedly for card-playing, but the
   members were distinguished by such a fearless excess of profligacy, as
   to obtain for it the name of "The Hell Club." They gloried in the name
   they had acquired for themselves, and nothing that could merit it was
   left untried. Beside their nightly or weekly meetings, they held a
   grand annual festival, at which each member endeavored to "outdo all
   his former outdoings" in drunkenness, blasphemy, and licentiousness.

   Of all who shone on these occasions, none shone half so brilliantly as
   Archibald Boyle. But, alas! The light that dazzled in him was not
   "light from heaven," but from that dread abode which gave name to the
   vile association which was to prove his ruin-ruin for time and
   eternity!

   Archibald Boyle had been at one time a youth of the richest promise,
   being possessed of dazzling talents and fascinating manners. No
   acquirement was too high for his ability; but, unfortunately, there was
   none too low for his ambition. Educated by a fond and foolishly
   indulgent mother, he early met in society with members of "The Hell
   Club." His elegance, wit, gaiety, and versatility of talent, united to
   the gifts of fortune, made him a most desirable victim for them; and a
   victim and a slave, glorying in his bondage, he quickly became. Long
   ere he was five-and-twenty; he was one of the most accomplished
   black-guards it could number on its lists. To him, what were heaven,
   hell or eternity! Words, mere words, that served no purpose, but to
   point his blasphemous wit, or nerve his execrations! To him, what glory
   was there, equal to that of hearing himself pronounced "the very life
   of the club?" Alas! There was none; for as soon as man forgets God, who
   alone can keep him, his understanding becomes darkened, and he glories
   in that which is his shame.

   Yet, while all within that heart was festering in corruption, he
   retained all his remarkable beauty of face and person, all his external
   elegance of manner; and continued an acknowledged favorite in the
   fairest female society of the day.

   One night, on retiring to sleep, after returning from one of the annual
   meetings of the club, Boyle dreamed that he was still riding, as usual,
   upon his famous black horse, toward his own house--then a country seat,
   embowered by, ancient trees, and situated upon a hill now built over by
   the most fashionable part of Glasgow and that he was suddenly accosted
   by some one, whose personal appearance he could not, in the gloom of
   night, distinctly discern, but who, seizing the reins, said, in a voice
   apparently accustomed to command: "You must go with me." "And who are
   you?" exclaimed Boyle, with a volley of blasphemous execrations, while
   he struggled to disengage his reins from the intruders grasp. "That you
   will see bye-and-bye," replied the same voice, in a cold, sneering
   tone, that thrilled through his very heart. Boyle plunged his spurs
   into the panting sides of his steed. The noble animal reared; and then
   suddenly darted forward with a speed that nearly deprived his rider of
   breath; but in vain, in vain! Fleeter than the wind he flew, the
   mysterious, half-seen guide, still before him! Agonized by, he knew not
   what, of indescribable horror and awe, Boyle again furiously spurred
   the gallant horse. It fiercely reared and plunged; he lost his seat,
   and expected at the moment to feel himself dashed to the earth. But not
   so; for he continued to fall - fall - fall--it appeared to himself with
   an ever-increasing velocity. At length, this terrific rapidity of
   motion abated, and, to his amazement and horror, he perceived that this
   mysterious attendant was close by his side.

   "Where." he exclaimed, in the frantic energy of despair, "Where are you
   taking me? Where am I? Where am I going?" "To hell," replied the same
   iron voice; and from the depths below, the sound so familiar to his
   lips was suddenly re-echoed.

   "To hell," onward, onward they hurried in darkness; rendered more
   horrible still by the conscious presence of his spectral conductor. At
   length, a glimmering light appeared in the distance, and soon increased
   to a blaze. But as they approached it, in addition to the hideously
   discordant groans and yells of agony and despair, his ears were
   assailed with what seemed to be the echoes of frantic revelry. They
   soon reached an arched entrance, of such stupendous magnificence, that
   all the grandeur of this world seemed in comparison but as the frail
   and dingy labors of the mole. Within it, what a scene! Too awful to be
   described. Multitudes, gnashing their teeth in the hopelessness of mad
   despair, cursed the day that gave them birth; while memory, recalling
   opportunities lost and mercies despised, presented to their fevered
   mental vision the scenes of their past lives. There fancy stilt
   pictured to them the young and lovely, moving up and down in the giddy
   mazes of the midnight dance; the bounding steed, bearing his senseless
   rider through the excitements of the goaded race; the intemperate,
   still drawling over the-midnight bowl, the wanton song, or maudlin
   blasphemy. There the slave of Mammon bemoaned his folly in bartering
   his soul for useless gold! While the gambler bewailed, alas! Too late,
   the madness of his choice.

   Boyle at length perceived that he was surrounded by those whom he had
   known on earth, but were some time dead; each one of them betraying his
   agony at the bitter recollections of the vain pursuits that had
   engrossed his time here--time lent to prepare for a far different
   scene!

   Suddenly, observing that his unearthly conductor had disappeared, he
   felt so relieved by his absence, that he ventured to address his former
   friend, Mrs. D----, whom he saw sitting with eyes fixed in intense
   earnestness, as she was wont on earth, apparently absorbed at her
   favorite game of loo. "Ha, Mrs. D----! Delighted to see you; d'ye know
   a fellow told me tonight he was bringing me to hell! Ha, ha! If this be
   hell," said he, scoffingly, "what a devilish pleasant place it must be!
   Ha, ha! Come, now, my good Mrs. D----, for auld langsyne, do just stop
   for a moment, rest, and--show me through the pleasures of hell," he was
   going, with reckless profanity, to add; but, with a shriek that seemed
   to cleave through his very soul, she exclaimed: "Rest! There is no rest
   in hell!" and from interminable vaults, voices, as loud as thunder,
   repeated the awful, the heart-withering sound: "THERE IS NO REST IN
   HELL"

   She hastily unclasped the vest of her gorgeous robe, and displayed to
   his scared and shuddering eye, a coil of fiery living snakes --"the
   worm that never dies"--the worm accusing conscience, remorse,
   despair--wreathing, darting, stinging in her bosom; others followed her
   example, and in every bosom there was a self-inflicted punishment. In
   some, he saw bare and throbbing hearts, on which distilled slow drops,
   as it were, of fiery molten metal, under which consuming, yet ever
   unconsumed, they writhed and palpitated in all the impotence of
   helpless, hopeless agony. And many a scalding drop was a tear of
   hopeless anguish, wrung by selfish, heartless villainy, from the eye of
   injured innocence on earth.

   In every bosom he saw that which we have no language to describe, no
   idea horrid enough even to conceive; for in all he saw the full-grown
   fruit of the fiend-sown seed of evil passions, voluntarily nourished in
   the human soul, during its mortal pilgrimage here: and in all he saw
   them lashed and maddened by the serpent-armed hand of Despair;

   For hell were not hell;

   If Hope had ever entered there!

   And they laughed, for they had laughed on earth at all there is of good
   and holy. And they sung-profane and blasphemous songs sang they! For
   they had often done so on earth, at the very hour God claims as his
   own, the still and midnight hour! And he who, in his vision, walked
   among them in a mortal frame of flesh and blood, felt how inexpressibly
   more horrible such sounds could be than ever was the wildest shriek of
   agony on earth.

   "These are the pleasures of hell," again assailed his ear, in the same
   terrific and interminable roll of unearthly sound.

   He rushed away; but as he fled, he saw those whom he knew must have
   been dead for thousands of years, still absorbed in their recollections
   of their sinful pleasures on earth, and toiling on through their
   eternity of woe. The vivid reminiscences of their godlessness on earth
   inflicted on them the bitterest pang in their doom in hell.

   He saw Maxwell, the former companion of his own boyish profligacy,
   borne along in incessant movement, mocked by the creations of his
   frenzied mind, as if intent op still pursuing the headlong chase.
   "Stop, Harry; Stop! Speak to me! Oh, rest one moment! " Scarce had the
   words been breathed from his faltering lips, when again his
   terror-stricken ear was stunned with the same wild yell of agony,
   re-echoed by ten thousand voices: "THERE IS NO REST IN HELL!"

   Boyle tried to shut his eyes. He found he could not. He threw himself
   down, but the pavement of hell, as with a living and instinctive
   movement, rejected him from its surface; and, forced upon his feet, he
   found himself compelled to gaze with still increasing intensity of
   horror, at the ever-changing, yet ever-steady torrent of eternal
   torment. And this was hell! The scoffer's jest-the by-word of the
   profligate!

   All at once he perceived that his unearthly conductor was once more by
   his side. "Take me," shrieked Boyle, "take me from this place! By the
   living God, whose name I have so often outraged, I adjure thee; take me
   from this place."

   "Can'st thou still name His name?" said the fiend, with a hideous
   sneer; "go, then; but--in a year and a day WE meet, to part no more!"

   Boyle awoke; and he felt as if the last words of the fiend were traced
   in letters of living fire upon his heart and brain. Unable, from actual
   bodily ailment, to leave his bed for several days, the horrid vision
   had full time to take effect upon his mind; and many were the pangs of
   tardy remorse and ill-defined terror that beset his vice-stained soul,
   as he lay in darkness and seclusion, to him so very unusual.

   He resolved, utterly and forever, to forsake "The Club." Above all, he
   determined that nothing on earth should tempt him to join the next
   annual festival.

   The companions of his licentiousness soon flocked around him; and
   finding that his deep dejection of mind did not disappear with his
   bodily ailment, and that it arose from some cause which disinclined him
   from seeking or enjoying their accustomed orgies, they became alarmed
   with the idea of losing "the life of the club," and bound themselves by
   an oath never to desist till they had discovered what was the matter
   with him, and had cured him of playing the Methodist. Their alarm as to
   losing "the life of the club" had been wrought up to the highest pitch,
   by one of their number declaring that, on unexpectedly entering Boyle's
   room, he detected him in the act of hastily hiding a book, which he
   actually believed was the Bible.

   Alas! Alas! Had poor Boyle possessed sufficient true moral courage, and
   dignity of character, not to have hidden the Bible, how different might
   have been his future! But like many a hopeful youth, he was ashamed to
   avow his convictions, and to take his stand for God, and his ruin was
   the result.

   After a time, one of his compeers, more deeply cunning than the rest,
   bethought himself of assuming an air of the deepest disgust with the
   world, the club, and the mode of life they had been pursuing. He
   affected to seek Boyle's company in a mood of congenial melancholy, and
   to sympathize in all his feelings. Thus he succeeded in betraying him
   into a much misplaced confidence as to his dream, and the effect it had
   produced upon his mind. The result may readily be guessed. His
   confidence was betrayed, his feelings of repentance ridiculed; and it
   will easily be believed, that he who "hid the Bible" had not nerve to
   stand the ribald jests of his profligate companions.

   We cannot trace the progress, and would not, if we could. Suffice it to
   say, that, virtuous resolutions once broken-prayers once offered,
   voluntarily called back by sin from the throne of heaven--all was lost!
   Yet not lost without such a fell struggle between the convictions of
   conscience and the spirit of evil, as wrung the color from his young
   cheek, and made him, ere the year was done, a haggard and gray-haired
   man.

   From the annual meeting he shrunk with an instinctive horror, and made
   up his mind utterly to avoid it. Well aware of this resolve, his
   tempters determined he should have no choice. How potent, how active,
   is the spirit of evil! How feeble is unassisted, Christless,
   unprayerful man! Boyle found himself, he could not tell how, seated at
   that table on that very day, where he had sworn to himself a thousand
   and a thousand times nothing on earth should make him sit. His ears
   tingled, and his eyes swam, as he listened to the opening sentence of
   the president's address: " Gentlemen, this is leap year; therefore, it
   is a year and a day since our last annual meeting."

   Every nerve in Boyle's body twanged in agony at the ominous, the
   well-remembered words. His first impulse was to rise and fly; but
   then--the sneers! The sneers!

   How many in this world, as well as poor Boyle, have sold their souls to
   the dread of a sneer, and dared the wrath of an almighty and eternal
   God, rather than encounter the sarcastic curl of a fellow-creature's
   lip?

   He was more than ever plied with wine, applause, and every other
   species of excitement, but in vain. His mirth, his wit, were like lurid
   flashes from the bosom of a brooding thunder-cloud, that pass and leave
   it darker than before; and his laugh sounded fiendish, even to the evil
   ears that heard it.

   The night was gloomy, with frequent and fitful gusts of chill and
   howling wind, as Boyle, with fevered nerves and reeling brain, mounted
   his horse to return home. The following morning the well-known black
   steed was found, with saddle and bridle on, quietly grazing on the
   road-side, about half-way to Boyle's country-house, and a few yards
   from it lay the stiffened corpse of its master.--An authentic
   narrative, taken from a tract.

                             "THE BRIDAL WINE-CUP."

   "Pledge with wine! Pledge with wine!" cried the young and thoughtless
   Harry. "Pledge with wine!" ran through the bridal party.

   The beautiful bride grew pale. She pressed her hands together, and the
   leaves of her bridal wreath trembled on her brow; her breath came
   quicker, and her heart beat more wildly.

   "Yes, Marian, lay aside your scruples for this once," said the Judge,
   in a low tone; "the company expects it. Do not so seriously infringe
   upon the rules of etiquette. In your own home, do as you please, but in
   mine, for this once, please me."

   Every eye was turned toward the bridal pair. Marian's principles were
   well known. Harry had been a convivialist, but of late his friends had
   noticed the change in his manner, and a difference in his habits.

   Pouring a brimming cup, they held it with tempting smiles toward her.
   She was very pale, though now more composed. Smiling, she accepted the
   crystal tempter and raised it to her lips. But scarcely had she done
   so, when very hand was arrested by her piercing exclamation of, "Oh,
   how terrible!"

   "What is it?" cried one and all, thronging together; for she had slowly
   carried the glass at arm's length, and was regarding it as if it were
   some hideous object.

   "Wait," she said, "wait, and I will tell you. I see," she added,
   pointing her jeweled fingers at the sparkling liquid, "a sight that
   beggars all description; and yet, listen, I will paint it for you if I
   can. It is a lovely spot; tall mountains, crowned with verdure, rise in
   awful sublimity around; a river runs through, and bright flowers grow
   to the water's edge. There is a thick, warm mist that the sun seeks
   vainly to pierce.

   "Trees, lofty and beautiful, wave to the motion of the breeze, and in
   their midst lies a manly form--but his cheeks, how deathly! His eyes,
   how wildly they glare around him, with the fitful fires of fever! One
   friend stands beside him; I should say kneels, for see, he is pillowing
   that poor head upon his breast.

   "Genius in ruins, on that high and holy looking brow. Why should death
   mark it, and he so young? Look, how he throws back the damp curls. See
   him clasp his hands. How he clutches at the form of his companion,
   imploring to be saved. Oh, hear him call piteously his father's name.
   See him twine his fingers together, as he shrieks for his sister, the
   twin of his soul, weeping for him in a distant native land. See! His
   arms are lifted to heaven. How wildly he prays for mercy. But fever
   rushes through his veins. The friend beside him is weeping.
   Awe-stricken, the dark men move silently away, and leave the living and
   the dying together."

   There was a hush in that princely parlor, broken only by what seemed a
   sob from some manly bosom. The bride stood yet upright, with quivering
   lips, and tears streaming down her pallid cheeks. Her arm had lost its
   tension, and the glass with its contents came slowly toward the range
   of her vision. She spoke again. Every lip was mute; her voice was low,
   faint, yet distinct. Still she fixed her sorrowful glance upon the
   wine-cup.

   "It is evening now; the great white moon is coming up, and her beams
   fall gently on his forehead. He moves not; his eyes are rolling hi
   their sockets, and are the piercing glances. In vain his friend
   whispers the names of father and sister. No soft hand and no gentle
   touch blesses or soothes him. His head shrinks back. One convulsive
   shudder, and he is dead."

   A groan ran through the assembly. So vivid was her description, so
   unearthly her look, so inspiring her manner, that what she described
   seemed actually to have taken place then and there. They noticed also
   that the bridegroom had hid his face, and was weeping.

   "Dead! " she repeated again, her lips quivering faster, as if her heart
   were broken; "and then they scooped him a grave, and then, without a
   shroud, they lay him down in the damp reeky earth; the only son of a
   proud father, the idolized brother of a fond sister; and he sleeps
   today in that distant country, with no stone to mark the spot.

   "There he lies, my father's son, my own twin brother--a victim of this
   deadly poison! "Father!" she exclaimed, turning suddenly, while the
   tears rolled down her cheeks, "father, shall I drink the poison now?"

   The form of the Judge was convulsed with agony. He raised not his head,
   but in a smothered voice he faltered: "No, my child, no!"

   She lifted the glittering goblet, and letting it fall suddenly to the
   floor, it was dashed to pieces. Many a tearful eye watched her
   movements, and instantaneously every glass was transferred to the
   marble table. Then, as she looked at the fragments of crystal, she
   turned to the company, saying: "Let no friend of mine who loves me,
   hereafter tempt me to peril my soul with wine or any other poisonous
   venom. Not firmer are the everlasting hills (God helping me) than my
   resolve never to touch or taste the terrible poison. And he to whom I
   have given my hand, who watched over my brother's dying form in that
   land of gold, will sustain me in my resolve. Will you not, my husband?"

   His glistening eye, his sad, sweet smile was the answer.

   The Judge had left the room; but when he returned, and, with a more
   subdued manner, took part in the entertainment of the bridal guests,
   none could fail to see that he, too, had determined to banish the
   enemy, and at once, from that princely home.

   Reader, this is no fiction. I was there, and heard the words which I
   have penned, as nearly as I can recollect them. This bride, her
   husband, and her brother, who died in the gold regions of California,
   were schoolmates of mine. Those who were present at the wedding of my
   associates never forgot the impression so solemnly made, and all from
   that hour forsook the social glass.--Selected.

                               A MOTHER'S FAITH -
                           THE LIFE OF BEATE PAULUS.

   In a sketch of the life of Beate Paulus, the wife of a German minister
   who lived on the borders of the Black Forest, are several incidents
   which illustrate the power of living faith, and the providence of a
   prayer-hearing God.

   Though destitute of wealth, she much desired to educate her children;
   and five of her six boys were placed in school, while she struggled,
   and prayed, and toiled, not only in the house, but out of doors, to
   provide for their necessities.

   "On one occasion," writes one of her children, "shortly before harvest,
   the fields stood thick with corn, and our mother had already calculated
   that their produce would suffice to meet all claims for the year. She
   was standing at the window casting the matter over in her mind, with
   great satisfaction, when her attention was suddenly caught by some
   heavy, black clouds with white borders, drifting at a great rate across
   the summer sky. It is a hail-storm! she exclaimed, in dismay; and
   quickly throwing up the window, she leaned out. Her eyes rested upon a
   frightful mass of wild storm-clouds, covering the western horizon, and
   approaching with rapid fury.

   "O God!" she cried, "there comes an awful tempest, and what is to
   become of my corn?" The black masses rolled nearer and nearer, while
   the ominous rushing movement that precedes a storm, began to rock the
   sultry air, and the dreaded hailstones fell with violence. Half beside
   herself with anxiety about those fields, lying at the eastern end of
   the valley, she now lifted her hands heavenward, and wringing them in
   terror, cried: "Dear Father in heaven, what art thou doing? Thou
   knowest I cannot manage to pay for my boys at school, without the
   produce of those fields! Oh! Turn Thy hand, and do not let the hail
   blast my hopes!"

   Scarcely, however, had these words crossed her lips, when she started,
   for it seemed as if a voice had whispered in her ear:

   "Is my arm shortened that it cannot help thee in other ways?" Abashed,
   she shrank into a quiet corner, and there entreated God to forgive her
   want of faith. In the meantime the storm passed. And now various
   neighbors hurried in, proclaiming that the whole valley lay thickly
   covered with hailstones, down to the very edge of the parsonage fields,
   but the latter had been quite spared. The storm had reached their
   border, and then suddenly taking another direction into the next
   valley. Moreover, that the whole village was in amazement, declaring
   that God had wrought a miracle for the sake of our mother whom he
   loved. She listened, silently adoring the goodness of the Lord, and
   vowing that henceforth her confidence should be only in Him."

   At another time she found herself unable to pay the expenses of the
   children's schooling; and the repeated demands for money were rendered
   more grievous by the reproaches of her husband, who charged her with
   attempting impossibilities, and told her that her self-will would
   involve them in disgrace. She, however, professed her unwavering
   confidence that the Lord would soon interpose for their relief, while
   his answer was: "We shall see; time will show."

   In the midst of these trying circumstances, as her husband was one day
   sitting in his study, absorbed in meditation, the postman brought three
   letters from different towns where the boys were at school, each
   declaring that unless the dues were promptly settled, the lads would be
   dismissed. The father read the letters with growing excitement, and
   spreading them out upon the table before his wife as she entered the
   room, exclaimed: "There, look at them, and pay our with your faith! I
   have no money, nor can I tell where to look for any."

   "Seizing the papers, she rapidly glanced through them, with a very
   grave face, but then answered firmly: "It is all right; the business
   shall be settled. For He who says: "The gold and silver are mine," will
   find it an easy thing to provide these sums." Saying which she hastily
   left the room.

   "Our father readily supposed she intended making her way to a certain
   rich friend who had helped us before. He was mistaken, for this time
   her steps turned in a different direction. We had in the parsonage an
   upper loft, shut off by a trap-door from the lower one, and over this
   door it was that she now knelt down, and began to deal with Him in
   whose strength she had undertaken the work of her children's education.
   She spread before Him those letters from the study-table, and told him
   of her husband's half-scoffing taunt. She also reminded Him how her
   life had been redeemed from the very gates of death, for the children's
   sake, and then declared that she could not believe that He meant to
   forsake her at this juncture; she was willing to be the second whom He
   might forsake, but she was determined not to be the first.

   "In the meanwhile, her husband waited down stairs, and night came on;
   but she did not appear. Supper was ready, and yet she stayed in the
   loft. Then the eldest girl, her namesake Beate, ran up to call her; but
   the answer was: "Take your supper without me; it is not time for me to
   eat." Late in the evening, the little messenger was again dispatched,
   but returned with the reply: "Go to bed; the time has not come for me
   to rest." A third time, at breakfast next morning, the girl called her
   mother. "Leave me alone," she said, "I do not need breakfast; when I am
   ready I shall come." Thus the hours sped on; and downstairs her husband
   and children began to feel frightened, not daring, however, to disturb
   her any more. At last the door opened, and she entered, her face
   beaming with a wonderful light. The little daughter thought that
   something extraordinary must have happened; and running to her mother
   with open arms, asked eagerly: "What is it? Did an angel from heaven
   bring the money?" "No, my child" was the smiling answer; "but now I am
   sure that it will come." She had hardly spoken, when a maid in peasant
   costume entered, saying: "The master of the Linden Inn sends to ask
   whether the Frau Pastorin can spare time to see him?" "Ah, I know what
   he wants," answered our mother. "My best regards, and I will come at
   once." Whereupon she started, and mine host, looking out of his window,
   saw her from afar, and came forward to welcome her with the words: "O
   madame, how glad I am you have come!" Then leading her into his back
   parlor, he said: "I cannot tell how it is, but the whole of this last
   night I could not sleep for thinking of you. For some time I have had
   several hundred gulden lying in that chest, and all night long I was
   haunted by the thought that you needed this money, and that I ought to
   give it to you. If that be the case, there it is--take it; and do not
   trouble about repaying me. Should you be able to make it up again, well
   and good; if not, never mind." On this my mother said: Yes, I do most
   certainly need it, my kind friend; for all last night I too was awake,
   crying to God for help. Yesterday there came three letters, telling us
   that all our boys would be dismissed unless the money for their board
   is cleared at once.

   "Is it really so?" exclaimed the inn-keeper, who was a noble-hearted
   and Christian man. "How strange and wonderful! Now I am doubly glad I
   asked you to come! Then opening the chest, he produced three weighty
   packets, and handed them to her with a prayer that God's blessing might
   rest upon the gift. She accepted it with the simple Christian words:
   "May God make good to you this service of Christian sympathy; for you
   have acted as the steward of One who has promised not even to leave the
   giving of a cup of water unrewarded."

   "Husband and children were eagerly awaiting her home; and those three
   dismal letters still lay open on the table, when the mother, who had
   quitted that study in such deep emotion the day before, stepped up to
   her husband, radiant with joy. On each letter she laid a roll of money,
   and then cried: Look, there it is! And now believe that faith in God is
   no empty madness!"--Wonders of Prayer.

                       DYING WORDS OF MISS MARY WILLARD.

   This devoted young lady was the sister of the well-known Frances E.
   Willard. She left this vale of tears June 8th, 1862. The record of her
   life is fully given in "Nineteen Beautiful Years." We copy the
   following from "Glimpses of Fifty Years," her sister's autobiography.--
   Editor.

   On the last day of her life, she was lying with her head in father's
   lap, and she asked to have the Bible read. He said: "Where shall I
   read?" She told him: "Oh, where it makes Christ seem beautiful!" He
   read a psalm. She said: "Please read where it says, Christ was sorry
   for sick folks. "Father read about the healing of the daughter of
   Jairus." She liked it, but when he had finished, her plaintive voice
   cried out: "Please read where it says he is sorry now."

   After awhile she added: "We believe that God loves us better than our
   mothers; yet, mother would have liked me to get well, and God doesn't
   seem to care. He doesn't seem to see fit to make me well - yet He knows
   what is right."

   In the night she was worse. She wanted everything still; kept moving
   her hands in a soothing, caressing way, and muttering: "So quiet, so
   quiet, no noise, so quiet!" At 4 o'clock, on the morning of the 8th of
   June (Sabbath morning), we became greatly alarmed, and for the first
   time father and I decided that she could not get well. I went at his
   suggestion for Mrs. Bannister and Mary. Father said to our Mary, for
   the first time coming directly to the subject of her danger: "My child,
   if God should think it best to take you to Himself, should you be
   afraid to go?" She looked quickly at him, with rather a pitiful face;
   she seemed to consider a moment, and then said, in her low, mournful
   tone: "I thought I should like to get well, for I am young; but if God
   wants me to go, I shouldn't be much afraid, but should say: "Take me,
   God."

   We asked if there was anything we could do for her. "Pray," she said,
   "pray thankful prayers." Mother asked her if she saw Christ, if he was
   near her. "Yes, I see him," she said; "but He is not very near; I wish
   he would come nearer."

   I asked her if we should pray; she said: "Yes;" and I prayed aloud,
   that Christ would come close to her, that she might see and feel him
   plainly; that since she had tried to love and obey Him, He would come
   right to her now in her great need. She clasped her hands together, and
   said, so joyfully: "He's come, He's come! He holds me by the hand. He
   died for me; He died for all this family-father, mother, Oliver,
   Frank," (and Mary Bannister says she added,) "my dear sister." "I'll
   have Him all to myself," she said; and then seemed to remember and
   added: "I'll have Him, and everybody may have him, too-there is enough
   for everybody. He is talking to me. He says: She tried to be good, but
   she wandered; but I will save her;'" and added: "I see Him on the
   cross; He died for the thief; He didn't die for good people, but for
   bad people; He died for me." I said: "I want to ask you to forgive me
   for all my unkind actions to you, for everything bad I ever did to
   you." She answered very earnestly: "Oh! I do, but you never did
   anything bad; you were always good." Mother asked her if she did not
   want to leave a message for Oliver. "Don't you think he will be with us
   in heaven?" she said; "of course, he is working for God. Tell him to be
   good, and to make people good;" and when I asked for a message for her
   Sunday-school class, she said: "Tell them to be good;" and then added,
   with great earnestness: "Tell everybody to be good."

   Almost at the last she said, with a bright smile on her face: "Oh! I'm
   getting more faith!" Mother questioned: "My darling, you will meet us,
   won't you, at the Beautiful Gate?" "Oh, yes! And you will all come;
   and, father, Christ wants you right off!"

   She moved her hand convulsively, and said: "I've got Christ --He's
   right here! "Then she said to me: "Oh, I'm in great misery; " and then:
   "Dear God, take me quick!" She held out her hands and said: Take me
   quick, God; take me on this side," turning toward the right. She lay
   still, bolstered up by pillows; I asked her if she knew me, and she
   repeated my name. Father asked her often if Christ was still near her;
   she would nod, but did not speak.

   She seemed troubled; after a few moments, father bent over her, and
   slowly and with difficulty, she told him of her dread of being buried
   alive; and he promised her over and over again that she should not be.
   Then she gave some little directions about preparing her bed, as she
   said: "For those who lay me out;" showing her perfect consciousness.
   She never spoke again, but opened her eyes and looked at us with such
   intentness; the pupils so wide, the iris so blue. I never saw such soul
   in human eyes before. She groaned a little, then, and for some time,
   she did not move. Her eyes closed slowly, her face grew white. Father
   said: "Lord Jesus, receive her spirit; Lord, we give her back to Thee.
   She was a precious treasure; we give her back to Thee." Mrs. Bannister
   closed Mary's eyes. Father and mother went into the sitting-room, and
   cried aloud. I leaned on the railing at the foot of the bed, and looked
   at my sister--my sister Mary, and knew that she was dead--knew that she
   was alive! Everything was far off; I was benumbed, and am but waking to
   the tingling agony.

               A CYCLONE OF POWER AND GLORY IN ANSWER TO PRAYER.

   At a convention of Christian workers, held in April, 1882, we witnessed
   a spiritual cyclone. Forty or fifty ministers and laymen of different
   denominations had come together, for prayer and counsel, concerning the
   most important doctrines of the Christian church. Great differences of
   opinion were expressed, and the controversy became so sharp that some
   seemed offended, and the spiritual influence of the meeting sadly
   hindered. In fact, the powers of darkness threatened to come in like a
   flood, and overthrow the good that had already been done.

   But some there were in that little company who knew the mighty power of
   prayer, and in that hour of need went on their faces before God with
   strong crying and tears. The Spirit interceded with groanings that
   could not be uttered, and soon an indescribable sacredness came over
   the meeting.

   A sister, who is in general opposed to what are termed outward
   manifestations, was so pressed in spirit that she began to groan aloud,
   and then to exclaim: "The Lord shall have His way! the Lord shall have
   His way! The Lord shall have His way!" Others began to weep. Then a
   minister, who had come to the meeting strongly opposed to the views set
   forth by the leading workers, jumped to his feet, and shouted the
   praise of God, and began to tell of the mighty baptism of the Holy
   Ghost he had received. And sooner than we can write it, a veritable
   cyclone of God's power and glory swept over the place, carrying
   everything before it. Stubborn hearts yielded, and, in a very few
   moments of time, many were saved and filled with the Spirit.

   Of this convention and closing service, a minister, who is now a
   presiding elder in the United Brethren Church, says "The interest
   increased steadily from first to last, closing in a tornado of Divine
   power. None who were present last evening can ever forget how, at the
   first shout of victory, nearly all of the congregation rushed out of
   the house, only to return and gaze in speechless wonder, as souls being
   brought under conviction for sin, cried for pardon, or shouted their
   praises at being brought from nature's darkness to God's marvelous
   light. Others, groaning under the conviction for holiness, wrestled
   until the carnal mind was cast out; when some leaped for joy, and
   others were laid prostrate under the weight of glory. Eternity alone
   can tell the blessed results of that closing service."

   God does not thus reveal himself to the children of men for naught, and
   already thousands have been influenced for good as a result of that
   Pentecostal outpouring of His Spirit. --Editor.

                               ONLY A TALLOW DIP

   The following was related in an evangelistic meeting: A woman who had
   been bedridden for years, lived near the railroad track, a long way
   from any other house. Near by was a deep gully over which the railroad
   passed on a new, substantial iron bridge, as was supposed. There was a
   terrible wind one night. This poor woman, as was often the case, was
   alone. All at once she heard a fearful crash; she felt sure it was the
   bridge. She looked at the clock. In ten minutes the through passenger
   train would be along. What should she do? Her son was away from home.
   Praying earnestly to God for help, she took the only light in the
   house, a tallow candle, and began to crawl (for she could not walk)
   toward the railroad track. How she ever got there she never knew. The
   track reached, she could hear the roar of the coming train. She prayed
   this prayer: "O God, help me to light this candle, and keep it burning
   until the engineer sees it; and make him see it." God heard her prayer.
   The candle was lighted, there was a lull; just then she waved the
   candle-would the engineer see it? She heard a grating sound, she knew
   the brakes were set. She lost consciousness then, but the train came to
   a stand -still a few feet from the yawning chasm. Hundreds of lives
   were saved. This weak, sick woman did what she could; God used what she
   had. He will use what you have for the saving of men, if you will do
   your part.--Union Gospel News.

   O Christian! If that poor woman felt so deeply the need, and made so
   great an effort, to save the passengers on that train from physical
   death, how ought you to feel, and what effort ought you to make, in
   order to rescue the multitudes about you that are hurrying on to
   eternal ruin, unconscious of their danger and ready to perish, unless
   some one, who has the light and knowledge, goes to their rescue?

                       A MANIFESTATION OF PARENTAL LOVE.

   There are some who reject Christianity because it seems to them
   incredible that God would have taken so much trouble, as the New
   Testament represents him to have done, for the salvation of creatures
   so infinitely beneath Him as we are. They forget that the New Testament
   teaches also that God is our Father. That being true, I declare to you
   that it is not surprising that God made such sacrifice to save us. Even
   a man will not permit a child to perish--any child, it need not be his
   own without putting forth mighty effort to save it.

   One fact is worth a dozen arguments; and I will therefore ask you to
   listen to a humble man, as he relates an incident in his otherwise
   uneventful life. For a little while imagine yourself to be seated
   around the table of an American boardinghouse, where the inmates are
   spending an hour or two in the evening relating the more remarkable
   events that have occurred to them; imagine that you are listening to
   one of the guests there, instead of to me.

   My name is Anthony Hunt. I am a drover, and I live many miles away upon
   the western prairie. There wasn't a house in sight when we moved there,
   my wife and I and now we haven't many neighbors, though those we have
   are good men.

   One day about ten years ago, I went away from home to sell some fifty
   head of cattle--fine creatures as ever I saw. I was to buy some
   groceries and dry goods before I came back and, above all, a doll for
   our youngest child, Dolly (she never had a shop doll of her own, only
   the rag-babies her mother made her). Dolly could talk of nothing else,
   and went down to the very gate to call after me to "buy a big one."

   Nobody but a parent can understand how my mind was on that toy, and
   how, when the cattle were sold, the first thing I started off to buy
   was Dolly's doll. I found a large one, with eyes that would open and
   shut when you pulled a wire, and had it wrapped up in paper, and tucked
   it under my arm while I had the parcels of calico, and delaine, and
   tea, and sugar put up. It might have been more prudent to have stayed
   until the morning, but I felt anxious to get back, and eager to hear
   Dolly's prattle about the doll she was so eagerly expecting.

   I mounted a steady-going old horse of mine and, pretty well loaded,
   started for home. Night set in before I was a mile from town, and
   settled down dark as pitch while I was in the midst of the wildest bit
   of road I know of. I could have felt my way through, I remembered it so
   well, and it was almost like doing that when the storm that had been
   brewing broke, and the rain fell in torrents. I was five, or may be six
   miles from home, too. I rode on as fast as I could; but suddenly I
   heard a little cry, like a child's voice. I stopped short and listened.
   I heard it again; I called, and it answered me. I couldn't see a thing;
   all was dark as pitch. I got down and felt about in the grass; called
   again, and again was answered. Then I began to wonder. I'm not timid;
   but I was known to be a drover, and to have money about me. I thought
   it might be a trap to catch me, and there to rob and murder me. I am
   not superstitious--not very--but how could a real child be out on the
   prairie in such a night at such an hour? It might be more than human.
   The bit of coward that hides itself in most men showed itself to me
   then, and I was half inclined to run away. But once more I heard that
   piteous cry, and, said I: "If any man's child is hereabouts, Anthony
   Hunt is not the man to let it lie here and die."

   I searched again. At last I bethought me of a hollow under the hill,
   and groped that way. Sure enough, I found a little dripping thing, that
   moaned and sobbed as I took it in my arms. I called my horse, and he
   came to me, and I mounted, and tucked the little soaked thing under my
   coat as best I could, promising to take it home to mamma.

   It seemed tired to death, and soon cried itself to sleep against my
   bosom. It had slept there over an hour when I saw my own windows. There
   were lights in them, and I sup-posed my wife had lit them for my sake;
   but when I got into the dooryard, I saw something was the matter, and
   stood still with dead fear of heart five minutes before I could lift
   the latch. At last I did it, and saw the room full of neighbors, and my
   wife amid them weeping. When she saw me she hid her face.

   "Oh, don't tell him," she said; "it will kill him."

   "What is it, neighbors?" I cried.

   And one said: "Nothing now, I hope. What's that in your arms?"

   "A poor lost child," said I. "I found it on the road. "Take it, will
   you? I've turned faint." And I lifted the sleeping thing, and saw the
   face of my own child, my little Dolly. It was my darling, and no other,
   that I had picked up on the drenched road. My little child had wandered
   out to meet papa and the doll, while her mother was at work, and for
   her they were lamenting as for one dead.

   I thanked God on my knees before them all.

   It is not much of a story, neighbors; but I think of it often in the
   nights, and wonder how I could bear to live now, if I had not stopped
   when I heard the cry for help upon the road the little baby-cry, hardly
   louder than a squirrel's chirp.

   Is God less pitiful than man? Like as a father pitieth his children, so
   the Lord pitieth them that fear him." Did you notice the last sentence
   in that man's story? "It is not much of a story, neighbors; but I think
   of it often in the nights, and wonder how I could bear to live now if I
   had not stopped when I heard that cry for help upon the road--that
   little baby cry, hardly louder than a squirrel's chirp."

   To me that sentence explains the whole story of redemption. That man's
   love for his child was such that life would have been intolerable to
   him had he failed to save her.

   Sinner! God the Father listened to the cry for help, the piteous wail
   of misery that ascended to Him from His lost children; and he sent His
   Son to seek and to save that which was lost.

   For, be it remembered, He knew not merely that certain children were
   perishing, but that they were His children.--Homiletic Cyclopedia.

                          "THERE'S THE LORD'S ANSWER."

   Many years ago, when in my country charge, I returned one afternoon
   from a funeral, fatigued with the day's work. After a long ride, I had
   accompanied the mourners to the churchyard. As I neared my stable door,
   I felt a strange prompting to visit a poor widow, who, with her invalid
   daughter, lived in a lonely cottage in an outlying part of the parish.
   My natural reluctance to make another visit was overcome by a feeling I
   could not resist, and I turned my horse's head toward the cottage. I
   was thinking only of the poor widow's spiritual needs; but when I
   reached her little house, I was struck with its look of unwanted
   barreness and poverty. After putting a little money into her hand, I
   began to inquire into their circumstances and found that. their
   supplies had been utterly exhausted since the night before. I asked
   them what they had done. "I just spread it before the Lord!" "Did you
   tell your case to any friend?" "Oh no, sir; naebody kens but Himself
   and me! I kent He would not forget; but I didna ken hoo. He wad help
   me, till I seen you come riding over the brae, and then I said:
   "There's the Lord's answer! " Many a time has the recollection of this
   incident encouraged me to trust in the loving care of my heavenly
   Father.--New Testament Anecdotes.

                             A LESSON FOR MOTHERS.

   A little girl once said: "Mother, does God ever scold?" She had seen
   her mother, under circumstances of strong provocation, lose her temper,
   and give way to the impulse of passion; and pondering thoughtfully for
   a moment, she asked: "Mother, does God ever scold?"

   The question was so abrupt and startling, that it arrested the mother's
   attention almost with a shock, and she said, "Why, my child, what makes
   you ask such a question?"

   "Because, mother, you have always told me that God was good, and that
   we should try to be like Him; and I should like to know if he ever
   scolds."

   "No, my child; of course not."

   "Well, I'm glad he don't, for scolding always hurts me, even if I feel
   I have done wrong; and it don't seem to me that I could love God very
   much if he scolded."

   The mother felt rebuked before her simple child. Never before had she
   heard so forcible a lecture on the evils of scolding. The words of the
   child sank deep in her heart, and she turned away from the innocent
   face of her little one to hide the tears that gathered to her eyes.
   Children are quick observers; and the child, seeing the effect of her
   words, eagerly inquired:

   "Why do you cry, mother? Was it naughty for me to say what I said?"

   "No, my love, it was all right; I was only thinking that I might have
   spoken more kindly, and not have hurt your feelings by speaking so
   hastily, and in anger, as I did."

   "O mother, you are good and kind; only I wish there were not so many
   bad things to make you fret and talk as you did just now. It makes me
   feel away from you so far, as if I could not come near you, as I can
   when you speak kindly. And, oh, sometimes I fear I shall be put off so
   far I can never get back again!"

   "No, my child, don't say that," said the mother, unable to keep back
   her tears, as she felt how her tones had repelled her little one from
   her heart; and the child, wondering what had so affected her parent,
   but intuitively feeling it was a case requiring sympathy, reached up,
   and throwing her arms about her mother's neck, whispered "Mother, dear
   mother, do I make you cry? Do you love me?"

   "O, yes! I love you more than I can tell," said the parent, clasping
   the little one to her bosom; and I will try never to scold again; but
   if I have to reprove my child, I will try to do it, not in anger, but
   kindly, deeply as I may be grieved that she has done wrong."

   "O, I am so glad. I can get so near to you if you don't scold! And do
   you know, mother, I want to love you so much, and I will try always to
   be good?"

   The lesson was one that sank deep in that mother's heart, and has been
   an aid to her for many years. It impressed the great principle of
   reproving in kindness, not in anger. If we would gain the great end of
   reproof --that of winning the child to what is right, and to the
   parent's heart.

   -- Mother, Home, and Heaven.

                          "I'M SO GLAD YOU HAVE COME!"

   I believe it to be a great characteristic of the American heart, that
   it clings to home and mother. I remember passing over a battlefield,
   and seeing a man just dying. His mind was wandering. His spirit was no
   longer on that bloody field; it was at his home far away. A smile
   passed over his face--a smile, oh, of such sweetness, as looking up, he
   said: "O mother! O mother! I'm so glad you have come! "And it seemed as
   if she were there by his side.

   By and by he said again: " It's cold! It's cold! Won't you pull the
   blanket over me?" I stooped down, and pulled the poor fellow's ragged
   blanket closer to his shivering form. And he smiled again "That will
   do, mother; that will do I " And so, turning over, he passed sweetly
   into rest, and was borne up into the presence of God on the wings of a
   pious mother's prayers. -- G.I Mingins.

                          A MOTHER'S PRAYER ANSWERED.

   Trained religiously, I had reached a young man's years before making a
   public profession of religion. Prior to my conversion, thoughts of the
   ministry sometimes flashed across my mind; but it was only a flash.
   After my conversion, I was earnest for the welfare of others, and
   wanted to promote the interests of the church and of humanity. The
   conviction grew upon me that I must preach; yet I tried to put that
   away, because I feared I could never succeed. I saw the greatness of
   the work, and the reproachful poverty then connected with the itinerant
   ministry. There were two special difficulties in the way. First, I had
   no gift of speech. My voice was poor, and in school I always shunned
   declamation. I firmly believed I could never make a speaker, and so
   chose the profession of medicine, which I studied three years in a
   professional school. I think I should have resolutely rejected the idea
   of the ministry, except that it seemed inseparably connected with my
   salvation. I fasted, I prayed for Divine direction; but I found no rest
   until, reading in the Bible one day, I found a passage which seemed
   especially written for me "Trust in the Lord with all thy heart; lean
   not to thine own understanding; in all thy ways acknowledge Him, and He
   shall direct thy paths." I accepted it, and resolved to do whatever God
   in his providence should indicate by opening the way. I never lisped to
   a friend the slightest intimation of my mental agony, but I took a more
   earnest part in the church services.

   One Sabbath I felt a strong impression that I ought to speak to the
   people at night in prayer-meeting, as we had no preaching. I said to
   myself: " How shall I? For my friends will say I am foolish, as they
   know I cannot speak with interest." Especially I dreaded an old uncle,
   who had been a father to me, and superintended my education. While I
   was discussing this matter with myself in the afternoon, my uncle came
   into the room, and, after a moment's hesitation, said to me: "Don't you
   think you could speak to the people tonight?" I was surprised and
   startled. I asked him if he thought I ought. He said, "Yes; I think you
   can do good."

   That night, for some strange reason, the house was crowded, and I made
   my first religious address to a public congregation. It was not
   written. It was not very well premeditated. It was simply an outgushing
   of a sincere and honest heart.

   My mother was a widow. I was her eldest son, the only child remaining
   at home. I feared it would break her heart to leave her, and feared it
   would be impossible to do so. One day, after great embarrassment, I was
   induced to speak to my mother on the subject of my mental struggles,
   and tell her what I thought God required of me. I never shall forget
   how she turned to me with a smile, and said : "My son, I have been
   looking for this hour ever since you were born

   She then told me how she and my dying father, who left me an infant,
   consecrated me to God, and prayed that, if it were His will, I might
   become a minister; and yet that mother had never dropped a word of
   intimation in my ear that she ever desired me to be a preacher. She
   believed so fully in the Divine call, that she would not bias my mind
   with even a suggestion of it in prayer.

   That conversation settled my mind. Oh, what a blessing is a sainted
   mother! To-day I can feel her hands on my head, and I hear the
   intonation of her voice in prayer. -- Bishop Simpson.

                                 THE PRODIGAL.

   The Rev. Theodore Clapp, for many years a minister of religion in the
   city of New Orleans, narrates the following incident, which occurred
   within his experience:

   Several years ago there was a lady--a mother--residing in one of the
   Northern States, distinguished for her wealth, social position, and
   religious character. She had a favorite son, for whose advancement in
   life great efforts had been made. But notwithstanding, he became a
   profligate and vagabond.

   I had known the youth in our school-boy days. The mother addressed to
   me a letter concerning her lost child. From the latest information she
   believed that he was wandering in the Southern States. She besought me,
   if I should meet the hapless fugitive, to acquaint her with the facts,
   and extend to him such offices of kindness as I might judge expedient.

   A few days after the receipt of this letter, the young prodigal made
   his appearance in New Orleans, and found his way to my study. He was in
   a most woeful plight, both physically and morally. In manners he was
   rude, audacious, and grossly profane. He wanted money. "Money will do
   you no good," said I, "unless you reform your life."

   "Reform! " repeated he; "it is impossible. It is entirely too late. I
   have no hope; I can never retrieve my steps. I have nothing- to live
   for. I am the execration of all who kn6w me. I have not a friend left
   in the wide world."

   On his saying this I went to my desk, and took out the letter from his
   mother. Showing him the superscription, I asked him if he knew the
   hand-writing. A change came over his manner. He replied with a
   thoughtful air: "It is my dear mother's.'' I opened the letter, and
   read to him a single paragraph; and this was-the sentence I read to him
   "O my Heavenly Father, I beseech Thee to preserve, forgive, and redeem
   my poor lost child; in Thy infinite mercy, be pleased to restore him to
   my embrace, and to the joys of sincere repentance."

   In moment he seemed as if struck by some unseen power. He sank down
   upon his chair, burst into tears, sobbed aloud, and convulsively
   exclaimed: "O God, forgive my base ingratitude to that beloved mother!
   Yes, the thought of that fond parent, in a far-distant and dishonored
   home -- who cherished for him an undying affection, who overlooked all
   his baseness, who never failed to mingle his outcast name with her
   morning and evening prayers -- the thought of such tenderness broke his
   obdurate heart, and the waters of penitence rushed forth.

   From that hour he was a reformed man. He is now an inhabitant of his
   native place, shedding around him the blessed influence of a sober,
   useful, and exemplary life.--Mother, Home, and Heaven.

                A GREAT REVIVAL IN ANSWER TO PREVAILING PRAYER.

   During the winter of t885-86 we were called to hold a revival meeting
   in New Haven, Shiawassee county, Michigan. During the first few days of
   the meeting we found many difficulties, and the powers .of darkness
   arrayed against the work. Keenly realizing our need, we went to God in
   earnest prayer, and soon experienced a wonderful travail of soul for
   the desolation of Zion. In less than twenty-four hours from the time
   this wonderful spirit us wrestling prayer was given us, the work
   commenced to move in earnest. The pastor, in sobs and tears, confessed
   that he was backslidden, asked pardon of some of his members, and came
   to the altar seeking forgiveness of God. Many professed Christians
   followed his example, and in a few days the whole country was in a
   flame of revival, such as had never been known in that section of the
   country. The spiritual condition of the community was so changed that
   for years sinners were converted at almost every public gathering of
   God's people. Never elsewhere have we witnessed so sweeping and
   thorough a work of grace, and such wonderful manifestations of God's
   presence and glory. Over two years after the commencement of that
   wonderful awakening, at a camp-meeting held in the same community, a
   paper was drawn up endorsing our work, and signed by several ministers
   of the gospel and forty or fifty others; and from that paper we clip
   the following statement in reference to this glorious revival, known in
   all that section as "the big revival":

   "When Brother Shaw came, great division and lack of harmony existed
   among the members of the different churches in the neighborhood --
   Methodist, Episcopal, Free Methodist, Weslyan Methodist, and German
   Evangelical. Bible Christianity was at a low ebb, but he preached the
   truth of God faithfully. He condemned sin of every kind. God honored
   the message by a mighty outpouring of the Holy Ghost. The truth went
   home to hearts. The whole county was stirred. Scores who opposed the
   work bitterly for a time, were brought under conviction, saved, and
   became its warmest friends. Under the mighty power of God souls were
   humbled, confessions were made, wrongs were made right, and sectarian
   bigotry melted away. Hearts were united. Several ministers of the
   gospel knelt at the altar as seekers. The work was so thorough that no
   difference could be discovered among the members of the different
   churches. All were equally separated from the world, and equally
   baptized with the Holy Ghost and fire. During the meeting, lasting in
   all about seven weeks, between two and three hundred souls were
   gloriously converted, reclaimed or sanctified. Never has there been
   known in all this community such a revival." -- Editor.

                    A SHIP'S CREW SAVED IN ANSWER TO PRAYER.

   I had a singular experience, which is very vivid to my mind. The
   precise year I cannot say, and I may be mistaken in the name of the
   vessel. But somewhere about the year 1860, the bark Benjamin Burgess
   sailed from Boston for Cienfugos. The crew were mostly from the house
   of which I had charge. There had been, and there still was, a powerful
   religious influence pervading our house. I said to the men as they were
   going on board: "Remember, Ishall pray for you every day." I made it a
   practice, directly after 12 M., to retire, and pray, and commune with
   God. One day, after the bark had been gone about six weeks, while
   bringing up before the Lord the different cases, this crew was
   presented with unusual interest. I was thrown into an agony of feeling
   before God, and I cried to him to have mercy on that crew. Such were my
   feelings. I noted the time. After the terrible struggle in prayer for
   God to save that crew, with strong cries and tears, there came into my
   feeling a great peace, as though prayer were' answered, and that crew
   made safe. Unbeknown to me, the bark was chartered to go to Antwerp,
   and thence to Boston. On their arrival back, I said "Boys, did you have
   a hard time in either passage? " "Yes," said they, "a fearful time on
   the voyage from Cienfugos to Antwerp. We were being driven upon the
   rocks in a terrible gale and storm. Captain Snow said to us: "Boys,
   there is no hope and no deliverance, unless God helps us; " and sure
   enough, to our great astonishment, there came a wind from off the
   shore, and we were saved." The day of my agony of prayer before the
   Lord for that crew, that they might be saved, was the day they were
   having that terrible experience on the bark. I have no comments to make
   on that experience. I simply give the facts in the case. -- N.
   Hamilton, in Christian Witness.

                           A MOST MIRACULOUS ESCAPE.

   Mrs. C. Chipperfield, of Springfield, Ohio, sent us, in 1887, an
   account of several very clear and definite answers to prayer for the
   supply of temporal needs, received during her Christian experience of
   about ten years, during the greater part of which time she was a widow;
   and added:

   "I would like to tell you how the Lord mercifully saved my boy from
   death. While I was on my knees praying for him, I was strongly
   impressed that some evil was about to happen to him; and while in
   earnest prayer for him the burden was lifted, and he was saved from a
   terrible death. In crossing the railroad, where there were many tracks,
   in trying to avoid one engine he was knocked down by another, and
   dragged a distance of a block or more; but though his face and hands
   were terribly lacerated and filled with coal-ashes, yet not a bone was
   broken. This was about eight years ago; and the next morning there was
   an article in the paper under the heading: A Most Miraculous Escape.'
   And when the railroad men tried to explain to me that it was because
   the road was so smooth that he was dragged along; or if the ties had
   been above the ground he must have been crushed, I said: No, but God
   heard his mother's prayer."

                            REMARKABLE EXPERIENCE OF
                                C. H. SPURGEON.

   On his fiftieth birthday, Rev. C. H. Spurgeon was interviewed in
   reference to his long and eventful ministerial life, especially as to
   his confidence in the efficacy of prayer. Being asked whether he had in
   any way modified his views, he replied:

   Only in my faith growing far stronger and firmer than ever. It is not a
   matter of faith with me, but of knowledge and everyday experience. I am
   constantly witnessing the most unmistakable instances of answers to
   prayer. My whole life is made up of them. To me they are so familiar as
   to tease to excite surprise; but to many they would seem marvelous, no
   doubt. Why, I could no more doubt the efficacy of prayer than I could
   disbelieve the laws of gravitation. The one is as much a fact as the
   other, constantly verified every day of my life. Elijah, by the brook
   Cherith, as he received the daily rations from the ravens, could hardly
   be a more likely subject for skepticism than I.

   Look at my Orphanage. To keep it going entails an annual expenditure of
   about ten thousand pounds. Only one thousand four hundred is provided
   for by endowment. The remaining eight thousand six hundred comes to me
   regularly in answer to prayer. I do not know where I shall get it from
   day to day. I ask God for it, and he sends it. Mr. Muller, of Bristol,
   does the same on a far larger scale, and his experience is the same as
   mine.

   The constant inflow of funds--of all the funds necessary to carry on
   these works--is not stimulated by advertisements, by begging letters,
   by canvassing, or any of the usual modes of raising the wind. We ask
   God for the cash, and he sends it. That is a good, material fact, not
   to be explained away.

   But quite as remarkable illustrations of the efficacy of believing
   faith are constantly occurring in spiritual things. Some two years ago
   a poor woman, accompanied by her neighbors, came to my vestry in deep
   distress. Her husband had fled the country; in her sorrow she went to
   the house of God, and something I said in the sermon made her think I
   was personally familiar with her case. Of course I had known nothing
   about her. It was a general illustration that fitted a particular case.
   She told me her story, and a very sad one it was. I said: There is
   nothing we can do but to kneel down and cry to the Lord for the
   immediate conversion of your husband." We knelt down, and I prayed that
   the Lord would touch the heart of the deserter, convert his soul, and
   bring him back to his home. When we rose from our knees , I said to the
   poor woman : "Do not fret about the matter. I feel sure that your
   husband will come home, and that he will yet become connected with our
   church." She went away, and I forgot all about it. Some months after
   she re-appeared, with her neighbors, and a man, whom she introduced to
   me as her husband. He had indeed come back, and he had returned a
   converted man. On making inquiry and comparing notes, we found that the
   very day on which we had prayed for his conversion, he, being at that
   time on board a ship far away on the sea, stumbled most unexpectedly
   upon a-stray copy of one of my sermons. He read it. The truth went to
   his heart. He repented, and sought the Lord, and as soon as possible he
   returned to his wife and to his daily calling. He was admitted a
   member, and last Monday his wife, who up to that time had not been a
   member, was received among us. That woman does not doubt the power of
   prayer. All the infidels in the world could not shake her conviction
   that there is a God that answereth prayer.

   I should be tha most irrational creature in the world if, with a life
   every day of which is full of experiences so remarkable, I entertained
   the slightest doubt on the subject. I do not regard it as miraculous;
   it is a part and parcel of the established order of the universe, that
   the shadow of a coming event should fall in advance upon some believing
   soul in the shape of prayer for its realization. The prayer of faith is
   a Divine decree commencing its operation. -- Faith Made Easy.

                             KATE SHELLY'S BRAVERY.

   Six years ago Miss Shelly won a gold medal from the Iowa Legislature,
   "and a wealth of admiration from all who read of her act of heroism."
   The facts are these In a fearful thunder-storm and a torrent of falling
   rain, she looked out of her window in the darkness of the night, and by
   the vivid flashes of lightning shining on the scene, she saw that a
   railroad bridge near her home had been swept away by the storm. Just
   then she saw the headlight of a locomotive swiftly approaching the spot
   where the bridge had just been swept away, and plunge into the abyss
   below. She lighted her lantern, and alone, amidst the thunder, and
   lightning, and storm, she crept up a rocky steep, and with her clothes
   torn to rags, and lacerated flesh, she reached the rails, and on her
   hands and knees crept out to the last tie of the fallen bridge, swung
   the lantern back and forth over the abyss, until she heard the faint
   voice of the engineer, who, though in the greatest peril himself, cried
   to her to go quickly and give the alarm to save the express train,
   which was then coming toward that perilous spot, and some help also, to
   rescue him. She started for the nearest station, which was a mile away.
   To reach that station she had to cross a high trestle bridge of five
   hundred feet in length. She had gone but a few steps when a fearful
   gust of wind put out her lantern, which she then threw away, knowing
   that she could not relight it in the storm. She then dropped upon her
   hands and knees, and crept along from tie to tie over the trestle. Her
   way was lighted only by frequent flashes of lightning. After crossing
   the bridge she hastened along the rails by the flashes of lightning to
   the station, and with what strength she had left told her story, and
   then fell in a dead faint at the station-agent's feet. Help went
   quickly to the poor engineer's rescue, and telegrams flew up and down
   the line, notifying all that the bridge was gone. While Miss Shelly lay
   yet unconscious, the express train came rushing into the depot. When
   the passengers learned what perils the brave girl had passed through to
   save them, and saw her still lying in an unconscious state, they took
   her up tenderly, and bathed her torn and bleeding limbs, and soon
   brought her back to consciousness. Oh, how the scene beggars
   description, as the men and women gather about this brave girl of
   sixteen, looking upon her pale face, her torn and bleeding form. As
   they think how she went through all this to save their lives, words are
   too weak to express the deep gratitude of their hearts. They laid a
   substantial expression of their appreciation at her feet. Then, as the
   best they could do, they embalmed her memory in their warmest
   affections, while the world placed a wreath of lasting honor on her
   brow. And Kate Shelly, living or dying, with her approving conscience,
   can say: "I did what I could."

   What an example to all Christians, who see so clearly the dark abyss
   just a step before unconverted men, and they rushing with great speed
   towards it. Let us swing the lamp of truth before them, and cry with
   great earnestness: "Danger ahead! Bridge gone! No crossing but through
   the bleeding victim of Calvary!" May we all learn a lesson of sacrifice
   and effort to save others, from this incident, that in the coming day
   Christ, may say of us: "They have done what they could." -- A. B.
   Earle.

                   HE BLESSES GOD FOR THE FAITH OF HIS GIRL.

   "I came home one night very late," says the Rev. Matthew Hale Smith, in
   his Marvels of Prayer, "and had gone to bed to seek needed rest. The
   friend with whom I boarded awoke me out of my first refreshing sleep,
   and informed me that a little girl wanted to see me. I turned over in
   bed, and said:

   "I am very tired, tell her to come in the morning, and I will see her.'

   "My friend soon returned and said:

   "I think you had better get up. The girl is a poor little suffering
   thing. She is thinly clad, is without bonnet or shoes She has seated
   herself on the door-step, and says she must see you, and will wait till
   you get up.' I dressed myself, and opening the outside door I saw one
   of the most forlorn looking little girls I ever beheld. Want, sorrow,
   suffering, neglect, seemed to struggle for the mastery. She looked up
   to my face, and said:

   "Are you the man that preached last night, and said that Christ could
   save to the uttermost?'

   "Yes.'

   "Well, I was there, and I want you to come right, down to my house, and
   try to save my poor father.'

   "'What's the matter with your father?'

   "He's a very good father when he don't drink. He's out of work, and he
   drinks awfully. He's almost killed my poor mother; but if Jesus can
   save to the uttermost, He can save him. And I want you to come right to
   our house now.'

   "I took my hat and followed my little guide, who trotted on before,
   halting as she turned the corners to see that I was coming. Oh, what a
   miserable den her home was! A low, dark, underground room, the floor
   all slush and mud--not a chair, table, or bed to be seen. . A bitter
   cold night, and not a spark of fire on the hob, and the room not only
   cold, but dark. In the corner, on a little dirty straw, lay a woman.
   Her head was bound up, and she was moaning as if in agony. As we
   darkened the doorway a feeble voice said: O my child! My child! Why
   have you brought a stranger into this horrible place?' Her story was a
   sad one, but soon told. Her husband, out of work, maddened with drink,
   and- made desperate, had stabbed her because she did not provide him
   with a supper, that was not in the house. He was then upstairs, and she
   was expecting every moment that he would come down and complete the
   bloody work he had begun. While the conversation was going on the fiend
   made his appearance. A fiend he looked. He brandished the knife, still
   wet with the blood of his wife.

   "The missionary, like the man among the tombs, had himself belonged to
   the desperate classes. He was converted at the mouth of a coal-pit. He
   knew the disease and the remedy--knew how to handle a man on the
   borders of delirium tremens.

   "Subdued by the tender tones, the madman calmed down, and took a seat
   on a box. But the talk was interrupted by the little girl, who
   approached the missionary, and said:

   "Don't talk to father; it won't do any good. If talking would have
   saved him, he would have been saved long ago. Mother has talked to him
   so much and so good. You must ask Jesus, who saves to the uttermost, to
   save my poor father.'

   "Rebuked by the faith of the little girl, the missionary and the
   miserable sinner knelt down together. He prayed as he never had prayed
   before; he entreated and interceded, in tones so tender and fervent,
   that it melted the desperate man, who cried for mercy. And mercy came.
   He bowed in penitence before the Lord, and lay down that night on his
   pallet of straw a pardoned soul.

   "Relief came to that dwelling. The wife was lifted from her dirty
   couch, and her home was made comfortable. On Sunday, the reformed man
   took the hand of his little girl and entered the infant class, to learn
   something about the Savior who saves to the uttermost.' He entered upon
   a new life. His reform was thorough. He found good employment, for when
   sober he was an excellent workman; and next to his Savior, he blesses
   God for the faith of his little girl, who believed in a Savior able to
   save to the uttermost all that come unto God by him."

                  "THE GREATEST REVIVAL OF THE CHRISTIAN ERA."

   Dr. Lyman Beecher said of the great revival in Rochester, N.Y.,
   conducted by Mr. Finney, that it was the greatest revival in the
   Christian era. During Mr. Finney's evangelistic ministry, hundreds of
   thousands were converted to God through his labors, joined to those of
   the church. His Lectures on Revivals " have been most wonderfully
   blessed in the conversion of sinners, directly and indirectly, not only
   in this country, but in foreign countries. When they were published in
   this country, 12,000 of them were sold as fast as they could be
   printed. They were reprinted in England and France. They were
   translated into Welsh, French and German. One publisher in London put
   out 80,000 volumes of them. Great revivals followed wherever they
   circulated.

   But why did such revivals follow Mr. Finney's preaching, and the
   reading of his lectures? I will let Mr. Finney answer this question
   himself. Said he, in his autobiography - "Let the reader remember that
   long day of agony and prayer at sea, that God would do something to
   forward the work of revivals, and enable me, if He desired to do it, to
   take such a course as to help forward the work. I felt certain then,
   that my prayers would be answered, and I have regarded all that I have
   since been able to accomplish, as in a very important sense, an answer
   to the prayers of that day. The spirit of prayer came upon me as a
   sovereign grace, bestowed upon me without the least merit, and in
   despite of all my sinfulness. He pressed my soul in prayer until I was
   enabled to prevail; and through infinite riches of grace in Christ
   Jesus, I have been many years witnessing the wonderful results of that
   day of wrestling with God. In answer to that day's agony, He has
   continued to give me the spirit of prayer."

   Said Dr. N. Murray: "Prayer is the power of the Church; and could I
   speak as loud as the trumpet which is to wake the dead, I would thus
   call upon the Church, in all branches and in all lands: Awake! awake!
   put on thy strength, Zion! put on thy beautiful garments, O Jerusalem!
   Arise, shine, for thy light is come, and the glory of the Lord is risen
   upon thee.' Patriarchs, prophets, apostles. martyrs, reformers, were
   mighty in prayer. -- Prevailing Prayer, by Wigle.

                            THE WIDOW AND THE JUDGE.

   Sometime about the commencement of the year 1871, train was passing
   over the North-Western Railroad, between Oskaloosa and Madison. In two
   of the seats, facing each other, sat three lawyers engaged at cards.
   Their fourth player had just left the carriage, and they needed another
   to take his place. "Come, Judge, take a hand," they said to a grave
   magistrate, who sat looking on, but whose face indicated no approval of
   their play. He shook his head, but after repeated urgings, finally,
   with a flushed countenance, took a seat with them, and the playing went
   on.

   A venerable woman, gray and bent with years, sat and watched the Judge
   from her seat near the end of the railway carriage. After the game had
   progressed awhile, she arose, and with trembling hand and almost
   overcome with emotion, approached the group. Fixing her eyes intently
   on the Judge, she said in a tremulous voice: "Do you know me,
   Judge----"

   "No, mother, I don't remember you," said the Judge, pleasantly. "Where
   have we met?"

   "My name is Smith," said she; "I was with my poor boy three days, off
   and on, in the court-room at Oskaloosa, when he was tried for -- for --
   for robbing somebody, and you are the same man that sent him to prison
   for ten years; and he died there last June."

   All faces were now absorbed, and the passengers began to gather around
   and stand up all over the car, to listen to and see what was going on.
   She did not give the Judge time to answer her, but becoming more and
   more excited, she went on:

   "He was a good boy, if you did send him to jail. He helped us clear the
   farm; and when father took sick and died, he done all the work, and we
   were getting along right smart. He was a stidy boy until he got to
   card-playin' an' drinkin', and then, somehow, he didn't like to work
   after that, and stayed out often till mornin'; and he'd sleep so late,
   and I couldn't wake him when I knowed he'd been out so late the night
   afore. And then the farm kinder run down, and then we lost the team;
   one of them got killed when he'd been to town one awful cold night. He
   stayed late, and I suppose they had got cold standin' out, and got
   skeered and broke loose, and run most home, but run agin a fence, and a
   stake run into one of in; and when we found it next mornin' it was
   dead, and the other was standin' under the shed. And so, after a while,
   he coaxed me to let him sell the farm, and buy a house and lot in the
   village, and he'd work at carpenter work. And so I did, as we couldn't
   do nothin' on the farm. But he grew worse than ever, and after awhile,
   he couldn't get any work, and wouldn't do anything but gamble and drink
   all the time. I used to do everything I could to get him to quit and
   be- a good, industrious boy agin; but he used to get mad after awhile,
   and once he struck me, and then in the morning I found he had taken
   what little money there was left of the farm, and had run off. After
   that time I got along as well as I could, cleanin' house for folks and
   washin', but I didn't hear nothin' of him for four or five years; but
   when he got arrested and was took up to Oskaloosa for trial, he writ to
   me."

   By this time there was not a dry eye in the car, and the cards had
   disappeared. The old lady herself was weeping silently, and speaking in
   snatches. But recovering herself, she went on:

   "But what could I do? I sold the house and lot to get money to hire a
   lawyer, and I believe he is here somewhere," looking around. "Oh, yes,
   there he is, Mr.----;" pointing to lawyer----who had not taken part in
   the play. "And this is the man, I am sure, who argued agin him,"
   pointing to Mr., the district attorney. "And you, Judge, sent him to
   prison for ten years; spose it was right, for the poor boy told me that
   he really did rob the bank; but he must have been drunk, for they had
   all been playin' cards most all the night, and drinkin'. But, oh dear!
   it seems to me kinder as though if he hadn't got to playin' cards he
   might a been alive yet. But when I used to tell him it was wrong and
   bad to play, he used to say: Why, mother, everybody plays now. I never
   bet only for the candy, or the cigars, or something like that.' And
   when we heard that the young folks played cards down to Mr. Culver's
   donation party, and that Squire Ring was goin' to get a billiard table
   for his young folks to play on at home, I couldn't do nothin' with him.
   We used to think it was awful to do that way, when I was young; but it
   jist seems to me as if everybody was goin' wrong now-a-days into
   something or other. But may be it isn't right for me to talk to you,
   Judge, in this way; but it jist seemed to me the very sight of them
   cards would kill me, Judge; I thought if you only knew how I felt, you
   would not play on so; and then to think, right here before these young
   folks! May be, Judge, you don't know how younger folks, especially
   boys, look up to such as you; and then I can't help thinking that may
   be if them that ought to know better than to o so, and them as are
   better larnt and all that, wouldn't set sich examples, my Tom would be
   alive and caring for his poor old mother; but now, there ain't any of
   my family left but me and my poor granchile, my darter's little girl,
   and we are going to stop with my brother in Illinoy."

   Tongue of man or angel never preached a more eloquent sermon than that
   gray, withered old lady, trembling with old age, excitement and fear
   that she was doing wrong. I can't recall half she said, as she, poor,
   lone, beggared widow, stood before the noble looking men, and pleaded
   the cause of the rising generation. The look they bore as she poured
   forth her sorrowful tale was indescribable. To say that they looked
   like criminals at the bar would be a faint description. I can imagine
   how they felt. The old lady tottered to her seat, and taking her little
   grandchild in her lap, hid her face on her neck. The little one stroked
   her gray hair with one hand and said: "Don't cry, grandma; don't cry,
   grandma." Eyes unused to weeping were red for many a mile on that
   journey. And I can hardly believe that any one who witnessed that scene
   ever touched a card again. It is but just to say that when the
   passengers came to themselves, they generously responded to the Judge,
   who, hat in hand, silently passed through her little audience. --
   Selected.

           "SAVED FROM THE FLAMES AND WAVES, AND SHALL BE FROM SINS."

   A Christian wife, whose husband was an officer on a Mississippi steamer
   (which was burned), as she prayed that her husband would be preserved
   and saved, not knowing of the disaster, was assured that his life would
   be spared and that he would be saved. When, the day following, she
   received a telegram, stating that her husband had perished, she folded
   it and said: " It is not so. He is saved from the flames and waves, and
   shall be from his sins." A few days later he arrived at home, and was
   soon converted. The faith of this Christian wife, after praying
   earnestly, was of the same nature as the faith of Luther, who, after
   praying nearly all night, with some of his friends, exclaimed: "
   Deliverance has come! Deliverance has come! " -- Rev. S.A. Keene, in
   Prevailing Prayer.

                          THE FAMOUS "PRAYING JOHNNY."

   This eminent saint of God labored in England during the early history
   of Methodism. His biographer, Harvey Leigh, says: "Our brother was an
   extraordinary man in the importunity and prevalence of his prayers.
   What has been said of the strength and constancy of his faith may be
   said, with equal propriety, of his importunate and prevalent prayers;
   that is, he was second to none. In fact, we need not be surprised at
   this, for generally these two excellences walk hand in hand. For some
   years he was known in the religious world to thousands by the singular
   name of

   Praying Johnny.' This epithet he justified in the whole of his conduct.
   His prayers were long and very fervent in his own closet. Mr.
   Bottomley, who was stationed with him in the Halifax circuit, says:
   During the time of his stay at Halifax, he was much given up to prayer,
   and generally spent about six hours each day upon his knees, pleading
   earnestly with God, in behalf of himself, the church and sinners, whose
   salvation he most ardently desired.

   "Frequently, when harassed by any particular temptation, when concerned
   about the temporal condition of any person in dangerous affliction,
   when under engagement to pray for one who was troubled with an evil
   spirit, when foiled some late attempt to do good, when travailing in
   anguish of mind for a revival of religion in the neighborhood in which
   he was laboring, and when deeply anxious to see the glory of the Lord
   revealed, he has spent many hours in the most decided abstinence and
   secluded retirement; and has sometimes, in this manner, devoted whole
   days and nights to God.

   "In the public services of the sanctuary, John had great influence with
   God in prayer. In answer to the earnest breathings of his soul, a whole
   assembly has been moved as the trees of a would are moved when shaken
   with a strong wind. A mighty shaking has been felt, and a great noise
   heard, amongst the dry bones. The breath of Jehovah has been felt,
   numbers among the slain have been quickened, and a great army has been
   raised up.

   "A strange fact connected with the history of this good man, and
   strikingly illustrative of his close communion with God in prayer, and
   of the results of such communion, we shall here relate. When in Hull
   circuit, he visited Burlington Quay, and was rendered eminently useful.
   When there, his home was with Mr. Stephenson, whose family was one of
   the most influential in the place. Their mercantile engagements were
   numerous; at home they carried on a considerable business, and were
   extensively connected with the shipping department. About the year
   1825, Mr. Stephenson had a ship at sea, on a foreign and distant
   voyage, about the safety of which he and the family began to feel
   anxious. There had not been any tidings of the vessel extending over a
   period far beyond what they had expected. And what tended much to
   increase their solicitude, they had a son on board for whom they feared
   the worst -- feared that they should see him no more. At this time Mr.
   Oxtoby was sojourning in the family, and was painfully concerned at
   witnessing their anxiety. Pressed in spirit for them, and desirous to
   be the instrument of their relief, he fell back upon his usual and safe
   resort--special fasting and protracted prayer to God--in which he
   besought the Almighty to give him an assurance whether the ship was
   really lost, or whether it would return home in safety. In his
   protracted travail, he clearly ascertained that the ship, which had
   been the object of so much solicitude, was not lost, but that it and
   the son for whose safety the family were so anxious, would, in due
   course, return in safety, and that all would be well. This welcome
   intelligence he communicated to the anxious family; and did it with as
   much confidence as characterized St. Paul's mind, when he uttered his
   noble speech to the embarrassed ship's crew, while they drew near to
   the island of Melita, and, contrary to all human appearance, assured
   them that not a hair of their heads should perish. Rut high as our
   brother stood in the estimation of the family, and exalted as was their
   opinion of his extraordinary piety, and the power and prevalency of his
   prayers, yet his calm and positive assertions on this subject almost
   exceeded the powers of their belief; and though they did not distrust
   them, they staggered at them. But John remained unmoved. He smiled at
   their doubts; reiterated his expressions of confidence; told them that
   God had shown him the ship while at prayer;' that he was as certain of
   her safe return as if she were in the harbor then; and that when the
   vessel returned, though he had never seen her, excepting when revealed
   to him in prayer, he should know her, and could easily distinguish her
   from any other. Time rolled on, John pursued his work, and the family
   remained anxious, when news reached them, one day, that the vessel was
   safe and on her way home. It soon after arrived, at which time Mr.
   Oxtoby was about ten miles distant in the country. The Stephenson
   family were, however, so delighted with the occurrence--with the
   realization of all/~their devoted friend had uttered--with the
   accomplishment of what, to them, appeared like a prediction, and from
   which the good man had never wavered--no, not for a moment--that a gig
   was immediately sent for him, by which he was to return with the least
   possible delay. When he reached Burlington Quay, Mr. Stephenson asked
   him if he should know the ship about which he had sought Divine
   counsel, providing he could see her. I should,' said John; God so
   clearly revealed her, to me in prayer, that I could distinguish her
   among a hundred.' Then they walked out on the pier, and on their left
   were many vessels, some near and some remote, floating at anchor in the
   spacious bay. Among them John looked, and exclaimed; while pointing in
   a certain direction : That's the ship which God showed me while at
   prayer. I knew she would come home safely, and that I should see her.'
   We need scarcely add that in this he was correct; and that this last
   particular of the strange account filled Mr. Stephenson with
   overwhelming amazement." -- Shining Lights.

                HOW THREE SUNDAY-SCHOOL CHILDREN MET THEIR FATE.

   When the Lawrence Mills were on fire a number of years ago--I don't
   mean on fire, but when the mill fell in--the great mill fell in, and
   after it had fallen in, the ruins caught fire. There was only one room
   left entire, and in it were three Mission Sunday-school children
   imprisoned. The neighbors and all hands got their shovels, and picks,
   and crowbars, and were working to set the children free. It came on
   night, and they had not yet reached the children. When they were near
   them, by some mischance a lantern broke, and the ruins caught fire.
   They tried to put it out, but could not succeed. They could talk with
   the children, and even pass to them some coffee and some refreshments,
   and encourage them to keep up. But, alas, the flames drew nearer and
   nearer to this prison. Superhuman were the efforts made to rescue the
   children; the men bravely fought back the flames; hut the fire gained
   fresh strength, and returned to claim its victims. Then piercing
   shrieks arose when the spectators saw that the efforts of the firemen
   were hopeless. The children saw their fate. They then knelt down and
   commenced to sing the little hymn we have all been taught in our Sunday
   school days, oh! How sweet "Let others seek a home below, which flames
   devour and waves overflow." The flames had now reached them; the
   stifling smoke began to pour into their little room, and they began to
   sink, one by one, upon the floor. A few moments more and the fire
   circled around them, and their souls were taken into the bosom of
   Christ. Yes, let others seek a home below if they will, but seek ye the
   Kingdom of God with all your hearts. --Moody's Anecdotes

                THE DYING CHILD'S PRAYER FOR HER DRUNKEN FATHER.

   A child from a poor family had an intemperate father, who often used to
   abuse his wife and children. This child had been to the Sunday-school
   -- had become pious. The physician told the father that his little girl
   would die. No he did not believe it. Yes, she will -- she must die in a
   few hours. The father flew to the bedside; would not part with her, he
   said.

   "Yes, father, you must part with me, I am going to Jesus. Promise me
   two things. One is, that you won't abuse mother any more, and will
   drink no more whisky."

   He promised in a solemn, steady manner. The little girl's face lighted
   up with joy.

   "The other thing is, promise me that you will pray," said the child.

   I cannot pray; don't know how," said the poor man.

   "Father, kneel down, please. There, take the words after me, I will
   pray; I learned how Jo pray in Sunday-school, and God has taught me how
   to pray too, my heart prays, you must let your heart pray. Now say the
   words."

   And she began in her simple language to pray to the Savior of sinners.
   After a little he began to repeat after her; as he went on his heart
   was interested, and he broke out into an earnest prayer for himself;
   bewailed his sins, confessed and promised to forsake them; entered into
   covenant with God; light broke out upon him in his darkness; how long
   he prayed he did not know; he seemed to have forgotten his child in his
   prayer. When he came to himself he raised his head from the bed on
   which he had rested it; there lay the little speaker, a lovely smile
   was upon the face, her little hand was in that of the father, but she
   had gone to be among the angels. --Power of Prayer, by Prime.

                      A PREVAILING PRAYER OF MRS. VAN COTT

   In 1868, Mrs. Maggie Newton Van Cott held a revival meeting at Stone
   Ridge, Ulster Co., N. Y. At the opening of the meeting, she announced,
   under the influence of the Spirit as she believed, that there would be
   a glorious revival, and that two hundred souls would be converted. Some
   were shocked at the prediction; and some of the very best people in the
   church were grieved, for they felt certain that she was doomed to
   disappointment. She labored for more than a week with little fruit. Her
   strength began to give way. Her warmest co-workers began to tremble for
   her. One morning she remarked to the lady at whose residence she was
   staying "I am going into the parlor to settle this church-matter with
   the dear Master. Please do not allow any one to come near me. If I do
   not come out in time for dinner, do not call me. If I am not with you
   in time for the afternoon meeting, you may call in the friends. I
   shall, in the name of God, this day have victory or death."

   It was a bitter cold day in February, and no fire had been kindled in
   that room all winter, and the frost was thick on the window-panes. She
   wrapped a large shawl around her, and bowed before God; and presented
   the promises covered with the blood of the Savior, and in them there
   could be no failure. "Ask, and ye shall receive," stood before her as
   in characters of living fire. Also "If ye abide in Me, and My words
   abide in you, ye shall ask what ye will, and it shall be done unto
   you." "Whatsoever ye shall ask in My name, that I will do, that the
   Father may be glorified in the Son." "If ye shall ask anything in My
   name, I will do it." It was the same voice that awoke slumbering chaos,
   and new-made worlds teeming with life, glorious and grand. An hour
   passed - another followed - she had grappled in with God's Word, and in
   the anguish of her spirit, as she afterwards declared, she could in a
   certain degree understand the Scripture, where it describes the
   Master's agony in the garden, when He sweat great drops of blood. In
   those hours of the most intense struggle of spirit, the great drops of
   sweat rolled from her brow. The tempter suggested: "Give it up, God
   will not give the answer today." "Then today, on this spot, I die," was
   her answer. The agony increased. The prayer became a struggle as for
   life. "I will not let Thee go. Thy word is truth. Thou hast said, "Now
   is the time." O God, now send the answer; now my Father, hear me for
   the sake of souls - for the two hundred. Christ has paid the price of
   their redemption. I plead His merits--I will not yield--I will not move
   - I will not let go my hold - Thou canst not turn me away Behold Thine
   own dear Son pleads - the Spirit intercedes Give, O give the answer."

   That moment a sweet ripple of peace floated over her soul, and soon
   shouts of rapture flooded her spirit.

   That night twenty seekers bowed at the altar of prayer. In less than
   five weeks two hundred and thirty-five persons professed faith in
   Christ.

   Thus it ever is, "The fervent, effectual prayer of the righteous
   availeth."--The Harvest and the Reaper.

                       A GREAT REVIVAL IN A SINGLE NIGHT.

   One of the most remarkable experiences we have had in seventeen years
   of evangelistic work, occurred in the spring of 1890. It will be
   remembered that at this time the United Brethren Church was sadly
   divided on the secrecy question, and in many places two pastors were
   employed-one by the "Liberals " and another by the "Radicals" of the
   same congregation. In our travels we stopped to visit an old friend,
   who was the "Radical" pastor in such a place as these to whom we have
   referred. We had no thought of stopping only over the Sabbath, and
   never did we get into a place where the people had less anticipations
   of a revival. Much hard feeling had existed, and many unkind,
   unchristian things had been said and done.

   Sunday evening our friend invited us to preach for him. God gave us
   unusual liberty in prayer and in preaching His word, and opened the
   very windows of heaven, and showers of blessing fell upon that dry and
   barren land. In spite of circumstances so utterly forbidding, in one
   short hour, the people found themselves in the midst of a powerful
   revival. We never witnessed so much confession in so short a time. Many
   in tears asked each other's forgiveness, and then came to the altar
   together, and prayed that they might regain their first love; and God
   heard and answered their prayers. The "Liberal" pastor was not present,
   but the "Liberal" presiding-elder was; and he and the "Radical" pastor
   had had little confidence in each other; but under the mighty power of
   the Spirit, their hearts were united, and they embraced each other in
   tears.

   Thus did God manifest His power, and get to His own name glory; and to
   Him alone be praise, both now and forever, for in His hands are the
   hearts of the children of men.--Editor.

                   WILLIAM CLOWES, THE SPIRITUAL MOUNTAINEER.

   This man of God was one of the founders of the Primitive Methodist
   denomination Rev. George Lamb, in his memorial of him, says:

   "On a certain missionary tour he walked one day twenty-four miles, and
   while on the road, he says: "I fell into a profound meditation on the
   fall of man, his departure from original holiness, the depth of
   iniquity into which sin had sunk him, and the impossibility for any
   power but that of God to restore him. These reflections I pursued in my
   mind until I was brought into great sorrow, and distress of soul. I
   felt the travail in birth, and experienced an internal agony on account
   of the millions of souls on the earth, who were posting on in the way
   of death, whose steps take hold on hell. I wept much, and longed for
   some convenient place on the road, where I might give vent to my
   burdened soul in prayer. In a short time I arrived on the borders of a
   wood; and then I gave way to my feelings, poured out my soul, and cried
   like a woman in the pangs of childbirth. I thought the agony into which
   I was thrown would terminate my life.

   "This was a glorious baptism for the ministry; the glory of God was
   revealed to me in a wonderful manner; it left an unction on my soul
   which continues to this day; and the sweetness which was imparted to my
   spirit, it is impossible for me to attempt a description of."

   Space will not allow us to follow this apostolic man as he went through
   the principal counties, and cities, and towns of England; nor to detail
   the wonderful displays of Divine power which took place under his
   ministry. Persecution raged against him, his name was cast out as evil,
   and he had to endure many and severe hardships. But wherever he went
   the work of God broke out in power, sinners were converted, believers
   sanctified, and classes organized. At every session of their Annual
   Conference, for years, their net increase amounted to four or five
   thousand, and not unfrequently the annual increase was ten thousand.

   "Mr. Clowes was very remarkable for his power in prayer. He abounded
   largely in the grace of supplication.' It has never fallen to my lot to
   experience such baptisms, as I never failed to feel, while kneeling
   with him before the mercy-seat. Perhaps it will be seen, in the light
   of eternity, that much of the success which has crowned the labors of
   the Connexion was graciously vouchsafed in answer to his fervent and
   effectual prayers.' The results of the midnight devotions which he
   rendered to God, and of his wrestlings until break of day,' when; as a
   prince, he had power with God and prevailed,' are yet to be revealed;
   the witness of these holy exercises is in heaven, and their record on
   high.

   "Streaming eyes, broken hearts, cries for mercy, and joyful
   deliverances, were ordinary effects produced when he drew nigh to God
   in public prayer. I was present at a love feast conducted by him and
   his friend, the Rev. I. Holliday, in Mill Street chapel, Hull, at the
   conclusion of which about forty souls were professedly converted to
   God.

   "Great as Mr. Clowes was in the pulpit, and mighty as he was in prayer,
   he was equally conspicuous for his strong and unwavering faith. I have
   believed, I do believe, and I will believe,' he would say; and he
   soared to what he called the mountains of frankincense, and the hills
   of myrrh,' and regaled himself with fruits and flowers in the garden of
   the Lord; bathed in its crystal fountains of purity; and basked in its
   blissful bowers of holy serenity and heavenly joy. His strong faith
   enabled him to make his constant abode where only a few of even good
   men pay an occasional visit; he lived at a great spiritual altitude, a
   sort of Pisgah's mountain-life, on lofty banks of high and holy
   regions. If ever he pitched his tent, he shifted it higher still; he
   was a spiritual mountaineer. His religious life appears to have been
   one rapid ascent from grace to grace.' No wonder that one who the
   walked with God in spiritual climes, where peace sheds its balm, hope
   bends its rainbow, and the soul dwells at ease," should be able to say,
   as did he, and to the honor of grace and the glory of God, be it
   recorded: "I have never had a doubt for forty years."

   "In the social circle he was serious without gloom, cheerful without
   levity; and perhaps no man could have passed half an hour in his
   fellowship without feeling-that he was breathing in an atmosphere of
   holiness, in contact with a spirit near of kin to just men made
   perfect,' and living for the time on the verge of heaven

   "John Nelson, in describing his introduction to Clowes, says : "There
   was a most impressive gravity in his demeanor when he received me. His
   eyes were devoutly lifted up to heaven, while he implored a blessing
   upon me. "Let us pray a minute," said he; and the next moment he was
   upon his knees, pouring out the desire of his soul for me, in a manner
   which I cannot fully describe, nor shall lever forget. Among other
   things which he fervently asked, this was one-that the Spirit which
   used to come upon Samson at times in the camp of Dan, might, in all its
   energy, come upon me; and that, aided by that power, I, too, might so
   smite the Philistines, that they might fall before me, heaps upon
   heaps. While he thus pleaded, the fire of the Holy Ghost fell upon me,
   and I was more fully endued with a power which, to a greater extent,
   prepared me for the work for which I was ill-fitted, and from which I
   had shrunk with trembling apprehensions."

   "Mr. Clowes had several prominent characteristics; but the most
   prominent of all was his constancy and power in prayer. In all things
   through which he was called to pass, he had one never-failing resource,
   and that was prayer.--Shining Lights

                HOW CARVOSSO PREVAILED WITH GOD FOR HIS CHILDREN

   Carvosso, noted for the earnestness and faith of his prayers, tells as
   follows of the conversion of his children:

   "I had always prayed for my children, but now I grasped the promise,
   with the hand of faith, and retired daily at special seasons to put the
   Lord to His word. I said nothing of what I felt or did, to any one but
   the Searcher of hearts, with whom I wrestled in an agony of prayer."

   About two weeks after he was called from his work, to pray with his
   daughter, who became a seeker of Christ. His oldest son was converted
   at the same time.

   Regarding his younger son he says: "I laid hold, by faith, on the
   promise which I had while pleading for my other children. One day while
   I was wrestling with God, in mighty prayer for him, these words were
   applied with power to my mind: "There shall not a hoof be left behind."
   Soon after he yielded, and obtained the knowledge of salvation by the
   remission of sins.

   "A dull and careless way of praying for our friends will avail nothing.
   It may conceal hypocrisy, or strengthen deception concerning our own
   piety, but it will not move God nor convert a single soul. Our friends
   know that we are not in earnest, and care little for it. But, let us
   take hold of the matter in a spirit corresponding to the magnitude of
   the object to be secured, and there will be a movement!"--Prevailing
   Prayer, by Wigle.

                     NEW ENGLAND SAVED IN ANSWER TO PRAYER.

   At an early date in our history, 1746, the French fitted out a powerful
   fleet for the destruction of New England. This fleet consisted of forty
   ships of war, and seemed to all human judgment a sufficient force to
   render that destruction certain. It was put under the command of the
   resolute and experienced Duke d Anville, and set sail on its terrible
   errand, from Chedabucto, in Nova Scotia.

   In the meantime, our pious forefathers, apprised of danger, and feeling
   that their safety was in God, appointed a season of fasting and prayer,
   to be observed in all their churches.

   While the Rev. Mr. Prince was officiating in Old South church (Boston),
   on this fast-day, and praying most fervently to God to avert the
   dreaded calamity, the wind suddenly rose (the day had till now been
   perfectly clear and calm), and became so powerful as to rattle
   violently all the windows in the building. The man of God, startled for
   a moment, paused in his prayer, and cast a look round upon the
   congregation. He then resumed his supplications, and besought Almighty
   God to cause that wind to frustrate the object of their enemies, and
   save the country from conquest and popery. The wind increased to a
   tempest, and that very night the greater part of the French fleet was
   wrecked on the coast of Nova Scotia. The Duke d'Anville, the principal
   general, and the second in command, both committed suicide. Many died
   with disease, and thousands were consigned to a watery grave. The small
   number that remained alive returned to France without health and
   without spirits. The enterprise was abandoned, and never again
   resumed.--Present Conflict of Science with Religion.

                            THE ESCAPE OF THE SPREE.

   Mr. D. L. Moody and others, who were on the disabled steamer Spree,
   believe that the vessel was providentially saved in answer to prayer.
   In the midst of a severe storm, on November 27, 1892, the main shaft
   broke, and plunged through the bottom of the ship. The water-logged
   vessel rolled fearfully, and the decks were washed by the waves. The
   passengers became greatly alarmed, the indications being that the
   vessel would sink before help could reach it.

   On Sunday, at Mr. Moody's suggestion, a prayer-service was organized.
   Every person on board attended, except the officers and crew, who could
   not leave their posts.

   Gen. O.O. Howard, who was one of the passengers, says: "It was the most
   impressive religious gathering any of us ever attended. Jews,
   Catholics, and all others forgot differences in creeds and
   denominations. There was no room for them in such an hour. Mr. Moody
   read the ninety-first and one hundred and seventh Psalms, which one of
   the Germans translated verse by verse for his countrymen. Mr. Moody
   offered a most fervent prayer, and made a short address. God heard us
   and answered us. I went to my stateroom to rest after the meeting, and
   I was asleep when some one touched me. I awoke to find a sweet, fond
   little German girl, the daughter of one of the passengers, by my cot.
   She could not understand a word of English, but my daughter had drilled
   her to speak four English words, which was the message she brought me,
   "The steamer is coming," and then she added her German "hallelujah.""

   Mr. Moody says of the rescue: "There never was a more earnest prayer to
   God than that of those seven hundred souls on that helpless, almost
   sinking ship in mid-ocean, Sunday evening, November 27th, when we met
   in the saloon to implore God's help; and God answered us, as I knew He
   would. He sent us a rescuing ship, and He calmed the sea so that for a
   week it was as smooth as it is in this harbor, though there were storms
   all around us. It was the grandest test of prayer I ever knew. My son
   was with me. He is a student in Yale College, and the learned
   professors there have instilled in him some doubts about God's direct
   interference in answer to prayer. After we had prayed that Sunday
   night, I had reached a point where I cared not whether it was God's
   will that we should go up or down. I determined to go to rest as though
   we were sailing safely on our way. My boy couldn't rest. We were fast
   drifting out of the track of vessels, and our peril was extreme. About
   2:15 o'clock he came and woke me, telling me to come on deck. There he
   pointed out an occasional glimpse of a tiny light that showed over the
   waves as our ship rolled heavily from side to side. "It is our star of
   Bethlehem," he cried, "and our prayers are answered." Before daylight
   the Huron, whose masthead light it was, had reached us, and the waves
   were stilled and the winds were hushed by Divine command, while we were
   drawn out of the direst peril to this safe haven.

   The Spree arrived at Queenstown December 2, with her stern thirty feet
   in the water, notwithstanding her pumps had been steadily worked from
   the moment of the disaster.--Northwestern Christian Advocate.

                     THE SAILOR AND THE PICTURE OF CHRIST.

   The following is stated by Rev. B. Fay Mills: "Some of you have seen
   the great picture that was painted by Muncakszy, of the Christ. That
   picture was being exhibited in Canada, at Toronto, I think, and there
   came a wild, rough, wicked sailor to see it. He entered the room, at
   the time of day when there were no others there; and, paying his money
   to the woman who sat inside the room, he came in and stood for a moment
   looking at the canvas as though he would glance at it and go away. But
   as he looked he could not turn. He stood there with his eyes fixed on
   the central figure of majesty and love. In a few minutes he took off
   his hat and let it fall on the floor. After a few minutes more he sat
   down upon a seat, and there he reached down and picked up a book that
   described the picture, and began to read, and every few seconds his
   eyes would turn towards the canvas, and toward the picture of Christ.
   The lady who sat by the door, saw him lift up his hand and wipe away
   the tears. Still he sat, till five, ten, fifteen, sixty minutes went
   away; and still the man sat there, as though he could not stir. At last
   he rose, and, coming softly and reverently toward the door, he
   hesitated, to take one last look, and said to the woman who sat there:
   "Madam, I am a rough, wicked sailor. I have never believed in Christ; I
   have never used His name except in an oath; but I have a Christian
   mother, and my old mother begged me today, before I went to sea, to go
   and look at the picture of the Christ. To oblige her I said I would
   come. I did not believe that any one believed in Christ; but as I have
   looked at that form, and that face, I have thought that some man must
   have believed in Him; and it has touched me, and I have come to believe
   in Him, too. I am going out from this time to be a believer in Jesus
   Christ--and a follower of Him." O that we may be changed into the same
   image from glory to glory."-- Prevailing Prayer.

                           A PERSECUTOR'S AWFUL END.

   The following is from the Journal of George Fox, the founder of the
   Society of Friends. Fox says of this wonderful occurrence

   "Then I came again to Thomas Taylor's, within three miles of Halifax,
   where was a meeting of about two hundred people, amongst which were
   many rude people, and divers butchers, several of whom had bound
   themselves with an oath before they. came out, that they would kill me
   (as I was told); one of these butchers had been accused of killing a
   man and a woman. They came in a very rude manner, and made a great
   disturbance in the meeting. The meeting being in a field, Thomas Taylor
   stood up, and said unto them: "If you will be civil, you may stay, but,
   if not, I charge you to be gone off my ground."

   But they were the worse, and said they would make it like a common; and
   they yelled, and made a noise, as if they had been at a bear-baiting.
   They thrust Friends up and down; and Friends, being peaceable, the
   Lord's power came over them. Several times they thrust me off from the
   place I stood on, by the crowding of the people together against me;
   but still I was moved of the Lord to stand up again, as I was thrust
   down. At last I was moved of the Lord to say unto them: "If they would
   discourse of the things of God, let them come up to me one by one; and
   if they had anything to say or to object, I would answer them all, one
   after another;" but they were all silent and had nothing to say. And
   then the Lord's power came so over them all, and answered the witness
   of God in them, that they were bound by the power of God; and a
   glorious, powerful meeting we had, and his power went over all; and the
   minds of the people were turned by the Spirit of God in them to God,
   and to Christ their teacher. The powerful word of Christ was largely
   declared that day; and in the life and power of God we broke up our
   meeting; and that rude company went their way to Halifax. The people
   asked them why they did not kill me, according to the oath they had
   sworn; and they maliciously answered, that I had so bewitched them,
   that they could not do it. Thus was the devil chained at that time.
   Friends told me, that they used to come at other times, and be very
   rude; and sometimes break their stools and seats, and make frightful
   work amongst them; but the Lord's power had now bound them. Shortly
   after this, the butcher that had been accused of killing a man and a
   woman before, and who was one of them that had bound himself by an oath
   to kill me, killed another man, and then was sent to York jail. Another
   of those rude butchers, who had also sworn to kill me, having
   accustomed himself to thrust his tongue out of his mouth, in derision
   of Friends when they passed by him, had it so swollen out of his mouth
   that he could never draw it in again, but died so."--Shining Lights.

                          REVIVAL AT HARVEY, ILLINOIS.

   During the spring of 1892, we held a five-weeks revival meeting in the
   Methodist Episcopal Church, in Harvey, the new temperance town near
   Chicago, Ill. A series of meetings had closed but a few weeks before,
   and the church was divided, and some were doing all in their power to
   undermine and destroy the influence of the godly pastor. From a human
   standpoint, it looked almost like presumption to commence a protracted
   effort under such unfavorable circumstances. Yet, in spite of the
   discouragements, we felt the call was from God, and were given an
   inspiration of prayer for the town. We prayed especially for help, and
   God sent two devoted sisters from Chicago, and one from Rockford, to
   our aid.

   After a few days of great burden of soul for the work, the Lord moved
   in power among the people, and from that time they came in great
   crowds. The work done was thus reported by Evangelist Sarah A. Cooke
   (one of the workers mentioned above), in the Highway and Banner of
   Holiness;

   "Harvey has never had such a shaking up as this before,' said the
   janitor of the Methodist church, as we looked on the display of the
   Lord's power moving on the people. Night after night the altar has been
   filled with seekers, and deep conviction has taken hold of many, long
   hardened by the deceitfulness of sin. In one of the factories they have
   commenced a noonday prayer-meeting, and another in the academy; the
   principal of which has been gloriously sanctified during the revival,
   and, like a fire in his bones, the love of God has burned. I believe,'
   he said in a testimony, a few nights ago, I can claim the whole academy
   for Christ.' Twenty-three the other afternoon professed they had found
   the Lord.

   "No church is preached, no creed (save the apostles'), no dogma, just,
   All have sinned and come short of the glory of God;' Except ye repent
   ye shall all likewise perish;' and the faithful saying: Jesus Christ
   came into the world to save sinners, even the chief;' and God, as ever
   honors His own word. Brother S.B. Shaw, of Michigan, is in charge.
   Weeping between the porch and the altar, realizing the awful
   responsibility of standing between the living and the dead, and by
   faith taking hold of God by the mighty arms of faith and prayer, he
   leads the work on gloriously."

   Of the same meeting, Sister Abbie Mills, author of "Quiet Hallelujahs"
   and "Whispers of the Comforter," wrote to the Christian Witness:

   "I am here beholding the works of the Lord. In this place, known to all
   that are afar off, as well as to them that are nigh, the people of God
   are getting clear titles to the reserved inheritance, incorruptible,
   undefiled, and that will endure when Harvey is no more. I came here on
   Thursday, thinking to make a very short stay, but found the people
   engaged in a holiness meeting, under the leadership of Brother Shaw, of
   Michigan. The interest is growing, and some are getting clean hearts,
   and being filled with the Holy Ghost daily. Yesterday (Sabbath) was a
   day of much blessing. The class meeting at the noon-hour was glorious.
   Several crossed over into Beulah-land, one aged brother leaving his
   tobacco behind. At 3 P. M., Sister Cooke, of Chicago, held a children's
   meeting. In the evening the church was very full. After the sermon by
   Brother Shaw, the altar filled twice, while first on one side, then on
   the other, the cleansed would arise to testify and give their place to
   others. Far out in the congregation also, there were some on their
   knees, seeking a God who was not afar off. I had thought my work for
   the winter about over, but am constrained to tarry here this week, and
   hope to see an increased outpour or downpour of salvation."

                      GEORGE MULLER, OF BRISTOL, ENGLAND.

   This mighty man of faith is too well known to the Christian world to
   need any introduction from us. We quote the following from a brief
   sketch of his life

   "The support of his orphanage amounts to $230,000 annually. The
   milk-bill amounts to $10,000 yearly! He has sometimes paid out as much
   as $27,500 in one day. In all, Mr. Muller has received for his
   orphanage and other works of a Christian and benevolent kind, a total
   of $4,275,000; and he declares that he never asked a human being for a
   sixpence! He has made it his uniform rule to go in prayer to Him who
   has the hearts of all men in His hands, and ask Him for all needed
   supply and men have been moved to give it; some giving out of their
   abundant wealth, and some out of their poverty. He has received as high
   as $45,000 in one donation, and scores of times $5,000. A principle of
   his has been never to contract a debt in connection with his orphanage.
   Often the last sixpence has been spent, and within a few hours either
   money must come or starvation but the money came without fail, and
   never were the children sent hungry to bed. Hundreds of times he has
   held two prayer-meetings in a day with his helpers, beseeching God to
   send them supplies for the next meal of food for the orphans; and in
   every case the Lord has graciously answered their prayer. In eleven
   years, he had received five thousand answers to prayer. In the course
   of his life he has received some thirty thousand answers to prayer
   within the same day of asking; and that for some things he had been
   praying every day for over thirty years, and the answer had not come as
   yet. He mentioned these things to encourage Christians patiently to
   wait on God. He had received answers after waiting fifteen, twenty, and
   thirty years. When in the deepest poverty, he never gives any human
   being the least intimation of his needs, either by word or look, but
   always carries every matter great and small to God, and continually
   rejoices in the Lord. He declares that his countenance never looks sad
   or anxious when in need, as he considers that would be dishonoring to
   God, and inconsistent with a perfect trust in Him.

   "He says: When I first began allowing God to deal with me, relying on
   Him, taking Him at His word, and set out, over half a century ago,
   simply to rely on Him for myself, family, taxes, traveling expenses,
   and every other need, I rested on simple promises.'

   I believed the word. I rested on it and practiced it. I took God at His
   word.' A stranger, a foreigner in England, I know seven languages, and
   might have used them perhaps as a means of remunerative employment; but
   I had consecrated myself to labor for the Lord. I put my reliance in
   the God who has promised, and He has acted according to His word. I've
   lacked nothing --nothing. I have had my trials, my difficulties, and my
   empty purse, but my receipts have aggregated tens of thousands of
   dollars, while the work has gone on all these years. " -- Shining
   Lights.

                    JOHN WESLEY HEALED IN ANSWER TO PRAYER.

   An illustrious example of constancy and power in prayer, we find in
   John Wesley : "It is said that as a matter of habit and rule, John
   Wesley's ordinary private praying consumed two hours a day.' At times
   he would gather his company and pray all night, or till the power of
   God came down. Nothing was considered too great or too small to take to
   the Lord. Seized with a pain in the midst of his preaching, so that he
   could not speak, I know my remedy,' he says, and immediately kneeled
   down. In a moment the pain was gone, and the voice of the Lord cried
   aloud to sinners. Being seized with a pain, fever and cough, so that he
   could scarcely speak, I called on Jesus aloud to increase) my faith.
   While I was speaking my pain vanished away, my fever left me, and my
   bodily strength returned.'

   "The elements, as well as sickness, were often in his way, and prayer
   removed the hindrances. Just as I began to preach the sun broke out and
   shone exceedingly hot on my head. I found if it continued I should not
   be-able to speak long, and I lifted up my heart to God. In a minute or
   two it was covered with clouds which continued till the service was
   over.' And he says: Let any one who please call this chance, I call it
   an answer to prayer.' It was raining, and Wesley and his congregation
   were crowded out of the church, and the rain ceased the moment they
   came out. He says in regard to this incident: How many proofs must we
   have that there is no petition too little, any more than too great, for
   God to grant?'

   "Wesley moved things mightily, because he moved God mightily. He became
   the prince of evangelists, because he was the prince of prayers. He
   stirred the world with the -fire of his zeal, because he had stirred
   heaven by the fire of his prayers. His pleas had access to men's
   consciences, because they had access to God. If more men prayed as John
   Wesley prayed, there would be more of John Wesley's thoroughly
   spiritual work done. " -- Prevailing Prayer, by Wigle.

                 PRAYER ANSWERED FOR A DEBT OF NINETY DOLLARS.

   A few years ago we owed a-man ninety dollars. When it came due we were
   unable to pay it. We went to him and asked his forgiveness, telling him
   our circumstances. He was a Christian, and manifested a Christian
   spirit in telling us not to worry over it, that he was not uneasy. Some
   time after this, we became greatly burdened on account of the debt, and
   were led out to pray God to open the way for us to meet the obligation,
   or to influence him to donate it, as he was a man of means.

   Soon after this, a brother minister came to us, and told us how he was
   impressed to pay the obligation for us. He said he had told his wife of
   his feelings, and she remarked that she had had the same conviction for
   some time.

   This minister, living in the same neighborhood, went and offered the
   money, or part of it, which the man took. But a short time after, he
   was so burdened over it that he could not sleep, and was compelled to
   take the money back to the minister, Brother K., in the night. He went
   to the home of Brother K----., and called him up, and in tears told him
   how the Lord had appeared to him in the night, and compelled him to
   return the money. He said it seemed that forks were sticking in him,
   and he was impressed to donate the money to us, instead of allowing our
   friend, Brother K----. to pay the obligation. Thus God answered our
   prayer in a time of special need, as he always does those that call
   upon Him in the right spirit.-- Editor.

                         CORN THE FROST COULD NOT KILL.

   By our request, Brother L.G. Whitney, a reliable Christian man, of
   Hemlock, Mich., writes us of a remarkable interposition of Providence
   in reference to his field of corn. This is his story:

   "Two years ago, the seed-corn in this part of the country proved
   poor--not having sufficiently ripened the previous year. I saw an
   advertisement of a ninety-days corn, and sent to Pennsylvania and
   obtained enough to plant eleven acres. It grew rapidly, and became tall
   and stout. When other corn was out of the way of the frost, mine was
   just beginning to fill. One day as I was walking through it, I realized
   that it could not come to maturity. I fell on my knees, and talked to
   my heavenly Father about it. I well remember how I addressed Him,
   saying: "Father, I have been deceived in this corn; according to the
   season and the nature of the corn it cannot ripen. But, Father, it is
   in Thy hands, I have given myself and all I have into Thy care. It is
   only by Thy power that this field of corn can ever ripen. Thy will be
   done. I will not complain" While I was thus addressing Him, heavenly
   peace filled my soul. Frost after frost came, and froze ice as thick as
   a window-glass. My neighbors would say: What is the matter with
   Whitney's corn that the frosts do not kill it?' It stood like a green
   forest through all the frosts till it ripened. I never had such a crop
   of corn before or since. I know the Lord will answer the prayers of the
   faithful in heart, and no good thing will he withhold from them that
   walk uprightly.'

                                 THE DYING BOY

   But I have another anecdote to tell. It was Ralph Wallace who told me
   of this one. A certain gentleman was a member of the Presbyterian
   Church. His little boy was sick. When he went home his wife was
   weeping, and she said:

   "Our boy is dying; he has had a change for the worse. I wish you would
   go in and see him." The father went into the room, and placed his hand
   upon the brow of his dying boy, and could feel that the cold, damp
   sweat was gathering there; that the cold, icy hand of death was feeling
   for the chords of life.

   "Do you know, my boy, that you are dying?" asked the father.

   "Am I? Is this death? Do you really think I am dying?"

   "Yes, my son, your end on earth is near."

   "And will I be with Jesus tonight, father?"

   "Yes, you will be with the Savior."

   "Father, don't you weep, for when I get there I will go right straight
   to Jesus, and tell Him that you have been trying all my life to lead me
   to Him."

   God has given me two little children, and ever since I can remember I
   have directed them to Christ; and I would rather they carried this
   message to Jesus that I had tried all my life to lead them to Him-than
   have all the crowns of the earth; and I would rather lead them to Jesus
   than give them the wealth of the world. If you have got a child, go and
   point the way I challenge any man to speak of heaven without speaking
   of children. "For of such is the kingdom of heaven."--Moody's Anecdotes

                        INSTANCES OF THE POWER OF PRAYER

   The instances in which, in answer to prayer, God has sent remarkable
   deliverances to people, are numerous and striking. In the days of Queen
   Elizabeth, die terrible Spanish Armada was scattered or destroyed in
   answer to fervent prayers offered by the people of God in England. In
   1746; the French armament of forty ships, prepared under the Duke
   d'Anville against the American colonies, was, in answer to prayer,
   totally ruined by a tempest. The leaders of the expedition were so
   overwhelmed at the suddenness and completeness of their disaster, that
   both of them committed suicide.

   But God can save his beleaguered people without destroying their foes.
   LeClerc tells us that when, in 1672, the Dutch were expecting an attack
   from their enemies by sea, "public prayers were ordered for
   deliverance. It came to pass that when their enemies waited only for
   the tide, in order to land. the tide was retarded, contrary to its
   usual course, for twelve hours, so that their enemies were obliged to
   defer the attempt to another opportunity; which they never found,
   because a storm arose afterwards, and drove them from the coast."

   How wonderfully God has answered prayer in behalf of good institutions
   founded to alleviate human misery. Of this we have a striking instance
   in the Orphan House, at Halle, founded by Francke. His school was
   unendowed. In 1696, he had not money to support the school a week
   longer. When the last morsel was about to be consumed, a thousand
   crowns were received from an unknown source. At other times of distress
   he received, answer to special prayer twenty, thirty, and fifty crowns.
   He says: "Another time all our provision was spent, but in addressing
   myself to the Lord, I found myself deeply affected with the fourth
   petition of the Lord's prayer, Give us this day our daily bread; and my
   thoughts were fixed in a more especial manner on the words this day,'
   because on the very same day we had great occasion for it. While I was
   yet praying, a friend of mine came before my door in a coach, and
   brought the sum of four hundred crowns -- Power of Prayer, by Prime.

                EDWARDPAYSON, A MAN WHO PRAYED WITHOUT CEASING.

   This well-known man of God was for many years pastor of the
   Congregational Church at Portland, Me. His remarkable success was, to a
   very great extent, the result of his prevailing prayers. Oh, that many
   might follow his example! We clip the following from a sketch of his
   life in "Shining Lights":

   He prayed without ceasing. Aware of the aberrations to which the human
   mind is liable, he most earnestly sought the guidance and control of
   the Holy Spirit. He felt safe nowhere but at the throne of grace. He
   may be said to have studied theology on his knees; much of his time he
   spent literally prostrated, with the Bible open before him, pleading
   the promises: "I will send the Comforter -- and when He, the Spirit of
   truth, is come, he will guide you into all truth."

   To his ardent and persevering prayers must, no doubt, be ascribed, in a
   great pleasure, his distinguished and almost uninterrupted success;
   and, next to these, the undoubted sincerity of his belief in the truths
   which he inculated. His language, his conversation and whole
   deportment, were such as brought home and fastened on the minds of his
   hearers the conviction that he believed, and therefore spoke. The
   revivals of religion which took place under his labors were numerous,
   and were characterized by a depth and power seldom seen. Nor was his
   eminent usefulness confined within the narrow sphere of his own
   congregation. In. distant parts of the country, at various special
   gatherings, his ministry was made a blessing to many thousands, both in
   the conversion of souls and in raising the tone of piety among
   believers.

   When his body, full of pain, was gradually sinking into the grave, he
   wrote to his sister: "Were I to adopt the figurative language of
   Bunyan, I might date this letter from the land of Beulah, of which I
   have been for some weeks a happy inhabitant. The celestial city is full
   in my view. Its glories beam upon me; its breezes fan me; its odors are
   wafted to me; its sounds strike upon my ears, and its spirit is
   breathed into my heart. Nothing separates me from it but the river of
   death, which now appears as an insignificant rill, that may be crossed
   at a single step, whenever God shall give permission. The Sun of
   Righteousness has been gradually drawing nearer and nearer, appearing
   larger and brighter as He approached, and now He fills the whole
   hemisphere; pouring forth a flood of glory, in which I seem to float
   like an insect in the beams of the sun; exulting, yet almost trembling,
   while I gaze on this excessive brightness, and wondering, with
   unutterable wonder, why God should deign thus to shine upon a sinful
   worm. A single heart and a single tongue seem altogether too inadequate
   to my wants; I want a whole heart for every separate emotion, and a
   whole tongue

   He was asked: "Do you feel to express that emotion reconciled?" "O,
   that is too cold! Rejoice! Triumph! And this happiness will endure as
   long as God himself, for it consists in admiring and adoring Him. I can
   find no words to express my happiness. I seem to be swimming in a river
   of pleasure, which is carrying me on to the great fountain. It seems as
   if all the fountains of heaven were opened, and all its fullness and
   happiness, and, I trust, no small portion of its benevolence, is come
   down into my heart."

   To his wife he said, while dying: " Hitherto I have viewed God as a
   fixed star, bright, indeed, but often intercepted by clouds; but now he
   is coming nearer and nearer; and spreads into a sun so vast and
   glorious, that the sight is too dazzling for flesh and blood to
   sustain." This was not a blind adoration of an imaginary Deity; for,
   added he, "I see clearly that all these same glorious and dazzling
   perfections, which now only serve to kindle my affections into a flame,
   and to melt down my soul into the same blessed image, would burn and
   scorch me like a consuming fire, if I were an impenitent sinner."

                              THE ANGEL OF MERCY.

   The following pathetic story of our late war is told by a Christian
   writer:

   "At the close of the first bloody day of the battle of Fredericksburg,
   hundreds of the Union wounded were left lying on the ground, and the
   road ascending Mary's Heights. All night and most of the next day, the
   open space was swept by artillery shot from both the opposing lines,
   and no one could venture to the sufferers' relief. All that time their
   agonized cries went up for "Water! Water!" But there was no one to help
   them, and the roar of the guns mocked their distress. At length,
   however, one brave fellow, behind the stone ramparts where the Southern
   forces lay, gave way to his sympathy, and rose superior to his love for
   life. He was a sergeant in a South Carolina regiment, and his name was
   Richard Kirkland. In the afternoon he hurried to General Kershaw's
   headquarters, and finding the commanding officer, said to him
   excitedly: "General, I can't stand this any longer. Those poor souls
   out there have been praying and crying all night and all day, and it's
   more than I can bear. I ask your permission to go and give them water?"

   "But, do you know,"' said the general, admiring the soldier's noble
   spirit, "do you know that as soon as you show yourself to the enemy you
   will be shot?"

   "Yes, sir; I know it; but to carry a little comfort to those poor dying
   men, I'm willing to run the risk."

   "The general hesitated for a moment, but finally said, with emotion:
   "Kirkland, it's sending you to your death, but I cannot oppose such a
   motive as yours. For the sake of it I hope God will protect you. Go."

   Furnished with a supply of water, the brave sergeant immediately
   stepped over the wall, and applied himself to his work of Chris Like
   mercy. Wondering eyes looked on as he knelt by the nearest sufferer,
   and, tenderly raising his head, held the cooling cup to his parched
   lips. Before his first service of love was finished, every one in the
   Union lines understood the mission of the noble soldier in gray, and
   not a man fired a shot. He staid there on that terrible field an hour
   and a half, giving drink to the thirsty and dying, straightening their
   cramped and mangled limbs, pillowing their heads on their knapsacks,
   and spreading their army coats and blankets over them, as mother would
   cover her child; and all the while he was so engaged, until his gentle
   ministry was finished, the fusilade of death was hushed."

   So it is on life's battlefield. The cannonade of sin and wickedness is
   hushed and powerless before the fearless Christian soldier who dares to
   do right, even though his life hangs in the balance.--N.W. Christian
   Advocate.

   lVY POISON SUDDENLY HEALED.

   In answer to our request, Sister S.E. McKeen, of Lake City, Iowa, has
   furnished us the following account of a wonderful case of physical
   healing. Her statement is entirely reliable. We give it in her own
   words

   "Last August, I attended a meeting held at Storm Lake, Iowa, for the
   promotion of holiness, and while there became acquainted with a young
   minister and wife from Dakota by the name of Cone. Unfortunately for
   them, they pitched their tent where poison-ivy had grown, and she
   became sadly poisoned. When I first saw her on Thursday evening, she
   was suffering from fever, and in great pain. Her face was swollen, her
   eye bloodshot, and her whole body was covered with the eruption that
   follows the ivy-poison. Her stomach also refused to retain food or
   medicine, and if she raised her head she became faint.

   "Physicians were consulted, and various remedies tried, but still she
   found no relief. The tent had been moved, and on Sabbath morning, when
   I called to see her on my way to the tabernacle to morning service, she
   was no better. That morning her husband had told me that she wanted
   them to pray that she might be healed. I went on to the service, but
   the tent was so crowded, and I was feeling so very tired, that I went
   to our tent to lie down for rest, and read my Bible. I had lain but a
   few minutes when her sister-in-law came in, and said that Mrs. Cone
   wanted me. On asking what was wanted, she said: "She wants you to pray
   that she may be healed." To say that I was surprised does not express
   it; I was amazed, for faith-cure' was something I did not know much
   about, never having given it any serious thought.

   I did not understand the work of the Holy Ghost, being myself a new
   convert to holiness, and having come to this place to be established in
   the doctrine.

   "I said: I'll go. O Jesus, show me what to say to the dear one, and for
   her to Thee." I sat down by her bed a moment, and then asked: Do you
   believe the prayer of faith will save you?' She quickly answered: Yes.'
   I knelt down beside her, and prayed, and the Holy Spirit took complete
   possession of me, for I did not know where I was or what I said; but
   when I arose my soul was so full I could not speak. I left her, still
   in prayer, without a word.

   "I was engaged in one of the small tabernacles, and had so completely
   given her over to Jesus that the whole thing passed from my mind. It
   was five o'clock when I returned, and as usual went to see how the
   sister was; when, lot I found her sitting outside her door, and dressed
   for evening service. When she saw me she said "Praise God! I'm healed.'
   Glory to Jesus! The Great Physician had been there and she was restored
   whole. Her husband had only that morning got permission to leave his
   tent on the ground, for the Storm Lake physician had said she could not
   be moved for a week. Hallelujah! How it strengthened my faith, and how
   strong I felt to do God's will. I have often felt my weakness since
   then, but it has been a bright spot to look back to ever since. I am
   walking in the highway of holiness, and light streaming down from above
   makes my pathway all clear, going home to Jesus."

                        REVELATIONS FROM GOD IN DREAMS.

   All dreams that make you better are from God. How do I know it? Is not
   God the source of all good? It does not take a very logical mind to
   argue that out. Tertullian and Martin Luther believed in dreams. The
   dreams of John Huss are immortal. St. Augustine, the Christian father,
   gives us the fact that a Carthagenian physician was persuaded of the
   immortality of the soul by an argument which he heard in a dream. The
   night before his assassination, the wife of Julius Caesar dreamed that
   her husband fell dead across her lap. It is possible to prove that God
   does appear in dreams to warn, to convert, and to save men. My friend,
   a retired sea-captain and a Christian, tells me that one night, while
   on the sea, he dreamed that a ship's crew were in great suffering.
   Waking up from his dream, he put about the ship, tacked in different
   directions, surprised everybody on the vessel--they thought he was
   going crazy--sailed on in another direction hour after hour, and for
   many hours, until he came to the perishing crew, and rescued them, and
   brought them to New York. Who conducted that dream? The God of the sea.

   In 1695, a vessel went out from Spithead for West India and ran against
   the ledge of rocks called the Caskets. The vessel went down, but the
   crew clambered up on the Caskets, to die of thirst or starvation, as
   they supposed. But there was a ship hound for Southampton that had the
   captain's son on board. This lad twice in one night dreamed that there
   was a crew of sailors dying on the Caskets. He told his father of his
   dream. The vessel came down by the Caskets in time to find and to
   rescue those two dying men. Who conducted that dream? The God of the
   rocks, the God of the sea.

   The Rev. Dr Bushnell, in his marvelous book, entitled "Nature and the
   Supernatural," gives the following that he got from Captain Yount, in
   California, a fact confirmed by many families: Captain Yount dreamed
   twice one night that one hundred and fifty miles away there was a
   company of travelers fast in the snow. He also saw in the dream rocks
   of a peculiar formation, and telling his dream to an old hunter, the
   hunter said " Why, I remember those rocks those rocks are in the Carson
   Valley Pass, one hundred and fifty miles away." Captain Yount, impelled
   by this dream, although laughed at by his neighbors, gathered men
   together, took mules and blankets, and started out on the expedition,
   traveled one hundred and fifty miles, saw those very rocks which he had
   described in his dream, and finding the suffering ones at the foot of
   those rocks, brought them back; to confirm the story of Captain Yount.
   Who conducted that dream? The God of the snow, the God of the Sierra
   Nevadas.

   God has often appeared in dreams to rescue and comfort. You have known
   people--perhaps it is something I state in your own experience--you
   have seen people go to sleep with bereavements inconsolable, and they
   awakened in perfect resignation because of what they had seen in
   slumber. Dr Crannage, one of the most remarkable men I ever
   met--remarkable for benevolence and great philapthropics--at
   Wellington, England, showed me a house where the Lord had appeared in a
   wonderful dream to a poor woman. The woman was rheumatic, sick, poor to
   the last point of destitution. She was waited on and cared for by
   another poor woman, her only attendant. Word came to her one day that
   this poor woman had died, and the invalid of whom I am speaking lay
   helpless upon the couch, wondering what would become of her. In that
   mood she fell asleep. In her sleep she said the Angel of the Lord
   appeared, and took her into the open air, and pointed in one direction,
   and there were mountains of bread, and pointed in another direction,
   and there were mountains of butter, and in another direction, and there
   were mountains of all kinds of worldly supply. The Angel of the Lord
   said to her: "Woman, all these mountains belong to your Father, and do
   you think that he will let you, his child, hunger and die?" Dr.
   Crannage told me, by some Divine impulse he went into that destitute
   home, saw the suffering there, and administered unto it, caring for her
   all the way through. Do you tell me that that dream was woven out of
   earthly anodynes? Was that the phantasmagoria of a diseased brain? No;
   it was an all-sympathetic God at dressing a poor woman through a dream.

   Furthermore, I have to say, that there are people in this house who
   were converted to God through a dream. The Rev. John Newton, the fame
   of whose piety fills all Christendom, while a profligate sailor on
   shipboard, in his dream, thought that a being approached him and gave
   him a very beautiful ring, and put it upon his finger, and said to him,
   "As long as you wear that ring, you will be prospered; if you lose that
   ring, you will be ruined." In the same dream another personage
   appeared, and by a strange infatuation persuaded John Newton to throw
   that ring overboard, and sank into the sea. Then the mountains in sight
   were full of fire, and the air was lurid, with consuming wrath. While
   John Newton was repenting of his folly in having thrown overboard the
   treasure, another personage came through the dream, and told John
   Newton he would plunge into the sea and bring the ring up if he desired
   it. He plunged into the sea and brought it up, and said to John Newton:
   "Here is that gem, but I think I will keep it for you, lest you lose it
   again;" and John Newton consented, and all the fire went out from the
   mountains, and all the signs of lurid wrath disappeared, from the air;
   and John Newton said that he saw in his dream that that valuable gem
   was his soul; and that the being who persuaded him to throw it
   overboard was Satan, and that the one who plunged in and restored that
   gem, keeping it for him, was Christ. And that dream makes one of the
   most wonderful chapters in the life of that most wonderful man.

   A German was crossing the Atlantic Ocean, and in his dream he saw a man
   with a handful of white flowers, and he was told to follow the man who
   had that handful of white flowers.

   The German, arriving in New York, wandered into the Fulton street
   prayer-meeting, and Mr. Lamphier--whom many of you know-the great
   apostle of prayer-meetings, that day had given to him a bunch of
   tuberoses. They stood on his desk, and at the close of the religious
   services he took the tube roses and started homeward, and the German
   followed him, and through an interpreter told Mr. Lamphier that on the
   sea he had dreamed of a man with a handful of white flowers and was
   told to follow him. Suffice it to say, through that interview and
   following interviews, he became a Christian, and is a city missionary
   preaching the gospel to his own countrymen. God in a dream!

   John Hardock, while on shipboard, dreamed one night that the day of
   judgment had come, and that the roll of the ship's crew was called
   except his own name, and that these people, this crew, were all
   banished; and in his dream he asked the reader why his own name was
   omitted, and he was told it was to give him more opportunity for
   repentance. He woke up a different man. He became illustrious for
   Christian attainment. If you do not believe these things, then you must
   discard all testimony, and refuse to accept any kind of authoritative
   witness. God in a dream!--T. DeWitt Talmage

                THE WONDERFUL RESULTS OF A LITTLE PRAYING BAND.

   In the year 1874, a little band of humble Christians was formed in
   Chicago, having for its one object the salvation of souls. Four of the
   number had been local preachers in England, others were lay-workers.
   But alike, their hearts burned within them to spread abroad the
   knowledge of redeeming love.

   Among them were Charles Cooke, now gone to join the innumerable company
   around the throne; W.G. Hanmer, now a chairman of the Free Methodist
   Church in Wisconsin; Mrs. Sarah A. Cooke, still engaged in evangelistic
   work; Richard S. Martin, at present pastor of Grace Methodist Episcopal
   Church, Chicago; Thomas Fluck, now preaching on the Pacific coast;
   Samuel Gittins, now in California; David Andrews, from that time to
   this out in the great harvest-field; and a Brother and Sister Jones,
   now working in Chicago. James Bird, now in glory, Henry Huck, and
   others, were engaged in business, but were with the band more or less
   throughout the great awakening of which we will speak.

   They labored for a time in Chicago; but in answer to earnest prayer for
   God's blessing and guidance, they were led out into North-Western
   Indiana.

   Their first Macedonian cry from outside the city was from Hessville, a
   small, neglected place, where the teacher of the day-school, a Mrs.
   Price, had been trying, amidst much opposition, to commence a Sabbath
   school. In such seemingly unfavorable surroundings the work broke out
   in great power. Other workers came to their aid, and soon the community
   was in a flame of revival. Great and glorious were the results. From
   Hessville the band were called to Gibson; and here, as before, the work
   spread in every direction.

   They went from Gibson to Ross station, where we first saw them. At the
   latter place, the meetings were held in a school-house; but crowds
   flocked together from the country round. We were then unsaved, and the
   manifestations of God's presence, and the working of His Spirit on
   hearts, were beyond anything we had previously witnessed, and were a
   great mystery to us. Such scenes cannot be described. It is enough to
   say, that sinners wept as if their hearts would break with sorrow for
   sin, and cried aloud for mercy, until their cries of penitence were
   changed to songs of praise for deliverance.

   Of the experience of the workers, Sister Cooke writes us: "We journeyed
   from place to place, as surely guided as the children of Israel when
   led by the pillar of fire. How often as our every want was supplied
   would the Savior's query come to our minds: When I sent you forth
   without purse or scrip, lacked ye anything?' and they said: "Nothing."
   Our God did supply all our needs. When a call came, we only asked: "Are
   we needed in that place? Is this God's call?" These questions
   satisfactorily answered, we went forward, dwelling with unspeakable
   delight upon the promise: Lo! I am with you alway.'

   Merrillville was their fourth point. Here a tent was donated by a
   Brother Morgan, who had been wonderfully blessed in the meetings. It
   was afterwards successively pitched at Wood's Mill, Blachley's Corners,
   Hebron, and other places, and at each place thousands thronged to the
   services. Under that tent, while it was located at Wood's Mill, the
   prayers of our sainted mother, who died when we were but thirteen years
   old, were answered, and we were gloriously and marvelously converted to
   God; and since that day God has in His mercy given us thousands of
   souls.

   In spite of opposition, the influence of the work was so great that it
   was felt in all that part of the state. In each place visited, the
   revival became the chief topic of conversation among all classes of
   society. In the very busiest seasons of the year, including the
   harvest-time, farmers might be seen all along the roads for miles,
   carrying loads of people to the meetings, and singing and praising God
   as they went. Truly those were days long to be remembered! In many
   cases people attended regularly, who lived eight or ten miles distant;
   and this interest continued, not only night after night, but week after
   week, and month after month. Sinners of every grade were saved, by
   scores and hundreds. Many of the converts were called to the ministry,
   and several labored with the band after their conversion; and many, to
   this day, are successful laborers in gospel fields.

   But we have not space to follow the progress of the work definitely.
   Hobart, Wheeler, Crown Point, Porter Cross Roads, Valparaiso, North
   Judson, Knox, and other places, were, in their turn, visited by that
   little, humble, fire-anointed band. After the weather became too cold
   for the use of the tent, large halls were used; and in some cases,
   large tabernacles were built especially for their use. Everywhere the
   mighty power of God was revealed, and many were rescued from eternal
   death. No account was kept; but multitudes were numbered among the
   redeemed, as the direct result of that glorious work, and thousands
   more are already saved, as the indirect result of their labors.

   But what was the secret of such abundant success? Most assuredly the
   work was not wrought by human might or wisdom, and no dependence was
   put in the arm of flesh. But it was wrought by the power of the Spirit,
   and that power was revealed in answer to earnest, constant) humble,
   prevailing prayer. Well has one of the workers said: "The work was
   cradled in prayer." In every hour of need, prayer was their one
   recourse. Truly they lived at the foot of the cross, and so constantly
   manifested the mind of Christ. To our personal knowledge, it was their
   custom, before each service, to repair together to some secluded spot,
   and there together pour out their souls to God in pleading for His
   blessing, and a fresh outpouring of His Spirit. And when they entered
   the meeting, they were so anointed by the Holy Ghost that revival fires
   were kindled by their very presence. Most of their preaching was in the
   form of burning exhortation. There were no prepared sermons. Just
   before the service, the question was asked "Who has the message?" and
   the one who felt it laid upon his heart, read the Word, and commented
   as he was led by the Spirit. They were also eminently given to secret
   prayer, and everywhere they went were called "The Praying Band."

   The second secret of their success was perfect unity in heart. Though
   members of different denominations, they never allowed mere differences
   of opinion to result in prejudice. By prayer and humility they were
   always able to see eye to eye concerning the work; and all who saw them
   were compelled to exclaim "Behold, how these love one another!"

   To this day, our heart burns within us as we think of what God there
   wrought through those faithful, humble souls and we exclaim with Sister
   Cooke: "I would go all around the world to see another work so
   glorious."--Editor.

                      TRIUMPHANT DEATH OF THREE CHILDREN.

   Three children of Brother and Sister I.L. Miller, of Sycamore, O., died
   about the beginning of 1893, of diphtheria. Brother Miller wrote us
   some of the particulars; and from these an account, though imperfect,
   is subjoined, mostly in his own language:

   "One was a girl of thirteen years, who was converted in our meeting,
   two years ago. Another was a girl of nine years, who was converted a
   short time after the death of the first, at family worship. Also a son,
   eighteen years of age, who was converted during his sickness. He
   rejoiced, and praised God until death.

   "The first, little Effie, was an earnest Christian worker." Often as we
   started for prayer-meeting, she would say: Wait until I go and get a
   little schoolmate." She talked much during her sickness about Jesus,
   although her suffering was great. At one time, a day before she died,
   she said to me: If I could rest a little while.' I said: "Don't you
   think Jesus would help you, if you would ask Him?" "Yes," she said;
   "you ask Him." She folded her hands and fell asleep, for a full half
   hour. On waking with a smile, I said to her: You had good rest.' Yes, I
   had; and I saw Jesus. He talked with me, and said he was coming for me
   soon. He showed me heaven; oh, such a beautiful place!' Soon after she
   called all, bidding them good-bye, saying: I am going to live with
   Jesus, and I want to meet you in heaven.' As the family were weeping,
   there was not a tear on her cheek; but with smiles and expressions of
   delight, she said:  Don't weep; Jesus will let me stay another day.'
   And so it was.

   "The next one was little Vetta, who died about a month later. One day
   she had been in an apparent stupor. She commenced to call Laurie,'
   several times. On waking she said that she had seen her aunt Laurie and
   her sister Effie; that they were together, and she would never come
   back any more to live here. So she talked freely of leaving, and of
   heaven. After this she, refused to take any more medicine, and said she
   wanted to die, and go to heaven, where Effie and Jesus were.--Thomas K.
   Doty, Editor Christian Harvester.

                                A GUIDING VOICE.

   A touching story came to us from Minnesota. A farmer, living on the
   edge of one of the many lakes of that state, started to cross it in a
   small sail-boat one evening after dark. The wind changed, and a gust
   overturned the boat when he was in the middle of the lake. The surface
   of the water was covered with large masses of floating ice. The farmer
   was an expert swimmer, and he struck out boldly towards the shore,
   where he thought his house stood; but he grew confused in the darkness;
   the ice formed rapidly over the whole lake.

   He was in a small, quickly-narrowing circle, in which he beat about
   wildly, the chill of death creeping over his body. He gave up at last,
   and was sinking in the freezing water, when he heard a sound.

   It was the voice of his little girl calling him: "Father! Father!" He
   listened. The sound of her voice would tell him which way home lay. It
   put fresh life into him. He thought: "If she would only call once more!
   But she will be frightened at the dark and cold. She will go in and
   shut the door"

   But just then came the cry, loud and clear: "Father!" "I turned," said
   the man afterward, in telling the story, "and struck out in the
   opposite direction. I had been going away from home. I fought my way;
   the ice broke before me.

   I reached the shore and home at last. But if my dear away from home. I
   fought my way; the ice broke before little girl had not persisted in
   calling me, though hearing no reply, I should have died there alone
   under the ice."--Wesleyan Methodist.

   What a multitude of souls about us, like that poor man, have lost their
   balance, and let go their grip on the life-boat, and are struggling
   amid the cold, icy waves of sin--soon to sink to the bottomless pit and
   be forever lost, unless some one goes as near to them as possible, and
   calls them in the right direction. Just one word spoken in Jesus' name
   may show them the right way, and be the means of their salvation.

   Dear brother, the sound of your voice, the words you may speak, the
   kind action you may do, may show some fallen brother the right way
   home. O let us not be weary in well-doing, for in due season we shall
   reap if we faint not.--Editor.

                         A WONDERFUL ANSWER TO PRAYER.

   Robert Green was born and brought up a slave in Charleston, S.C. His
   master was a Methodist minister, who owned a large number of slaves,
   and was consequently very rich; but the act of emancipation suddenly
   reduced him to poverty. This reverse of fortune so overcame him, that
   he was taken immediately sick, and died soon after. Robert had by this
   time become a first-class cook, and when freed, he went as cook on
   board a steamship running from Charleston to New York. This position he
   held for two years, after which he came to New York to live, and found
   no difficulty in getting and keeping a situation as cook in saloons or
   hotels. While engaged in this business he was taken sick with a
   rheumatic disease, which confined him to his bed for six months. After
   having spent all of his savings for doctors and nurses, he was carried
   to the Home, a helpless cripple; he could use neither hands nor feet.

   One afternoon as we were visiting through the wards, finding him so
   very sick, we stopped by his bed, and began to talk with him about his
   soul, warning him to get ready for death. Until this time he had been
   careless and unconcerned about eternal things; but to find strangers so
   interested in his soul's welfare, and the solemnity and earnestness
   with which the exhortation was delivered, so deeply impressed him, that
   he could not obliterate the effect from his mind. He slept none that
   night, for the solemn words kept ringing in his ears: "Get ready for
   death! Get ready for death!" At one time during the night, he felt
   quite sure that he saw the same missionary standing by his bedside,
   repeating the same words: "You better get ready for death!" He heard
   her voice, and knew it to be the same that warned him in the afternoon.
   The following day he would take no food, but said that he must fast and
   pray until the Lord had forgiven his sins. He was in great distress of
   soul, praying day and night for mercy. The next Wednesday he asked if
   he might be taken into the chapel to the meeting. The doctor said he
   was not able to go; but he begged so hard that he finally consented;
   and two of the men helped him into the chapel. After the sermon, an
   invitation was given for sinners to come to the altar for prayer.
   Robert said he wanted to go, and the men helped him to the altar, where
   he began to cry for mercy. The praying ones gathered around him, and
   carried his case to the Lord in mighty prayer. He had a hard struggle,
   but came off victorious. The blessing came in overwhelming power; he
   began to shout the praises of God, and asked to be helped on his feet.
   They told him he could not stand, and had better remain sitting. But he
   begged them to help him on his feet; so they raised him from the chair,
   and held him, while he continued to shout: "Glory to God! Glory to
   God!" Soon he told them to let him go, and, breaking away, he walked
   off a few steps, and stood shouting: "Glory to God!" for a few moments.
   Then he began walking to and fro in front of the altar, still shouting:
   "Glory to God! He has converted my soul, and healed my body! I am a
   well man. Glory to God! He has converted my soul, and healed my body!"

   The next day one of the doctors came into the ward, and left him some
   medicine. He said: " Doctor, I don't want any more medicine. The Lord
   has converted my soul, and healed my body." "I heard," said the doctor,
   "that you walked from the chapel into the ward yesterday; Are you well
   to-day? Let me see you walk!" Robert rose to his feet, and walked
   across the ward and back. "That will do," said the doctor; "I guess you
   will be able to leave the Home soon." And he did leave soon after, and
   engaged in his -former business. It is about four years since his
   conversion. He has enjoyed perfect health ever since, is a member in
   good standing in one of the churches, and continues faithfully
   following the Lord. -- Brands from the Burning.

        MISS CARRIE WEBB'S STORY OF HER RESTORATION TO HEALTH BY PRAYER.

   Miss Carrie C. Webb, who believes that she experienced faith-cure
   recently, while sojourning at Northport, L.I., has returned to her
   home, 416 Gold-street, Brooklyn, and many friends and neighbors have
   called to see her, and hear her remarkable story. She is twenty-three
   years old, and of slender form. She has been a teacher in the Hanson
   Place Baptist Church for several years, and her father is a deacon in
   the Bedford Avenue Baptist Church, whose venerable pastor, the Rev. Dr.
   Hutchings, with many members of his congregation, are firm believers in
   the efficacy of prayer in removing disease. Two months ago Miss Webb
   went to spend the summer at her brother's house, in Northport, and her
   condition, physically and mentally, was such that her friends never
   expected to see her come back alive. She has, however, returned, with
   her mind bright and clear, and her health apparently fully restored.
   This is Miss Webb's explanation of how the change was brought about:

   "I had been declining in health for nearly seven years, suffering
   constantly from bronchitis and a severe cough. My mind became affected,
   and I had strange and uncontrollable fancies, and became morbid and
   despondent. I was at last attacked with neuralgia, and often prayed
   that I might die, as I became a burden to my family. One day soon after
   I arrived at Northport and while I was lying on a lounge in the
   library, at my brother's house, my eye lighted on a book on the
   faith-cure. I read it. That same afternoon my brother asked me if I had
   ever thought of faith-cure, and told him about the book-incident,
   adding that I had never thought of it in connection with myself. I
   said, I did not think I had sufficient faith to receive such a
   blessing. He told me to think over and pray about the matter; and three
   days after I went to him and told him I was ready to be anointed. My
   brother sent for the Presbyterian minister of the village, and when he
   arrived, we went into the library. The service was very impressive, and
   I wept all the time it was going on, and when he was pouring oil on my
   head. I did not feel any better the next day, but rather worse.

   "Just one week after the anointing I awoke in unusual pain, and prayed
   to God to let me die. Then I suddenly thought it would be better for me
   to pray for health; and I prayed, and cried, for three hours. Finally,
   when I arose and stood erect, I felt a sensation of health and strength
   I had not known for seven long years. I realized that I was well again,
   and that my prayers had been answered. Not only had my pains all
   vanished, but the cloud also disappeared from my mind. The cure was
   genuine and complete. I have not had a pain or ache since that morning
   of prolonged prayer." -- New York Sun.

    REMARKABLE PRAYER OF MISSIONARY COX AND HIS BROTHER, FOR THEIR BROTHER.

   Melville B. Cox was the first missionary of the Methodist Episcopal
   Church to Africa. He labored in Liberia but a short time, and died. It
   was he who, just before his death uttered those words, that have often
   been reiterated, for the purpose of stimulating the endeavors of the
   missionary cause, as follows: "Let a thousand fall before Africa be
   given up!" His memoir was prepared by his brother, and published by the
   Methodist Book Concern. In it is a letter, which will fully explain
   itself, and at the same time show why we have given it a place in these
   pages. It is as follows:

   "NEW YORK, July 25, 1835.

   "My Dear Sir: There is one circumstance in the life of the late Mr.
   Cox, which, at least to some of his Christian friends, may claim a
   degree more of attention than he has given to it, and which it is
   probably out of your own power to give, without some additional facts
   in the case. If I recollect rightly, he has merely recorded the fact,
   and that rather incidentally. A relation of the circumstances is the
   more important, as without the detail, the fact may become a subject of
   ridicule by the semi-infidel, hut with this detail may afford him a
   suggestion, the truth of which he cannot so easily gain say. I am
   aware, too, that the occurrence may he passed over, as have been
   thousands of others of a similar, and even of a more striking
   character, without acknowledging any supernatural agency; but it must
   be on the ground of admitting greater mysteries in the explanation than
   would be found in frankly confessing even the agency of the Deity.

   "The following are the facts they occurred when Mr. Cox was about
   twenty years of age. At the time of this singular incident, his brother
   James, who, it will be seen, was concerned in the affair, was at sea,
   being master of the brig, Charles Faucet,' which was then on her
   passage to New Orleans. This young gentleman, although well fitted for
   his business in every other respect, and irreproachable in his conduct
   among men, was destitute of religion.

   "From the hour that James sailed for New Orleans, Melville, with
   another brother of his, and who was alike partner in his precious
   faith,' made the absent brother a constant subject of prayer. Such,
   indeed, were their feelings for James, and so absorbing to them was be
   great question of his soul's salvation, that it became, for a few
   weeks, with them, their first and last thought for the day.

   "One evening, just as the sun had fallen, the two brothers, as they
   were sometimes wont- to do, visited the edge of the woods, back of the
   village, where they then resided, and there knelt down to pray. The
   first object of interest before them was their absent brother, whose
   image came up to their view with more than ordinary distinctness, and
   who, it seemed to them, was not only far away on the sea, tossed upon
   its waves as the spirit of the storm might drive him, but without hope,
   without God in the world,' and liable to fall into the gulf of woe. As
   they prayed, their own spirits seemed in agony for James ; and they
   poured out their feelings in alternate offerings, with a depth of
   sympathy, of religious fervor, of faith in God, never before
   experienced by them for him. It was given to them to wrestle with God
   in prayer, and to importune as for their own souls. And thus they did,
   unconscious of the nightly dews that were falling upon them, until the
   conflict seemed past, and the blessing they sought gained. They both
   rose from prayer, and without exchanging a word upon the subject of
   their feelings, went to their different homes for the night.

   "The next morning, the brothers met; but the feelings of the past night
   were yet too vivid to be dissipated. Said Melville to the younger What
   did you think of our feelings last night?' I think,' said the younger
   brother, James has experienced religion.' Well, I think,' said
   Melville, THAT HE IS DEAD and I have put it down in my diary, and you
   will see if it is not true.' A few weeks passed away, and tidings came
   that James was dead. He died within a few days' sail of the Balize, in
   the evening, and, as the brothers supposed, by a comparison of the
   letter they received with Melville's diary, on the same hour in which
   they were engaged in prayer for his soul.

   "The above letter contained no reference to his religious feelings, so
   that the correctness of the younger brother's impressions was yet to be
   determined. - On the return of the brig, however, it was ascertained by
   conversation with the mate, that the feelings of both were equally
   true. It appeared from the mate's testimony, and other circumstances,
   that immediately after his sailing, James became serious, abandoned
   profaneness, to which he had been accustomed for years, and forbade the
   indulgence of this profitless and degrading crime on board his vessel;
   and this Seriousness continued to the hour of his death. He
   communicated his thoughts, however, to no one, excepting to his
   friends, upon paper, which they received after his death. Yet it does
   not appear from any of these circumstances, that he found peace to his
   mind, unless it were in his last hour.

   "On the morning of the day on which he died, he said to his mate," he
   thought he should die that day;' and, accordingly, made what
   arrangements he could for such an event. He gave some directions about
   the vessel, and requested a lock of hair to be cut from his head;
   which, with a ring that he took from his finger, was handed to his
   friends. He then gave himself up to his fate. In the evening, the mate
   went below; and seeing quite a change had taken place in his
   appearance, and that death was rapidly approaching, he took his hand,
   and thus addressed him: Captain Cox, you are a very sick man.' Yes, I
   know it,' was calmly, though feebly articulated. You are dying,'
   continued the mate. Yes, I know it," he again whispered. And you are
   willing?' Yes, blessed and burst into a flood of tears, and expired.

   "To the Christian, I have nothing to say on the above circumstance. To
   him all is clear as the light of day. But to the infidel, I may propose
   one question. How was it possible that the event of James' death, and
   the change which he evidently experienced in his feelings--call it by
   what name you please, and the consolation of which no one would take
   from the dying-how is it possible that the event should be so strongly
   impressed upon the minds of these two brothers, when he to whom they
   related was thousands of miles distant; and how could it occur, too, on
   the very hour when the events were taking place?

   "Affectionately yours, F."

                             THE HEAVEN BUILT WALL.

   In the campaign of Napoleon in Russia, while the French army was
   retreating from Moscow, there lay in a poor, low cottage, in a little
   village, an invalid boy. This village was exactly in the course of the
   retreating army, and already the reports of its approach had reached
   and excited the terrified inhabitants. In their turn, they began to
   make preparations for retreat; for they knew there was no hope for them
   from the hands of soldiers, all seeking their own preservation, and
   giving no quarter to others. Every one who had the strength to fly,
   fled; some trying to take with them their worldly goods, some to
   conceal them. The little village was fast growing deserted. Some burnt
   their houses or dismantled them. The old were placed in wagons, and the
   young hurried their families away with them

   But in the little cottage there was none of this bustle. The poor
   crippled boy could not move from his bed. The widowed mother had no
   friends intimate enough to spare a thought for her in this time of
   trouble, when every one thought only of those nearest to him and of
   himself. What chance in flight was there for herself and her young
   children, among whom one was the poor crippled boy?

   It was evening, and the sound of distant voices and of preparation had
   died away. The poor boy was wakeful with urging his mother to leave him
   to his fate, now dreading lest she should take him at his word, and
   leave him behind.

   The neighbors are just going away; I hear them no longer," he said. "I
   am so selfish, I have kept you here. Take the little girls with you; it
   is not too late. And I am safe; who will hurt a poor helpless boy?"

   "We are all safe," answered the mother; "God will not leave us, though
   all else forsake us."

   "But what can help us?' persisted the boy. "Who can defend us from
   their cruelty? Such stories as I have heard of the ravages of these
   men! They are not men; they are wild beasts. Oh, why was I made so weak
   - so weak as to be utterly useless? No strength to defend, no strength
   to fly."

   "There is a sure wall for the defenseless," answered his mother "God
   will build us up a sure wall."

   "You are my strength now," said the boy; I thank God that you did not
   desert me. I am so weak, I cling to you. Do not leave me, indeed! I
   fancy I can see the cruel soldiers hurrying in. We are too poor to
   satisfy them, and they would pour their vengeance upon us! And yet you
   ought to leave me! What right have I to keep you here? And I shall
   suffer more if I see you suffer."

   "God will be our refuge and defense still," said the mother and at
   length, with low, quieting words, she stilled the anxious boy, till he,
   too, slept like his sisters. The morning came of the day that was to
   bring the dreaded enemy. The mother and children opened their eyes to
   find that a "sure wall" had indeed been built for their defense. The
   snow had begun to fall the evening before. Through the night it had
   collected rapidly. A "stormy wind, fulfilling His word" had blown the
   snow into drifts against the low house, so that it had entirely covered
   it--a protecting wall, built by Him who holds the very winds in his
   fists, and who ever pities those who trust in Him. A low shed behind
   protected the, way to the outhouse, here the animals were, and for a
   few days the mother and her children kept themselves alive within their
   cottage, shut in and concealed by the heavy barricade of snow.

   It was during that time that the dreaded scourge passed over the
   village. Every house was ransacked; all the wealthier ones deprived of
   their luxuries, and the poorer ones robbed of their necessaries. But
   the low-roofed cottage lay sheltered beneath its wall of snow, which,
   in the silent night, had gathered about it. God had protected the
   defenseless with a "sure wall."--Guiding Hand, by H.L. Hastings.

                            A WONDERFUL EXPERIENCE.

   In 1890, Sister K. J. Convers, of Stanton, Mich., wrote us of her
   remarkable recovery through the faith and prayers of Sister N.G.
   Fisher, of the same place. We are well acquainted with these saints of
   God, and know the circum-stances as related to be reliable. Sister
   Convers' statement is as follows:

   In the year 1885, I was healed by the hand of God, and am still telling
   of His power, and praising Him for His love to me. At that time I had
   had poor health for a number of years, but for several weeks previous
   to my healing was dangerously ill. I went to a great many doctors. They
   all said I must die. The last one who came said I could not live but a
   short time. But in early life I gave my heart to God, and, so was only
   waiting for Him to take me home. March 1, 1885, I was taken worse.
   Friends came to see me, expecting it would be the last time. Brother
   and Sister Honer sat up with me. In the morning, just before they
   started home, he said: "Sister Convers, at half past two, look to God.
   We will remember you in prayer for your healing." For nearly a year
   before, every time I saw Sister Fisher she would say that God wanted to
   cure me. I would answer: "I would like to get well;" but that was about
   all the thought I ever gave it, until God fitted me for the work to be
   done. At the time Brother and Sister Honer appointed for special
   prayer, I was taken very bad. Every time I coughed they had to raise me
   to keep me from strangling; and that time when I laid down I saw Sister
   Fisher standing at the foot of my bed, while at the same time she was
   one mile away praying for me. Just by her side I saw the blessed Savior
   standing. I saw His hand pointing toward me, and heard Him say "If you
   take that medicine you will surely die at four in the afternoon." God
   sent Sister Fisher to see me. He came with her, and filled both of us
   with His blessed faith; praise His name! I had consumption. My lungs
   were so nearly gone that my voice could only be heard in a faint
   whisper. I had heart-disease, and a tumor in my right side, so that I
   could not touch my feet by bending over. My left side had been struck
   with paralysis, and my hand was helpless. Had ulcers on my liver, and
   had not lain on my left side for six months. It was just half past four
   when Sister Fisher came, and at half past six I was a well woman, and
   up off from my bed, praising God for what He had done for me. I felt
   God's hand laid on every diseased spot. When the hand was laid on my
   arm, I felt the hand so plainly I could tell the side the fingers were
   on. When it passed off from my arm, the Lord said to me: "Now can you
   raise clean hands?" My husband said my hand went up; I held it there
   one hour without even moving a finger. One Monday evening after God
   healed me, I walked one mile to church, and told what God had done for
   me. It has been five years since God healed me, and I keep well, by
   having faith in Him; and when I feel badly I just ask God to keep me
   well, and I have faith He will, and He does. My faith is strong today.
   If God can save us from sin, He is able to heal our bodies. I have laid
   aside medicine, and taken God for my physician, and am telling to
   everybody what God can do, if we will believe His word. Praise His
   matchless name forever! O you of little faith, take God at His word and
   be healed.

                           INSTANCES OF DIVINE POWER.

   I. In the spring of 1858, during the prevalence of the wide-spread
   revivals described in Prime's "Power of Prayer," I was soundly
   converted to God. At that time I was in mature young manhood, and in
   business. My health had been poor for a number of years, and when I
   gave my heart to the Lord Jesus, I appeared to myself to be standing on
   the very verge of death and hell.

   A short time after the mighty change, I was led to pray for "Hezekiah's
   fifteen years." Hezekiah, the pious king of Judah, was "sick unto
   death;" but "he turned his face to the wall, and prayed unto the Lord,"
   and the Lord was pleased to restore him to health, and made him the
   promise: "I will add unto thy days fifteen years."

   My case occurred long before faith-cure received the attention that it
   does at present. In fact, nothing special appears to have been known or
   thought about it in those days. The impression upon my mind was
   doubtless born of the Holy Spirit. I was not led to pray for restored
   health, but simply for fifteen years of continued life. My prayer
   became very earnest, until it resulted in a settled and grounded faith.
   I most certainly and most devoutly believed that I should yet live
   fifteen years. But there was a condition in my mind to the promise.
   This was, that I should not backslide. I felt that if I turned from the
   service of the God who had wonderfully saved me, I should soon die.

   The promise of God--the witness, if you please--that my life would be
   spared, was so clear and pronounced, that I scarcely ever thought of
   doubting it. Indeed, in preaching funeral sermons, and speaking as one
   naturally would sometimes of the uncertainty of life, in such a way as
   to include my own, the words would gag my throat, and I would have to
   use language that was more guarded and more in accordance with what I
   understood to be the facts in my own case.

   Of course, my life went on in fact, nothing could destroy it while I
   carefully kept the one only condition-that of fidelity to God But at no
   time was I impressed or permitted to make any public statement of my
   assurance, or, indeed, in private, except in possibly a couple of
   instances, where I thought special good might be the result.

   The result was, I not only lived fifteen years--years added to my
   natural allotment--but also, I am now actually considerably advanced on
   my third fifteenth year! The last fact indicated is no doubt a result
   of the many prayers of the people of God, as well as my own, that my
   days of usefulness might still be lengthened out. To God be everlasting
   glory!

   II. I received my first appointment to a pastoral work by Bishop
   Simpson, in 1860. It was to a comparatively new work, on the northern
   border of the great "North woods," and not far from the Adirondacks, in
   the State of New York. It was a lumber region. There were two lakes,
   the Upper and Lower Chateaugay, and a river, the Chateaugay, running
   out from them northward until it crossed the frontier, and emptied into
   the river St. Lawrence. On the east side of the lower lake was an
   isolated neighborhood, having a schoolhouse. I learned that the gospel
   was not preached there at all. I was therefore led to send an
   appointment into the neighborhood for a meeting. It was to be held at a
   certain hour in the afternoon. This was during the latter part of the
   summer of 1860.

   When the day came for filling the appointment, about a dozen of us
   started up the river toward the lake, in a boat. The most of the
   company went for the pleasure of going, but I went solely to preach the
   gospel of the Son of God. The boat was moved with oars; there was a
   sail, but this was use while we were in the river. It was a
   considerable distance up the river, perhaps a mile. But there was a
   boom in the whole distance up to the lake, and this, added to the facts
   that the river was very narrow, and there were logs on one side of the
   boom a large part of the way, made our progress very slow.

   As we at last emerged from the river into the lake, with two miles of
   lake between us and my appointment, I looked at my watch, and saw at
   once that by rowing we could not reach the school house in time. There
   was no wind, so the sail could not be used. I sat in the stern of the
   boat, and thought. Being late to meeting was particularly obnoxious to
   me; what should be done? I prayed. Prayer always brings us out right;
   praise God! I said nothing to the company, but simply prayed. As I
   prayed I began to believe. Believe what? That the wind would spring up,
   so that I could get to the school-house on time. And, sure enough in a
   very short time the breeze began, at first very gently, and then
   increasing, until it became almost a gale. The sail was quickly
   unfurled, and we scud through that little lake at a wonderful speed.
   Arriving at the shore, the waves ran so high that it was with some
   difficulty we could safely land.

   The result was, myself and wife arrived at the school-house before any
   of the congregation. In due time the people were on hand, and I had the
   pleasure of dealing out to them the saving word of God.

   There was no wind, but there was a pressing necessity for it. Prayer
   was made, faith was exercised, and the wind came. Was it a miracle?
   That is what I call it--call it what you will. Praise God!

   III. In 1882, I received an invitation to assist Brother S. B. Shaw,
   the editor of this book, in a series of campmeetings in the State of
   Michigan. I accepted the invitation, and was at several of the
   meetings. I was in those years as now, conducting the "Christian
   Harvester," and depended on subscriptions, etc., received during the
   campmeeting seasons, for the means of buying a stock of paper, which
   was usually needed along in the month of September of each year. This
   year, for some reason or other, I received but little money at the
   meetings though souls were saved and sanctified and arrived at my home
   in Ohio with the usual need of paper, and no money to buy it with. I
   went to God with my need-his need. He inspired my faith that the money
   should come. At that time of the year comparatively little money was
   wont to come in through the mails; but soon after praying, they began
   to bring in unusual amounts. One man in Illinois sent me twenty
   dollars--a man who was an entire stranger possibly he had seen me, but
   I did not remember him. All he asked in return for the money was a
   year's subscription to the Harvester, and that I should pray for him.
   The unusual in flow of money continued until a sufficient amount was
   received to pay for the stock of paper then it immediately stopped.
   Sammy Hick, the eccentric Yorkshire local preacher, had faith for a
   wind to grind out his wheat, the flour being needed to feed the people
   who were coming to the "quarterly-meeting;" and the moment Sammy's
   grist was ground the wind ceased, and none of the neighbors could get
   any grinding--unless, as the miller said, they had Sammy's faith. So in
   my case--and showing that it was a matter of pure faith, and not in the
   usual order of things-when money enough came to supply the need,
   further supply was immediately withheld. Again, to God be all the
   glory! Amen.--Thos. K. Daly.

                   PERSECUTORS PUT TO SILENCE, AND CONVERTED.

   The following is from the Autobiography of that wonderful revivalist,
   Charles G. Finney. The circumstances as related occurred early in his
   ministry, at Gouverneur, N.Y.

   I have said that there was a Baptist church, and a Presbyterian, each
   having a meeting-house standing upon the green, not far apart; and that
   the Baptist church had a pastor, but the Presbyterian had none. As soon
   as the revival broke out, and attracted general attention, the Baptist
   brethren began to oppose it. They spoke against it, and used very
   objectionable means indeed to arrest its progress. This encouraged a
   set of young men to join hand in hand, to strengthen each other in
   Opposition to the work. The Baptist Church was quite influential; and
   the stand that they took greatly emboldened the opposition, and seemed
   to give it a peculiar bitterness and strength, as might be expected.
   Those young men seemed to stand like a bulwark in the way of the
   progress of the work.

   In this state of things, Brother Nash and myself, after consultation,
   made up our minds that that thing must be overcome by prayer, and that
   it could not be reached in any other way. We therefore retired to a
   grove, and gave ourselves up to prayer until we prevailed; and we felt
   confident that no power which earth or hell could interpose, would be
   allowed permanently to stop the revival.

   The next Sabbath, after preaching morning and afternoon myself for I
   did the preaching altogether, and Brother Nash gave himself up almost
   continually to prayer - we met at five o'clock in the church, for a
   prayer-meeting. The meeting-house was filled. Near the close of the
   meeting, Brother Nash arose, and addressed that company of young men
   who had joined hand in hand to resist the revival. I believe they were
   all there, and they sat braced up against the Spirit of God. It was too
   solemn for them really to make ridicule of what they heard and saw; and
   yet their brazen-facedness and stiff-neckedness were apparent to
   everybody.

   Brother Nash addressed them very earnestly, and pointed out the guilt
   and danger of the course they were taking. Toward the close of his
   address, he waxed exceedingly warm,and said to them: "Now, mark me,
   young men! God will break your ranks in less than one week, either by
   converting some of you, or by sending some of you to hell. He will do
   this as certainly as the Lord is my God !." He was standing where he
   brought his hand down on the top of the pew before him, so as to make
   it thoroughly jar. He sat immediately down, dropped his head, and
   groaned with pain.

   The house was as still as death, and most of the people held down their
   heads. I could see that the young men were agitated. For myself, I
   regretted that Brother Nash had gone so far. He had committed himself,
   that God would either take the life of some of them, and send them to
   hell, or convert some of them, within a week. However, on Tuesday
   morning of the same week, the leader of these young, men came to me, in
   the greatest distress of mind. He was all prepared to submit; and as
   soon as I came to press him, she broke down like a child, confessed,
   and manifestly gave himself to Christ. Then he said: "What shall I do,
   Mr. Finney?" I replied: "Go immediately to all your young companions,
   and pray with them, and exhort them, at once to turn to the Lord." He
   did so; and before the week was out, nearly if not all of that class of
   young men, were hoping in Christ.

                  JOHN KNOX'S PREVAILING PRAYER FOR SCOTLAND.

   Among the mighty men of faith and prayer whose names will stand forth
   until this world's history is completed, is that of John Knox. The days
   of turbulence developed their holy zeal and courage. Summoned before
   the highest of earth's great ones, true everywhere to God, and a man
   mighty in prayer, Queen Mary of Scotland once said of Knox that she
   feared his prayers more than an army of ten thousand men. On England's
   throne sat Mary, the daughter of Henry VIII., who had been brought up
   by her mother, Catharine of Aragon, in the dark faith of Rome, a
   complete tool in the hands of the priests, whose one design was to
   destroy the Protestants. Soon the jails were filled, the fires kindled
   in Smithfield, and the whole land was one scene of desolation, and the
   Protestants were hunted as partridges on the mountains. The great heart
   of John Knox was stirred. On his knees, on his face for hours together
   before God, he pleaded for Scotland. "All Scotland for Christ! " was
   his ceaseless cry.

   In one of these seasons of mighty taking hold of God, he sprang to his
   feet with the cry: "Deliverance has come! Deliverance has come!" As
   soon as the courier could speed his way from London to the city where
   John Knox lived, he made the proclamation: "Mary, Queen of England, is
   dead!"

   Pray ye the Lord of the Harvest, to raise up such men in our days, when
   the tide of worldliness threatens the whole church, and Catholicism is
   spreading her baneful influence over the free institutions of our land;
   only waiting for the chance to re-enact the scenes of St. Bartholomew's
   day in France, or the massacre of ten thousand Protestants in one day
   as in Ireland, to crush out the religion of our fathers, to burn the
   Bible, and plunge the whole land into papal darkness--Sarah A. Cooke.

                          THE BLIND RESTORED TO SIGHT.

   At the age of twenty years, a lady in Winchester, Iowa, began to lose
   her health, and in a short time was confined to her bed. And she
   writes; "In addition to this, I lost the use of my eyes, and was blind
   and helpless, a greater portion of my time, for five years.

   "I enjoyed the blessing of prayer and trust some six months before
   feeling at liberty to pray for the healing of my body; fearing I should
   desire it without due submission to God's will. It was with fear and
   trembling that I first made known this request. Though my pleadings in
   this direction were earnest, and often agonizing, yet I could say with
   a fervor as never before: "Not my will but Thine be done."

   "About the end of November, or early in December, 1873, I realized that
   my faith was perfect, that I was ready now to be healed; that my faith
   was momentarily waiting on God, and resting without a doubt on the
   promises. From this time forward, my faith remained fixed with but one
   exception. During the time between December, 1873, and July 1874, I was
   healed to such an extent that I could walk some, and see more or less
   every day, though sometimes with only one of my eyes. A portion of this
   time, I felt as though in a furnace of fire; but amid the flames, I
   realized the presence of the Son of God, who said: I have chosen thee
   in the furnace of affliction.' This for a time seemed an answer to my
   petition, and so I thought it my life work to suffer. For a while my
   faith became inactive, and I almost ceased praying for my health.
   Though I felt submissive, yet somehow I was soon crying, and that most
   instinctively: "Thou Son of David, have mercy on me!" After this, my
   faith did not waver. Oh, the lesson of patience I learned in thus
   waiting on God's good time! And with what comfort could I present my
   body an offering to Him, realizing that as soon as at all possible with
   His will, I should be healed; I had an assurance of this, but did not
   know whether it would be during life, or accomplished only at death.

   In this manner I waited before God until the morning of the 26th of
   July, when, without ecstasy of joy, or extra illumination, came a sense
   of the presence of Jesus, and a presentation of this gift, accompanied
   with these words: "Here is the gift for which you have been praying;
   are you willing to receive it?"

   I at first felt the incoming of the Divine power at the parts affected,
   steadily driving out the disease, until death was swallowed up in
   victory. I at once arose from my bed, and proceeded to work about the
   house, to the great astonishment of my friends, some of whom thought me
   wild; but I continued my work, assuring them that Jesus had healed me.
   Realizing the scrutiny and doubt with which I was observed, I said to
   my father: "What do you think?" He replied: "It is supernatural power;
   no one can deny it."

   "My healing took place on Wednesday; on Saturday I was persuaded to lie
   down, but found the bed was no place for me; I thought of Peter's
   wife's mother, who arose and ministered to them, I knew that to her,
   strength as well as health was instantly given, as in the case of the
   palsied man, who rose, took up his bed, and departed. I returned to my
   work, backing my experience with those in God's word, and since then
   have not lain down during the daytime.

   My friends could not realize the completeness of the cure, until I read
   a full hour, and that by lamplight, and until asked to desist, the
   first opportunity after being healed.

   A week from this time, I discharged the hired girl, taking charge of
   the household work, which I have continued with perfect ease. About
   four weeks after my healing, I had occasion to walk four miles, which I
   did with little or no weariness. Let me add, to the praise of God, that
   I have no disease whatever. Am able to do more hard work with less
   weariness than at any other period in my life, and faith in the Lord is
   the balm that made me whole." --Selected

                           SPECIAL ANSWERS TO PRAYER.

   Our old friend, J. Baker, now preaching at Hartford, Mich., who has for
   years trusted the Lord for all things, both temporal and spiritual,
   sends us the following:

   At the Raisin Center campground, August, 1886, a brother came to me on
   Saturday evening, requesting that I should come to his tent on Sunday
   morning, and anoint him for the cure of his deafness. He was a man
   between forty and fifty years of age. He had been deaf ever since a
   boy; his deafness being caused by scarlet fever. At the time appointed,
   in company with Clara Rouch and Carrie Kimball, I went to his tent, and
   anointed him with oil, we laying our hands upon his head. He was
   instantly healed, and shouted and rolled on the ground, calling on
   those standing around to help him praise the Lord. He declared he could
   hear the faintest whisper.

   When I lived in Detroit, in the winter of 1883 I had a house in view
   which I desired to use as a home for friendless women. The rent was $20
   per month. I asked the Lord for the amount to be given me inside of six
   days, if it was his will I should have the house. In a few days I
   received a check for $25, from Chicago. Some years afterward, I met the
   individual who sent the money, and he told me he was very forcibly
   impressed to send me the money. He never knew what it was for until I
   told him the circumstance.

                THE SECRET OF JAMES CAUGHEY'S WONDERFUL SUCCESS.

   This wonderful evangelist was known to only a few of the present
   generation. He died at a good old age in New Brunswick, N.J., but two
   or three years before the publication of this book.

   In one of his books, Mr. Caughey says: "I am now fully persuaded that
   in proportion as the Spirit of God shall condescend to second my
   efforts in the gospel message, I shall be successful. No man has ever
   been signally used in winning souls to Christ without the help of the
   Spirit. With it, the humblest talent may astonish earth and hell, by
   gathering into the path of life thousands for the skies; while, without
   it, the finest, the most splendid talents, remain comparatively
   useless"

   Mr. Caughey was called of God to visit England and Ireland, in which
   countries he labored seven years with the most signal success. During
   this time, " nearly twenty-two thousand persons professed conversion
   under his immediate labors, and nearly ten thousand entered into the
   rest of full salvation." He gives the following account of his call, in
   a letter to a friend, from which we extract as follows

   "You will remember our Conference of 1839 was held in the city of
   Schenectady, N. V. That year I was appointed to Whitehall, N. V.
   Shortly after, I had my library study furniture forwarded to my
   station.

   "It was then I began seriously to reflect upon the propriety of
   choosing a wife, believing that marriage is honorable in all men.' I
   had traveled a number of years, studied hard, and expended all my time
   and strength in winning souls to Christ. My brethren approved of my
   intention. But while indulging in this purpose-for some reasons I could
   not explain-my heart became very hard. The Lord seemed to depart from
   me; and that countenance, which so often beamed upon me from above, and
   had daily, for many years, brightened my soul into rapturous joy,
   appeared now to be mantled in the thickest gloom.

   "The more I reflected thus: I can see no good reason why I should be
   singular among my brethren, nor continue to lead this solitary life, my
   heart became harder, and my dark-ness increased. I was soon involved in
   a variety of evil reasonings. My will seemed to be in a conflict with
   some-thing invisible. God, who had honored me with such intimate
   communion with himself since my conversion, apparently left me to
   battle it out alone. So it appeared to me then; but now I see God
   himself was contending with me. I was about to step out of the order of
   his providence; and he was resolved to prevent it, unless I should
   refuse to understand why he thus resisted me. Had I continued the
   conflict, I believe he would have let me take my own course; nor would
   he have cast me off; yet I solemnly feel he would have severely
   chastised my disobedience.

   "My distress and gloom were so great, I could not unpack my library,
   nor arrange my study. I began to reflect most solemnly upon my unhappy
   state of mind, and became more concerned to regain my former peace and
   joy in God, than to obtain any temporal blessing whatever. The world
   was a blank, a bleak and howling wilderness, to my soul, without the
   smiles of my Savior. In fact, that I could not live, but must wither
   away from the face of the earth, without his comforting and satisfying
   presence. Like a well-chastised son, I came back to the feet of my
   Heavenly Father, and with many tears I besought him to reveal his face
   to my soul; that if my purposes were crossing his to show me; and
   whatever was his will, I would at once, by his help, yield my soul unto
   it. "Lord God," I said, "if my will crosses thy will, then my will must
   be wrong; for thine cannot but be right." Now I cared not what he
   commanded me to do, or to leave undone; I stood ready to obey. I felt
   assured clear light from God on some points would soon reach my soul;
   and I was fully prepared for it. But I no more expected such an order
   as came soon after, than I expected he would command me to fly upward
   and preach the gospel in another planet. During three days I cried to
   God, without any answer. On the third day, in the afternoon, I obtained
   an audience with the Lord. The place was almost as lonely as Sinai,
   where Moses saw the burning bush. It was under open sky, a considerable
   distance from the habitations of men; steep rocks and mountains, deep
   forests, and venomous reptiles, surrounded me. Here, and in a moment,
   the following passage was given me to plead: "And the Lord descended in
   the cloud, and stood with him there, and proclaimed the name of the
   Lord. And the Lord passed by before him, and proclaimed: "The Lord, The
   Lord God, merciful and gracious, long-suffering, and abundant in
   goodness and truth, keeping mercy for thousands, forgiving iniquity,
   and transgression, and sin, and that will by no means clear the
   guilty."--Exodus 34: 5-7. I took hold of this; many of the words were
   as fire, and as a hammer to break the rocks in pieces before the Lord.
   The fountains of tears were opened, and the great deep of my heart was
   broken up. I left the place, however, without receiving any light; but
   my heart was fully softened and subdued, and I felt assured I had
   prevailed in some way with God. I was confident light and direction
   were coming; but of what nature I could not tell.

   "This was on the 9th of July,1839. The same evening, about twilight,
   eternal glory be to God! When reading in, small, room adjoining my
   study, a light, as I conceived from heaven, reached me. . My soul was
   singularly calmed and warned by a strange visitation. In a moment I
   recognized the change; the following, in substance, was spoken to my
   heart; but in a manner, and with a rapidity, I cannot possibly
   describe. Every ray of Divine glory seemed to be a word that the eye of
   my soul could read, a sentence which my judgment could perceive and
   understand: These matters which trouble thee must be let entirely
   alone. The will of God is, that thou shouldst visit Europe. He shall be
   with thee there, and give thee many seals to thy ministry. He has
   provided thee with funds. Make thy arrangements accordingly; and, next
   Conference, ask liberty from the proper authorities, and it shall be
   granted thee. Visit Canada first; when this is done, sail for England.
   God shall be with thee there, and thou shalt have no want in all thy
   journeyings; and thou shalt be brought back in safety again to America'

   I arose from my knees under a strong conviction that God had called me
   to take this tour. Letters were written immediately to Canada, etc. The
   next day my soul was calm and happy. My books were unpacked, and
   everything in my study arranged with a glad heart and free. Eleven
   months were before me, to criticize the impressions on my soul.

   With delight I commenced my pastoral work, visited from house to house,
   and had the pleasure of seeing a most powerful revival of religion in
   my circuit. During this period not the least wish entered my heart to
   form any connection or engagement whatever that would entangle or
   hinder me from fulfilling what I conceived to be the high and solemn
   commission I had received from the Lord. I continued to resign the
   whole matter to God, entreating him to overrule all to his glory, and
   to hedge up my way if it were not his will I should leave America."

                       "LET THEM ABIDE TILL THE MORROW."

   The beautiful valley of Wyoming, on the banks of the Susquehanna river,
   in Luzerne Co., Pa., has long been known alike to the student of
   history and the lovers of poetry and song.

   Dr. W. H. Van Doren records, in The Evangelist, an incident which
   recalls the calamities that overwhelmed Wyoming, and illustrates the
   gracious care of an everpresent God, for those who trust in Him.

   It was in the beginning of July, 1778, that an aged saint, who with his
   four sons, lived on a mountain overlooking the valley, found that his
   barrel of meal was nearly exhausted, and bade his sons fill their sacks
   with grain, and early in the morning descend the long road to the mill
   in the valley. As requested, before daylight each of the boys had fed
   his horse, and they were all prepared by sunrise for their journey. And
   as the day would be too far spent to have their grain ground, they were
   accustomed at such times to spend the night near the mill in Wyoming.

   As the patriarch came forth in the morning from the closet of prayer,
   and said to the waiting sons, "Not today! the young men were greatly
   surprised.

   "But, father, our supply is used up, and why should we delay?" they
   said, as they turned and gazed over the valley, which lay in calm and
   quiet peacefulness before them.

   "Not today, my sons," repeated with emphasis by the man of prayer,
   satisfied the youths that the father meant what he said. He added: "I
   know not what it means, but in my prayer my mind was deeply impressed
   with this word "Let them abide till the morrow."

   Without charging their venerated parent with superstition or ignorance,
   the obedient sons yielded to his, unladed their beasts, placed them in
   their stalls, and waited for another morning to come.

   That memorable night a horde of savages, with torch and tomahawk,
   entered Wyoming Valley, and commenced their work of destruction; and it
   is said that before the bloody drama ended, not a house, barn, church,
   school, or mill, escaped the flames; and few of the inhabitants escaped
   the sudden but deadly blows of the savages. From one end of the valley
   to the other the settlers were butchered or burned with remorseless
   fury.

   In the morning at sunrise, the father and sons were standing on the
   highest point, and lo! the valley was filled with volumes of ascending
   smoke and flames. The awful truth flashed on their minds. The aged
   saint kneeled down with his sons on the mountain-top, and in humble,
   adoring prayer thanked God for the promise: "The angel of the Lord
   encampeth round about them that fear him."--Guiding Hand.

               "BEHOLD, I SEND YOU FORTH AS SHEEP AMONG WOLVES."

   How continually, as we follow the Lord closely, do His own blessed
   teachings, His own words, come with full force to our memory, clothed
   with life and power! One such experience I shall never forget. We were
   holding tabernacle meetings in Shiawassee county, Mich. One night, as
   we gathered to commence, everything looked ominous The dark
   countenances of the men gathered on the outside of the congregation,
   soon broke out in murmured words of threatening. God was working, and
   the great adversary, "the devil, and father of lies," had circulated
   through all the community the report that we were breaking up families;
   as some, contrary to the wishes of relatives, had decided to take the
   "narrow way, to "forsake all, and follow Jesus." The crowd increased,
   and soon we found it impossible to carry on the service.

   Then came the words of Jesus: "Behold, I send you forth as sheep among
   wolves." Our little band, as my eye glanced over them, how helpless
   they looked! As hemming us in was a rough crowd, whose teeth gleamed
   and whose howlings were like those of wolves. The scene of the
   martyrdom of Stephen came up right before me. How they gnashed on him
   with their teeth!

   Soon our leader, Brother S. B. Shaw, sprang upon a stump of a tree,
   saying: "Every one get on his knees, and hold right on to God." In a
   lower tone he said: "They have got Brother Jenkinson, and will tear him
   to pieces, if we do not hold on to God for him."

   Soon mighty cries went up unto Him who is able to save. For about two
   hours the scene lasted. While at its very height, the assuring words
   came to me from the blessed Savior: "There shall not a hair of your
   head perish." Then the crowd began gradually to disperse, and full of
   thankful joy we lay down in our little tents to slumber; the angel of
   the Lord encamping round about us.

   "I knew," said Brother Jenkinson, "they could not hurt me while you
   were holding on to God for me in prayer; and while their fists came
   down upon me they seemed as soft as pads of velvet." His clothes were
   much torn, but not one bruise or mark of violence was upon his person.
   One man, more full of violent hate than the others, had threatened that
   he would yet take the life of Brother Jenkinson; but the Lord told him
   to fear him not, for his enemy was no more in his hands than a little
   stick, and as easily broken. - Mrs. Sarah A. Cooke.

   As this sister has contributed several articles to the of this book, it
   will not be amiss to say, that we have been acquainted with her ever
   since the day of our conversion she helped pray us into the light of
   salvation. We never knew a person to spend more time than she does in
   prayer, or to manifest more joy in the Lord's work. She is one of the
   two sisters, so often mentioned in connection with the experience of
   Mr. Moody. They were so greatly burdened for him that Sister Cooke went
   to him repeatedly, and told him of his lack of power. He was brought
   under deep conviction, and requested them to pray for him. The three
   finally went on their knees, and there wrestled with God; he groaning
   and agonizing until the baptism of fire fell upon him. The world knows
   the results of the wonderful experience which, under God, these humble
   sisters were there enabled to lead him into; and for which multitudes
   praise God on earth, and will praise him in heaven.--Editor.

                      THE SECRET OF JOHN SMITH'S SUCCESS.

   This extraordinary man died at the early age of thirty-seven He
   commenced his labors as a Wesleyan minister in England, in 1816, and
   closed them nearly simultaneously with his life on the 3d of November,
   1831. The following, which reveals the secret of his success, is from
   "Sketches of Wesleyan Preachers," a very interesting work, by Robert A.
   West:

   "Constant communion with God was at the foundation of Mr. Smith's great
   usefulness. In this he was surpassed by none of any age. Whole nights
   were often given up to prayer, and always, when in anything like
   moderate health often, too, when wasted by painful disease-he arose at
   four o'clock in the morning, and throwing himself before the
   mercy-seat, for three hours wrestled with God in mighty prayer. The
   writer has heard, from persons in whose houses he has been temporarily
   residing, that in the coldest winter morning they have heard him at
   that hour with suppressed voice pleading with God, while his groans
   have revealed the intensity of his feelings. Immediately after
   breakfast and family worship, he would again retire with his Bible into
   his study, and spend until near noon in the same hallowed employment.
   Here unquestionably was the great secret of his power in pubic prayer
   and in preaching--the Lord, who seeth in secret, rewarding him openly.
   Every sermon was thus sanctified by prayer.

   "On one occasion, when at a country appointment, the time for
   commencing the service had elapsed, and Mr. Smith did not make his
   appearance. He had left the house where he was a guest about half an
   hour before, after being some time in his closet. At length he was
   found in an adjoining barn, wrestling in prayer for a blessing upon the
   approaching service; having retired thither, that unobserved he might
   pour out his full soul before his heavenly Father. He arose, briefly
   expressed his regret at not having observed the lapse of time, and on
   the way to the chapel relapsed into silent prayer.

   "During the sermon that evening the fervent prayer of the righteous man
   proved effectual. The Spirit of God descended upon the congregation;
   the deep, attentive silence observed at the commencement of the
   discourse was soon interrupted by sobs and moans, and these ere long
   were followed by loud and piercing cries for mercy, as one after
   another the hearers were pricked to the heart, and the strongholds of
   Satan were beaten down; until, so universal was the cry of the broken
   hearted, that Mr. Smith found it necessary to desist from preaching,
   and descend into the altar. As he had continued his discourse for some
   time after its remarkable effects first showed themselves, there was
   considerable confusion for want of a leading and controlling spirit,
   and the disorder was rapidly increasing; but when he descended from the
   pulpit, and took charge of the meeting, his admirable plans and great
   influence, aided by a yet almost equal to the roar of thunder, soon
   wrought a change and in perfect order, though not in silence, the
   meeting continued until midnight. Whatever apparent confusion there
   might be in these meetings, they were, actually, conducted
   systematically. Mr. Smith had his method amid the surrounding
   excitement, and he never delegated control to another, but was the last
   to retire from the scene of the Redeemer's triumphs." --Anecdotes of
   the Ministry

              HOW WILLIAM TENNENT DEFEATED THE POWERS OF DARKNESS.

   During the great revival of religion in America, which took place under
   Mr. Whitefield, and others distinguished for their piety and zeal at
   that period, Mr. Tennent was laboriously active, and much engaged to
   help forward the work; in the performance of which he met with strong
   and powerful temptations. The following is from his own lips:

   On the evening preceding public worship, he selected a subject for the
   discourse intended to be delivered, and made some progress in his
   preparations. In the morning he resumed the same subject, with an
   intention to extend his thoughts further on it; but was presently
   assaulted with a temptation that the Bible was not of Divine authority,
   but the invention of man. He instantly endeavored to repel the
   temptation by prayer, but his endeavors proved unavailing. The
   temptation continued, and fastened upon him with greater strength as
   the time advanced for public service. He lost all the thoughts which he
   had prepared on the preceding evening. He tried other subjects, but
   could get nothing for the people. The whole book of God, under that
   distressing state of mind, was a sealed book to him; and, to add to his
   affliction, he was "shut up in prayer;" a cloud, dark as that of Egypt,
   oppressed his mind.

   Thus agonized in spirit, he proceeded to the church, where he found a
   large congregation assembled, and waiting to hear the word; and then he
   was more deeply distressed than ever; and especially for the dishonor
   which he feared would fall upon religion through him that day. He
   resolved, however, to attempt the service. He introduced it by singing
   a psalm, during which time his agitation increased to the highest
   degree. When the moment for prayer commenced, he arose, as one in the
   most painful and perilous situation, and, with arms extended to heaven,
   began with this exclamation: "Lord, have mercy upon me!" On the
   utterance this petition he was heard; the thick cloud instantly broke,
   away, and light shone upon his soul. The result was a deep solemnity
   throughout the congregation; and the house, at the end of the prayer,
   was a place of weeping. He delivered the subject of his evening
   meditations, which was brought to his full remembrance, with an
   overflowing abundance of other weighty and solemn matter. The Lord
   blessed this discourse, so that it proved the happy means of the
   conversion of about thirty persons. This day he ever afterwards spoke
   of as his harvest day."--Anecdotes of the Ministry.

                         IN INDIA--IN ANSWER TO PRAYER.

   The following very interesting account was written by request,
   expressly for this book. The author was a missionary of the Methodist
   Episcopal Church in India for a number of years. He is, at the date of
   our publication, pastor at Huntington, O.:

   In January, 1888, my devoted wife, since gone to glory and myself, were
   appointed by Bishop Thoburn to open work in a district of the native
   state of Hyderabad, India. Our parish embraced more than a thousand
   towns and villages, over a million souls--a district practically
   untouched Christian evangelism. Full of faith in God, the missionaries
   cheerfully proceeded to the new field of conflict. Six months later.
   visited for the third time, Kinnal, a village of probably souls, sixty
   miles from our center, for the purpose of supervising a day-school and
   Sunday school, recently begun, preaching the gospel to the people. We
   had not a single Christian convert in the village except Andronika, our
   native teacher, and his young wife and these were imported for the
   purpose intimated. Weary from our long bullock-cart ride, we spent an
   h6ur in rest and at dinner, after which the school work was after. At
   five o'clock the people were called together to hear a short gospel
   talk, and witness the first Christian baptismal service they had
   probably ever seen. Nearly the entire village, in an amazingly brief
   time, had congregated in the street just in front of our little
   mission-room, which we had--recently purchased for thirty rupees ($10).

   The village was just being scourged by those deadly diseases, cholera
   and small-pox, and the deluded natives had sacrificed nearly all their
   poultry, sheep, goats, and much fruit, to appease the anger of their
   imaginary deities; and still the scourge went on. For eight months
   there had been no rainfall, and the people were in a semi-starved
   condition, and hence a ready prey to these virulent diseases. It is
   need. less to say that our simple discourse upon "Jesus, the
   all-sufficient sacrifice," had many eager listeners in this sad,
   spirit-broken assembly.

   Then followed a scene we shall never forget. Just in front of the
   missionary and his companion stood Andronika and his wife presenting
   their little babe for Christian baptism.

   Before the ceremony was finished, a man of the weaver's caste
   prostrated himself before us, preparatory to the making of an urgent
   appeal. We beckoned him to wait until the close of the service. Then,
   after another prostration, the poor fellow advanced to make his
   request.

   With a sad expression on his face and tremulous voice, he proceeded to
   say: "My wife is dying. For four days I have been breaking cocoanuts
   and making poojahs, and my wife has been growing worse all the time;
   now I beg of you--to pray to your God, to see if he will hear and save
   my wife!" We were conducted by the sad husband into a little mud hut
   near by, followed by the multitude. There lay the poor wife,
   unconscious and moaning. A brief examination all the broken-hearted
   husband had said. It was quite evident that the case was beyond human
   help. An indescribable burden came upon my soul while contemplating the
   situation. I turned to my dear wife and said: "There no use giving this
   woman any medicine; it is too late, I can do nothing for her. Only God
   can help her. And if the purpose of the miracle on Mount Carmel, in
   answer to the prayer of Elijah, was to vindicate God's cause before the
   worshipers of Baal, may not the Lord raise this woman to health, to
   vindicate himself in this province of a million devotees to false
   gods?"

   Her answer (I'll never forget it) was: "According thy faith be it unto
   thee." Then I said to the husband: "Jesus Christ, who is the only God,
   can save your wife if he thinks best. Now if he cures her, will you
   then forever renounce your idols, and worship Jesus Christ only?" - A
   moment of intense anxiety, and his aged mother rushed up to him, and
   plead with him in tears to answer in the negative.

   He replied: "I can make better answer after she is cured." But I
   insisted that I could not feel justified in asking my Savior to
   interfere in his behalf, unless he was willing to answer the question
   in the affirmative, and worship Jesus if he showed Himself by His
   superior power to be God.' Then there came to the poor tried soul
   another awful struggle.

   All his relatives and the priests gathered around him and tried to
   persuade him that it would be better for his to die than that he should
   mal- such a promise.- Another moment of awful suspense, and the brave
   soul turned answered: "Houdu" ("yes," in the Canarese tongue) Jesus
   Christ can save my wife, it shows that what you right--my gods are
   false, and I ought then to Christ"

   With eyes uplifted, we prayed the dear Lord to get Himself a great name
   among these benighted souls. Oh what a baptism of assurance came into
   our souls!

   We turned immediately to go away, and in less than a minute the excited
   husband came rushing after us, "Jesus Christ, He is God! My wife is
   well and began, in every conceivable way, to express his gratitude.

   Till nearly midnight the voice of that joyful man, up and down the
   narrow streets of the village, was heard crying: "Jesus Christ, He is
   the only true God!" Towards morning, a copious shower of rain fell, and
   the natives said: "It is because the missionary is praying."

   At five o'clock next morning, we left the village, with hundreds of its
   grateful people following in procession, to do honor to those whom they
   said brought so much blessing to their village. For miles they
   followed, and not until we earnestly remonstrated, did they turn back.
   We believe that that event of providence will be blessed to the
   salvation not only of hundreds in that village, but to many in other
   places; or among those who witnessed what has been related, were more
   than a score who had been sent from adjoining villages to induce, if
   possible, the missionary to begin work in their towns. These may for a
   time continue in heathenism, but they will not forget the strange Power
   which wrought such wonders before their eyes.

   Praise the Lord for His wonderful goodness!--A.E. Winter.

                               "CAN I BE SAVED?"

   Away on the western coast of England there stands a steep rock that is
   known to everybody as' the "Lady's Rock." At high water it is
   surrounded by the sea; but at low water it stands upon a sandy beach,
   and is easily reached.

   It gets the name from an accident that occurred years ago. One summer
   day a lady walked along the beach as this rock, and there sat down and
   began to read a book that interested her. She read on, never thinking
   of any danger, when she was suddenly startled by a loud cry from the
   cliffs The coast guard had seen her and shouted across the bay She
   looked up and in a moment saw her peril Between herself and the shore
   there were the curling waves and the white foam spreading over the
   sands. Her first look showed her nothing but certain death, for the
   waves were rising every moment; and as she stood hesitating, a
   huge-breaker dashed its spray over her. Above her frowned the steep,
   black rock, and even the fisherlads could scarcely climb to get the
   sea-birds' eggs; there seemed to be no way of escape there. She looked
   across to the crowd that were gathering on the shore, but no boat could
   live in that tumbling sea. Then, as she stood with the waves creeping
   up after her like wild beasts that chased their prey, she wrung her
   hands in agony and burst into tears, crying:

   "Can I be saved? Can I be saved?"

   A moment before it was nothing to her; now it was everything --Wealth,
   luxury, comfort, pleasure-all thought of these were swept away. Her
   only anxiety was this: "Oh, to be saved!" Then across from the shore
   came the cry from the coast-guard again: "You must climb the rock! Your
   only chance is to climb the rock! She looked at it hanging over her
   with jagged sides, and steep, slippery front. How could she climb it?
   But as she delayed, a wave swept up and flung itself over the place
   where she stood, and below her the waters surged and hissed. Then she
   grasped the rock desperately, and dragged herself up, and hung to the
   face of it, tremblingly feeling for a higher foothold, rising, little
   by little, until she reached a ledge, from where she looked
   shudderingly on the waves below. Then crept upward until again the
   spray flew about her. "Climb higher!" rang from the shore, this time
   from a hundred voices; for the tidings of her peril had spread to the
   adjoining village. Again she gathered her strength, and hardly I know
   how, she crept, little by-little, hanging on with dragging herself
   through narrow openings, pressing up the steep, slippery places, until
   now within her reach a tuft of grass; seizing it she fell fainting on
   the top b the reach of the waves, while the excited people cried shout
   "She's saved! Thank Heaven she's saved!'

   A story wild and strange, like the coast, and yet it is very life-true
   of you, reader. Slowly the sea is chasing you from point to point. The
   sea is rising about, you. You can look back and see how it has driven
   you from day to day, from year to year; and yet you are unmindful of
   it: Taken up with a hundred things, you do not see it. It is the last
   thing you think of. You have time for everything else. -You can think
   of business, of pleasure, of politics, of the markets, of
   friendships-of everything else but this. And yet the time is coming
   when you will see the peril, when your own eyes shall look upon the
   threatening danger, and all of these things of today shall be nothing.
   Suddenly, all in a moment, you will start up with the cry: " What must
   I do to be saved? " and it may be too late.--Rev. Mark Guy Pearse.

                          THE WIDOW'S PRAYER ANSWERED.

   A captain's widow, whom I knew for many years of our chapel, was much
   concerned for the conversion of her son, who was a sailor. For a long
   time he had promised to be a comfort and help to his mother; but
   through the influence of bad companions he became very wicked and
   dissolute. Many times have I gone to the public house and other places
   of temptation to allure him home to his mother's house; and in no
   instance when his mother's name had been mentioned has he refused to
   come; for on him the charming name of mother seemed to exercise a
   potent, irresistible spell. I have often taken him up into our
   Sunday-school room, where he used to be a scholar, and have reasoned
   and prayed him till the tears ran down his cheeks, and he would promise
   to get on "a better tack."

   On one of these occasions I gave him a pocket Bible, in which he
   engaged to read one verse a day until the ship returned from Sidney. I
   mentioned this to his mother, and shall not soon forget her look, as
   she said: Thank God! Thank God! I now have hopes of his conversion." He
   was gone many months, and but little was heard of him; but mother
   prayed for him daily at a fixed time. It pleased the Lord to visit her
   with a painful disease, which terminated in her death, but her faith,
   joy and peace were marvelous and delightful to witness. I do not
   remember paying her a single visit in which she did not mention her
   son, and express her belief that she would meet him in glory.

   One evening she remarked: "I am near the grave, I feel my time here is
   very short; I will leave a message for my boy, which you must deliver
   to him." Observing her extreme weakness, I prayed with her a few
   moments, and promised to see her early the next day. Accordingly I
   called, and saw that she was indeed dying. She desired to be propped up
   in bed, and to sing a hymn; and, in order to support her in this final
   effort, her two daughters knelt on the bed, and upheld her as well as
   they could. She spoke to them of her funeral and her property. When
   this business had been transacted she said to me: " I know that I am
   dying, but I have no fear; all is light and beautiful. Christ is here
   Christ is mine, and I am his." Her voice became stronger and clearer,
   and she bade us sing. Her daughters could sing but little, their hearts
   were too full. However, we all did our best in singing her favorite
   verses.

   "Fearless of hell and ghastly death,

   I'd break through every foe;

   The wings of love and arms of faith,

   Would bear me conqueror through."

   While we were singing, a loud knocking was heard. A servant having gone
   for the doctor, I dent to the door, and, my surprise, found the
   sailor-boy just returned from the I explained to him his mother's
   condition, and -got remain in the parlor till I broke the news to her
   returned to her bedside, she said: "Oh I thought it was my dear boy.
   Oh; how I should to see him once more, and to give him my blessing.'

   "Are you able," I inquired, "to hear him, or to him? With a smile, she
   replied: "I can bear anything, through Christ."

   I went for the sailor, and when I brought him into the room we found
   her praying, with her eyes closed, for her only son. In a few moments
   she looked around and saw her long absent child. He threw his arms
   around his mother's neck and tried to speak, but could not. But the
   mother cried: "Hallelujah! Jesus is faithful and true;" and after one
   kiss, she added:

   "My dear boy, I am dying and going to Jesus. I have prayed every day
   for you, my dear Frank. What shall I tell Jesus about you? Your father
   is there," pointing upwards "your sisters are on the way. Oh, what
   shall I tell my blessed Savior?"

   "You can tell Him what you like, mother. I am a Christian, converted to
   God, mother; and he knows all about

   "The mother's heart was full; the good news overcame her strength, and
   she exclaimed

   "Let me go, Lord, I have seen thy salvation! My prayers are all
   answered! My son is saved, clothed, and in his right mind! Glory!
   Glory! Glory!"

   After sleeping a few minutes she awoke with a beautiful smile on her
   face, and said: " I see the angels, harps, crowns; bright, golden
   crowns! Let me go! "and, raising her hand above her head, she
   exclaimed: "Victory, through faith in His blood!" Then her arm fell,
   her eyes closed, and her spirit returned to God who gave it. - T.G.
   Garland.

                           PRAYERS ANSWERED FOR RAIN.

   Within two blocks of the Pacific Mission, in Chicago, is one of our
   large depots, the Rock Island and Lake Shore. Here is a good field for
   labor. One night, when inviting one and another to the mission, a. lady
   answered: "We are or our way to Oberlin." "The place," I asked, "where
   Charles Finney lived?" "Yes." "And did you know him?" "Yes," she
   answered; "and my husband, who is here, was a member of his church."
   Soon he joined us, much crippled and out of health; at first but little
   inclined to talk. I told him how precious the memory of Mr. Finney was,
   and asked if he could tell us any personal reminiscences of him. Soon
   the fire began to burn in his heart, and his lips began to speak. He
   said:

   "We had been long without rain. All vegetation was drying up;
   everything looked parched. In the prayer preceding the sermon, on
   Sabbath, Mr. Finney began to pour out his full heart to God for rain.
   He laid the whole case before Him. Lord, the cattle in the fields are
   lowing for water; there will be no food for them for winter, unless
   thou sendest rain. The harvest will fail - no food for man-unless Thou
   sendest rain. The little squirrels in the woods are panting for rain.
   On and on the petitions rose, faith rising as he prayed, until he felt
   they had entered into the ear of the Lord of Sabaoth, and, that as a
   prince, he had power with God, and prevailed.' His closing words were:
   "Lord; we want rain, and we want it now!" The service proceeded, the
   text was chosen, and for about half an hour Mr. Finney preached, when
   the rain began to dash against the windows. He stopped, and gave out
   the hymn:

   "When all thy mercies, O my God,

   My rising soul surveys,

   Transported with the view,

   I'm lost in wonder, love, and praise"

   "The whole congregation rose to their feet, and don't think, in that
   assembly of three thousand people was one dry eye. I never can tell
   it," said the stranger:" but it melts me right up." Yea, we were all
   melted, while "heaven came souls to greet, and glory crowned the Mercy
   seat."

   "God, who lived in Elijah's time,

   Is just the same today."

   "Elijah was a man subject to like passions as we are and he prayed
   earnestly "when the sins of the people were hurrying them on to
   destruction" that it might not rain; and it rained not on the earth for
   the space of three years. And again he prayed, and the heavens gave
   rain." Are not all these scriptures given to encourage and strengthen
   the faith of God's people in all ages? Yea, verily! Two sisters had
   left the Taylorville, Ill., campground on their way to visit a sick
   woman. The earth had become as dust; all nature was parched and drying
   up under the hot beams of the sun. It was Saturday; and looking forward
   to the Sabbath, bringing its multitudes from all the surrounding
   country, they thought of the suffering and discomfort there would be.
   The elder of the two asked: "Is not God the same today as in the days
   of Elijah?" The dry bed of a spring seemed a good place for prayer, and
   there they knelt together. Soon their united faith took hold, and the
   assurance was given that their prayers were heard, and their petitions
   should be granted.

   Rev. L. B. Kent, of Jacksonville, the leader of the meeting, proposed
   at the close of the afternoon service, that a meeting should be held
   for prayer for rain. "And shall I hide what the Lord has already
   promised?" was the query whispered by the Spirit. "No;" and rising to
   her feet, one of the sisters told how the Lord had promised the rain.

   Night came. The moon, in her glorious brightness, shone forth, and
   there was no indication in the heavens of rain. Hour after hour passed,
   while every now and then, as faith 2 held on for the promised blessing,
   the assuring words of Jesus would come: "If ye abide in me, and my
   words abide in you, ye shall ask what ye will, and it shall be done
   unto you three o'clock came, and the rain began to fall, and the
   hallelujahs and praises to God went up from many a waiting heart. It
   fell copiously until seven o'clock when clouds dispersed, and the
   people gathered and the work of God moved on blessedly.--Sarah A. Cooke

                               THE WIDOW'S SHOES.

   A poor woman-a widow with an invalid son-a member of the church, could
   not attend church, or the neighborhood prayer-meetings, for the want of
   shoes. She asked the Lord for the shoes. That very day, the village
   school-master called in to see her son. Meanwhile, he noticed that the
   boy's mother had very poor shoes. He said nothing, but felt impressed,
   and inwardly resolved to purchase the poor woman a pair of shoes
   forthwith. He accordingly hired a horse, rode two miles on horseback to
   a shoe-store, bought the shoes, and requested them sent to the widow's
   cottage without delay. They proved a perfect fit; and that very night
   the overjoyed woman hurried to the prayer-meeting, to announce that in
   answer to prayer the Lord had sent her the shoes.

   The young school-master, who, I suspect, was informant himself, now a
   venerable, white-haired man, heard the poor woman's testimony; and his
   pillow that night was wet with tears of gratitude and joy, because God
   had used him thus to bless the poor widow, and to answer her prayers.--
   Answers to Prayer.

                            INSTANTANEOUSLY HEALED.

   Brother E. B. Williams, of Warren, Ill., writes us of instantaneous
   recovery of a woman in answer to prayer as follows

   "In the year 1830, in the town of Shelby, Orleans county N.Y., a woman
   of middle age lay very sick for a time under the doctor's care without
   any benefit and pronounced by all as incurable As I was praying one
   morning in church, without thinking of the case, there came a voice to
   me from some source which was as distinct as a man could speak, saying:
   Go, and pray with and for that woman.' I went to her home the next
   week, and tried to make her comfortable. She was apparently in a dreamy
   state. I left the house without prayer, and thought no more of it,
   until a day or two after, when father and I went to the same place on
   business. She saw me and beckoned me to come to her, and I did so. She
   whispered to me, asking why I did not pray for her the other day, and
   added: "Something told me thee came to pray for me,' (she was a
   Quaker.) I told her I was sent to do so, but diffidence and timidity
   prevented at that time. I felt no call to pray then but a day or two
   after, while I was alone and going by the place, without thought on the
   subject, the words came to me again, as plain as man could speak them:
   Go, and pray for that woman' I went in, and called the family together
   and while we engaged in prayer, an invisible power was felt by all in
   the house, and that woman was healed at once, and was well."

                         THE LORD'S WAY OF SENDING HELP

   A few years ago we were led out to pray for means to make a payment on
   our home, in Grand Rapids, Mich. The amount was one hundred dollars,
   and it was due in two weeks. We had no way of getting the money; and,
   realizing the promises of God to be reliable, we laid the matter before
   the Lord in prayer.

   At the time, we were holding meetings in the southern part of Michigan.
   When the answer to prayer came, we wrote home to wife, telling her that
   we had the evidence beyond every possibility of a doubt, that the Lord
   would send the money in time.

   In a few days we received a letter from a brother in Texas, whom we had
   only met but once, saying that he was impressed to send us fifty
   dollars; which was enclosed in the letter. In a short time twenty-five
   dollars were received from a friend in our own State. The balance came
   in smaller sums.

   At the time the obligation was due, the money was on hand, and we
   praised God for his special help in a time of need.--Editor.

                           REDFIELD IN A HARD PLACE.

   John W. Redfield was a remarkable revivalist among the Methodists and
   Free Methodists. He died not many years ago. From his memoir, prepared
   by J. G. Terrill, we take the following:

   "The Sabbath came, and I went to church. A goodly number had come,
   probably from curiosity, to see the new preacher. I had resolved to
   deliver my own soul regardless of persons or conditions, by declaring
   the whole counsel of God. But I saw no favorable indications. After a
   few efforts during the week following to bring about a change, and
   finding it all in vain, I went to sinners and exhorted them to flee
   from the wrath to come. The response from them was: "Go, look after
   your ungodly members." Sabbath came again, and I delivered my message
   in view of the judgment; When I was leaving the church, I met the
   principal member of the official board, who accosted me thus: We don't
   like your preaching here at all, nor the chapters you lead from the
   pulpit. Hell is not very popular here.'

   "I inquired: Will you tell me, brother, what I have preached that is
   not Bible truth?"

   "Well," said he, "I believe it is true."

   "Do you want me to preach lies?" I asked.

   "I went home, weeping along the street. I now saw I was going to
   accomplish anything, I must do it with might. So, Monday morning, I
   went to the grove, and before, the Lord in prayer. It seemed as though
   the power I experienced of darkness were all about me. The sensations
   were as if by the hardest effort I was overcoming great obstacles and
   rising higher and higher, until my head struck against a rock, and I
   sank back overcome. I arose and sought another place to plead with God,
   and there experienced the same. Thus I continued day after day through
   the week. I would go to the house once in a while and get something to
   eat, and then return to the struggle. Sometimes my agony was such that
   it seemed to me I could rend the heavens with my cries for the
   salvation of sinners. It seemed to me that if I could hold on until the
   victory came, I should see them saved. When Saturday night came my very
   brain seemed sore, and the jar of my step gave me pain. I felt a kind
   of bewilderment coming on, but I had received no answer. I had
   resolved, in the name of God, to see a break and salvation come to the
   church, on the next Sabbath, or an end put to its standing as a stench
   in the nostrils of the Almighty and the world.

   "Sunday morning came, and with eyes sore from weeping, and my brain
   tender from the continual struggle of the week, I walked softly and
   carefully to the church, and into the pulpit. In opening the service, I
   said to the membership. "This day ends my labors in this place. You do
   not want me here, and I do not want to stay, for I am heartily tired of
   pouring water on to rocks. But if God will help me, I will either see a
   break today, or see this ungodly apology for Methodism annihilated. I
   have asked no man's money; I go at my own expense; but I shall go
   straight for God." Nothing seemed to move in the morning. In the
   evening I went into the pulpit again, and announced that I should
   redeem my pledge. Of course, this aroused their hate to a high pitch.
   As God helped, I pointed out the track of an acceptable disciple, and
   the only one that could possibly pass the gates of Paradise. At the
   close of the sermon, I asked those, and only those who meant it and
   would take this track and where needed go to their neighbors and
   confess to them, and pray with them, and who would seek for the
   blessing of holiness until they knew they had it, to rise. I didn't
   believe I could get them to come forward. Two only arose, and they were
   of the most lowly. Well,' said I, there seem to be but three of us,
   counting myself as one, and God besides; but I think we will try and
   have a prayer meeting. Those two and myself were all that would kneel,
   I in the altar and they at their seats, about half-way down the church.
   I opened with a short prayer, and began to rise in spirit until I
   struck that rock again. I then asked some one else to pray, but no one
   responded; and I tried again with the same experience and result, and
   the third time, and the fourth, and fifth until the sixth time, in
   immediate succession. I now felt that this is the last time, and that
   if I did not get the victory, God would say to me: Let them alone.' The
   case was a desperate one, and I knew the world and the devil were
   against me, and the church members who would not kneel; but I said in
   my prayer: O God, I'll go as far as I can." Again in spirit I began to
   rise, and soon I struck that rock again, and it seemed to shiver to
   atoms. Instantly the house was filled with the Divine glory. The two
   who were kneeling with me fell, and their shouts and screams were so
   loud that they alarmed the village. The people came running in to see
   what was the matter, and as they crowded up the aisles and saw the two
   prostrate under the power of God, tears each other down their faces;
   and the poor tempted members began one after another to confess their
   hostility and ask for pardon, and promised to take the track pointed
   out to them. I stayed one more week, and forty-five sinners were
   converted. The preacher, who had abandoned the work returned and
   revival went on in power for some time.-- Ten or fifteen years
   afterward, I heard from that society, and it still was well.'

     PRAYER ANSWERED FOR ONE HUNDRED MISSIONARIES AND MONEY TO SUPPORT THEM

   Major O. M. Brown, President of the Ohio Christian Alliance, of
   Cleveland, O.H, furnishes us the following:

   In the spring of 1890, Rev. A. B. Simpson, President of the
   International Christian Alliance, was burdened in prayer for the
   heathen, who were perishing without the knowledge of the true God. And
   as he prayed, he began to inquire: "Lord, what can I do about it?" Then
   he began to ask the Lord to give him that year, one hundred
   missionaries for the foreign work, and money enough to pay their
   transit, and support them one year on the field; which would be about
   one hundred thousand dollars.

   At the New York State Convention of the Alliance, held at Round Lake,
   in July of that same year, Mr. Simpson gave a very stirring address on
   the subject, and the people pledged $1,800 in a few minutes. At the
   Ohio Convention, at Beulah Park, near Cleveland, a few days later,
   $2,200 was pledged. And at the Old Orchard Convention, in Maine, in the
   month of August, $35,000 was pledged. Afterward, the pledges kept
   coming in, until there was upwards of $100,000 pledged. Before the year
   was out, the one hundred missionaries were many of them, in the field,
   or on the way thither. A few of them had not yet departed, but were
   ready to sail.

   The work nearly doubled during the year 1892. These missionaries are
   scattered over large portions of the heathen world-in India, China,
   Japan, Africa, Palestine, South America, and the Islands of the Sea.
   None of this great force of Christian workers receive any stated salary
   for their service; and no member of the Mission Board receives any
   remuneration for his service. God will honor those who ask large things
   of Him.

                          TESTIMONY OF A SAVED INFIDEL

   He had been given up by some as a hopeless case. One man, however,
   prayed for him until he prevailed, and the infidel was saved.

   A revival was in progress, and in the midst of a melting meet mg he
   arose and to the surprise of many, "with face shining as did the face
   of Moses when he saw God," he gave the following striking and
   suggestive testimony:

   "I stand," said Mr. R----, "to tell you the story of my conversion."
   His lips trembled slightly as he spoke, and his bosom heaved with
   suppressed emotion. "I am as a brand plucked out of the burning. The
   change in me is an astonishment to myself; and all brought about by the
   grace of God, and that unanswerable argument. It was a cold morning in
   January, and I had just begun my labor at the anvil in my shop, when I
   looked out and saw Mr. B----approaching. He dismounted quickly and
   entered. As he drew near I saw he was agitated. His look was full of
   earnestness; his eyes were dimmed with tears; he took me by the hand;
   his breast heaved with emotion, and with indescribable tenderness he
   said: Mr. R----, I am greatly concerned for your salvation-greatly
   concerned for your salvation,' and he burst into tears. He stood with
   my hand grasped in his; he struggled to regain self-possession; he
   often essayed to speak, but not a word could he utter; and finding that
   he could say no more, he turned, went out of the shop, got on his
   horse, and rode slowly away.

   "Greatly concerned for my salvation,' said I, audibly, and I stood and
   forgot to bring my hammer down. There I stood with it upraised -
   greatly concerned for my salvation.' Here is a new argument for the
   truth of religion, which I have never heard before, and which I know
   not how to answer. Had the aged man reasoned with me I could have
   confounded him; but here is no threadbare argument for the truth of
   religion. Religion must be truth or this man would not feel as he does
   Greatly concerned for my salvation, it rung through my ears like a
   thunderclap in a clear sky Greatly concerned I ought, for my own
   salvation, said I "What shall I do?

   "I went to my house. My poor pious wife, whom I had always ridiculed
   for her religion, exclaimed: Why, Mr. R----what is the matter with
   you?' Matter enough,' said I, filled with agony and overwhelmed with a
   sense of sin. Old Mr. B----has rode two miles this cold morning to tell
   me he was greatly concerned for my salvation. What shall I do? What
   shall I do?'

   "I do not know what you can do, said my astonished wife; I do not know
   what better you can do than to get on your horse, and go and see him.
   He can give you better counsel than I, and tell you what you must do to
   be saved.'

   "I mounted my horse, and pursued after him. I found him alone in that
   same little room where he had spent the night in prayer for my poor
   soul, where he had shed many tears over such a reprobate as I, and had
   besought God to have mercy upon me.

   "I am come,' said I to him, to tell you that I am greatly concerned for
   my own salvation'

   "Praised be God,' said the aged man. It is a faithful saying, and
   worthy of all acceptance, that Jesus Christ came into the world to save
   sinners,' even the chief: and he began at that same scripture, and
   preached to me Jesus. On that same floor we knelt, and together we
   prayed-and we did not -separate that day till God spoke peace to my
   soul.

   "I have often been requested to look at the evidence of the truth of
   religion, but blessed be God, I have evidence for its truth here,"
   laying his hand upon his heart, "which nothing can gainsay or resist. I
   have often been led to look at this, and that argument for the truth of
   Christianity; but I could overturn and, as I thought, completely
   demolish and annihilate them all. But I stand here tonight, thankful to
   acknowledge that God sent an argument to my conscience and heart, which
   could not the answered or resisted, when a weeping Christian came to
   tell me how greatly concerned he was for my salvation. God taught him
   that argument when he spent the night before him in prayer for my soul!
   Now I can truly say, I am a happy man. My peace flows like a river. My
   consistent, uncomplaining wife, who so long bore with my impiety and
   unbelief, now rejoices with me, that, by the grace of God, I am what I
   am--- that whereas I was blind, now I see. And here permit me to say if
   you would wish to reach the heart of such a poor sinner as I, you must
   get your qualifications where he did, in your closet and on your knees;
   So it shall be with me. I will endeavor to reach the hearts of my
   infidel friends through the closet and by prayer.

   He sat down overcome with emotion, amid the tears and the suppressed
   sobs of the assembly. All were touched; for all knew what he once was,
   all saw what he had now become.--Tract.

                        "I DON'T LOVE YOU NOW, MOTHER."

   A great many years ago I knew a lady who had been sick for two years,
   as you have seen many a one, all the while slowly dying with
   consumption. She had one child-a little boy named Henry.

   One afternoon I was sitting by her side, and it seemed as if. she would
   cough her life away. Her little boy stood by the post of the bed, his
   blue eyes filled with tears to see her suffer so. By and by the
   terrible cough ceased. Henry came and put his arms around his mother's
   neck, nestled his head in his mother's bosom, and said, "Mother I do
   love you, I wish you wasn't sick."

   An hour later, the same loving, blue-eyed boy came in all aglow,
   stamping the snow off his feet. "O mother may I go skating? It is so
   nice Ed and Charley are going." "Henry" feebly said the mother the ice
   is not hard enough yet." "But mother," very pettishly said the boy,
   "you are sick all the how do you know?" "My child, you must obey me,"
   said his mother.'

   It is too bad angrily sobbed the boy, who an so loved his mother. - "I
   would not like to have my little boy go," said his mother, looking
   sadly at the little boy all covered with frowns; "you said you loved me
   - be good." "No, I don't love you now, mother'," said the boy, going
   out and slamming the door.

   Again the dreadful coughing came upon her, and thought no more of the
   boy. After the coughing had commenced, I noticed tears falling thick
   upon her pillow, but sank from exhaustion into a light sleep.

   In a little while muffled steps of men's feet were heard coming into
   the house, as though carrying something; and they were carrying the
   almost lifeless body of Henry.

   Angrily had he left his mother and gone to skate-- disobeying her; and
   then broken through the ice, sunk under the water, and now saved by a
   great effort, was brought home barely alive to his sick mother.

   I closed the doors, feeling more danger for her life than the child's,
   and coming softly in, drew back the curtains from the bed. She spoke,
   "I heard them-it is Henry; Oh I knew he went. Is he dead?" But she
   never seemed to hear the answer I gave her. She commenced coughing-she
   died in agony--strangled to death. The poor mother! The boy's
   disobedience killed her.

   After a couple of hours I sought the boy's room. "Oh I wish I had not
   told mother I did not love her. Tomorrow I will tell her I do," said
   the child sobbing painfully. My heart ached; tomorrow I knew we must
   tell him she was dead. We did not till the child came fully in the
   room, crying, "Mother I do love you." Oh l may I never see agony like
   that as the lips he kissed gave back no kiss as the hands he fell
   lifeless from his hand instead of shaking his hand like it always had
   and the boy knew she was dead

   "Mother I do love you now" all the day he sobbed and cried "O mother
   mother forgive me" Then he would leave his mother "Speak to me,
   mother!" but she could never speak again, and he - he last words she
   had ever never speak again him say, were, "Mother, I don't love you
   now."

   That boy's whole life was changed; sober and sad he was ever after. He
   is now a gray haired old man, with one sorrow-over his one act of
   disobedience, one wrong word embittering all his life--with those words
   ever ringing in his ears, "Mother, I don't love you now."

   Will the little ones who read this remember, if they disobey their
   mother, if they are cross and naughty, they say every single time they
   do so, to a tender mother's heart, by their actions, if not in the
   words of Henry, the very same thing, "I don't love you now, mother?"

                 A BLACKSMITH PREVAILED WITH GOD FOR A REVIVAL.

   A story related by Mr. Finney, will illustrate the power of the mighty
   prayer of faith, even when every human aid seems withheld, and nothing
   remains but the burning, throbbing heart, breathing out its longings,
   and pouring out its groans and tears before the Lord.

   In a certain town there had been no revival for many years; the church
   was nearly run out, the youth were all unconverted, and desolation
   reigned unbroken. There lived in a retired part of the town, an aged
   man, a blacksmith by trade, and of so stammering a tongue that it was
   painful to hear him speak. On one Friday, as he was at work in his shop
   alone in his mind became greatly exercised about the state of the
   church, and of the impenitent. His agony became so great that he was
   induced to lay aside his work, lock the shop door, and spend the
   afternoon in prayer.

   He prevailed and on the Lord's day, called on the minister and desired
   him to appoint a conference meeting. After some hesitation--the
   minister consented--observing, however, that he feared but few would
   attend. He appointed it the same evening, at a large, private house.

   The people gathered from far and near, doubtless to surprise of the
   unbelieving and faint-hearted. A solemn sense of the presence of God
   seemed to oppress the as feelings too deep for speech were welling up
   in many hearts. All was silent for a time, until one sinner broke out
   in and said, if any one could pray, he begged him to pray for him.
   Another followed, and still another, until it was found that persons
   from every quarter of the town were under deep conviction. And what was
   remarkable was, that they all dated their conviction at the hour when
   the old man was praying in his shop. A powerful revival followed. Thus
   this old stammering man prevailed, and as a prince had power with
   God.--Records of Prevailing Prayer.

                    RESULT OF REV. JOHN S. INSKIP'S PRAYER.

   From the life of that devoted and noted evangelist, Rev. J. S. Inskip,
   we quote the following incident, which occurred while he was pastor at
   Springfield, Ohio, January, 1851. A few days before its occurrence, he
   recorded in his journal that he felt unusually encouraged to look unto
   God for a revival of religion in his own heart, and among the members
   of his church, and that he was favored with much freedom in discoursing
   upon the duty and encouragements to prayer. We give the account in his
   own words:

   "This has been one of the greatest days I have ever seem! In the
   morning I went into the high school and conducted the opening
   exercises. I then went into the church and attended to some items of
   business, intending to go subsequently into the country. As I passed
   along the street I received a message from Brother Howard, requesting
   me immediately to repair to the high school. I went without delay and
   found in one of the rooms of the institution such a scene as I never
   witnessed before. There were over thirty of the young ladies and
   smaller children weeping and crying aloud for mercy. The exercises of
   the institution were suspended. We held a meeting for the benefit of
   the students in the afternoon. I presume, during day there were some
   eighteen converted. At night we held a society meeting. There were some
   eight or ten more convent making in all some thirty conversions during
   the day. Twenty joined the society. I never knew such a work. To God be
   all the glory, glory, glory in the highest! My soul is unspeakably
   happy." From this manifestation of Divine power, the work spread into
   the town. It was a time of great excitement.

            THE WINDS CONTROLLED IN ANSWER TO JOHN WESLEY'S PRAYER.

   In Dr. Adam Clark's record of his life and early ministry, he relates
   the following instance of prevailing prayer:

   John Wesley, with some of his co-workers, had been laboring in the
   Norman Islands, and had appointed a day to be at Bristol. Taking
   passage with Dr. Clark, Dr. Coke, and Joseph Bradford, in an English
   brig which had touched at Guernsey, on its voyage from France, they
   left Guiernsey with a fine, fair breeze, and every prospect of making a
   quick passage. In a short time the wind died away, and a contrary wind
   arose, and blew with great force. Mr. Wesley was in the cabin, reading;
   and hearing the bustle on deck, occasioned by putting the vessel about,
   he put his head above deck and inquired the cause. Being told that the
   wind was contrary, and they were obliged to tack ship, he said; "Let us
   go to prayer." - At his request, Coke, Clark, and Bradford prayed. As
   they concluded, Mr. Wesley broke out into fervent supplication, which
   seemed, says Dr. Clark, to be more the offspring of strong faith than
   mere desire. He said: "Almighty and everlasting God, thou hast thy say
   everywhere, and all things serve the purposes of thy will; thou boldest
   the winds in thy fists, and upon the water-floods, and reignest a king
   forever--command these winds and these waves, that they obey THEE, an
   take us speedily and safely to the haven where we would be," etc The
   power of his petition was felt by all He from his knees made no kind of
   remark, but took up his band continued his reading Dr Clark went on
   deck, surprise, found the vessel standing on her course with a steady
   breeze, which did not abate, but of nine or ten miles an hour, until
   they were safely at their desired port. Mr. Wesley made no remark on
   the sudden change of the wind. "So fully," says Dr. Clark, "did he
   expect to be heard, that he took it for granted he was heard. Such
   answers to prayed he was in the habit of receiving, and therefore to
   him the occurrence was not strange."

   He who hath "gathered the wind in his fists," (Prov. Xxx:4,) and who
   rules the raging of the sea, bends low to hear his children cry, and
   deigns to hear their prayer. "Oh, that men would praise the Lord for
   his goodness, and his wonderful works to the children of men

                     THE CLOUDS STAYED IN ANSWER TO PRAYER.

   In his "Memorials of Methodism in Virginia," Dr. W.W. Bennett relates
   the following incidents in the life of John Easter, one of the pioneer
   ministers who labored there nearly one hundred years ago. He is
   represented as being the most powerful exhortatory preacher of his day.
   His faith was transcendent, his appeals irresistible, his prayers like
   talking to God -face to face. Perhaps no man has ever been more
   signally honored of God as an instrument in the conversion of
   souls.--On one of his circuits eighteen hundred members were added to
   the church in a single year. Many thrilling scenes under his preaching
   yet linger in memory of the people in those counties where he
   principally labored. A most extraordinary display of his faith was
   witnessed in Brunswick. At Merritt's meeting house a quarterly meeting
   was in progress, and so vast was--the concourse of people from many
   miles around, that the services were con ducted in a beautiful
   grove--near the church. In the midst of the exercises, a heavy cloud
   arose, and swept rapidly toward the place of worship. From the skirts
   of the grove the could be seen coming on across the fields The people
   were in consternation; no house could hold one third of the multitude
   and they were about to scatter in all directions Easter rose in the
   midst of the confusion, "Brethren,"' cried he at the top of his voice,
   "be still while I call upon God to stay the clouds, till his word can
   be preached to perishing sinners."

   Arrested by his voice and manner, they stood between hope and fear. He
   kneeled down and offered a fervent prayer that God would stay the rain
   that the preaching of his word might go on, and afterward send
   refreshing showers. While he was praying, the angry cloud, as it
   swiftly rolled up to them, was seen to part asunder in the midst, pass
   on either side of them, and close again beyond, leaving a space several
   hundred yards in circumference perfectly dry. The next morning a
   copious rain fell again, and the fields that had been left dry-were
   well watered.--Records of Prevailing Prayer.

                    RESULTS OF A LIFE OF PREVAILING PRAYER.

   William Taylor, now M.E. Bishop to Africa, and one of the greatest of
   living men, was converted in 1841, when about twenty years old. He soon
   entered the ministry and spent seven years in the Baltimore Conference,
   and a second seven years in California. While there he became known the
   world over as the "California Street Preacher." At the end of that time
   God clearly called him to general evangelistic work and for nearly
   forty years he has proved himself one of the most mighty men in
   Christian faith and labor that the church of God has ever known. In
   every continent on the globe and many of the Islands of the sea he has
   proclaimed to listening multitudes the unsearchable riches of Christ,
   and untold thousands have been converted to God. His first field,
   outside of the United States and Canada, with the exception of a few
   months in England & Ireland, was Australia, where God gave him six
   thousand souls as the result of the labor of two and one-half years.
   But more wonderful victories awaited him. From Australia God led his
   servant to Africa, and, there among the heathen; speaking what was to
   him an unknown tongue, God wrought so mightily, so gloriously, that the
   record is one of the most remarkable that can be found in all the
   history of the Christian Church. In the short space of' seven months
   nearly 8,000 souls were converted. Out of this number 1,200 were
   colonists, and the rest were Kaffirs, Fingoes and Hottentots. The
   following account of a meeting held at Heald Town is quoted from "Life
   of William Taylor," by Rev. E. Davies, and is a fair illustration of
   the victories of that seven months tour in Africa.

   "The Wesleyan Chapel will hold about eight hundred. The first service
   was to the natives, but Charles Pamla was not there to interpret; but
   they found a Kaffir boy, who, after private instruction from Mr.
   Taylor, answered a good purpose. His name was Siko. He put the
   sentences into Kaffir very rapidly. An extraordinary power rested upon
   the audience. Silence reigned, except the suppressed sobs. After the
   sermon the simplicity of the gospel was explained, and the way of
   salvation by faith, and when they were invited, about three hundred
   rushed forward to take the kingdom by storm. They all prayed audibly,
   and the floor was wet with their tears, yet none seemed to be crying
   louder than their neighbors. The pastor was afraid, but God was in the
   movement.

   "Fourteen whites were among the seekers. As soon as any one was
   converted he was placed in a seat on the side of the pulpit and had an
   opportunity to testify for Christ. One hundred and thirty-nine natives
   and seven whites gave their names as converted in one service, which
   lasted five hours.

   "In a few days after he held another service in the same place, at
   which God's power was manifested almost as on the Day of Pentecost. It
   surpassed anything Mr. Taylor ever saw. It was as the Spirit of God
   moving upon the waters, yea, as the Spirit that moved in the valley of
   dry bones and raised them up an exceeding great army.

   At this second service at Heald Town there Were one hundred and
   sixty-seven converted, making a total for two services of three hundred
   and six natives and ten whites saved.

   Many will wonder what kind of preaching could produce marvelous
   results. He remarks:

   I. He preached the law, as proclaimed from the burning Mount of Sinai,
   the law-that is holy, just and good, the law that is our schoolmaster
   to bring us to Christ. He sought to kill before he made alive, to
   convict before he sought to point out Christ.

   II. He preached the gospel in all its wonderful and glorious provisions
   of justification, regeneration, adoption and the witness of the Spirit,
   and that no professor of religion should live without this grace.

   III. He preached purity of heart and the baptism of fire to all true
   believers, and his speech and his preaching was not with enticing words
   of man's wisdom, but in demonstration of the Spirit and of power.

   IV. He spent much of time in wrestling with God for divine guidance and
   power to win souls. At one place he could not succeed in starting a
   school until he had spent a whole night in prayer. All the most
   important movements of his life were the result of prevailing prayer.

   As a result of his faith and devotion, self-supporting missions have
   been established, not only in Africa, but also in India and South
   America, that are a wonder to the world. Christ-like in his devotion,
   strong in faith and mighty in prayer, his life with its results must
   prove a never-failing inspiration to church till time shall be no more.

                              PROTECTED BY ANGELS.

   A good clergyman was once sent to a wild and dangerous part of
   Australia on some errand of duty and mercy traveled up to the place too
   poor to be in any great from bush-rangers or robbers, but as he came
   back he had to bring in his saddle-bags a large sum of money not of his
   but belonging to the dying man he had been sent for to comfort.

   He knew that a dangerous robber was aware that riding along this lonely
   track through the bush with all his about him, and when he got to one
   part of the road he felt so frightened that he thought he was not
   trusting God as a Christian should.

   He wanted a little quiet, so he got off his horse and by it, with his
   eyes shaded against it, praying for faith courage not to be afraid of
   bush-rangers or robbers, and to guarded against them. He prayed till he
   felt calm enough ride on, and then he mounted his horse and reached the
   in safety with the money which he had in charge.

   Some time later he was once more called to visit a man a sick bed, and
   he recognized him as the robber of whom had been so afraid in his ride.
   This man told him that he felt he could not die without confessing that
   on that day he had followed him, intending to rob and murder him, but
   could get no opportunity.

   "Why did you not do it when I got off my horse?" asked the clergyman in
   surprise.

   "I could not then," said the bush-ranger; "there were too many of you."

   "What do you mean?" asked the clergyman. "I was quite alone in the
   bush, standing with my head resting against my horse's side for a long
   time. You could have killed me then."

   "You were not alone," said the bush-ranger; "I saw you standing as you
   describe, but there was a man on each side there had been no other men
   with the clergyman in that hour of terror when he cried to God, but it
   is just possible that God really opened the robbers eyes and showed him
   his angels guarding his servant as he went on his dangerous duty, as
   Elisha's servant's eyes were opened to see guardians around his muster.

   Whatever may be the explanation God did send his angels to frighten
   away the robber, and by so doing he saved him from a great crime as
   well as the good clergyman from death. - The Mission Worker.

   "Are they not all ministering spirits, sent forth to for them who who
   shall be heirs of salvation?"

                  DR.CHAS.CULLIS - "THE MAN THAT BELIEVED GOD"

   In 1861, a Christian physician in the city of Boston first recorded his
   desire to open a private hospital, or home, for those consumptives who
   were excluded from the public hospital on the ground that they were
   incurable. His professional income was already wholly consecrated to
   the Lord, but it was not at all sufficient to justify such an
   undertaking, and his only hope was that if his desire was prompted by
   the Holy Spirit, God would provide the way for its fulfillment.

   Nearly two years later, as his biographer tells us, "the burden of the
   possible and yet impossible work grew so heavy that he began to pray in
   that alternative manner by which. in after years he was accustomed to
   seek the settlement of difficult questions: O Lord, if this thought is
   from thee, give me the means to realize it; and if not, I pray thee
   take it out of my mind.' On the evening of that very day a trifling sum
   of money was given him, unsolicited, by a friend who knew of his plan
   for a consumptive's home." Such was the beginning of a work for God
   that has justly ranked Dr. Chas. Cullis among the, greatest men of
   faith the world has ever known.

   Of the miracles of grace manifested in answer to the prayers of this
   devoted servant of God, we can only make a few, brief statements. In
   September, 1864, he opened his first consumptive's home. Within twelve
   months, by the purchase of a second building the capacity of the home
   was doubled and all bills were paid. Constant proofs had been given,
   both and spiritual, that this servant of God had not trusted in vain
   The amount of money received during the first year--$5916.28. The
   second year was in many respects one of trial. His faith was at times
   severely tested, but eighty-eight patients were cared for souls were
   converted and the total receipts given in answer to the prayer of faith
   were $8293.10. During the third year a children's orphanage was added
   to the work. At the end of the fifth year the work included five
   departments, Consumptive's Home, the Orphanage, the Deaconness' House
   with its training school for nurses, the Willard Tract Repository and
   the Willard street Chapel. This summary of the report of the home for
   this year Dr. Cullis wrote:

   "The Lord has given in answer to prayer, in cash during the year,
   $13,360.45. For the Home, since the commencement of the work,
   $47,627.85," and adds:

   "We still trust that every death has been in Christ. Regarding one case
   only, we cannot express ourselves with certainty; as this patient
   entered in a dying state, and in about thirty-six hours passed away.
   During this time he was too feeble to do more than to say he would ask
   for pardon through the blood of Jesus."

   How severely at times his faith was tested, is shown in the following
   item early in the sixth year; "This noon I had but twenty cents in the
   world, belonging to myself or any branch of the work. Money was needed
   to purchase groceries for supper. I asked the Lord to send the amount
   in season. At three o'clock a messenger from the Home called for the
   needed money. Just at the same moment, the mail arrived; the last
   letter opened contained a check for ten dollars from Dover, N.H. Truly
   they that trust in the Lord shall not be confounded!" Yet the same year
   he contracted for Grove Hall, property, and agreed to pay $90,000.00
   for it, in order that he might give his great household of suffering
   ones what the city, could not afford them, abundant liberty and light
   and air. Thus the work grew upon his hands and in the introduction to
   the report of the seventeenth year of this work, are these memorable
   words:

   "For seventeen years I have believed! The word has been true to me. My
   God faileth never. The promises stand out upon the firmanent of his
   word as the stars in the blue above, and they shed their light as truly
   as the stars; but, like them, they are only seen by those who look up
   The promises are revealed to those who are looking unto Jesus"'

   In the same year of the work, the entire amount of money received m
   response to simple faith in God reached and passed sum of half a
   million dollars; and at the end of the twentieth year, two thousand
   seven hundred and seven consumptives had been cared for, the grand
   total of receipts was $621,960.36 and the value of; real estate held in
   trust for the work at home and abroad, over and above the mortgages
   upon it, was not for from $300,000.00, and almost a thousand souls had
   in the Home I found pardon and peace in the Saviour. Nor have we even
   mentioned the millions of tracts and books circulated, the home and
   foreign missions established, the Cancer Home, the Spinal Home, the
   Boydton Institute, and other departments of this great work. How many
   thousand Christian hearts have been strengthened, how many of the
   Lord's children have been healed of disease, how many souls saved, how
   many believers baptized with the Spirit in our own and other lands, as
   a direct result of the devotion of this servant of God, only the
   heavenly records can show. All this an answer to prayer? And yet the
   record is not finished, for though Dr. Culls has gone from labor to
   reward, the different departments of the work which he established
   still prosper and his mighty influence still lives and the power of his
   life is still felt all over the Christian world. And when at the last
   great day all that has been accomplished by his life is made known,
   will not the answer of the redeemed, in glory be: "ALL THIS IN ANSWER
   TO PRAYER."

                             THE LORD WILL PROVIDE.

   Some years since when we were living in Grand Rapids and were trying to
   pay for our little home there, our heart was burdened because of a
   payment of one hundred dollars that would be due in a few days. We were
   at the time laboring in; revival work in the southern part of the
   state, were in very close circumstances and from the human standpoint
   could see no way of deliverance. But as we took the matter to the
   Lord's in prayer we were greatly helped of the Spirit and received the
   evidence that God would supply the money needed to make the payment on
   the home, and wrote to wife that we had the evidence beyond the
   possibility of a doubt that the money was coming And it came, $50.00
   from a brother in Texas whom we had never seen but once or twice, a
   brother in the Lord and the balance in smaller from different sources.
   Nor is this by any means the only case which God has helped us in a
   time of especial need now we have great reason to praise him that in a
   time of severe and general financial depression he has so greatly
   prospered us in the circulation of this book and for the evidence we
   have had that the" book is proving a blessing and encouragement to
   thousands of hearts. We also wish to record to the glory of God, his
   great mercy in healing our wife of consumption in January last (1894)
   About a year before her father died of the same disease, She cared for
   him during part of his last illness and from that time her own strength
   steadily failed until she was entirely unable to work. Her lungs pained
   her constantly--her life was evidently rapidly wasting away, and aside
   from the power of God to deliver, she had no hope of living more than a
   few months.

   We too felt that in God was our only hope of deliverance.

   On the evening of January 15, we attended prayer meeting and then
   received the assurance of God's willingness to heal her. On our return
   we said to her, "If you will walk in the light God will heal you not
   many days hence." Little more was said, but a few minutes after she
   remarked to a friend who was visiting us, "My lungs certainly feel
   different." Early the next morning we were each led out to pray for the
   work to done and were enabled by faith to claim victory. The same
   moment the difference in her breathing was clearly observable. Her
   lungs felt as if having received new life and she rapidly gained
   strength. The same morning she was healed she clearly felt called to go
   out in evangelistic work in answer to a call that had come from friends
   not knowing, of her illness but two weeks she started. Before her
   healing she had only attended public service once in about two months
   and then in great weariness, but while absent from home she preached
   every night for five weeks, without exception or difficulty with her
   lungs and saw over fifty souls gloriously converted to god.

   Truly our God is the Lord, and he is able and willing to help his
   children in every time of need.

   AGENTS WANTED EVERYWHERE

TO SELL THIS BOOK

   No Rook will Sell more Rapidly or Easily than this. It is Already
   Having a Remarkably Large Sale.

   Its circulation offers a grand chance to agents and Christian workers.
   Think of the good that can be done by placing this book in the hands of
   the parents, young people, and children of our land. If you wish to
   make money to the glory of God help us in this work. IT WILL BRING
   SUNSHINE AND BLESSING INTO EVERY HOME IT ENTERS. We want thousands to
   work for it at once. Read a few of the good things others say of it.

   Western Christian Advocate.--"It is simply wonderful, and no one can
   read the book without having his faith in prayer greatly strengthened."

   Rev. B. Fay Mills, the noted Evangelist.--"I have been very much
   pleased with the general outline and appearance of your book, and with
   what I have been able to read."

   Chaplain C. C. McCabe, the noted worker in behalf of Missions.--"This
   book will remind the reader that there are Elijahs still upon the
   earth; that Peniel is still accessible to those who would secure power
   with God and with men.'

   Rev. Wm. Tudor, Bishop of Africa. - "The book compiled by Rev. S.B.
   Shaw, true to its title, is indeed a collection of touching incidents
   and remarkable answers to prayer'--very."

   The Union Signal, Organ of the W.C.T.U-- "This book is neither
   doctrinal nor denominational, yet distinctly Christian. Its high
   religious tone, its fascinating spirit, and the high rank of its
   contributors, make it a strong faith tonic and an inspiration to
   prevailing prayer."

   Rev. M.J. Cramer. D.D., Associate Editor of Theological Review and
   formerly U. S. Minister to Denmark. --" I find it intensely
   interesting. The facts narrated therein are worth volumes of abstract
   arguments.'

   Rev. David Howell, Superintendent of the Board of Home Missions of the
   Presbyterian Synod of Michigan.--"I take great pleasure in saying that
   I have examined with rest care the book published by S.B. Shaw and have
   been greatly helped by it."

   Rev. S.P. Spreng, Editor of Evangelical Messenger. - "Am much pleased
   with it. The author has evidently taken great pains in the selection of
   these incidents, and baa been aided by a discriminating judgment due to
   wide reading and much experience in practical Christian work."

   Religious Telescope, Organ U.B. Church.-- "This book is properly named.
   "The Incidents are touching,' the touch in the right place, and in such
   away as to comfort and encourage every devout heart that reads them.
   They are all so well authenticated as to be thoroughly reliable. The
   hook should have a wide-circulation and be read by Christian people
   generally."

   Roy. B. Carradine, Author and noted Evangelist of M.E. Church
   South.--"I have read portion of the book and regard it as excellent."

   Methodist Recorder.--"The book is full of incidents and illustrations
   for public speakers, and will encourage every reader to greater faith
   and more earnest prayer."

   Rev M.S. Terry, D.D., Professor of Old Testament Theology in Garrett
   Biblical Institute, and Principal of Bible School at Bay View Assembly.
   - "This is a book to bring one near to God. The soul that loves
   communion with its Maker will find spiritual food within these pages.
   The tender Christian heart will be made more tender in its love for
   God; and if the worldling would only read and-ponder such miracles of
   grace he, too, would find that which might be to him the gate of life
   eternal."

   Write at once for terms to agents. Be early in the field. A copy of the
   book is all the outfit needed. This will be sent post-paid on receipt
   of price, $1.00. Address

   S. B. SHAW

   1188. Division. St., Grand Rapids MICH.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [1] Soon after the Publication of this item in the Michigan Holiness
   Record, August 1887, the editor received the following testimony from
   Mrs. Clarissa Olds Keeler who, with her husband, edited the Banner of
   Love. In Washington. D. C.: "I have just been looking over the last
   Record, and I see the account of Elder Knapp's prayer in Erie. I was a
   little girl when that incident occurred but I remember it. Elder Knapp
   was preaching In our church (or rather the church my parents belonged
   to. the one we all of us children attended), and his prayer was
   answered as related. God is not mocked.'"
     __________________________________________________________________

            This document is from the Christian Classics Ethereal
               Library at Calvin College, http://www.ccel.org,
                   generated on demand from ThML source.
