     __________________________________________________________________

           Title: The Way Into the Holiest
      Creator(s): Meyer, F.B. (1847-1929)
   CCEL Subjects: All; Christian Life;
      LC Call no: BS2775
     LC Subjects:

                  The Bible

                  New Testament

                  Special parts of the New Testament
     __________________________________________________________________

THE WAY INTO THE HOLIEST:


  EXPOSITIONS OF THE EPISTLE TO THE

  HEBREWS.

F.B. Meyers B.A.,

    Author of:

    "Tried by fire";  "The Life and Light of Men";

    "The Psalms: Notes on Readings";

    etc., etc.

    Baker Book House

    Grand Rapids Mich.

    1951



   Edited by Larry Hendrickson

   P.O. box 295 Lowell, OR 97452
     __________________________________________________________________

PREFACE.

   This Epistle bears no name of author, or designationof church. But it
   needs neither. In every sentence we can detect the Authorshipof the
   Holy Ghost: and feel that it has a message not to one age, but to all;
   not to one community, but to the universal Church.

   We do not therefore discuss questions which are amply treated in every
   commentary; but set ourselves at once to derive those great spiritual
   lessons which are enshrined in these sublime words.

   And probably there is no better way of vindicating the authority of the
   Pentateuch than by showing that it lay at the basis of the teaching of
   the early Church; and that especially the Book of Leviticus was the
   seed-plot of New Testament Theology.

   There are two strong tendencies flowing around us in the present day:
   the one, to minimize the substitutionary aspect of the death of Christ;
   the other, to exaggerate the importance of mere outward rite. To each
   of these the study of this great Epistle is corrective. We are taught
   that our Lord's death was a Sacrifice. We are taught also that we have
   passed from the realm of shadows into that of realities.

   These chapters are altogether inadequate for the treatment of so vast a
   theme; but such as they are, they are sent forth, in dependence on the
   Divine Blessing, in the fervent hope that they may serve to make more
   clear and plain to those who would find and enter it, the Way into the
   Holiest of all.

   F.B. MEYER.

   Editors note.

   I have endeavored to remain true to the original manuscript as was
   delivered to me.  I did, however, make some punctuation correction so
   as to make it more readable to the computer audience.  Namely, I
   replaced a few hyphens where I saw them confusing the text.  I also
   corrected a couple of obvious errors found in the original printing. If
   these changes cause any confusion  I, alone, take full responsibility;
   please e-mail me at  [1]rlarryh@teleport.com and I will make any
   corrections necessary.

   Larry Hendrickson
     __________________________________________________________________

I. THE WORD OF GOD.


    "GOD--who at sundry times and in divers manners spake in time past unto the
    fathers by the prophets, hath in these last days spoken unto us by his Son."
    HEBREWS i. 1,2.

   GOD." What word could more fittingly stand at the head of the first
   line of the first paragraph in this noble epistle! Each structure must
   rest on him as foundation; each tree must spring from him as root; each
   design and enterprise must originate in him as source. "IN THE
   BEGINNING-GOD," is a worthy motto to inscribe at the commencement of
   every treatise, be it the ponderous volume or the ephemeral tract. And
   with that name we commence our attempt to gather up some of the glowing
   lessons which were first addressed to the persecuted and wavering
   Hebrews in the primitive age, but have ever been most highly prized by
   believing Gentiles throughout the universal Church. The feast was
   originally spread for the children of the race of Abraham; but who
   shall challenge our right to the crumbs? In our endeavor to gather
   them, be thou, God, Alpha and Omega, First and Last. In the original
   Greek, the word "God"is preceded by two other words, which describe the
   variety and multitudinousness of his revelation to man. And the whole
   verse is full of interest as detailing the origin and authority of the
   Word of God, and as illustrating the great law which appears in so many
   parts of the works of God, and has been fitly called the law of VARIETY
   IN UNITY.

   That law operates in Nature.   The earliest book of God. No thoughtful
   man can look around him without being arrested by the infinite variety
   that meets him on every side. "All flesh is not the same flesh; . . .
   there are celestial bodies, and bodies terrestrial: but the glory of
   the celestial is one; and the glory of the terrestrial is another. . .
   . One star differeth from another star in glory." You cannot match two
   faces in a crowd; two leaves in a forest; or two flowers in the
   woodlands of spring. It w~ld seem as if the molds in which natural
   products are being shaped are broken up and cast aside as soon as one
   result has been attained. And it is this which affords such an infinite
   field for investigation and enjoyment, forbidding all fear of monotony
   or weariness of soul.

   And yet, amid all natural variety, there is a marvelous unity. Every
   part of the universe interlocks by subtle and delicate links with every
   other part. You cannot disturb the balance anywhere without sending a
   shock of disturbance through the whole system. Just as in some majestic
   Gothic minster the same idea repeats itself in bolder or slighter
   forms, so do the same great thoughts recur in tree and flower, in
   molecule and planet, in diatom and man. And all this because, if you
   penetrate to Nature's heart, you meet God. "Of him, and through him,
   and to him, are all things." "There are diversities of operations; but
   it is the same God which worketh all in all." The unity that pervades
   Nature's temple is the result of its having originated from one mind,
   and having been effected by one hand, the mind and hand of God.

   That law also operates throughout the Scriptures. There is as great
   variety there as in Nature. They were written in different ages. some
   in the days of "the fathers"; others at "the end of these days" for us.
   In the opening chapters, under the guidance of the Spirit of God, Moses
   has embodied fragments of hallowed tradition, which passed from lip to
   lip in the tents of the patriarchs; and its later chapters were written
   when the holy city, Jerusalem, had already been smitten to the ground
   by the mailed hand of Titus.

   They were written in different countries: these in the deserts of
   Arabia; those under the shadow of the pyramids; and others amid the
   tides of life that swept through the greatest cities of Greece and
   Rome. You can detect in some the simple pastoral life of Palestine; in
   others the magnificence of Nebuchadnezzar's empire. In one there is the
   murmur of the blue Aegean; and in several the clank of the fetter in
   the Roman prison-cell.

   They were written by men belonging to various ranks, occupations, and
   methods of thought.. shepherds and fishermen, warriors and kings; the
   psalmist, the prophet, and the priest; some employing the stately
   religious Hebrew, others the Chaldaic patois, others the polished
   Greek-every variety of style, from the friendly letter, or sententious
   proverb, to the national history, or the carefully prepared treatise,
   in which thought and expression glow as in the fires--but all
   contributing their quota to the symmetry and beauty of the whole.

   And yet, throughout the Bible, there is an indubitable unity. What else
   could have led mankind to look upon these sixty-six tractlets as being
   so unmistakably related to each other that they must be bound up
   together under a common cover? There has been something so unique in
   these books that they have always stood and fallen together. To
   disintegrate one has been to loose them all. Belief in one has led to
   belief in all. Their hands are linked and locked so tightly that where
   one goes all must follow. And though wise and clever men have tried
   their best, they have never been able to produce a single treatise
   containing that undefinable quality which gives these their mysterious
   oneness; and to lack which is fatal to the claims of any book to be
   included with them, or to demand the special veneration and homage of
   mankind.

   The world is full of religious books; but the man who has fed his
   religious life upon the Bible will tell in a moment the difference
   between them and the Scriptures of the Old and New Testaments. The eye
   can instantly detect the absence of life in the artificial flower; the
   tongue can immediately and certainly detect the absence or presence of
   a certain flavor submitted to the taste; and the heart of man, his
   moral sense, is quick to detect the absence in all other religious
   books of a certain savor which pervades the Bible, from Genesis, the
   book of beginnings, to the Apocalyptic announcements of the quick
   coming of the King.

   And in the possession of this mysterious attribute, the Old and new
   Testaments are one. You cannot say there is more of it in the glowing
   paragraphs of the Apostle Paul than in the splendid prophecies and
   appeals of the great evangelic prophet, Isaiah. It is certainly in the
   Gospels; but it is not less in the story of the Exodus. Throughout,
   there is silence on topics which merely gratify curiosity, but on which
   other professed revelations have been copiously full. Throughout, there
   is no attempt to give instruction on science or nature; but to bend all
   energy in discussing the claims of God on men. Throughout, the crimson
   cord of sacrifice is clearly manifest, on which the books are strung
   together as beads upon a thread. And throughout, there is ever the
   subtle, mysterious, ineffable quality called Inspiration: a term which
   is explained by the majestic words of this opening verse, "God, having
   spoken of old to the fathers, hath at the end of these days spoken to
   us."

   Scripture is the speech of God to man. It is this which gives it its
   unity. "The Lord, the mighty God, hath spoken, and called the earth."
   The amanuenses may differ; but the inspiring mind is the same. The
   instruments may vary; but in every case the same theme is being played
   by the same master-hand. We should read the Bible as those who listen
   to the very speech of God. Well may it be called "the Word of God."

   But the Scripture is God's speech in man. The heavenly treasure is in
   vessels of earth. "He spake unto the fathers in the prophets. . . He
   hath spoken unto us in his Son." It is very remarkable to study the
   life of Jesus, and to listen to his constant statements as to the
   source of his marvelous words. So utterly had he emptied himself, that
   he originated nothing from himself; but lived by the Father, in the
   same way as we are to live by him. He distinctly declared that the
   words he spake, he spake not of himself; but that words and works alike
   were the outcome of the Father, who dwelt within. Through those lips of
   clay the eternal God was speaking. Well might he also be called "the
   Word of God"!

   And here the words of the prophets in the Old Testament are leveled up
   to the plane of the words of Jesus in the New. Without staying to make
   the least distinction, our writer tell us, beneath the teaching of the
   Spirit, that he who spake in the one spake also in the others. Let us
   then think with equal reverence of the Old Testament as of the New. It
   was our Saviour's Bible. It was the food which Jesus loved, and lived
   upon. He was content to fast from all other food, if only he might have
   this. It was his one supreme appeal in conflict with the devil, and in
   the clinching of his arguments and exhortations with men. And here we
   discover the reason. The voice of God spake in the prophets, whose very
   name likens them to the up-rush of the geyser from its hidden source.

   As God spake in men, it is clear that he left them to express his
   thoughts in the language, and after the method, most familiar to them.
   They will speak of Nature just as they have been accustomed to find
   her. They will use the mode of speech whether poem or prose which is
   most habitual to their cast of thought. They will make allusions to the
   events transpiring around them, so as to be easily understood by their
   fellows. But, whilst thus left to express God's thoughts in their own
   way, yet most certainly the divine Spirit must have carefully
   superintended their utterances, so that their words should accurately
   convey his messages to men.

   In many parts of the Bible there is absolute dictation, word for word.
   In others, there is divine superintendence guarding from error, and
   guiding in the selection and arrangement of materials: as when Daniel
   quotes from historic records; and Moses embodies the sacred stories
   which his mother had taught him beside the flowing Nile. In all, there
   is the full inspiration of the Spirit of God, by whom all Scripture has
   been given. Holy men spake as they were moved by the Holy Spirit, . . .
   searching what, or what manner of time, the Spirit of Christ which was
   in them did signify" (2 Tim. iii. i6 ; 2 Pet. i. 20, 21 ; 1 Pet. i.
   ii).

   We need not deny that other men have been illuminated; but the
   difference between illumination and inspiration is as far as the east
   is from the west. Nor do we say that God has not spoken in other men,
   or in these men at other times; but we do say that only in the Bible
   has God given the supreme revelation of his will, and the authoritative
   rule of our faith and practice. The heart of man bears witness to this.
   We know that there is a tone in these words which is heard in no other
   voice. The upper chords of this instrument give it a timbre which none
   other can rival.

   The revelation in the Old Testament was given in fragments (or
   portions). This is the meaning of the word rendered in the Old Version
   sundry times, and in the Revised divers portions. It refers, not to the
   successive ages over which it was spread, but to the numerous
   "portions" into which it was broken up. No one prophet could speak out
   all the truth. Each was intrusted with one or two syllables in the
   mighty sentences of God's speech. At the best the view caught of God,
   and given to men through the prophets, though true, was partial and
   limited.

   But in Jesus there is nothing of this piecemeal revelation. "In him
   dwelleth all the fullness of the Godhead bodily." He hath revealed the
   Father. Whosoever hath seen him hath seen God; and to hear his words is
   to get the full-orbed revelation of the Infinite.

   The earlier revelation was in many forms.  The earthquake, the fire,
   the tempest, and the still small voice-each had its ministry. Symbol
   and parable, vision and metaphor, type and historic foreshadowing, all
   in turn served the divine end; like the ray which is broken into many
   prismatic hues. But in Jesus there is the steady shining of the pure
   ray of his glory, one uniform and invariable method of revelation.

   Oh the matchless and glorious Book, the Word of God to men-to us;
   revealing not only God, but ourselves; explaining moods for which we
   had no cipher; touching us as no other book can, and in moments when
   all voices beside wax faint and still; telling facts which we have not
   been able to discover, but which we instantly recognize as truth; the
   bread of the soul; the key of life; disclosing more depths as we climb
   higher in Christian experience: we have tested thee too long to doubt
   that thou art what Jesus said thou wast, the indispensable and precious
   gift of God.
     __________________________________________________________________

II. THE DIGNITY OF CHRIST



    "Who being the brightness of his glory, and the express image of his person,
    and upholding all things by the word of his power, when he had by himself
    purged our sins, sat down on the right hand of the Majesty on high. Being
    made so much better than the angels."   HEBREWS i. 3, 4.

                                       In

   SON.-" He hath spoken unto us in his Son." God has many sons, but only
   one Son. When, on the morning of his resurrection, our Lord met the
   frightened women, he said, "I ascend unto my Father and your Father,
   and my God and your God." But, as he used the words, they meant
   infinitely more of himself than they could ever mean of man, however
   saintly or childlike.  No creature-wing shall ever avail to carry us
   across the abyss which separates all created from all uncreated life.
   But we may reverently accept the fact, so repeatedly emphasized, that
   Jesus is "the only begotten Son, which is in the bosom of the Father"
   (John i. i8). He is Son in a sense altogether unique.

   This term, as used by our Lord, and as understood by the Jews, not only
   signified divine relationship, but divine equality. Hence, on one
   occasion, the Jews sought to kill him, because he said that God was his
   Father, making himself equal with God (John v. i8). And he, so far from
   correcting the opinion-as he must have done instantly, had it been
   erroneous, went on to confirm it and to substantiate its truthfulness.
   The impression which Jesus of Nazareth left on all who knew him was
   that of his extreme humility; but here was a point in which he could
   not abate one jot or tittle of his claims, lest he should be false to
   his knowledge of himself, and to the repeated voice of God. And so he
   died, because he affirmed, amid the assumed horror of his judges, that
   he was the Christ, the Son of God. "He counted it not a prize to be on
   an equality with God." It was his right.

   His dignity is still further elaborated in the words which follow. He
   is THE BEAM OF THE DIVINE GLORY, for so might the word translated
   effulgence be rendered. We have never seen the sun, but only its
   far-traveled ray, which left its surface some few minutes before. But
   the ray is of the same constitution as the orb from which it comes; if
   you unravel its texture, you will learn something of the very nature of
   the sun; they live in perpetual and glorious unity. And as we consider
   the intimacy of that union, we are reminded of those familiar words,
   which tell us that though no man hath seen God at any time, yet he has
   been revealed in the Word made flesh. We hear our Master saying again
   the old, deep, mysterious words: "I and my Father are one. We will come
   and make our abode." And we can sympathize with the evening hymn of the
   early Church, sung around the shores of the Bosphorus:


   "Hail! gladdening Light, of his pure glory poured,

   Who is the Immortal Father, Heavenly, Blest."


   He is also THE IMPRESS OF THE DIVINE NATURE. The allusion here is to
   the impression made by a seal on molten wax; and as the image made on
   the wax is the exact resemblance, though on another substance, of the
   die, so is Christ the exact resemblance of the Father in our human
   flesh. And thus he was able to say, "He that bath seen me hath seen the
   Father." The Life of Jesus is the Life of God rendered into the terms
   of our human life; so that we may understand the very being and nature
   of God by seeing it reproduced before us, so far as it is possible, in
   the character and life of Jesus. These two images complete each other.
   You might argue from the first, that as the ray is only part of the
   sun, so Christ is only part of God; but this mistake is corrected by
   the second, for an impression must be coextensive with the seal. You
   might argue from the second, that as the impression might be made on a
   very inferior material, so Christ's nature was a very unworthy vehicle
   of the divine glory; but this mistake is corrected by the first, for a
   beam is of the same texture as the sun. Coextensive with God, of the
   same nature as God; thus is Jesus Christ.

   He is, therefore, superior to angels (ver. 4).-Lofty as was the esteem
   in which Hebrew believers had been wont to hold those bright and
   blessed spirits, they were not for a moment to be compared with him
   whose majestic claims are the theme of these glowing words.

   He surpasses them in the glory of Divine Nature. Turn to Psalm ii. -one
   of the grandest miniature dramas in all literature. Probably composed
   on some marked episode in the reign of David, there is a glow, a
   sublimity, in the diction which no earthly monarch could exhaust. We
   are not, therefore, surprised to find the early Church applying it to
   Christ (Acts iv. 25). In reading it, we first hear the roar of the mob
   and the calm decision of the throne; and then our attention is centered
   on him who comes forward, bearing the divine autograph to the decree
   which declares him Son. Nothing like this was ever said to angel,
   how-ever exalted in character or devoted in service. It is only
   befitting, then, that the unsinning sons of light should worship him;
   and as we hear the command issued, "Let all the angels of God worship
   him," we are still further impressed by the immense distance between
   their nature and his.

   Do we worship him enough?   During his earthly life he was constantly
   met by expressive acts of homage, which, unlike Peter in the house of
   Cornelius, he did not repress. The almost instinctive act of the little
   group, from which he was parted on the Mount of Olives in his
   ascension, was to worship him (Luke xxiv. 52). And no sooner had he
   passed to his home than there burst from the Church a tide of adoration
   which has only become wider and deeper with the ages. The Epistles, and
   especially the Book of Revelation, teem with expressions of worship to
   Christ. And the death-cries of martyrs must have familiarized the
   heathen mind with the homage paid to Christ by Christians. Of the
   worship offered him in catacombs, or in their secret meetings, amongst
   dens and caves, paganism was necessarily ignorant. But the behavior and
   exclamations of the servants of Jesus, arraigned before heathen
   tribunals, and exposed to the most agonizing deaths, were matters of
   public notoriety.

   Some years ago, beneath the ruins of the Palatine palace, was
   discovered a rough sketch, traced in all probability by the hand of a
   pagan slave in the second century. A human figure, with the head of an
   ass, is represented as fixed to the cross; while another figure, in a
   tunic, stands on one side, making a gesture which was the customary
   pagan expression of adoration. Underneath this caricature ran the
   inscription, rudely written, Alexamenos adores his God. But what a
   tribute to the worship paid in those early days to our Saviour, amidst
   gibes and taunts and persecution!

   The hymns which have come down to us ring with the same spirit. Pliny
   writes to tell the Emperor that the Christians of Asia Minor were
   accustomed to meet to sing praise to Christ as God. As each morning
   broke, the believer of those primitive days repeated in private the
   Gloria in Excelsis, as his hymn of supplication and praise: "Thou only
   art holy; thou only art the Lord; thou only, O Christ, with the Holy
   Ghost, art most high in the glory of God the Father." The early Church
   did not simply admire Christ, it adored him.

   Is not this a great lack in our private devotions?   We are so apt to
   concentrate our thoughts on ourselves; and to thank for what we have
   received. We do not sufficiently often forget our own petty wants and
   anxieties, and launch down our tiny rivulet, until we are borne out
   into the great ocean of praise, which is ever breaking in music around
   the person of Jesus. Praise is one of the greatest acts of which we are
   capable; and it is most like the service of heaven. There they ask for
   naught, for they have all and abound; but throughout the cycles of
   glory the denizens of those bright worlds fill them with praise. And
   why should not earthly tasks be wrought to the same music? We are the
   priests of creation; it becomes us to gather up and express the
   sentiments which are mutely dumb, but which await our offering at the
   altar of God.

   Let a part of our private and public devotion be ever dedicated to the
   praise of Jesus; when we shall break forth into some hymn, or psalm, or
   spiritual song, singing and praising Christ with angels and archangels
   and all the hosts of the redeemed. On that brow, once thorn-crowned,
   let us entwine our laurels. Upon that ear, once familiarized with
   threats and scorn, let us pour the fullness of our adoring devotion. So
   shall we gain and give new thoughts of the supreme dignity of the Lord
   Jesus. "Thou art worthy to receive...honor."
     __________________________________________________________________

III THE GLORY OF CHRIST'S OFFICE


    "He hath by inheritance obtained a more excellent name."  Hebrews i. 4.


   APART from Scripture, we should have been disposed to infer the
   existence of other orders of intelligent and spiritual beings besides
   man. As the order of creation climbs up to man from the lowest living
   organism through many various stages of existence, so surely the series
   must be continued beyond man, through rank on rank of spiritual
   existence up to the very steps of the eternal throne. The divine mind
   must be as prolific in spiritual as it has been in natural forms of
   life.

   But we are not left to conjecture. From every part of Scripture come
   testimonies to the existence of angels. They rejoiced when the world
   was made, and they are depicted as ushering in with songs that new
   creation for which we long. They stood sentries at the gate of a lost
   paradise; and at each of the twelve gates of the New Jerusalem an angel
   stands (Rev. xxi. 12). They trod the plains of Mamre, and sang over the
   fields of Bethlehem. One prepared the meal on the desert sands for
   Elijah; another led Peter out of gaol and a third flashed through the
   storm to stand by the hammock where the Apostle Paul was sleeping (Acts
   xxvii. 23,24).

   But in the mind of the pious Hebrew the greatest work which the angels
   ever wrought was in connection with the giving of the law. The children
   of Israel received the law "as it was ordained by angels" (Acts vii.
   53, R.v.). It was necessary, therefore, in showing the superiority of
   the Gospel to the Law, to begin by showing the superiority of him
   through whom the Gospel was given, over all orders of bright and
   blessed spirits, which, in their shining ranks and their twenty
   thousand chariots, went and came during the giving of the decalogue
   from the brow of Sinai (Psalm lxviii. 17).

   It is not difficult to prove the Lord's superiority to angels. It is
   twofold: in Nature and in Office.

   In Nature.   "He hath by inheritance obtained a more excellent name
   than they" (ver. 4). In verse 7, quoted from Psalm civ. 4 (R.v. marg.),
   where they are distinctly spoken of as messengers and ministers, they
   are compared to winds and flames.-winds, for their swiftness and
   invisibility; flames, because of their ardent love. But how great the
   gulf between their nature, which may thus be compared to the elements
   of creation, and the nature of that glorious Being whom they are bidden
   to worship, and who is addressed in the sublime title of Son! (Heb.i.6;
   Psalm xcvii. 7.)

   In Offce.  In verse 14 they are spoken of as ministering spirits, "sent
   forth to do service for the sake of them that shall inherit salvation"
   (R.v.). This liturgy of service is a literal fact. When struggling
   against overwhelming difficulties; when walking the dark, wild
   mountain-pass alone; when in peril or urgent need-we are surrounded by
   invisible forms, like those which accompanied the path of Jesus,
   ministering to him in the desert, strengthening him in the garden,
   hovering around his cross, watching his grave and accompanying him to
   his home. They keep pace with the swiftest trains in which we travel.
   They come unsoiled through the murkiest air. They smooth away the
   heaviest difficulties. They garrison with light the darkest sepulchers.
   They bear us up in their hands, lest we should strike our foot against
   a stone. Many an escape from imminent peril; many an unexpected
   assistance; many a bright and holy thought whispered in the ear, we
   know not whence or how-is due to those bright and loving spirits. "The
   good Lord forgive me," says Bishop Hall, "for that, amongst my other
   offenses, I have suffered myself so much to forget the presence of his
   holy angels." But valuable as their office is, it is not to be
   mentioned in the same breath as Christ's, which is set down for us in
   this chapter.

   He Is The Organ of Creation.   "By whom also he made the worlds." To
   make that which is seen out of nothing, that is creation: it is a
   divine work; and creation is attributed to Christ. "By him were all
   things created that are in heaven and that are in earth." "All things
   were made by him; and without him was not anything made that was made"
   (Col. i. 16; John i. 3). But the word here and in xi. 3 translated
   worlds means ages. Not only was the material universe made by him, but
   each of the great ages of the world's story has been instituted by
   Jesus Christ.

   When genius aspires to immortality, it leaves the artist's name
   inscribed on stone or canvas: and so Inspiration, "dipping her pen in
   indelible truth, inscribes the name of Jesus on all we see-on sun and
   stars, flower and tree, rock and mountain, the unstable waters and the
   firm land; and also on what we do not see, nor shall, until death has
   removed the veil-on angels and spirits, on the city and heavens of the
   eternal world."

   This thought comes out clearly in the sublime quotation made in verse
   10 from Psalm cii. That inspired poem is obviously inscribed to
   Jehovah: "Thou, Jehovah, in the beginning hast laid the foundation of
   the earth; and the heavens are the work of thy hands." But here,
   without the least apology, or hint of accommodating the words to an
   inferior use, it is applied directly to Christ. Mark the certainty of
   this inspired man that Jesus is Jehovah! How sure of the Deity of his
   Lord! And what a splendid tribute to his immutability!

     Mark how the Epistle rings with the unchangeableness of Jesus, in his
   human love (xiii. 8), in his priesthood (vii. 24), and here in his
   divine nature (vv. 10-12). We live in a world of change. The earth is
   not the same today as it was ages ago, or as it will be ages on. The
   sun is radiating off its heat. The moon no longer as of yore burns and
   glows; she is but an immense opaque cinder, reflecting the sunlight
   from her disk. Stars have burnt out, and will. The universe is waxing
   old, as garments which from perpetual use become threadbare. But the
   wearing out of the garment is no proof of the waning strength or
   slackening energy of the wearer. Nay, when garments wear out quickest,
   it is generally the time of robustest youth or manhood. You wrap up and
   lay aside your clothes when they have served their purpose; but you are
   the same in the new suit as in the old. Creation is the vesture of
   Christ. He wraps himself about in its ample folds. Its decay affects
   him not. And, when he shall have laid it all aside, and replaced it by
   the new heavens and the new earth, he will be the same forevermore.

   With what new interest may we not now turn to the archaic record, which
   tells how God created the heavens and the earth. Those sublime
   syllables, "Light, be!" were spoken by the voice that trembled in dying
   anguish on the cross. Rolling rivers, swelling seas, waving woods,
   bursting flowers, caroling birds, innumerable beasts, stars sparkling
   like diamonds on the pavilion of night-all newly made; all throbbing
   with God's own life; and all very good: but, mainly and gloriously, all
   the work of those hands which were nailed helplessly to the cross,
   which itself, as well as the iron that pierced him, was the result of
   his creative will.

   He Is The God of Providence.  "Upholding all things by the word of his
   power" (ver. 3). He is the prop which underpins creation. Christ, and
   not fate. Christ, and not nature. Christ, and not abstract impersonal
   law. Law is but the invariable method of his working. "In him all
   things live, and move, and have their being." "By him all things
   consist." He is ever at work repeating on the large scale of creation
   the deeds of his earthly life. And if he did not do them, they must be
   forever undone. At his word rainwater and dew become grape-juice; tiny
   handfuls of grain fill the autumn barns; storms die away into calm;
   fish are led through the paths of the sea; rills are sent among the
   mountains; and stars are maintained in their courses, so that "not one
   faileth."

   All power is given unto him in heaven and on earth. Why, then, art thou
   so sad? Thy best Friend is the Lord of Providence. Thy Brother is Prime
   Minister of the universe, and holds the keys of the divine
   commissariat. Go to him with the empty sacks of thy need; he will not
   only fill them, but fill them freely, without money and without price;
   as Joseph did in the old story of the days of the Pharaohs.

   He Is The Saviour of Sinners.   "He purged our sins." We shall have
   many opportunities of dwelling on this glorious fact. Jesus is Saviour,
   Redeemer, and the High-Priest. This is his proudest title; in this work
   no angel or created spirit can bear him rivalry. In the work of
   salvation he is alone. No angel could atone for sin, or plead our
   cause, or emancipate us from the thrall of evil.

   But notice the finality of this act. "He made purging of sins " (see
   Greek). It is finished; forever complete; done irrevocably and finally.
   If only we are one with him by a living faith, our sins, which were
   many, are washed out; as an inscription from a slate, as a stain from a
   robe, as a cloud from the azure of heaven. Gone-as a stone into the
   bottomless abyss! Gone-never to confront us here or hereafter! "Who is
   he that condemneth? It is Christ that died, yea, rather, that is risen
   again; who is even at the right hand of God; who also maketh
   intercession for us" (Rom. viii. 34).

   He Is Also King.   And on what does his kingdom rest?  What is the
   basis of that Royalty of which we constantly sing, in the noble words
   of the primitive Church?   "Thou art the King of Glory, Christ." It is
   a double basis.

   He is King by right of his divine nature.  "Thy throne, O God, is
   forever and ever." Well might Psalm xlv. be entitled the poem of the
   lilies, as if to denote its pure and choice and matchless beauties. It
   celebrated the marriage of Solomon: but, after the manner of those
   inspired singers, its authors soon passed from the earthly to the
   heavenly; from the transient type of the earthly realm to the eternal
   and imperishable realities of the divine royalty of Christ.

   He is also King as the reward of his obedience unto death.  "He became
   obedient unto death, even the death of the cross: wherefore, God also
   hath highly exalted him" (Phil. ii. 8,9). Satan offered him sovereignty
   in return for one act of homage, and Christ refused, and descended the
   mountain to poverty and shame and death; but through these things he
   has won for himself a Kingdom which is yet in its infancy, but is
   destined to stand when all the kingdoms of this world have crumbled to
   dust.

   As Christ emerged from the cross and the grave, where he had purged our
   sins, it seemed as if words were addressed to him which David had
   caught ages before: "The LORD said unto my Lord, Sit on my right hand,
   until I make thine enemies thy footstool" (ver. 13; Psalm cx. I). This
   is the interpretation which the Apostle Peter, in the flush of
   Pentecostal inspiration, put upon these words (Acts ii. 34). And,
   accordingly, we are told, "He was received up into heaven, and sat on
   the right hand of God " (Mark xvi. 19). "He sat down on the right hand
   of the Majesty on high" (ver. 3).

   "He sat down."  Love is regnant. The Lamb is in the midst of the
   Throne. Behold his majesty, and worship him with angels and archangels,
   and all the throng of the redeemed. Prostrate yourself at his feet,
   consecrating to him all you are and all you have. Comfort yourself also
   by remembering that he would not sit to rest from his labors in
   redemption, and in the purging away of sins, unless they were so
   completely finished that there was nothing more to do. It is all
   accomplished; and it is all very good. He has ceased from his works,
   because they are done; and therefore he is entered into his rest. And
   that word "until" is full of hope. God speaks it, and encourages us to
   expect the time when he shall have put down all rule and all authority
   and power; and when death itself, the last enemy, shall be destroyed (1
   Cor. xv. 24-26).
     __________________________________________________________________

IV. DRIFTING



    "We ought to give the more earnest heed to the things which we have heard,
    lest at any time we should let them slip."-HEBREWS ii. 1


   SALVATION is a great word; and it is one of the keywords of this
   Epistle. Heirs of salvation (i.14); so great salvation (ii. 3); Captain
   of salvation (ii. 10); eternal salvation (v. 9); things that accompany
   salvation (vi.9); salvation to the uttermost (vii. 25); and his
   appearance the second time without sin unto salvation (ix. 28).

   Sometimes it is salvation from the penalty of sin that is spoken of.
   The past tense is then used, of that final and blessed act by which,
   through faith in the blood of Jesus, we are forever placed beyond fear
   of judgment and punishment; so that we are to the windward of the
   storm, which spent itself on the head of our Substitute and
   representative on Calvary, and can therefore never break on us. "By
   grace have ye been saved through faith" (Eph. ii. 8, R.v.).

   Sometimes it is salvation from the power of sin. The present tense is
   then employed, of the long and gradual process by which we are set free
   from evil, which has worked itself so deeply into our system. "Unto us
   which are being saved the word of the cross is the power of God" (1
   Cor. i. i8, R.v.). Sometimes salvation from all physical and other
   evils is implied. The future tense is then summoned into requisition,
   painting its splendid frescoes on the mists that hang so densely before
   our view, and telling us of resurrection in our Saviour's likeness and
   presentation in his home, faultless, with exceeding joy. "We know that
   when he shall appear we shall be like him; for we shall see him as he
   is" (i John iii. 2). "Now is our salvation nearer than when we
   believed: the night is far spent; the day is at hand" (Rom. xlii. 11,
   12).

   In the above passage the word "salvation"includes the entire process,
   from its beginning to its end; though perhaps it is especially
   tinctured with the first thought mentioned above. And if we follow out
   the figure suggested by the rendering of the first verse of this
   chapter in the Revised Version, we may compare salvation to a great
   harbor, past: which we are in danger of drifting through culpable
   neglect. "We ought to give the more earnest heed to the things that
   were heard, lest haply we drift away from them." "How shall we escape
   if we neglect so great salvation!"

   CONSIDER GOD'S SCHEME OF SALVATION AS A GREAT HARBOR.-After a wild
   night, we have gone down to the harbor, over whose arms the angry waves
   have been dashing with boom of thunder and in clouds of spray. Outside,
   the sea has been tossing and churning; the cloudrack driving hurriedly
   across the sky; the winds howling like the furies of olden fable. But
   within those glorious walls, the barks which had put in during the
   night were riding in safety; the sailors resting, or repairing rents in
   sail and tackle, whilst the waters were unstirred by the storm raging
   without. Such a refuge or harbor is a fit emblem of salvation, where
   tempest-driven souls find shelter and peace.

   It is great in its sweep.   Sufficient to embrace a ruined world. Room
   in it for whole navies of souls to ride at anchor. Space enough for
   every ship of Adam's race launched from the shores of time. He is the
   propitiation for the whole world." "Whosoever will." Already it is
   becoming filled. There a vessel once manned by seven devils, a pirate
   ship, but captured by our Emmanuel; and at her stem the name, Mary of
   Magdala. And here one dismasted, and almost shattered, rescued from the
   fury of the maelstrom at the last hour; on her stem the words, The
   Dying Thief And there another, long employed in efforts to sap the very
   walls of the harbor, and now flying a pennon from the masthead, Chief
   of Sinners and Least of Saints. And all around a forest of masts, "a
   multitude which no man can number, of all nations, and kindreds, and
   peoples, and tongues."

   It is great in its foundations.   The chief requisite in constructing a
   sea-wall is to get a foundation which can stand unmoved amid the
   heaviest seas. The shifting sand must be pierced down to the granite
   rock. But this harbor has foundations mighty enough to inspire strong
   consolation in those who have fled to it for refuge; the promise, and
   as if that were not enough, the oath, of God (Heb. vi. 17, 18). Hark,
   how the storm of judgment is rising out there at sea! "If the
   foundations be destroyed, what shall the righteous do?" Fear not! there
   is no room for alarm. The waves may wash off some mussel-shells, or
   tear away the green sea-lichen which has incrusted the moldings on the
   walls; but it would be easier to dig out the everlasting hills from
   their base than make one stone in those foundations start.

   It was great in its cost.   By the tubular bridge over the Menai
   Straits stands a column, which records the names of those who perished
   during the construction of that great triumph of engineering skill.
   Nothing is said of the money spent, only of the lives sacrificed. And
   so, beside the harbor of our salvation, near to its mouth, so as to be
   read by every ship entering its inclosure, rises another column, with
   this as its inscription: "Sacred to the memory of the Son of God, who
   gave his life a sacrifice for the sin of the world." It seems an easy
   thing to be saved: "Look unto me, and be ye saved." But we do not
   always remember how much happened before it became so easy-the agony
   and bloody sweat; the cross and passion; the precious death and burial.

   It has been great in its announcement.   The Jews thought much of their
   Law, because of the majesty of its proclamation. Spoken from the
   inaccessible cliffs of Sinai, with its beetling crags, its red
   sandstone peaks bathed in fire; while thunders and lightnings, thick
   clouds and trumpet-notes, were the sublime accessories of the scene. It
   was the authorized belief also that the Law was given through angels
   (Deut. xxxiii. 2 ; Acts vii. 53; Gal. iii. 19 ; Heb. ii. 2). And the
   thought that these strong and sinless beings were the medium of the
   Almighty's will served, in the eyes of all devout Hebrews, to enhance
   the sanctity and glory of the Law.

   Compared with this, how simple the accessories of the words of Jesus!
   Spoken in sweet and gentle tones, falling as the soft showers on the
   tender grass, and distilling quietly as the dew; not frightening the
   most sinful, nor startling little babes, they stole as the melody from
   silver bells, borne on a summer wind into the ears of men. The boat or
   hill-slope his pulpit; the poor his audience; the common incidents of
   nature or life his text.

   But in reality there was a vast difference. The announcement of the Law
   was by angels. The announcement of the Gospel was by the Son. If the
   one were august, what must not the other have been! If the one were
   made sure by the most tremendous sanctions, what should not be said of
   the other! Proclaimed by the Lord; confirmed by Apostles and
   eye-witnesses; testified to by the Almighty himself, in signs and
   wonders, and gifts of the Holy Ghost how dare we treat it with
   contumely or neglect? Or, if we do, shall not our penalty be in
   proportion to the magnitude of our offense? "If the word spoken through
   angels proved steadfast, and every transgression and disobedience
   received a just recompense of reward; how shall we escape, if we
   neglect so great salvation?" "Therefore we ought to give the more
   earnest heed to the things that were heard, lest haply we drift away
   from them."

   It will be great in its penalties.   The tendency of our age is to
   minimize God's righteous judgment on sin. It seems to be prevalently
   thought that, because our dispensation is one of love and mercy,
   therefore there is the less need to dread the results of sin. But the
   inspired writer here argues in a precisely contrary sense. Just because
   this age is one of such tender mercy, therefore sins against its King
   are more deadly, and the penalties heavier. In the old days no
   transgression, positive, and no disobedience, negative, escaped its
   just recompense of reward; and in these days there is even less
   likelihood of their doing so. The word spoken by the Son is even more
   steadfast (i.e., effective to secure the infliction of the punishment
   it announces) than the word of angels. My readers, beware! "He that
   despised Moses' law died without mercy under two or three witnesses; of
   how much sorer punishment shall he be thought worthy who hath trodden
   under foot the Son of God!" (x. 28, 29.)

   THE DANGER TO WHICH WE ARE MOST EXPOSED.-"Lest haply we drift away"
   (ii. 2, R.v.). For every one that definitely turns his back on Christ,
   there are hundreds who drift from him. Life's ocean is full of
   currents, any one of which will sweep us past the harbor-mouth even
   when we seem nearest to it, and carry us far out to sea.

   It is the drift that ruins men.   The drift of the religious world. The
   drift of old habits and associations; which, in the case of these
   Hebrew Christians, was setting so strongly toward Judaism, bearing them
   back to the religious system from which they had come out. The drift of
   one's own evil nature, always chafing to bear us from God to that which
   is earthly and sensuous. The drift of the pressure of temptation.

   The young man coming from a pious home does not distinctly and
   deliberately say, "I renounce my father's God." But he finds himself in
   a set of business associates who have no care for religion; and, after
   a brief struggle, he relaxes his efforts and begins to drift, until the
   coastline of heaven recedes so far into the dim distance that he is
   doubtful if he ever really saw it.

   The business man who now shamelessly follows the lowest maxims of his
   trade was once upright and high-minded. He would have blushed to think
   it possible for such things to be done by him. But he began by yielding
   in very trivial points to the strong pressure of competition; and when
   once he had allowed himself to be caught by the tide, it bore him far
   beyond his first intention.

   The professing Christian who now scarcely pretends to open the Bible or
   pray came to so terrible a position, not at a single leap, but by
   yielding to the pressure of the constant waywardness of the old nature,
   and thus drifted into an arctic region, where he is likely to perish,
   benumbed and frozen, unless rescued, and launched on the warm
   gulf-stream of the love of God.

   It is so easy, and so much pleasanter, to drift. Just to lie back, and
   renounce effort, and let yourself go whither the waters will, as they
   break musically on the sides of the rocking boat. But, ah, how
   ineffable the remorse, how disastrous the result!

   Are you drifting? You can easily tell. Are you conscious of effort, of
   daily, hourly resistance to the stream around you, and within? Do the
   things of God and heaven loom more clearly on your vision? Do the
   waters foam angrily at your prow as you force your way through them? If
   so, rejoice! but remember that only divine strength can suffice to
   maintain the conflict, and keep the boat's head against the stream. If
   not, you are drifting. Hail the strong Son of God! Ask him to come on
   board, and stay you, and bring you into port.

   AN UNANSWERABLE QUESTION.  "How shall we escape, if we neglect?" The
   sailor who refuses lifeboat and harbor does not escape. The
   self-murderer who tears the bandages from his wounds does not escape.
   The physician who ridicules ordinary precautions against plague does
   not escape. "How then shall we escape?"

   Did the Israelite escape who refused to sprinkle the blood upon the
   doorposts of his house? Did the man who gathered sticks on the
   Sabbath-day escape, although he might have pleaded that it was the
   first offense? Did the prince who had taken the Moabitess to wife
   escape, though he bore a high rank? Did Moses and Aaron escape, though
   they were the leaders of the people? No! None of these escaped. "Every
   transgression and disobedience received its just recompense of reward."
   "How then shall we escape?"

   Is it likely that we should escape? We have neglected the only Name
   given under heaven among men by which we can be saved. We have added
   contumely to neglect in refusing that which it has cost God so much to
   give. We have flouted his only Son, our Lord; and our disrespect to him
   cannot be a small crime in the eye of the Infinite Father. "How shall
   we escape?"

   No, if you neglect (and notice, that to neglect is to reject), there is
   no escape. You shall not escape the storms of sorrow, of temptation, or
   of the righteous judgment of God. You shall not escape the deserved and
   necessary punishment of your sins. You shall not escape the worm which
   never dies, nor the fire which is never quenched. Out there,
   shelterless amid the rage of the sea; or yonder, driven to pieces on
   the rocks: you shall be wrecked, and go down with all hands on board,
   never sighted by the heavenly watchers, nor welcomed into the harbor of
   the saints' everlasting rest.
     __________________________________________________________________

V. "WHAT IS MAN?"


    "We see Jesus,...crowned with glory and honor." {HEBREWS ii. 5-9.


   IN the first great division of this treatise, we have seen the
   incomparable superiority of the Lord Jesus to angels, and archangels,
   and all the heavenly host. But now there arises an objection which was
   very keenly realized by these Hebrew Christians; and which, to a
   certain extent, presses upon us all; Why did the Son of God become man?
   How are the sorrows, sufferings, and death of the Man of Nazareth
   consistent with the sublime glories of the Son of God, the equal and
   fellow of the Eternal?

   These questions are answered during the remainder of the chapter, and
   may be gathered up into a single sentence: he who was above all angels
   became lower than the angels for a little time; that he might lift men
   from their abasement, and set them on his own glorious level in his
   heavenly Father's kingdom; and that he might be a faithful and merciful
   High Priest for the sorrowful and tempted and dying. Here is an act
   worthy of a God Here are reasons which are more than sufficient to
   answer the old question, for which Anselm prepared so elaborate a reply
   in his book, "Cur Deus Homo?"

   "What is man?" Those three words in verse 6 are the fit starting point
   of the argument. We need not only a true philosophy of God, but a true
   philosophy of man, in order to right thinking on the Gospel. The
   idolater thinks man inferior to birds and beasts and creeping things,
   before which he prostrates himself. The materialist reckons him to be
   the chance product of natural forces which have evolved him; and before
   which he is therefore likely to pass away. The pseudo-science of the
   time makes him of one blood with ape and gorilla, and assigns him a
   common origin with the beasts. See what gigantic systems of error have
   developed from mistaken conceptions of the true nature and dignity of
   man!

   From all such we turn to that noble ideal of man's essential dignity,
   given in this sublime paragraph, which corrects our mistaken notions;
   and, whilst giving us an explanation that harmonizes with all our
   experience and observation, opens up to us vistas of thought worthy of
   God.

   MAN AS GOD MADE HIM. The description given here of the origin and
   dignity of man is taken from Psalm viii., which is doubtless a
   reminiscence of the days when David kept his father's sheep; even if it
   were not composed on that very spot over which in after-years the
   heavenly choirs broke upon the astonished shepherds "abiding in the
   field, keeping watch over their flock by night."

   Turn to that Psalm, and see how well it expresses the emotions which
   must well up in devout hearts to God as we consider the midnight
   heavens, the tapestry work of his fingers, and the spheres lit by the
   moon and stars, which he has ordained. How impossible it is for those
   who are given to devout reflection to come in contact with any of the
   grander forms of natural beauty, the far-spread expanse of ocean, the
   outlines of the mountains, the changing pomp of the skies without
   turning from the handiwork to the great Artisan, with some such
   expression as the apostrophe with which the Psalm opens and closes: "
   LORD, our Lord, how excellent is thy name in all the earth 1"

   At first sight, man is utterly unworthy to be compared with those vast
   and wondrous spectacles revealed to us by the veiling of the sun. His
   life is but as a breath; as a shadow careering over the mountain-side;
   as the existence of the aphides on a leaf in the vast forests of being.
   What can be said of his character, sin-stained and befouled, in
   contrast with peaks whose virgin snows have never been defiled; with
   sylvan scenes, whose peace has never been ruffled; with silvery
   spheres, whose chimes of perfect harmony have never been broken by
   discord? Four times over is the question asked upon the pages of
   Scripture, "What is man, that thou art mindful of him?" (Psalm cxliv.
   3; Job vii. 17, 20; Psalm viii. 4; Heb. ii. 6.)

   Yet it is an undeniable fact that God is mindful of man, and that he
   does visit him. "Mindful!" There is not a moment in God's existence in
   which he is not as mindful of this world of men as the mother of the
   babe whom she has left for a moment in the next room, but whose
   slightest cry or moan she is quick to catch. "I am poor and needy; yet
   the Lord thinketh upon me." "How precious are thy thoughts unto me,
   God!" "Visiting!" No cot is so lowly, no heart so wayward, no life so
   solitary, but God visits it. No one shall read these lines, the path
   around whose heart-door is not trodden hard by the feet of him who
   often comes and stands and knocks. We speak as if only our sorrows were
   divine visitations. Alas for us, if it were only so! Every throb of
   holy desire, every gentle mercy, every gift of Providence, is a
   visitation of God.

   But there must be some great and sufficient reason why the Maker of the
   universe should take so much interest in man. Evidently bigness is not
   greatness; a tiny babe is worth more than the tallest mountain; and an
   empress-mother will linger in the one room where her child is ill,
   though she forsake the remainder of her almost illimitable domain. What
   if earth shall turn out to be the nursery of the universe! The true
   clew, however, to all speculation is to be found in the declaration by
   the Psalmist of God's original design in making man: "Thou crownedst
   him. ...Thou madest him to have dominion. . . . Thou hast put all
   things under his feet " (Psalm viii. 5, 6, R.v.). Nor was this lofty
   ideal first given to the Psalmist's poetic vision. It had an earlier
   origin. It is a fragment of the great charta of humanity, which God
   gave to our first parents in Paradise.

   Turn to that noble archaic record, Gen. i. 26-28, which transcends the
   imaginings of modern science as far as it does those legends of
   creation which make the heathen literature with which they are
   incorporated incredible. Its simplicity, its sublimity, its fitness,
   attest its origin and authority to be divine. We are prepared to admit
   that God's work in creation was symmetrical and orderly, and that he
   worked out his design according to an ever-unfolding plan. But science
   has discovered nothing as yet to contradict the express statements of
   Scripture, that the first man was not at all inferior to ourselves in
   those intellectual and moral faculties which are the noblest heritage
   of mankind.

   "God created man in his own image" (Gen. i. 27). -There we have the
   divine likeness. Our mental and moral nature is made on the same plan
   as God's: the divine in miniature. Truth, love, and purity, like the
   principles of mathematics, are the same in us as in him. If it were not
   so, we could not know or understand him. But since it is so, it has
   been possible for him to take on himself our nature-possible also that
   we shall be one day transformed to the perfect image of his beauty.

   "And God said, Have dominion" (Gen. i. 28). -There you have royal
   supremacy. Man was intended to be God's viceregent and representative.
   King in a palace stored with all to please him: monarch and sovereign
   of all the lower orders of creation. The sun to labor for him as a very
   Hercules; the moon to light his nights, or lead the waters round the
   earth in tides, cleansing his coasts; elements of nature to be his
   slaves and messengers; flowers to scent his path; fruits to please his
   taste; birds to sing for him; fish to feed him; beasts to toil for him
   and carry him. Not a cringing slave, but a king crowned with the glory
   of rule, and with the honor of universal supremacy. Only a little lower
   than angels; because they are not, like him, encumbered with flesh and
   blood. This is man as God made him to be.

   MAN AS SIN HAS MADE HIM. "We see not yet all things subjected to him"
   (Heb. ii. 8, R.v.). His crown is rolled in the dust, his honor
   tarnished and stained. His sovereignty is strongly disputed by the
   lower orders of creation. If trees nourish him, it is after strenuous
   care, and they often disappoint. If the earth supplies him with food,
   it is in tardy response to exhausting toil If the beasts serve him, it
   is because they have been laboriously tamed and trained; whilst vast
   numbers roam the forest glades, setting him at defiance. If he catch
   the fish of the sea, or the bird of the air, he must wait long in
   cunning concealment.

   Some traces of the old lordship are still apparent in the terror which
   the sound of the human voice and the glance of the eye still inspire in
   the lower creatures, as in the feats of lion-tamer or snake-charmer.
   But for the most part anarchy and rebellion have laid waste man's fair
   realm.

   So degraded has he become, that he has bowed before the objects that he
   was to command; and has prostrated his royal form in shrines dedicated
   to birds, and four-footed beasts, and creeping things. It is the
   fashion nowadays to extol heathen philosophy; but how can we compare it
   for a moment with the religion of the Bible, when its pyramids are
   filled with mummies of deified animals, and its temples with the sacred
   bull!

   Where is the supremacy of man? Not in the savage cowering before the
   beasts of the forest; nor in the civilized races that are the slaves of
   lust and sensuality and swinish indulgence; nor in those who, refusing
   to recognize the authority of God, fail to exercise any authority
   themselves. "Sin hath reigned," as the Apostle says most truly (Rom.
   v.21). And all who bow their necks beneath its yoke are slaves and
   menials and cowering subjects, in comparison with what God made and
   meant them to be.

   Do not point to the wretched groups surrounding the doors of the
   gin-palaces in the metropolis of the most Christian people of the
   world, and regard their condition as a stain on the love or power of
   God. This is not his work. These are the products of sin. An enemy hath
   done this. Would you see man as God intended him to be, you must go
   back to Eden, or forward to the New Jerusalem. Sin defiles, debases,
   disfigures, and blasts all it touches. And we may shudder to think that
   its virus is working through our frame, as we discover the results of
   its ravages upon myriads around.

   MAN AS CHRIST CAN MAKE HIM. " We behold Jesus crowned with glory and
   honor" (ver. 9). "What help is that?" cries an objector; "of course he
   is crowned with glory and honor, since he is the Son of God." But
   notice, the glory and honor mentioned here are altogether different
   from the glory of Heb. i. 3. That was the incommunicable glory of his
   deity. This is the acquired glory of his humanity.

   In John xvii. our Lord himself distinguishes between the two. In verse
   5, the glory which he had with the Father as his right before all
   worlds. In verse 24, the glory given as the reward for his sufferings,
   which he could not have had unless he had taken upon himself the form
   of a servant, and had been made in the fashion of man, humbling
   himself, and becoming obedient to the death of the cross, "made a
   little lower than the angels, because of the suffering of death;
   crowned with glory and honor: that he, by the grace of God, should
   taste death for every man" (Phil ii. 7, 8; Heb. ii. 10).

   This is the crown wherewith his Father crowned him in the day of the
   gladness of his heart, when, as man, he came forth victorious from the
   last wrestle with the Prince of hell. All through his earthly life he
   fulfilled the ancient ideal of man. He was God's image; and those who
   saw him saw the Father. He was Sovereign in his commands. Winds and
   waves did his bidding. Trees withered at his touch. Fish in shoals
   obeyed his will. Droves of cattle fled before his scourge of small
   cords. Disease and death and devils owned his sway. But all was more
   fully realized when he was about to return to his Father, and said, in
   a noble outburst of conscious supremacy, "All power is given unto me in
   heaven and in earth."

   "We behold him." Behold him, Christian reader! The wreaths of empire
   are on his brow. The keys of death and Hades swing at his girdle. The
   mysterious living creatures, representatives of redeemed creation,
   attest that he is worthy. All things in heaven and earth, and under the
   earth, and in the seas, worship him; so do the bands of angels, beneath
   whom he stooped for a little season, on our behalf.

   And as he is, we too shall be.  He is there as the type and specimen
   and representative of redeemed men. We are linked with him in
   indissoluble union. Through him we shall get back our lost empire. We
   too shall be crowned with glory and honor. The day is not far distant
   when we shall sit at his side-joint-heirs in his empire; comrades in
   his glory, as we have been comrades in his sorrows; beneath our feet
   all things visible and invisible, thrones and principalities and
   powers; whilst above us shall be the unclouded empyrean of our Father's
   love, forever and forever. Oh, destiny of surpassing bliss! Oh, rapture
   of saintly hearts! Oh, miracle of divine omnipotence!

     __________________________________________________________________

                        VI. "Perfect through sufferings



    "It became him, for whom are all things, and by whom are all things, in
    bringing many sons unto glory, to make the Captain of their salvation
    perfect through sufferings."

   HEBREWS ii. 10.


   THERE is no book which can stand the test of sorrow and suffering as
   the Bible can. Other books may delight us in sunny hours, when the
   heart is gay; but in dark and overcast days we fling them aside, and
   eagerly betake ourselves to our Bibles. And the reason for this is in
   the fact that this Book was born in the fires. It is soaked with the
   tears, either of those who wrote or of those addressed.

   Take, for instance, this Epistle. It was intended to solace the bitter
   anguish of these Hebrew Christians, who were exposed to the double fury
   of the storm. In the first place, there was the inevitable opposition
   and persecution to be encountered by all followers of the Nazarene; not
   only from the Gentiles, but specially from their fellow-countrymen, who
   accounted them apostates.

   Next, there was the pain of excommunication from the splendid rites of
   the Temple, with its daily service, its solemn feasts, its magnificent
   ceremonial. Only those amongst our-selves who from childhood have been
   wont to worship in some splendid minster, with its pealing organ,
   full-voiced choir, and mystery of architecture, arresting and
   enchaining every sense of beauty, but who have felt constrained to join
   the worship of an obscure handful in some plain meetinghouse, can
   realize how painfully those who were addressed in these words missed
   the religious associations of their early days.

   And then this suffering, thorn-crowned, dying Messiah! It seemed almost
   impossible to realize that he was the Christ of national desire. The
   objections that baffled the faith of the two travelers to Emmaus arose
   in almost irresistible force: "The chief priests and our rulers have
   crucified him; but we trusted that it had been he which should have
   redeemed Israel" (Luke xxiv. 20).

   No attempt is made in these words to minimize the sufferings of Christ.
   That were impossible and superfluous. He is King in the realm of
   sorrow; peerless in his pain; supreme in his distress. Though earth be
   full of sufferers, none can vie with our Lord in his. Human nature is
   limited. The confines of its joys or sorrows are soon touched. The
   pendulum swings only hither and thither. But who shall estimate the
   capacity of Christ's nature? And because of it, he could taste the
   sweets of a joy beyond his fellows, and of sorrow so excessive as to
   warrant the challenge: "Behold, and see if there be any sorrow like
   unto my sorrow, wherewith the Lord hath afflicted me in the day of his
   fierce anger." If it be true, as Carlyle says, that our sorrow is the
   inverted image of our nobility, how deep must the sorrow have been of
   the noblest of our race! Well may the Greek liturgy, with infinite
   pathos, speak of his "unknown sorrows."

   Shall the sufferings of Christ cause us to reject Christ? Ah, strange
   infatuation! As well reject the heaven because of its sun, or night
   because of the queenly moon; or a diadem because of its regal gem; or
   home because of mother. The sufferings of Christ are the proudest boast
   of the Gospel. He himself wears the insignia of them in heaven; as a
   general, on the day of triumph, chooses his choicest order to wear upon
   his breast. Yes, and it was the deliberate choice of him, "for whom are
   all things, and by whom are all things "-and who must, therefore, have
   had every expedient at his command-that the path of suffering should be
   his Son's way through our world. Every track through creation is as
   familiar to Omniscience as the tracks across the hills to the
   gray-haired, plaided shepherd. Had he wished, the Father might have
   conducted the Son to glory by another route than the thorny, flint-set
   path of suffering. But the reasons for this experience were so
   overwhelming that he could not evade them. Nothing else had been
   becoming. Those reasons may be stated almost in a sentence.

   Our Father has on hand a work greater than his original creation. He is
   "bringing many sons unto glory." The way may be rugged and tedious; but
   its end is glory. And it is the way along which our Father is bringing
   us; for, since we believe on the Son, we have the right to call
   ourselves sons (John i. 12). And there are many of us. Many sons,
   though only one Son. We do not go solitarily along the narrow way. We
   are but part of a multitude which no man can number. The glory of which
   we have already spoken, and into which Jesus has entered, is not for
   him alone, but for us also. "Many sons" are to be his joint-heirs;
   reigning with him on his throne, sharing his unsearchable riches and
   his everlasting reign.

   But all these sons must tread the path of sufering. Since the first sin
   brought suffering to our first parents, and bloodshed into the first
   home, there has been but one lot for those who will live Godly. Their
   road leads to glory; but every inch of it is stained with their blood
   and watered by their tears. It climbs to Hermon's summit; but it
   descends immediately into somber and devil-haunted plains. It conducts
   to the Mount of Olives, with its ascension light; but it first
   traverses the glades of Gethsemane, the wine-press of Golgotha, the
   solitude and darkness of the grave.


   "The path of sorrow, and that path alone,

   Leads to the land where sorrow is unknown."

   What true soul has not its wilderness of temptation; its conflicts with
   Sadducees and Scribes; its hour of weariness and watching; its tears
   over cities full of rebellious men; its disappointments from friends;
   its persecutions from foes; rejection, agony, friendlessness,
   loneliness, denials, trial, treacheries, deaths, and burials? Such is
   the draught which the noblest and saintliest have drunk from the golden
   chalice of life.

   Foreseeing our needs, our Father has provided for us a Leader. It is a
   great boon for a company of pilgrims to have a Great-heart; for an army
   to have a captain; for an exodus to have a Moses. Courageous,
   sagacious, and strong leaders are God's good gifts to men. And it is
   only what we might have expected that God has placed such a One as the
   efficient Leader at the head of the long line of pilgrims, whom he is
   engaged in bringing to glory. The toils seem lighter and the distance
   shorter; laggards quicken their pace; wandering ones are recalled from
   by-paths by the presence and voice of the Leader, who marches,
   efficient, royal, and divine, in the van. heirs of glory, weary of the
   long and toilsome march, remember that ye are part of a great host: and
   that the Prince, at the head of the column, has long since entered the
   city; though he is back again, passing as an inspiration along the
   ranks as they are toiling on.

   Our Leader is perfect. Of course this does not refer to his moral or
   spiritual attributes. In these he is possessed of the stature of the
   perfect Man, and has filled out, in every detail, God's ideal of
   manhood. But he might have been all this without being perfectly
   adapted to the work of leading many sons through suffering to glory. He
   might have been perfect in character, and desirous to help us; but, if
   he had never tasted death, how could he allay our fears as we tread the
   verge of Jordan? If he had never been tempted, how could he succor
   those who are tempted? If he had never wept, how could he stanch our
   tears? If he had never suffered, hungered, wearied on the hill of
   difficulty, or threaded his way through the quagmires of grief, how
   could he have been a merciful and faithful High-Priest, having
   compassion on the ignorant and wayward? But, thank God, our Leader is a
   perfect one. He is perfectly adapted to his task. His certificate,
   countersigned by the voice of inspiration, declares him fully
   qualified.

   But this perfect efficiency, as we have seen, is the result of
   suffering. In no other conceivable way could he have been so
   effectively qualified to be our Leader as he has been by the ordeal of
   suffering. Every pang, every tear, every thrill, all were needed to
   complete his equipment to help us. And from this we may infer that
   suffering is sometimes permitted to befall us in order to qualify us to
   be, in our poor measure, the leaders and comforters of our brethren,
   who are faltering in the march. When next we suffer, let us believe
   that it is not the result of chance, or fate, or man's carelessness, or
   hell's malevolence; but that perhaps God is perfecting our adaptability
   to comfort and succor others.

   Are there not some in your circle to whom you naturally betake yourself
   in times of trial and sorrow? They always seem to speak the right word,
   to give the very counsel you are longing for; you do not realize,
   however, the cost which they had to pay ere they became so skillful in
   binding up gaping wounds and drying tears. But if you were to
   investigate their past history you would find that they have suffered
   more than most. They have watched the slow untwisting of some silver
   cord on which the lamp of life hung. They have seen the golden bowl of
   joy dashed to their feet, and its contents spilt. They have stood by
   ebbing tides, and drooping gourds, and noon sunsets; but all this has
   been necessary to make them the nurses, the physicians, the priests of
   men. The boxes that come from foreign climes are clumsy enough; but
   they contain spices which scent the air with the fragrance of the
   Orient. So suffering is rough and hard to bear; but it hides beneath it
   discipline, education, possibilities, which not only leave us nobler,
   but perfect us to help others. Do not fret, or set your teeth, or wait
   doggedly for the suffering to pass; but get out of it all you can, both
   for yourself and for your service to your generation, according to the
   will of God.

   Suffering educates sympathy; it softens the spirit, lightens the touch,
   hushes the tread; it accustoms the spirit to read from afar the
   symptoms of an unspoken grief; it teaches the soul to tell the number
   of the promises, which, like the constellations of the arctic circle,
   shine most brilliantly through the wintry night; it gives to the spirit
   a depth, a delicacy, a wealth of which it cannot otherwise possess
   itself. Through suffering he has become perfected.

   His sufferings have purchased our pardon. He tasted death for every
   man. But his sufferings have done more in enabling him to understand
   experimentally, and to allay, with the tenderness of one who has
   suffered, all the griefs and sorrows that are experienced by the
   weakest and weariest of the great family of God.

   So far, then, from rejecting him because of his sorrows, this shall
   attract us the more quickly to his side. And, amid our glad songs, this
   note shall predominate: "It behoved Christ to suffer." "In the midst of
   the throne, a Lamb as it had been slain."

     __________________________________________________________________

  VII THE DEATH OF DEATH


    "Forasmuch then as the children are partakers of flesh and blood, he also
    himself likewise took part of the same; that through death he might destroy
    him that had the power of death, that is, the devil; and deliver them, who
    through fear of death were all their lifetime subject to bondage." HEBREWS
    ii. 14, 15.

   WE fear death with a double fear. There is, first, the instinctive fear
   shared also by the animal creation; for the very brutes tremble as the
   moment of death draws near. Surely this fear is not wrong. It is often
   congenital and involuntary, and afflicts some of God's noblest saints:
   though doubtless these will some day confess that it was most
   unwarrantable, and that the moment of dissolution was calm and sweet
   and blessed.

   It is a growing opinion among thoughtful men that the moment of death,
   when the spirit passes from its earthly tabernacle, is probably the
   most painless and the happiest moment of its whole earthly story. And
   if this be so generally, how much more must it be the case with those
   on whose sight are breaking the glories of Paradise! The child whose
   eyes feast upon a glowing vista of flower and fruit, beckoning it
   through the garden-gate, hardly notices the rough woodwork of the gate
   itself as it bounds through; and probably the soul, becoming aware of
   the beauty of the King and the glories of its home, is too absorbed to
   notice the act of death, till it suddenly finds itself free to mount
   and soar and revel in the dawning light.

   But there is another fear of death, which is spiritual. dread its
   mystery. What is it? Whither does it lead? Why does it come just now?
   What is the nature of the life beyond? We see the movements on the
   other side of the thick curtain which sways to and fro; but we can
   distinguish no form. The dying ones are conscious of sights and sounds
   for which we strain eye and ear in vain.


   We dread its leave-taking. The heathen poet sang sadly of leaving earth
   and home and family. Long habit endears the homeliest lot and the
   roughest comrades: how much more the true-hearted and congenial-it is
   hard to part from them. If only we could all go together, there would
   be nothing in it. But this separate dropping-off, this departing one by
   one, this drift from the anchorage alone! Who can deny that it is a
   lonesome thing?


   Men dread the after-death.  " The sting of death is sin." The sinner
   dreads to die, because he knows that, on the other side of death, he
   must meet the God against whom he has sinned, and stand at his bar to
   give an account and receive the due reward of his deeds. How can he
   face that burning glory? How can he answer for one of a thousand? How
   can mortal man be just with God? How can he escape hell, and find his
   place amid the happy festal throngs of the Golden City?

   Many of man's fears were known to Christ. And he knew that they would
   be felt by many who were to be closely related to him as brethren. If,
   then, he was prompted by ordinary feelings of compassion to the great
   masses of mankind, he would be especially moved to relieve those with
   whom he had so close an affinity, as these marvelous verses unfold. He
   and they are all of one (ver. 11). He calls them brethren through the
   lips of psalmist and prophet (ver. 12). He takes his stand in the
   assembled Church, and sings his Father's praise in its company (ver. I
   2). He even associates himself with them in their humble childlike
   trust (ver. 13). He dares to accost the gaze of all worlds, as he comes
   forward leading them by the hand (ver. 13). Oh, marvelous
   identification! Oh, rapturous association! More wondrous far than if a
   seraph should cherish friendship with a worm! But the preciousness of
   this relationship lies in the fact that Jesus will do all he can to
   alleviate that fear of death, which is more or less common to us all.


   But in order to do it, he must die. He could not be the death of death
   unless he had personally tasted death. He needed to fulfill the law of
   death by dying, before he could abolish death. Our David must go into
   the valley of Elah, and grapple with our giant foe, and wrest from him
   his power, and slay him with his own sword. As in the old fable
   Prometheus could not slay the Minotaur unless he accompanied the yearly
   freight of victims, so must Jesus go with the myriads of our race into
   the dark confines of the tomb, that death might do its worst in vain;
   that the grave might lose its victory; and that the grim gaoler might
   be shown powerless to hold the Resurrection and the Life. Had Christ
   not died, it might have been affirmed that, in one place at least,
   death and sin, chaos and darkness, were supreme. "It behooved him,
   therefore, to suffer, and to rise from the dead the third day." And,
   like another Samson, carrying the gates of his prison-house, he came
   forth, demonstrating forever that light is stronger than darkness,
   salvation than sin, life than death. Hear his triumphant cry, as thrice
   the risen and ascended Master exclaims, "I died, and lo, I am alive
   forevermore, and have the keys of Hades and of death." Death and hell
   chose their own battleground, their strongest; and there, in the hour
   of his weakness, our King defeated them, and now carries the trophy of
   victory at his girdle forevermore. Hallelujah!


   But he could only have died by becoming man. Perhaps there is no race
   in the universe that can die but our own. So there may be no other spot
   in the wide universe of God seamed with graves, shadowed by the
   outspread wings of the angel of death, or marked by the plague-spot of
   sin. "Sin entered into the world, and death by sin; and so death passed
   upon all." In order then to die, Christ must take on himself our human
   nature. Others die because they are born; Christ was born that he might
   die. It is as if he said: "Of thee, human mother, must I be born; and I
   must suffer the aches and pains and sorrows of mortal life; and I must
   hasten quickly to the destined goal of human life; I have come into the
   world to die." "Forasmuch as the children are partakers of flesh and
   blood, he also himself likewise took part of the same, in order that
   through death he might destroy him that had the power of death, that
   is, the devil: and deliver them, who through fear of death were all
   their lifetime subject to bondage."


   BY DEATH CHRIST DESTROYED HIM THAT HAD THE POWER OF DEATH. Scripture
   has no doubt as to the existence of the devil. And those who know much
   of their own inner life, and of the sudden assaults of evil to which we
   are liable, cannot but realize his terrible power. And from this
   passage we infer that that power was even greater before Jesus died.
   "He had the power of death." It was a chief weapon in his infernal
   armory. The dread of it was so great as to drive men to yield to any
   demands made by the priests of false religions, with their dark
   impurities and hideous rites. Thus timid sheep are scared by horrid
   shouts and blows into the butcher's shambles.

   But since Jesus died, the devil and his power are destroyed. Brought to
   naught, not made extinct. Still he assails the Christian warrior,
   though armed from head to foot; and goes about seeking whom he may
   devour, and deceives men to ruin. Satan is not impotent though chained.
   He has received the wound which annuls his power, but it has not yet
   been effectual to destroy him.

   His power was broken at the cross and grave of Jesus. The hour of
   Gethsemane was the hour and power of darkness. And Satan must have seen
   the Resurrection in despair. It was the knell of his destiny. It sealed
   his doom. The prince of this world was judged and cast out from the
   seat of power (John xii. 31 ; xvi. ii). The serpent's head was bruised
   beyond remedy.

   Fear not the devil, child of God; nor death! These make much noise, but
   they have no power. The Breaker has gone before thee, clearing thy way.
   Only keep close behind him. Hark ! He gives thee power over all the
   power of the enemy, and nothing shall by any means hurt thee (Luke x.
   9). No robber shall pluck thee from thy Shepherd's hand.


   By DEATH CHRIST DELIVERS FROM THE FEAR OF DEATH. A child was in the
   habit of playing in a large and beautiful garden, with sunny lawns; but
   there was one part of it, a long and winding path, down which he never
   ventured; indeed, he dreaded to go near it, because some silly nurse
   had told him that ogres and goblins dwelt within its darksome gloom. At
   last his eldest brother heard of his fear, and, after playing one day
   with him, took him to the embowered entrance of the grove, and, leaving
   him there terror-stricken, went singing through its length, and
   returned, and reasoned with the child, proving that his fears were
   groundless. At last he took the lad's hand, and they went through it
   together, and from that moment the fear which had haunted the place
   fled. And the memory of that brother's presence took its place. So has
   Jesus done for us!


   Fear not the mystery Of death! Jesus has died, and has shown us that it
   is the gateway into another life, more fair and blessed than this-a
   life in which human words are understood, and human faces smile, and
   human affections linger still. The forty days of his resurrection life
   have solved many of the problems, and illumined most of the mystery. To
   die is to go at once to be with him. No chasm, no interval, no weary
   delay in purgatory. Absent from the body, present with the Lord, One
   moment here in conditions of mortality; the next beyond the stars.


   Fear not the loneliness of death! The soul in the dark valley becomes
   aware of another at its side, "Thou art with me." Death cannot separate
   us, even for a moment, from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus
   our Lord. In the hour of death Jesus fulfills his own promise, "I will
   come again and take you unto myself." And on the other side we step
   into a vast circle of loving spirits, who welcome the new-comer with
   festal songs (2 Peter i. 11)


   Fear not the after-death! The curse and penalty of sin have been borne
   by him. Death, the supreme sentence on sinners, has been suffered for
   us by our Substitute. In him we have indeed passed on to the other side
   of the doom, which is justly ours, as members of a sinful race. Who is
   he that condemneth? It is Christ that died, yea, rather, that is risen
   again."

   Death! How shall they die who have already died in Christ? That which
   others call death, we call sleep. We dread it no more than sleep. Our
   bodies lie down exhausted with the long working-day, to awake in the
   fresh energy of the eternal morning; but in the meanwhile the spirit is
   presented faultless before the presence of his glory with exceeding
   joy.

     __________________________________________________________________

VIII. CHRIST'S MERCIFUL AND FAITHFUL HELP

    " merciful and faithful high-priest in things pertaining to God."  HEBREWS
    ii. 17.


   DOST thou wonder that thy Lord was tempted and sorrowful? It is indeed
   the marvel of eternity; and yet not so marvelous, when we consider the
   beings whom he elected to succor, help, and save, and of whom each of
   us is one.

   Had he chosen to lay hold of fallen angels, with a view of raising them
   from their lost estate, he would without doubt have taken upon himself
   their nature, and descended into the pit; identifying himself with
   their miseries, and paving, by his sufferings, a pathway across the
   great fixed gulf which intervenes between their lost estate and
   Paradise. But verily he took not hold of angels, but of the seed of
   Abraham; and had no alternative therefore but to assimilate himself in
   all points to the nature of those whom, in infinite mercy and grace, he
   brothered.

   There are two things thou needest, reader; and not thou only, but all
   men, reconciliation, and succor in the hour of temptation. These
   instinctive cravings of the soul are as mighty and as irrepressible as
   the craving of the body for sleep or food; and they are as evident amid
   our luxury and refinement as in primeval forests, or beside the
   historic rivers of antiquity-the Nile, the Indus, the Euphrates.

   To meet these two needs, men have constituted one of their number a
   priest. That word has an ominous sound to our ears, because it has been
   associated with immoralities and cruelty. The world has never seen more
   unscrupulous or rapacious tyrants than its priests, whether of Baal or
   Moloch, of Judaism or the Papacy. All through the ages it has seemed
   impossible for men to receive power in the spiritual realm without
   abusing it to the injury of those who sought their help. Study the
   history of the priesthood, which murdered Christ because he threw too
   strong a light upon its hypocrisies and villainies, and you have the
   history of every priestcraft which has darkened the world with crime,
   and saturated its soil with the blood of the noblest and saintliest of
   men.


   And yet the idea of the priest is a natural and a beautiful one. It is
   natural for men who are conscious of sin barring their access into the
   presence of a holy God, and demanding sacrifice in order to peace, to
   say to one of their fellows, "Our hands are stained with blood, and
   grimed with toil; our garments spotted with pollution and dust; our
   lives too busy for us to spare time for those rites which alone can fit
   the sinner to stand before the eye of God: do for us what we cannot do
   for ourselves; prepare thyself by holy rite and vigil and fasting from
   sin, so as to be able to stand in the presence-chamber of the All-Holy;
   and when thou hast acquired the right of audience with him, speak for
   us, atone for us, make reconciliation for our sins; and then come forth
   to us, succoring and blessing those who cannot attain to thy position,
   but must ever struggle as best they may with the strong, rough, bad
   world in which they are doomed to live."

   This seems the underlying thought of the vast system which has built
   temples in every land, reared altars on every soil, and constituted a
   priesthood amid the most degraded as well as the most civilized races
   of mankind.

   And there is great beauty in the work and ministry of a true priest.
   Not always engaged in the darker work of sacrificing flocks of fleecy
   sheep, by which alone, in those rude days, the cost of sin could be
   computed; the true priest would have other, and, perhaps, more
   congenial work. He would be the shepherd of the timid souls around him;
   listening to confessions whispered over the heads of the dumb victims;
   feeling compassion for erring and wayward ones; comforting those who
   were passing through scenes of sorrow, till faces shadowed with tears
   began to gleam with holy light; arresting the proud hand of the
   oppressor, as Ambrose did in lawless days, to rescue the poor from the
   mailed blow. Never studying self-interest; never consuting ease or
   pleasure or gain; never resting while one poor wanderer was away in the
   snowdrift or on the wild. Yes, and more: he would be the spokesman of
   souls, praying for those who did not pray for themselves; praying for
   those who knew not what or how to ask; interceding for the whole race
   of man. Ah! how often must such a one have been compelled by the
   pressure of the burden to go apart from the busy crowds to some lone
   spot, that he might pour out before God the long litany of need and
   sorrow and temptation which had been poured into his heart. Lovely
   ideal; ah, how seldom realized!


   All this is Jesus Christ, and more. Words fail indeed to say all that
   he is in himself, or all that he can be to those that trust him. And it
   is because of this that he is able to give such blessed help to all who
   need it. Let us consider that help.


   IT Is SOVEREIGN AND UNEXPECTED HELP. Angels fell. Once they were the
   peers of heaven. They sang its songs, plucked its flowers of amaranth,
   and drank its tranquil bliss. They loved its King, and served him, like
   the sunbeam, with unpolluted brightness and unswerving direction. But,
   alas! they fell from heaven to hell. And for them there is no help, so
   far as we can learn. "God taketh not hold of angels."

   But he has set his heart upon us, the poor children of dust, the
   creatures of the transient moments of time, who had fallen by the same
   sin of self-will. Here is a theme for meditation! We cannot pierce the
   mystery, or understand its full import. But we may, with wondering
   faith and joy, accept the chalice, brimming with unmerited, unexpected,
   undeserved grace, and drain its draughts of bliss.


   IT IS HUMAN HELP. " Made like unto his brethren." The peculiarity of
   this phrase testifies to Christ's pre-existence and glory, and
   indicates how great a stoop on his part it involved ere he could be
   like man. He had to be made like man, i.e., he was not like man in the
   original constitution of his being. We cannot solve the mystery of the
   holy incarnation. And yet the thought of it has never been quite
   foreign to the heart of man. Many a Greek and Hindu myth rested on an
   instinctive craving for the presence of God in human flesh, which
   became parent to the belief that such a thing had been, and might be
   again. Even in the highlands of Galatia, the most ready explanation of
   the miracles of Paul was that the gods had come down in the likeness of
   men.

   But though there be such a profound mystery resting on this subject,
   yet the union of the Almighty with a human life is at least not more
   incomprehensible than the union of a spiritual, unmaterial principle,
   as the soul, with a material organism, as the human body. When the
   secrets of our own nature have been unraveled, it will be time enough
   for us to demand of the Almighty that, when he assumes our nature, lie
   should disrobe himself of all mystery. How exquisite is the arrangement
   that God's help should come to us through the Son of Man; that our
   Helper should shed true human tears, and feel true human pity Jew
   though he was, child of the most exclusive and intolerant of peoples,
   yet the humanity which is greater than Judaism makes us oblivious to
   all else than that lie is our Brother.


   IT IS HIGH-PRIESTLY HELP. The full meaning of this phrase will appear
   as we proceed. It is sufficient to say here, that all that men have
   sought to realize in human priesthoods, but in vain, is realized with
   transcendent beauty in him. Nor is there any way of weaning men from
   the human priesthoods which deceive, but to present to them the
   all-glorious, immaculate priesthood of Christ.

   It is of little use only to denounce the priests that are coming back
   to Protestant England through a thousand covert channels, or the people
   who go to them. There is a craving in their heart which impels them. It
   is of no use to fight against nature. But satisfy it; give it its true
   nutriment; supply its wants with reality; and it will be content to
   drop the false for the true, the paste diamond for the Golconda
   pebbles, the human for the divine. Men must have a priest; and they are
   going back to the mummeries of Rome, because there has been too scanty
   a presentation in our pulpits of the priesthood of Jesus.


   IT IS MERCIFUL AND FAITHFUL HELP. When we are in need, we want help
   wedded with mercy. The patient in the infirmary does not like to be
   treated as a broken watch. Oh that he were at home again, to be nursed
   by the soft hands of his mother, which ever feel so skillful and gentle
   and soft! We need merciful help, which does not upbraid, is not in too
   great a hurry to listen, and gladly takes all extenuating circumstances
   into account. Such mercy is in the heart of Jesus. And his help is ever
   faithful, too. This word has a fine tint of meaning, almost lost in our
   translation, giving the idea of one who runs up at the first cry of
   distress. He neither slumbers nor sleeps. He watches us with a gaze
   which is not for a moment diverted from us. He sees us through the
   storm. He sits beside the molten metal. He will help us right early
   -i.e., when the day breaks. You may be bereft of all power of
   consecutive thought, unable to utter a single intelligible sentence,
   frantic with agony and remorse; but if you can only moan, he will
   instantly respond. "He will be very gracious unto thee at the voice of
   thy cry."


   IT IS HELP BASED ON RECONCILIATION FOR SIN. Sin is one of the greatest
   facts in our history. It is impossible to ignore it. You cannot explain
   man unless you take it into account. For this the world has been
   covered with the apparatus of sacrifice; and the cry has rung in a
   monotone of despair, "How shall man be just with God?"

   But Jesus met the demands of conscience, echoing those of a broken law,
   when on Calvary, as High-Priest, he offered himself as victim, and made
   an all-sufficient, satisfactory, and complete sacrifice for the sin of
   the world.

   Burdened one, groaning under the load of sin, remember that he bare thy
   sins in his own body on the tree. Approach the holy God, reminding him
   of that fact, and daring on account of it to stand unabashed and
   accepted in his sight.


   IT IS SYMPATHETIC HELP FOR THE TEMPTED. " Them that are tempted."
   Within that circle we all stand. Each is tempted in subtler, if not in
   grosser, forms; in extraordinary, if not in ordinary, ways. You have
   been trying, oh, so hard, to be good; but have met with some sudden
   gust, and been overcome. Tempted to despair! Tempted to yield to
   Potiphar's wife! Tempted to become a brute! No lawn without the
   fowler's snare! No day without its sorrow! No night without its noisome
   pestilence! No rose without its thorn!

   Do we not need succor? Certainly; and he is able to succor the tempted,
   because he has suffered the very worst that temptation can do. Not that
   there was ever one symptom or thought of yielding; yet suffering to the
   point of extreme anguish, beneath the test.

   O sufferers, tempted ones, desolate and not comforted, lean your heads
   against the breast of the God-Man, whose feet have trodden each inch of
   your thorny path; and whose experiences of the power of evil well
   qualify him to strengthen you to stand, to lift you up if you have
   fallen, to speak such words as will heal the ache of the freshly gaping
   wound. If he were impassive, and had never wept or fought in the Garden
   shadows, or cried out forsaken on the cross, we had not felt him so
   near as we can do now in all hours of bitter grief.

   O matchless Saviour, on whom God our Father has laid our help, we can
   dispense with human sympathy, with priestly help, with the solace and
   stay of many a holy service; but thou art indispensable to us, in thy
   life, and death, and resurrection, and brotherhood, and sympathizing
   intercession at the throne of God!
     __________________________________________________________________

                         IX. A WARNING AGAINST UNBELIEF



    "Take heed, brethren, lest there be in any of you an evil heart of unbelief,
    in departing from the living God." -HEBREWS iii. 12.


     THE contrast between the third and fourth chapters of this epistle is
   very marked. The former is like a drear November day, when all the
   landscape is drenched by sweeping rain, and the rotting leaves fall in
   showers to find a grave upon the damp and muddy soil. The latter is
   like a still clear day in midsummer, when nature revels in reposeful
   bliss beneath the unstinted caresses of the sun. There is as much
   difference between them as between the seventh and eighth chapters of
   the Epistle to the Romans.

   But each chapter represents an experience of the inner Christian life.
   Perhaps the majority of Christians live and die in the third chapter,
   to their infinite loss. Comparatively few pass over into the fourth.
   Yet why, reader, should you not pass the boundary line today, and leave
   behind forever the bitter, unsatisfactory experiences which have become
   the normal rule of your existence? Come up out of the wilderness, in
   which you have wandered so long. Your sojourn there has been due, not
   to any desire on the part of God, or to any arbitrary appointment of
   his, or to any natural disability of your temperament; but to certain
   grave failures on your part, in the regimen of the inner life.

    The antipodes of your hitherto dreary experiences is Christ, the
   unsearchable riches of Christ; to be made a partaker of Christ: for
   Christ is the Promised Land that flows with milk and honey, in which we
   eat bread without scarceness, and gather the grapes and pomegranates
   and olives of rare spiritual blessedness.


   WILDERNESS EXPERIENCES. Never did a nation occupy a prouder position
   than the children of Israel on the morning when they stood victorious
   on the shores of the Red Sea. The power of the tyrant had been broken
   by a series of marvelous miracles. The chivalry of Egypt had sunk as
   lead in the mighty waters of death. And as the sun rose behind the
   mountains of Edom, and struck a flashing pathway across the burnished
   mirror of the sea, it revealed long lines of corpses washed up to the
   water's edge. Behind, Egypt left forever. Above, the fleecy cloud,
   chariot of God, tabernacle for his presence. Before, the Land of
   Promise. Many a man was already dreaming of vineyards and olive yards,
   and a settled home, all of which lay within two or three months' easy
   march.

   But of those six hundred thousand men, flushed with victory and hope,
   two only were destined to see the land flowing with milk and honey; and
   these not until forty weary years had slowly passed away. And what
   became of all the rest? Alas! their carcasses fell in the wilderness.
   Instead of reposing in some family burying-place in the Land of
   Promise, their bodies were taken up one by one and laid in the desert
   waste; the sands their winding-sheet; the solitude their mausoleum. It
   took forty years for them all to die. And to accomplish this there must
   have been a high percentage of deaths. How dreary those incessant
   funerals! How monotonous the perpetual sounds of Oriental grief moaning
   through the camp! What wonder that Psalm xc., written among such
   scenes, is so inexpressibly sad!

   The wilderness experience is emblematic, amongst other things, of
   unrest, aimlessness, and unsatisfied longings. Unrest: the tents were
   constantly being struck to be erected again in much the same spot.
   Theirs a perpetual weariness; and they were not suffered to enter into
   God's rest. Aimlessness: they wandered in the wilderness in a desert
   way; they found no city of habitation. Unsatisfied longings: hungry and
   thirsty, their soul fainted in them.

   But how typical of the lives of many amongst ourselves! Life is passing
   away so swiftly from us, but how unideal! How few Christians seem to
   have learned the secret of the inner rest! How many are the victims of
   murmuring and discontent; or are bitten by the serpents of jealousy and
   passion, of hatred and ill-will! The almost universal experience tells
   of broken vows and blighted hopes, of purposeless wanderings, of a
   monotony of failure. Always striking and pitching the camp! Always
   surrounded by the same monotonous horizon, sand, with here and there a
   palm tree! Always fed on the same food, till the soul loathes it! Life
   passes away amid fret and chafing disappointment and weariness of
   existence, till we say with Solomon, "Vanity of vanities, all is
   vanity."

   One of the scourges of the desert is the sandstorm, when the hot wind
   is laden with light powdery dust, which finds its way into eyes and
   mouth and lungs; penetrating the clothes, stinging the skin, and making
   life almost unbearable. An apt illustration of the small annoyances,
   the petty irritations, the perpetual swarm of gnat-like stings, which
   invade our most comfortable circumstances, and make us question whether
   life is worth living.

   Then there is also the mirage. When from afar green glades seem to
   attract the weary traveler, who, as he reaches them, finds his hopes
   deceived and his thirst mocked. Emblem this of the disappointments to
   which they expose themselves who are ever seeking for some earthly good
   to mitigate the hardships and sorrows of their life, instead of seeking
   the fellowship and blessed help of the living Christ. They travel
   forward, thinking at every step that they are nearing an oasis in their
   desert march; but, as they approach, the fabric of their hopes fades
   away into the air.

   "We are made partakers of Christ." These words may either mean that all
   believers together partake of the fullness of Jesus, or that they all
   partake with him of the fullness of God. "Heirs of God, and joint-heirs
   with Christ." But whichever be the true rendering, the thought is
   inexpressibly helpful. Jesus Christ is our Promised Land, and our
   Joshua to lead us thither. He gives us rest. In him are orchards and
   vineyards, and all manner of precious things. His comfort for our
   sorrow; his rest for our weariness; his strength for our weakness; his
   purity for our corruption; his ever-present help for our need. Oh,
   blessed Jesus, surely it is the wonder of heaven that we make so little
   of thee!


   THE CAUSE OF THE WILDERNESS EXPERIENCE. They could not enter in because
   of unbelief. See how unbelief raises a barrier which shuts us out of
   blessing. A fortune may have been left you; but if you do not believe
   the intelligence and apply for it, you will not profit by it. A
   regiment of angels may be passing by your home, with blessings in their
   hands that might enrich you forever; but if you do not believe the
   tidings that they are on the march, you will not go out to greet or
   welcome them. A noble character may rear itself in the neighborhood in
   which you live, or the society in which you move; but if you do not
   believe in it, you will derive no stimulus or comfort from its genial
   and helpful influence. So whatever Christ may be, and however near, he
   will be nothing to you unless you have learned to trust him.

   There are three conditions in which unbelief thrives with us, as with
   the children of Israel: they murmured.


   The first outbreak was in the wilderness of Sin (Exod.xvi.), within a
   few days of the Exodus. There was no bread. The provisions hastily
   brought from Egypt were consumed. They had their kneading-troughs, but
   no flour to knead. There was no organized commissariat. "And the whole
   congregation of the children of Israel murmured against Moses and
   against Aaron in the wilderness: and the children of Israel said unto
   them, Would that we had died by the hand of the Lord in the land of
   Egypt, when we sat by the flesh-pots, when we did eat bread to the
   full; for ye have brought us forth into this wilderness, to kill this
   whole assembly with hunger."

   The second outbreak was at Rephidim (Exod. xvii.). There was no water.
   The scanty desert brooks were heaps of scorching stones, and not a leaf
   of vegetation trembled in the burning sunshine. And again the sullen
   sounds of discontent were heard as the people muttered their belief
   that they had been brought out of Egypt to perish there.

   But the most serious outbreak occurred shortly after they left Sinai
   (Num. xiii.). The green hills of Palestine at last appeared in view,
   and spies were sent forward to search the land. After forty days they
   returned laden with luscious fruits; but they had a story to tell of
   the strength and fortifications of the Canaanites, which filled the
   people with dismay; and "all the people murmured against Moses and
   against Aaron, and said, Would God that we had died in the land of
   Egypt." "Yea, they despised the pleasant land, they believed not his
   word; but murmured in their tents, and hearkened not unto the voice of
   the Lord. Therefore he lifted up his hand unto them, that he would
   overthrow them in the wilderness" (Psa. cvi. 24-26). A murmuring,
   complaining heart is one which has already commenced to disbelieve in
   the wise and loving lead of Christ, and in which unbelief will thrive.


   "They departed from the living God." God is the Home and Source of
   life. From him, as from a fountain, all things derive their being,
   strength, and beauty. If Israel had remained in living union with him,
   there would have been no failure in their supplies; and there would
   have been sufficient grace to make the people calm and restful and
   strong amid these privations and difficulties. But they departed from
   him. They thought they could do better for themselves. They forsook the
   Fountain of living water, and went up into the hills to hew out for
   themselves broken, i.e., cracked cisterns, which could hold no water.
   Of the Rock that begat them they grew unmindful; and so became as the
   desert tamarisk, which inhabits dull and uninhabited wastes, in
   contrast to the tree whose roots are fed by rivers, and whose arms
   shadow generations.

   Let us ask ourselves whether there has been any declension in our
   heart-religion, less prayerfulness, less closeness in our walk with
   God, less enjoyment in the worship of his house; for, if so, unbelief
   is sure to manifest itself, as the fungus which grows fat on the damp
   and foetid soil. Unbelief cannot live in the sunlight of fellowship
   with God.


   They failed to learn the lessons of the past. They did not deny the
   past. They would have told you with flashing eyes the wonderful story
   of deliverance. But they did not trust God's love and wisdom; they did
   not rely on his repeated promises that he would most certainly bring
   them in as he had already brought them out; they did not find in the
   past a guarantee that he would not fail nor forsake them. At Sin they
   should have said, "He gave us these bodies with these appetites and
   needs: we may trust him to provide them with food. 'Our heavenly Father
   knows that we have need of all these things.'" At Marah they should
   have said, "He gave us manna, surely he can supply our thirst." At
   Paran they should have said, "God has promised to give us the land; and
   so, though the Canaanites are strong, and their cities walled to
   heaven, we will dare believe in him." Instead of this they cried, "He
   smote the rock, and the waters gushed out; and the streams overflowed.
   Can he give bread also? Can he give flesh for his people?"

   As we pass through life we should carefully store our hearts with the
   memory of God's great goodness, and fetch from past deliverances the
   assurances that he will never leave, neither forsake. Has he conveyed
   us across the Atlantic to leave us to drown in a ditch? Has he been
   with us in six troubles to desert us in the seventh? Has he saved, and
   can he not keep? Has he redeemed us from hell, and can he not bring us
   to heaven?


   "His love in time past forbids us to think

   He'll leave us at last in trouble to sink;

   Each sweet Ebenezer we have in review

   Confirms his good pleasure to help us right through."


   If we would guard against unbelief, we should reinforce our faith by
   constantly recapitulating the story of God's past dealings; and thus
   through the stream of memory the uplands of our life will send their
   deposits of blessed helpfulness to reinforce us in our daily anxieties
   and perplexities. "The Lord hath been mindful of us, he will bless us."
   "If, when we were enemies, we were reconciled to God by the death of
   his Son, much more, being reconciled, we shall be saved by his life."

   You were happy in your childhood; your early days were set in a golden
   frame; but dear ones have vanished, as the oak's shadow from the forest
   undergrowth, and you feel unprotected and lonely: but the God of your
   childhood will not be less thoughtful of you than in those happy bygone
   days.

   You have stepped out on the waters, and as the storm threatens you, you
   almost wish yourself back; but he who was with you in the fair haven
   will be as near you when the winds rave and the waves lift up their
   voice. You are on the point of exchanging the flesh-pots of Egypt for
   the new land of Canaan, with its blessed promise; and on the way, heart
   and flesh fail at the new and untried scenes that daunt and perplex:
   but he who delivered you from Pharaoh can shield you from Amalek; he
   who cleft the Red Sea will divide the Jordan.


   INSPIRED CAUTIONS. " Take heed lest there be in any one of you an evil
   heart of unbelief in departing from the living God." Unbelief is the
   child, not of the head, but of the heart. It is always well to know the
   source of disease, then the physician can attack it in its citadel. If
   unbelief were the creature of our intellect, we must needs meet it
   there with argument; but since it is the product of a wrong state of
   heart, of an evil heart, we must meet it there.

   "This," says William Law, "is an eternal truth, which you cannot too
   much reflect upon, that reason always follows the state of the heart;
   and what your heart is, that is your reason. If your heart is full of
   sentiments, of penitence, and of faith, your reason will take part with
   your heart; but if your heart is shut up in death and dryness, your
   reason will delight in nothing but dry objections and speculations."


   Guard against an evil heart. If the heart were in a right condition,
   faith would be as natural to it as flowers in spring; or as smiles on
   the face of healthy, innocent childhood. As soon as the heart gets into
   an evil state-harboring sin; cherishing things which you would not
   excuse in others, but condone in yourself; permitting unholy thoughts
   and desires to remain unchecked and unjudged, then, beware! for such a
   heart is no longer able to believe in God. Its head turns dizzy; its
   eyes are blinded; and it is in imminent peril of falling irretrievably.

   Take heed, then; watch and pray; examine yourselves whether ye be in
   the faith; prove your own selves! Expose yourselves to the searching
   light of God's Spirit. Cultivate the honest and good heart. Most of the
   infidelity of the present day arises from man's disinclination to
   retain God in his knowledge. More skepticism may be traced to a
   neglected prayer closet than to the arguments of infidels or the halls
   of secularists. First, men depart from God; then they deny him. And,
   therefore, for the most part, unbelief will not yield to clever sermons
   on the evidences, but to home thrusts that pierce the points of the
   harness to the soul within. "Keep thy heart beyond all keeping, since
   out of it are the issues of life."


   Guard especially against heart-hardening. Hard hearts are unbelieving
   ones; therefore beware of ossification of the heart. The hardest hearts
   were soft once, and the softest may get hard. The chalk which now holds
   the fossil shells was once moist ooze. The horny hand of toil was once
   full of soft dimples. The murderer once shuddered when, as a boy, he
   crushed a worm. Judas must have been once a tender and impressionable
   lad.

   But hearts harden gradually, like the freezing of a pond on a frosty
   night. At first the process can be detected by none but a practiced
   eye. Then there is a thin film of ice, so slender that a pin or needle
   would fall through. At length it will sustain a pebble, and, if winter
   still hold its unbroken sway, a child, a man, a crowd, a cart will
   follow. We get hard through the steps of an unperceived process.

   The constant hearing the truth without obeying it. The knowing a better
   and doing the worse. The cherishing of unholy things that seem fair as
   angels. The refusal to confess the wrong and to profess the right. All
   these things harden. Beware of the deceitfulness of sin! Take heed to
   yourselves! Exhort one another daily.

   Guard against a fickle heart. This is the sin which this epistle
   especially opposes. There are many around us who eagerly embrace a
   novelty; but when the stress comes, as it always does, like the
   settling of a house, there is a slackening off. We must hold fast our
   boldness and the glorying of our hope steadfast to the end. We can only
   become partakers of Christ if we hold fast the beginning of our
   confidence firm to the end.

   We should see not only to our own heart, but to the heart of our
   brethren; and exhort one another daily, watching over each other, and
   seeking to revive drooping piety and reanimate fainting hope. Let us
   take heed to these things today. Now is God's time. The Holy Ghost
   saith, Today. Every day of delay is dangerous, because the hardening
   process becomes more habitual. Today restore what you have taken
   wrongfully; adjust a wrong, promote a right. Today renounce some evil
   habit, some unhallowed pastime, some unlawful friendship. Today reach
   out after some further realization of the fair ideal whch beckons you.
   Today leave the wilderness forever, and enter by faith the Land of
   Promise.
     __________________________________________________________________

                             X. THE GOSPEL OF REST

    "There remaineth therefore a rest to the people of God.  "-HEBREWS iv. 9.


   THE keynote of this chapter is Rest. In the second verse it is spoken
   of as a gospel, or good news. And is there any gospel that more needs
   preaching in these busy, weary days, through which our age is rushing
   to its close, than the Gospel of Rest? On all hands we hear of strong
   and useful workers stricken down in early life by the exhausting
   effects of mental toil. The tender brain tissues were never made to
   sustain the tremendous wear and tear of our times. There is no
   machinery in human nature to repair swiftly enough the waste of nervous
   energy which is continually going on. It is not, therefore, to be
   wondered at that the symptoms of brain tiredness are becoming familiar
   to many workers, acting as warning signals, which, if not immediately
   attended to, are followed by some terrible collapse of mind or body, or
   both.

   And yet it is not altogether that we work so much harder than our
   forefathers; but that there is so much more fret and chafe and worry in
   our lives. Competition is closer. Population is more crowded. Brains
   are keener and swifter in their motion. The resources of ingenuity and
   inventiveness, of creation and production, are more severely and
   constantly taxed. And the age seem's so merciless and selfish. If the
   lonely spirit trips and falls, it is trodden down in the great onward
   rush, or left behind to its fate; and the dread of the swoop of the
   vultures, with rustling wings, from unknown heights upon us as their
   prey, fills us with an anguish which we know by the familiar name of
   care. We could better stand the strain of work if only we had rest from
   worry, from anxiety, and from the fret of the troubled sea that cannot
   rest, as it moans around us, with its yeasty waves, hungry to devour.
   Is such a rest possible?

   This chapter states that such a rest is possible. "Let us labor
   therefore to enter into that rest." Rest? What rest? His rest, says the
   first verse; my rest, says the third verse; God's rest, says the fourth
   verse. And this last verse is a quotation from the earliest page of the
   Bible, which tells how God rested from all the work that he had made.
   And as we turn to that marvelous apocalypse of the past, which in so
   many respects answers to the apocalypse of the future given us by the
   Apostle John, we find that, whereas we are expressly told of the
   evening and morning of each of the other days of creation, there is no
   reference to the dawn or close of God's rest-day; and we are left to
   infer that it is impervious to time, independent of duration,
   unlimited, and eternal; that the ages of human story are but hours in
   the rest-day of Jehovah; and that, in point of fact, we spend our years
   in the Sabbath-keeping of God. But, better than all, it would appear
   that we are invited to enter into it and share it; as a child living by
   the placid waters of a vast fresh water lake may dip into them its cup,
   and drink and drink again, without making any appreciable diminution of
   its volume or ripple on its expanse.

   What is meant by God resting? Surely not the rest of weariness! "He
   fainteth not, neither is weary." Though he had spread forth the
   heavens, and laid the foundations of the earth, and weighed the
   mountains in scales, and the hills in a balance, and had invented ten
   thousand differing forms of being, yet his inventiveness was as fresh,
   his energy as vigorous as ever. Surely not the rest of inactivity. "My
   Father worketh hitherto," said our Lord. "In him we live, and move, and
   have our being." True, he is not now sending forth, so far as we know,
   suns, or systems, or fresh types of being. But his power is ever at
   work, repairing, renewing, and sustaining the fabric of the vast
   machinery of the universe. No sparrow falls to the ground without him.
   The cry of the young lion and the lowing of the oxen in the pastures
   attract his instant regard. "In him all things consist." It was the
   rest of a finished work. He girded himself to the specific work of
   creation, and summoned into being all that is; and when it was finished
   he said it was very good: and at once he rested from all his work which
   he had created and made. It was the rest of divine complacency, of
   infinite satisfaction, of perfect content. It was equivalent to saying,
   "This creation of mine is all that I meant it to be, finished and
   perfect. I am perfectly satisfied; there is nothing more to be done; it
   is all very good."


   This, then, is the rest which we are invited to share. We are not
   summoned to the heavy slumber which follows over-taxing toil, nor to
   inaction or indolence; but to the rest which is possible amid swift
   activity and strenuous work; to perfect equilibrium between the
   outgoings and incomings of the life; to a contented heart; to peace
   that passeth all understanding; to the repose of the will in the will
   of God; and to the calm of the depths of the nature which are
   undisturbed by the hurricanes which sweep the surface, and urge forward
   the mighty waves. This rest is holding out both its hands to the weary
   souls of men throughout the ages, offering its shelter as a harbor from
   the storms of life.


   But is it certain that this rest has not already been entered and
   exhausted by the children of men? That question is fully examined and
   answered in this wonderful paragraph. The Sabbath did not realize that
   rest (ver. 3). We cannot prize its ministry too highly. Its law is
   written, not only in Scripture, but in the nature of man. The godless
   band of French Revolutionists found that they could not supersede the
   week by the decade, the one-day-in-seven by the one-day in-ten. Like a
   ministering angel it relieves the monotony of labor, and hushes the
   ponderous machinery of life, and weaves its spell of rest; but it is
   too fitful and transient to realize the rest of God. It may typify it,
   but it cannot exhaust it. Indeed, it was broken by man's rebellion as
   soon as God had sanctified and hallowed it. Canaan did not realize that
   rest (ver. 8). The Land of Promise was a great relief to the marchings
   and privations of the desert. But it was constantly interrupted, and at
   last, in the Captivity, broken up; as the forms of the mountains in the
   lake by a shower of hail. Besides, in the Book of Psalms, written four
   hundred years after Joshua had led Israel across the Jordan, The Holy
   Spirit, speaking by David, points onward to a rest still future (Psalm
   xcv. 7). Surely, then, if neither of these events has realized the rest
   of God, it remains still, waiting for us and all the people of God.
   "There remaineth, therefore," unexhausted and unrealized, "a
   Sabbath-keeping to the people of God."


   And there is yet a further reason for this conviction of God's
   unexhausted rest. Jesus, our Forerunner and Representative, has entered
   into it for us. See what verse 10 affirms: "He that is entered into his
   rest; " and who can he be but our great Joshua, Jehovah-Jesus? He also
   has ceased from his own work of redemption, as God did from his of
   creation. After the creative act, there came the Sabbath, when God
   ceased from his work, and pronounced it very good; so, after the
   redemptive act, there came the Sabbath to the Redeemer. He lay, during
   the seventh day, in the grave of Joseph, not because he was exhausted
   or inactive, but because redemption was finished, and there was no more
   for him to do. He sat down at the right hand of the Majesty on High;
   and that majestic session is a symptom neither of fatigue nor of
   indolence. He ever liveth to make intercession; he works with his
   servants, confirming their words with signs; he walks amid the seven
   golden candlesticks. And yet he rests as a man may rest who has arisen
   from his ordinary life to effect some great deed of emancipation and
   deliverance; but, having accomplished it, returns again to the ordinary
   routine of his former life, glad and satisfied in his heart. Nor is
   this rest for Christ alone; but for us also, who are forever identified
   with him in his glorious life. We have been raised up together with him
   in the mind and purpose of God, and have been made to sit with him in
   the heavenlies; so that in Jesus we have already entered into the rest
   of God, and have simply to appropriate it by a living faith.


   How, then, may we practically realize and enjoy the rest of God ?-( 1)
   We must will the will of God. So long as the will of God, whether in
   the Bible or in providence, is going in one direction and our will in
   another, rest is impossible. Can there be rest in an earthly household
   when the children are ever chafing against the regulations and control
   of their parents? How much less can we be at rest if we harbor an
   incessant spirit of insubordination and questioning, contradicting and
   resisting the will of God! That will must be done on earth as it is in
   heaven. None can stay his hand, or say, What dost thou? It will be done
   with us, or in spite of us. If we resist it, the yoke against which we
   rebel will only rub a sore place on our skin; but we must still carry
   it. How much wiser, then, meekly to yield to it, and submit ourselves
   under the mighty hand of God, saying, "Not my will, but thine be done!"
   The man who has learned the secret of Christ, in saying a perpetual
   "Yes"to the will of God; whose life is a strain of rich music to the
   theme, "Even so, Father"; whose will follows the current of the will of
   God, as the smoke from our chimneys permits itself to be wafted by the
   winds of autumn, that man will find rest unto his soul.


   We must accept the finished work of Christ. He has ceased from the work
   of our redemption, because there was no more to do. Our sins and the
   sins of the world were put away. The power of the adversary was
   annulled. The gate of heaven was opened to all that believe. All was
   finished, and was very good. Let us, then, cease from our works. Let us
   no longer feel as if we have to do aught, by our tears or prayers or
   works, to make ourselves acceptable to God. Why should we try to add
   one stitch to a finished garment, or append one stroke to the signed
   and sealed warrant of pardon placed within our hands? We need have no
   anxiety as to the completeness or sufficiency of a divinely finished
   thing. Let us quiet our fears by considering that what satisfies
   Christ, our Saviour and Head, may well satisfy us. Let us dare to stand
   without a qualm in God's presence, by virtue of the glorious and
   completed sacrifice of Calvary. Let us silence every tremor of unrest
   by recalling the dying cry on the cross, and the witness of the empty
   grave.


   We must trust our Father's care. "Casting all your care upon him, for
   he careth for you." Sometimes like a wild deluge, sweeping all before
   it, and sometimes like the continual dropping of water, so does care
   mar our peace. That we shall some day fall by the hand of Saul; that we
   shall be left to starve or pine away our days in a respectable
   workhouse; that we shall never be able to get through the difficulties
   of the coming days or weeks; household cares, family cares, business
   cares; cares about servants, children, money; crushing cares, and cares
   that buzz around the soul like a swarm of gnats on a summer's day, what
   rest can there be for a soul thus beset? But, when we once learn to
   live by faith, believing that our Father loves us, and will not forget
   or forsake us, but is pledged to supply all our needs; when we acquire
   the holy habit of talking to him about all, and handing over all to
   him, at the moment that the tiniest shadow is cast upon the soul; when
   we accept insult and annoyance and interruption, coming to us from
   whatever quarter, as being his permission, and, therefore, as part of
   his dear will for us, then we have learned the secret of the Gospel of
   Rest.


   We must follow our Shepherd's lead. " We which have believed do enter
   into rest" (ver. 3). The way is dark; the mountain track is often
   hidden from our sight by the heavy mists that hang over hill and fell;
   we can hardly discern a step in front. But our divine Guide knows. He
   who trod earth's pathways is going unseen at our side. The shield of
   his environing protection is all around; and his voice, in its clear,
   sweet accents, is whispering peace. Why should we fear? He who touches
   us, touches his bride, his purchased possession, the apple of his eye.
   We may, therefore, trust and not be afraid. Though the mountains should
   depart, or the hills be removed, yet will his loving kindness not
   depart from us, neither will the covenant of his peace be removed. And
   amid the storm, and darkness, and the onsets of our foes, we shall hear
   him soothing us with the sweet refrain of his own lullaby of rest: "My
   peace I give unto you; in the world ye shall have tribulation, but in
   me ye shall have peace."
     __________________________________________________________________

                        XI. THE WORD OF GOD AND ITS EDGE


    "The Word of God is quick and powerful, and sharper than any two-edged
    sword, piercing even to the dividing asunder of soul and spirit, and of the
    joints and marrow, and is a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the
    heart."   HEBREWS iv. 12.

   WE all have to do with God. "Him with whom we have to do." You cannot
   break the connection. You must do with him as a rebel, if not as a
   friend; on the ground of works, if not on the ground of grace; at the
   great white throne, if not in the fleeting days of time. You cannot do
   without God. You cannot do as you would if there were no God. You
   cannot avoid having to do with him; for even though you were to say
   there was no God, doing violence to the clearest instincts of your
   being, yet still you would breathe his air, eat his provender, occupy
   his world, and stand at last before his bar.

   And, if you will pardon the materialism of the reference, I will follow
   the suggestion of my text, and say that the God with whom we have to do
   has eyes. "The eyes of him with whom we have to do." "Thou art a God
   that seest" was the startled exclamation of an Egyptian slave girl
   whose childhood had been spent amid the vast statues of gods who had
   eyes with far-away stony stare, but saw not. And she was right. "The
   Lord looketh from heaven; his eyes behold, his eyelids try, the
   children of men."


   Those eyes miss no one. " There is not any creature not manifest in his
   sight." The truest goodness is least obtrusive of itself. It steals
   unnoticed through the world, filling up its days with deeds and words
   of gentle kindness, which are known only to heaven; and herein it finds
   its sufficient reward. It prays behind closed doors; it exercises a
   vigorous self-denial in secret; it does its work of mercy by stealth.
   Thus the great blatant world of men, with its trumpets and heralds and
   newspaper notices, knows little of it, and cannot find the nooks where
   God's wild flowers bloom in inaccessible heights, for his eye alone.
   But the Father seeth in secret. The eyes of the Lord are upon the
   righteous. His eyes run to and fro throughout the whole earth, to show
   himself strong on behalf of those whose heart is perfect toward him. Do
   you want guidance? Look up! those eyes wait to guide by a glance. Are
   you in sorrow? they will film with tears. Are you going astray? they
   shall beckon you back, and break your heart, as Peter's. You will come
   to find your heaven in the light radiated by the eye of God, when once
   you have learned to meet it, clad in the righteousness of Jesus.

   Unconverted reader, remember there is no screen from the eye of God.
   His eyes are as a flame of fire; and our strongest screens crackle up
   as thinnest gauze before the touch of that holy flame. Even rocks and
   hills are inadequate to hide from the face of him that sits upon the
   throne. "Whither shall I go from thy presence?" That question is
   unanswered, and unanswerable. It has stood upon the page of Scripture
   for three thousand years, and no one yet of all the myriads that have
   read it has been able to devise a reply. Heaven says, Not here. Hell
   says, Not here. It is not among angels, or the lost, or in the vast
   silent spaces of eternity. There is no creature anywhere not manifest
   to his sight. He who made vultures, able from immense heights to
   discern the least morsel on the desert waste, has eyes as good as they.
   And think how terrible are the eyes of God! When Egypt's chivalry had
   pursued Israel into the depths of the sea, they suddenly turned to
   flee. Why? Not because of thunder or lightning or voice; but because of
   a look. "The Lord looked out of the cloud, and troubled the Egyptians."
   Ah, sinner, how terrible will it be for thee to abide under the frown
   of God! "With the froward he will show himself froward."


   Those eyes miss nothing. "All things are naked and opened unto the eyes
   of him with whom we have to do." It is said of the Lord Jesus, on one
   occasion, that he entered into Jerusalem, and into the Temple; and when
   he had looked round about on all things, he went out. It was his last,
   long, farewell look. But note its comprehensiveness. Nothing escaped
   it. We look only on parts of things, and often look without seeing. But
   the Lord seeth not as man seeth; for man looketh on the outward
   appearance, but the Lord looketh on the heart. "Naked and opened." This
   is a sacrificial phrase, indicating the priestly act of throwing the
   victim on its back before him, so that it lay, exposed to his gaze,
   helpless to recover itself, ready for the knife. Ah, how eagerly we try
   to hide and cloak our sin! We dare not pen a truthful diary; we dread
   the illness which would unlock our tongues in wholesale chatterings; we
   shrink from the loving gaze of our dearest. We deceive man, and
   sometimes ourselves; but not our great High-Priest. He sees all, that
   secret sin; that lurking enmity; that closed chamber; that hidden
   burglar; that masked assassin; that stowaway; that declension of heart;
   that little rift within the lute; that speck of decay in the luscious
   fruit. And thus it is that men are kept out of the Canaan of God's
   rest, because he sees the evil heart of unbelief which departs from
   himself; and on account of which he swears now, as of old, "they shall
   not enter into my rest."


   Is it not a marvel that he who knows so much about us should love us
   still? It were indeed an inexplicable mystery, save for the truth of
   the words which so sweetly follow: "Seeing, then, that we have a great
   High-Priest." He has a priest's heart. His scrutiny is not one of
   morbid or idle curiosity, but of a surgeon, who intently examines the
   source of disease with pity and tenderness, and resolves to extirpate
   it as quickly and as painlessly as possible. Is it not frequently the
   case that fuller knowledge will beget love, which once seemed
   impossible? There are some people whose faces are so hard, and their
   eyes so cold, that we are instantly repelled; but if we knew all, how
   they have been pierced and wounded, and disappointed, we should begin
   to pity them, and pity is close kinsman to love. The Saviour has known
   us from all eternity, our downsittings and uprisings, our secret
   possibilities of evil, our unfathomed depths of waywardness and
   depravity; and yet he loves us, and will love us.

   "He knows all, But loves us better than he knows."


   And out of this love, which wells up perennially in the heart of Jesus,
   unfrozen by the winter of our neglect, Unstanched by the demands of our
   fickleness, there comes the stern discpline of which this passage
   proceeds to speak. In majestic phrase, the Apocalyptic seer tells how
   he beheld the Word of God ride forth on his snow-white steed, arrayed
   in crimson robes, whilst the many crowns of empire flashed upon his
   brow. Two features are specially noted in his appearance. His eyes were
   as a flame of fire; this characteristic looks back over the words we
   have considered. Out of his mouth goeth a sharp two-edged sword; this
   looks forward to the words which now invite us. We must never divorce
   these two. The eyes and the sword. Not the eyes only; for of what use
   would it be to see and not strike? Not the sword only; for to strike
   without seeing would give needless pain, this would be surgery
   blindfolded. But the searching tender vision, followed by the swift and
   decisive flash of the sword of amputation and deliverance. Oh, who will
   now submit to that stroke, wielded by the gentle hand that often
   carried healing and blessing, and was nailed to the cross; guided by
   unerring wisdom, and nerved by Almighty strength? Not death, but life
   and fruitfulness, freedom and benediction, are all awaiting that one
   blow of emancipation. That sword is the Word of God.


   THE WORD OF GOD IS LIVING. The words he speaks are spirit and life
   (John vi. 63). Wherever they fall, though into dull and lifeless soil,
   they begin to breed life, and produce results like themselves. They
   come into the heart of an abandoned woman; and straightway there follow
   compunction for the past, vows of amendment, and the hasty rush to
   become an evangelist to others. They come into the heart of a dying
   robber; and immediately he refrains from blasphemy, and rebukes his
   fellow, and announces the Messiahship, the blamelessness, the
   approaching glory, of the dying Saviour. They come into hearts worn out
   with the wild excesses of the great pagan ages, and ill-content, though
   enriched with the spoils of art and refinement and philosophy in the
   very zenith of their development; and lo! the moral waste begins to
   sprout with harvests of holiness, and to blossom with the roses of
   heaven. If only those words, spoken from the lips of Christ, be allowed
   to work in the conscience, there will be forthwith the stir of life.


   THE WORD OF GOD IS ACTIVE, i.e., energetic. Beneath its spell the blind
   see, the deaf hear, the paralyzed are nerved with new energy, the dead
   stir in their graves and come forth. There are few things more
   energetic than life. Put a seed into the fissure of a rock, and it will
   split it in twain from top to bottom. Though walls and rocks and ruins
   impede the course of the seedling, yet it will force its way to the
   light and air and rain. And when the Word of God enters the heart, it
   is not as a piece of furniture or lumber. It asserts itself and strives
   for mastery, and compels men to give up sin; to make up long standing
   feuds; to restore ill-gotten gains; to strive to enter into the strait
   gate. "Now ye are pruned," said our Lord, "through the word that I have
   spoken to you." The words of Christ are his winnowing-fan, with which
   he is wont to purge his flour, whether in the heart or the world. We
   are not, therefore, surprised that a leading tradesman in a thriving
   commercial center said that the visit of two evangelists, who did
   little else than reiterate the Word of God, was as good as a revival of
   trade, because it led so many people to pay up debts which were
   reckoned as lost.


   THE WORD OF GOD IS SHARP. Its sharpness is threefold. It is sharp to
   pierce. On the day of Pentecost, as Peter wielded the sword of the
   Spirit, it pierced three thousand to the heart; and they fell wounded
   to the death before him, crying, "What shall we do?" Often since have
   strong men been smitten to the dust under the effect of that same
   sword, skillfully used. And this is the kind of preaching we need. Men
   are urged to accept of the gift of God, and many seem to comply with
   the invitation; but in the process of time they fall away. Is not the
   cause in this, that they have never been wounded to the death of their
   self-esteem, their heart has never been pierced to the letting of the
   blood of their own life, they have never been brought into the dust of
   death? Oh for Boanerges! able to pierce the armor of excuses of vain
   hopes, behind which men shield themselves, that many may cry with Ahab,
   pierced between the joints of the harness "Turn thine hand, and carry
   me out of the battle, for I am wounded!"


   It is sharp to divide. With his sharp knife the priest was accustomed
   to dissect the joints of the animal, and to open to view even the
   marrow of the bones. Every hair was searched, every limb examined; and
   thus the sacred gift was passed, and permitted to be offered in
   worship. And God's scrutiny is not satisfied with the external
   appearance and profession. It goes far deeper. It enters into those
   mysterious regions of the nature where soul and spirit, purpose,
   intention, motive, and impulse, hold their secret court, and carry on
   the hidden machinery of human life. Who can tread the mysterious
   confines where soul and spirit touch? What is the line of demarkation?
   Where does the one end, and the other begin? We cannot tell; but that
   mystic Word of God could cut the one from the other, as easily as the
   selvage is divided from the cloth. It is at home in distinctions which
   are too fine drawn and minute for human apprehension. It assumes an
   office like that which Jesus refused when he said, "Who made me a judge
   and divider over you?"


   It is sharp to criticise and judge. "Quick to discern the thoughts and
   intents of the heart." Christ is eager about these. Because what a man
   thinks and intends in his heart, that he will be sooner or later in
   life. We must expect to have our most secret thoughts, relations, and
   purposes questioned, criticised, and measured by the Word of God. No
   court of inquiry was ever presided over by a more exact inquisitor than
   this. The corpses of the dead past are exhumed; the old lumber-rooms
   with their padlocked boxes are explored; the accounts of bygone years
   are audited and taxed. God is critic of all the secrets of the heart.
   As each thought or intention passes to and fro, he searches it. He is
   constantly weighing in the balance our thoughts and aims, though they
   be light as air.

   On one occasion, when Saul had spared the spoils of a doomed city,
   together with its monarch, the latter came to Samuel, not as a
   criminal, but delicately, as a pampered friend. And Samuel said, "As
   thy sword has made women childless, so shall thy mother be childless
   among women. And Samuel hewed Agag in pieces before the Lord." Thus it
   is that we have spared too many of our sins, at the risk of our
   irreparable rejection from the throne of true manhood and
   righteousness. How much better to let Christ do his work of amputation
   and excision! If we do not know ourselves, let us ask him to search us.
   If we cannot cut off the offending member, let us look to him to rid us
   of it.

   Do not fear him; close after these terrible words, as the peal of bells
   after the crash of the storm on the organ at Freiburg, we are told that
   "he was tempted in all points like as we are," and that " we have not a
   High~Priest who cannot be touched with the feeling of our infirmities."
   "Does she sing well?" asked the trainer of a new operatic singer.
   "Splendidly," was the reply; "but if I had to bring her out, I would
   first break her heart." He meant that one who had not been broken by
   sorrow could not touch the deepest chords of human life. Ah! there is
   no need for this with our Lord Jesus; reproach broke his heart. He
   understands broken hearts, and is able to soothe and save all who come
   unto God by him.
     __________________________________________________________________

                          XII. TIMELY AND NEEDED HELP



    "Let us therefore come boldly unto the throne of grace, that we may obtain
    mercy, and find grace to help in time of need."-HEBREWS iv. 16.



   NEED! Time of need! Every hour we live is a time of need; and we are
   safest and happiest when we feel our needs most keenly. If you say that
   you are rich, and increased in goods, and have need of nothing, you are
   in the greatest destitution; but when you know yourself to be wretched,
   miserable, poor, blind, and naked, then the traveling merchantman is
   already standing on your doorstep, knocking (Rev. iii. 17-20). It is
   when the supply runs short, that Cana's King makes the vessels brim
   with wine.

   Have you been convinced of your need? If not, it is quite likely that
   you will live and die without a glimpse of the rich provision which God
   has made to meet it. Of what use is it to talk of rich provisions and
   sumptuous viands to those already satiated? But when the soul, by the
   straits of its necessity, has been brought to the verge of desperation,
   when we cry with the lepers of old, "If we say we will enter into the
   city, then the famine is in the city, and we shall die there; and if we
   sit still here, we die also", then we are on the verge of discovering
   the rich provision that awaits us (2 Kings vii. 8): all spiritual
   blessings in the heavenlies (Eph. i. 3); and all things that pertain to
   life and godliness (2 Pet. i. 3). There are two causes, therefore, why
   many Christians are living such impoverished lives: they have never
   realized their own infinite need; and they have never availed
   themselves of those infinite resources which hang within their reach,
   like fruit from the stooping boughs of an orchard in autumn.

   Our needs are twofold. We need mercy. This is our fundamental need.
   Mercy when we are at our worst, yes, and at our best; mercy when the
   pruning knife cuts deep, yes, and when we are covered with foliage,
   flower, or fruit; mercy when we are broken and sore vexed, yes, and
   when we stand on the paved sapphire work upon the mountain summit to
   talk with God. The greatest saint among us can no more exist without
   the mercy of God than the ephemeral insects of a summer's noon can live
   without the sun.


   We need grace to help. Help to walk through the valleys; and to walk on
   the high places, where the chamois can hardly stand. Help to suffer, to
   be still, to wait, to overcome, to make green one tiny spot of garden
   ground in God's great tillage. Help to live and to die.


   Each Of these is met at the throne. Come, let us go to it. It is not
   the great white throne of judgment, but the rainbow-girt throne of
   grace. "No," you cry, "never! I am a man of unclean lips and heart; I
   dare not face him before whom angels veil their faces; the fire of his
   awful purity will leap out on me, shriveling and consuming. I
   exceedingly fear and quake; or, if I muster courage enough to go once,
   I shall never be able to go as often as I need, or to ask for the
   common and trivial gifts required in daily living." Hush, soul! thou
   mayest approach as often and as boldly as thou wilt; for we have a
   great High Priest, who is passed through the heavens, and not one who
   cannot be touched with the feeling of our infirmities.


   A PRIEST.-Deep down in the heart of men there is a strong and
   instinctive demand for a priest, to be daysman and mediator, to lay one
   hand on man and the other on God, and to go between them both. Wit and
   sarcasm may launch their epithets on this primordial craving; but they
   might as well try to extinguish by the same methods the craving of the
   body for food, of the understanding for truth, of the heart for love.
   And no religion is destined to meet the deepest yearnings of the race,
   which does not have glowing at the heart the provision of a priest to
   stand before the throne of grace; as, of old, the priest stood before
   the mercy seat, which was its literal prefigurement under the
   dispensation of the Levitical law.


   A curious proof of this human craving for a priest is given in the book
   of Judges. On the ridge of the hills of Ephraim stood the ancestral
   home of a wealthy family, containing within its precincts a private
   sanctuary, where though there were teraphim, ephod, and vestments, yet
   there was no priest. Nothing, however, could compensate for that fatal
   lack. And Micah said to a Levite, who happened to pass by: "Dwell with
   me, and be unto me a father and a priest." And when he, nothing loath,
   consented, Micah comforted himself by saying, "Now know I that the Lord
   will do me good, seeing I have a Levite to my priest." But the same
   feelings that actuated him were shared by a portion of the tribe of
   Dan, on their way to colonize a remote part of the country. They, too,
   must have a priest; and so, while six hundred armed warriors stood
   around the gate, five men stole through the court, broke into the
   little chapel, carried off its images and other apparatus for worship,
   bribed the priest, by the offer of higher wage, to accompany them; and,
   long before the theft was discovered, the whole party had resumed their
   journey, and were far upon their way.


   All families of mankind have followed the same general programme.
   Wherever they have built homes for themselves, they have erected the
   wigwam, the pagoda, the parthenon, the obelisk guarded temple, the
   Gothic minster fashioned after the model of the forest glade, a leafy
   oracle petrified to stone; and they have chosen one of themselves, set
   apart from ordinary work, and sanctified by special rites to minister,
   treading its floors, and pleading at its altars, interceding for them
   in times of famine, pestilence, and plague; blessing their arms as they
   went forth to fight, and receiving their spoils of victory; making
   propitiation for sin, and assuring of forgiveness.


   This craving was most carefully met in that venerable religion in which
   these Hebrew Christians had been reared. The sons of Aaron were the
   priests of Israel. They wore a special dress, ate special food, and
   lived in special towns; whilst every care was taken to accentuate their
   separation to transact the spiritual concerns of the nation. For
   sixteen centuries this system had prevailed, relying around it the
   deepest and most sacred emotions; and, like ivy, entwining itself
   around the oak of the national life. And, as we have seen, it was no
   small privation for these new converts to wrench themselves from such a
   system, and accept a religion in which there was no visible temple,
   ceremonial, or priest.

   But here we learn that Jesus Christ is the perfect answer to these
   instinctive cravings which blindly pointed to him in all ages of human
   and Hebrew history. This is the aim of these opening chapters, and by
   two lines of proof we have been led to the same conclusion. Before us
   stand two mighty columns: the one is in chapters i. and ii. of this
   Epistle; the other is in iii. and iv. They have a common base from
   which they spring, the Sonship of Christ. The first column is called,
   Christ superior to Angels; and this is the scroll around its capital,
   that Jesus, as man's representative, has entered into the glories
   promised in the eighth Psalm. The second column is called, Christ
   superior to Moses; with this scroll around its capital, that Jesus, as
   our representative, has entered into the Rest of God. And each of them
   helps to support a common chapiter, the Priesthood of Christ. The first
   two chapters end with a description of the merciful and faithful High
   Priest, who makes reconciliation for the sins of the people (ii. I 7, I
   8). The next two chapters close with the words on which we are dwelling
   now, concerning the Great High-Priest (iv. 14). In the mouth of two
   witnesses every word is established. We need no human priests. Their
   work is done, their office is superseded, their functions are at an
   end. To arrogate any priestly functions of sacrifice, of absolution, or
   of imparting sacramental grace, is to intrude sacrilegiously on ground
   which is sacred to the Son of God; and, however royal such are in mien
   or intellect, they must be withstood, as Azariah withstood
   Uzziah-saying, "It appertaineth not unto thee to burn incense unto the
   Lord, but to Jesus, our Great High-Priest; go out of his office, for
   thou hast trespassed; neither shall it be for thine honor from the Lord
   God."

   A HIGH PRIEST. A Priest of priests, able to sacrifice, not only for the
   people, but for all the priests of his house; and alone responsible for
   the rites of the great day of Atonement, when every other priest was
   banished from the precincts of the Temple, while the high priest, clad
   in simple white, made an atonement for the sins of himself, his family,
   and his people.

   We have been made priests unto God; but our priestly work consists in
   the offering of the incense of prayer and praise, and the gifts of
   surrendered lives. We have nothing to do with atonement for sin; which
   is urgently required by us, not only for our sins as ordinary members
   of the congregation, but for those which, consciously or unconsciously,
   we commit in the exercise of our priestly office. Our penitential tears
   need to be sprinkled by the blood of Jesus; our holiest hours need to
   be accepted through his merits; our noblest service would condemn us,
   save for his atoning sacrifice.


   A GREAT HIGH PRIEST. All other high priests were inferior to him. He is
   as much superior to the high priests as any one of them was to the
   priests of his time. But this does not exhaust his greatness. He does
   not belong to their line at all, but to an older, more venerable, and
   grander one; of which that mysterious personage was the founder, to
   whom Abraham, the father of Israel, gave tithes and homage. "Declared
   of God a High Priest after the order of Melchisedek." Nay, further, his
   greatness is that of the Son of God, the fellow and equal of Deity. He
   is as great as his infinite nature and the divine appointment and his
   ideal of ministry could make him.


   PASSED THROUGH THE HEAVENS. Between the holy place where the priest
   daily performed the service of the sanctuary, and the inner shrine
   forbidden to all save to the high priest once each year, there hung a
   veil of blue. And of what was that blue veil the emblem, save of those
   heavenly curtains, the work of God's fingers, which hang between our
   mortal vision and the marvels of his presence chamber? Once a year the
   high priest carried the blood of propitiation through the blue veil of
   separation, and sprinkled it upon the mercy seat; and in this
   significant and solemn act he typified the entrance of our blessed Lord
   into the immediate presence of God, bearing the marks and emblems of
   his atoning death, and taking up his position there as our Mediator and
   Intercessor, in whom we are represented, and for whose sake we are
   accepted and beloved.


   TOUCHED WITH THE FEELING OF OUR INFIRMITIES. He hates the sin, but
   loves the sinner. His hatred to the one is measured by his cross; his
   love to the other is infinite as his nature. And his love is not a
   dreamy ecstasy; but practical, because all the machinery of temptation
   was brought into Operation against him. It would take too long to
   enumerate the points at which the great adversary of souls assails us;
   but there is not a sense, a faculty, a power, which may not be the
   avenue of his attack. Through eye-gate, ear-gate, and thought-gate his
   squadrons seek to pour. And, marvelous though it be, yet our High
   Priest was tempted in all these points, in body, soul, and spirit;
   though there was no faltering in his holy resolution, no vacillation or
   shadow of turning, no desire to yield. "The prince of this world
   cometh, and hath nothing in me."

   All his experiences are vividly present to him still; and whenever we
   go to him, pleading for mercy or help, he instantly knows just how much
   and where we need it, and immediately his intercessions obtain for us,
   and his hands bestow, the exact form of either we may require. "He is
   touched." That sympathetic heart is the metropolis to which each
   afferent nerve carries an immediate thrill from the meanest and
   remotest members of his body, bringing at once in return the very help
   and grace which are required. Oh to live in touch with Christ! always
   touching him, as of old the women touched his garment's hem; and
   receiving responses, quick as the lightning flash, and full of the
   healing, saving virtue of God (Mark .28).
     __________________________________________________________________

                                XIII GETHSEMANE



    "Who in the days of his flesh, when he had offered up prayers and
    supplications with strong crying and tears unto him that was able to save
    him from death, and was heard in that he feared: though he were a Son, yet
    learned he obedience by the things which he suffered." HEBREWS v.7, 8.



   Eight ancient olive trees still mark the site of Gethsemane; not
   improbably they witnessed that memorable and mysterious scene referred
   to here. And what a scene was that! It had stood alone in unique and
   unapproachable wonder, had it not been followed by fifteen hours of
   even greater mystery.

   The strongest words in Greek language are used to tell of the keen
   anguish through which the Saviour passed within those Garden walls. "He
   began to be sorrowful"; as if in all his past experiences he had never
   known what sorrow was! "lie was sore amazed"; as if his mind were
   almost dazed and overwhelmed. "He was very heavy," his spirit stooped
   beneath the weight of his sorrows, as afterward his body stooped
   beneath the weight of his cross; or the word may mean that he was so
   distracted with sorrow, as to be almost beside himself. And the Lord
   himself could not have found a stronger word than he used when he said,
   "My soul is exceeding sorrowful, even unto death."

   But the evangelist Luke gives us the most convincing proof of his
   anguish when he tells us that his sweat, like great beads of blood,
   fell upon the ground, touched by the slight frost, and in the cold
   night air. The finishing touch is given in these words, which tell of
   his "strong crying and tears."


   THE THINGS WHICH HE SUFFERED. What were they? They were not those of
   the Substitute. The tenor of Scripture goes to show that the work of
   substitution was really wrought out upon the cross. There the robe of
   our completed righteousness was woven from the top through-out. It was
   on the free that he bare our sins in his own body. It was by his blood
   that he brought us nigh to God. It was by the death of God's Son that
   we have been reconciled to God; and the repeated references of
   Scripture, and especially of this epistle, to sacrifice, indicate that
   in the act of dying, that was done which magnifies the law, and makes
   it honorable, and removes every obstacle that had otherwise prevented
   the love of God from following out its purposes of mercy.

   We shall never fully understand here how the Lord Jesus made
   reconciliation for the sins of the world, or how that which he bore
   could be an equivalent for the penalty due from a sinful race. We have
   no standard of comparison; we have no line long enough to let us down
   into the depths of that unexplored mystery; but we may thankfully
   accept it as a fact stated on the page of Scripture perpetually, that
   he did that which put away the curse, atoned for human guilt, and was
   more than equivalent to all those sufferings which a race of sinful men
   must otherwise have borne. The mystery defies our language, but it is
   apprehended by faith; and as she stands upon her highest pinnacles,
   love discerns the meaning of the death of Christ by a spiritual
   instinct, though as yet she has not perfectly learned the language in
   which to express her conceptions of the mysteries that circle around
   the cross. It may be that in thousands of unselfish actions, she is
   acquiring the terms in which some day she will be able to understand
   and explain all.

   But all that we need insist on here, and now, is that the sufferings of
   the Garden are not to be included in the act of Substitution, though,
   as we shall see, they were closely associated with it. Gethsemane was
   not the altar, but the way to it.

   Our Lord's suffering in Gethsemane could hardly arise from the fear of
   his approaching physical sufferings. Such a supposition seems wholly
   inconsistent with the heroic fortitude, the majestic silence, the calm
   ascendency over suffering with which he bore himself till he breathed
   out his spirit, and which drew from a hardened and worldly Roman
   expressions of respect.

   Besides, if the mere prospect of scourging and crucifixion drew from
   our Lord these strong crying and tears and bloody sweat, he surely
   would stand on a lower level than that to which multitudes of his
   followers attained through faith in him. Old men like Polycarp, tender
   maidens like Blandina, timid boys like Attalus, have contemplated
   beforehand with unruffled composure, and have endured with unshrinking
   fortitude, deaths far more awful, more prolonged, more agonizing.
   Degraded criminals have climbed the scaffold without a tremor or a sob;
   and surely the most exalted faith ought to bear itself as bravely as
   the most brutal indifference in the presence of the solemnities of
   death and eternity. It has been truly said that there is no passion in
   the mind of man, however weak, which cannot master the fear of death;
   and it is therefore impossible to suppose that the fear of physical
   suffering and disgrace could have so shaken our Saviour's spirit.

   But he anticipated the sufferings that he was to endure as the
   propitiation for sin. He knew that he was about to be brought into the
   closest association with the sin which was devastating human happiness
   and grieving the divine nature. He knew, since he had so identified
   himself with our fallen race, that, in a very deep and wonderful way,
   he was to be made sin and to bear our curse and shame, cast out by man,
   and apparently forsaken by God. He knew, as we shall never know, the
   exceeding sinfulness and horror of sin; and what it was to be the
   meeting-place where the iniquities of our race should converge, to
   become the scapegoat charged with guilt not his own, to bear away the
   sins of the world. All this was beyond measure terrible to one so holy
   and sensitive as he.

   He had long foreseen it. He was the Lamb slain from before the
   foundation of the world. Each time a lamb was slain by a
   conscience-stricken sinner, or a scapegoat let go into the wilderness,
   or a pigeon dipped into the flowing water encrimsoned by the blood of
   its mate, he had been reminded of what was to be. He knew before his
   incarnation where in the forest the seedling was growing to a sapling
   from the wood of which his cross would be made. He even nourished it
   with his rain and sun. Often during his public ministry he was
   evidently looking beyond the events that were transpiring around him to
   that supreme event, which he called his "hour." And as it came nearer,
   his human soul was overwhelmed at the prospect of having to sustain the
   weight of a world's sin. His human nature did not shrink from death as
   death; but from the death which he was to die as the propitiation for
   our sins, and not for ours only, but for those of the whole world.

   Six months before his death he had set his face to go to Jerusalem,
   with such a look of anguish upon it as to fill the hearts of his
   disciples with consternation. When the questions of the Greeks reminded
   him that he must shortly fall into the ground and die, his soul became
   so troubled that he cried, "Father, save me from this hour !" And now,
   with strong cryings and tears, he made supplication to his Father, as
   king that, if it were possible, the cup might pass from him. In this
   his human soul spoke. As to his divinely wrought purpose of redemption,
   there was no vacillation or hesitation. But, as man, he asked whether
   there might not be another way of accomplishing the redemption on which
   he had set his heart.

   But there was no other way. The Father's will, which he had come down
   from heaven to do, pointed along the rugged, flinty road that climbed
   Calvary, and passed over it, and down to the grave. And at once he
   accepted his destiny, and with the words "If this cup may not pass from
   me except I drink it, thy will be done," he stepped forth on the flints
   that were to cut those blessed feet, drawing from them streams of
   blood.


   HIS STRONG CRYING AND TEARS. Our Lord betook himself to that resource
   which is within the reach of all, and which is peculiarly precious to
   those who are suffering and tempted, he prayed. His heart was
   overwhelmed within him; and he poured out all his anguish into his
   Father's ears, with strong cryings and tears. Let us note the
   characteristics of that prayer, that we too may be able to pass through
   our dark hours, when they come.

   It was secret prayer. Leaving the majority of his disciples at the
   Garden gate, he took with him the three who had stood beside Jairus's
   dead child, and had beheld the radiance that steeped him in his
   transfiguration. They alone might see him tread the winepress: but even
   they were left at a stone's cast, whilst he went forward alone into the
   deeper shadow. We are told that they became overpowered with sleep; so
   that no mortal ear heard the whole burden of that marvelous prayer,
   some fitful snatches of which are reserved in the Gospels.

   It was humble prayer. The evangelist Luke says that he knelt. Another
   says that he fell on his face. Being formed in fashion as a man, he
   humbled himself and became obedient to death, even the death of the
   cross. And it may be that even then he began to recite that marvelous
   Psalm, which was so much on his lips during those last hours, saying,
   "I am a worm, and no man; a reproach of men and despised of the
   people."


   It was filial prayer. Matthew describes our Lord as saying, " my
   Father"; and Mark tells us that he used the endearing term which was
   often spoken by the prattling lips of little Jewish children, Abba. For
   the most part, he probably spoke Greek; but Aramaic was the language of
   his childhood, the language of the dear home in Nazareth. In the hour
   of mortal agony, the mind ever reverts to the associations of its first
   awakening. The Saviour, therefore, appearing to feel that the more
   stately Greek did not sufficiently express the deep yearnings of his
   heart, substituted for it the more tender language of earlier years.
   Not "Father" only, but "Abba, Father!"


   It was earnest prayer. "He prayed more earnestly," and one proof of
   this appears in his repetition of the same words. It was as if his
   nature were too oppressed to be able to express itself in a variety of
   phrase; such as might indicate a certain leisure and liberty of
   thought. One strong current of anguish running at its highest could
   only strike one monotone of grief, like the note of the storm or the
   flood. Back, and back again, came the words, cup . .pass . . . will . .
   . Father. And the sweat of blood, pressed from his forehead, as the red
   juice of the grape beneath the heavy foot of the peasant, witnessed to
   the intensity of his soul.

   It was submissive prayer. Matthew and Mark quote this sentence,
   "Nevertheless not what I will, but what thou wilt." Luke quotes this,
   "Father, if thou be willing, remove this cup from me; nevertheless, not
   my will, but thine be done."

   Jesus was the Father's Fellow's co-equal in his divine nature; but for
   the purpose of redemption it was needful that he should temporarily
   divest himself of the use of the attributes of his deity, and live a
   truly human life. As man, he carefully marked each symptom of his
   Father's will, from the day when it prompted him to linger behind his
   parents in the temple; and he always instantly fulfilled his behests.
   "I came down from heaven," he said, "not to do mine own will, but the
   will of him that sent me. "This was the yoke he bore, and in taking it,
   he found rest unto his soul. Whatever was the danger or difficulty into
   which such obedience might carry him, he ever followed the beacon-cloud
   of the divine will; sure that the manna of daily strength would fall,
   and that the deep sweet waters of peace would follow where it led the
   way. That way now seemed to lead through the heart of a fiery furnace.
   There was no alternative than to follow; and he elected to do so, nay,
   was glad, even then, with a joy that the cold waters of death could not
   extinguish. At the same time, he learnt what obedience meant, and gave
   an example of it, that shone out with unequaled majesty, purity, and
   beauty, unparalleled in the annals of the universe. As man, our Lord
   then learnt how much was meant by that word obedience. "He learned
   obedience." And now he asks that we should obey him, as he obeyed God.
   "Unto them that obey him."

   Sometimes the path of the Christian's obedience becomes very difficult.
   It climbs upward; the gradient is continually steeper; the foothold
   ever more difficult; and, as the evening comes, the nimble climber of
   the morning creeps slowly forward on hands and knees. The day is never
   greater than the strength; but as the strength grows by use, the
   demands upon it are greater, and the hours longer. At last a moment may
   come, when we are called for God's sake to leave some dear circle; to
   risk the loss of name and fame; to relinquish the cherished ambition of
   a life; to incur obloquy, suffering, and death; to drink the bitter
   cup; to enter the brooding cloud; to climb the smoking mount. Ah! then
   we too learn what obedience means; and have no resource but in strong
   cryings and tears.

   In such hours pour out thy heart in audible cnes. Plentifully mingle
   the name "Father" with thine entreatles. Fear not to repeat the same
   words. Look not to man, he cannot understand thee; but to him who is
   nearer to thee than thy dearest. So shalt thou get calmer and quieter,
   until thou rest in his will; as a child, worn out by a tempest of
   passion, sobs itself to sleep on its mother's breast.


   THE ANSWER. "He was heard for his godly fear." His holy reverence and
   devotion to his Father's will made it impossible that his prayers
   should be unanswered; although, as it so often happens, the answer came
   in another way than his fears had suggested. The cup was not taken
   away, but the answer came. It came in the mission of the angel that
   stood beside him. It came in the calm serenity with which he met the
   brutal crowd, that soon filled that quiet Garden with their coarse
   voices and trampling feet. It came in his triumph over death and the
   grave. It came in his being perfected as mediator, to become unto all
   them that obey him the Author of eternal salvation, and the High-Priest
   forever after the order of Melchizedek.

   Prayers prompted by love and in harmony with godly fear are never lost.
   We may ask for things which it would be unwise and unkind of God to
   grant; but in that case, his goodness shows itself rather in the
   refusal than the assent. And yet the prayer is heard and answered.
   Strength is instilled into the fainting heart. The faithful and
   merciful High-Priest does for us what the angel essayed to do for him;
   but how much better, since he has learnt so much of the art of comfort
   in the school of suffering! And out of it the way finally emerges into
   life, though we have left the right hand and foot in the grave behind
   us. We also discover that we have learnt the art of becoming channels
   of eternal salvation to those around us. Ever since Jesus suffered
   there, Gethsemane has been threaded by the King's highway that passes
   through it to the New Jerusalem. And in its precincts God has kept many
   of his children, to learn obedience by the things that they suffer, and
   to learn the divine art of comforting others as they themselves have
   been comforted by God.

   There are comparatively few, to whom Jesus does not say, at some time
   in their lives, "Come and watch with me." He takes us with him into the
   darksome shadows of the winepress, though there are recesses of shade,
   at a stone's cast, where he must go alone. Let us not misuse the
   precious hours in the heavy slumbers of insensibility. There are
   lessons to be learnt there which can be acquired nowhere else; but if
   we heed not his summons to watch with him, it may be that he will close
   the precious opportunity by bidding us sleep on and take our rest;
   because the allotted term has passed, and the hour of a new epoch has
   struck. If we fail to use for prayer and preparation the sacred hour,
   that comes laden with opportunities for either; if we sleep instead of
   watching with our Lord: what hope have we of being able to play a noble
   part when the flashing lights and the trampling feet announce the
   traitor's advent? Squander the moments of preparation, and you may have
   to rue their loss through all the coming years!
     __________________________________________________________________

                     XIV. IMPOSSIBLE TO RENEW TO REPENTANCE



    "It Is impossible for those who were once enlightened, and have tasted of
    the heavenly gift, and were made partakers of the Holy Ghost, and have
    tasted the good word of God, and the powers of the world to come, if they
    shall fall away, to renew them again unto repentance; seeing they crucify to
    themselves the Son of God afresh, and put him to an open shame."-HEBREWS vi.
    4-6.


    The sacred writer enumerates four fundamental principles: Repentance
   from dead works, which in the old dispensation was symbolized by divers
   baptisms, or washings; Faith toward God, typified by the laying of
   hands on the head of the victim-sacrifices; the Resurrection of the
   dead; and Eternal Judgment. And then he proposes not to lay them again,
   but to leave them. There is no thought, however, of deserting them. The
   great principles on which God saves the soul are identical in every
   age, and indispensable.

   We can only leave them as the child leaves the multiplication-table,
   when it is well learnt, but which lies at the root of all after-study;
   as the plant leaves the root, when it towers into the majestic shrub,
   which draws all its life from that low origin; and as the builder
   leaves the foundation, that he may carry up stone on stone, and leans
   on the foundation most heavily, when he has left it at the furthest
   distance below him. And we are taught the reason why these principles
   are not laid afresh. It would be useless to do so; it would serve no
   good purpose; it would leave in the same state as it found them those
   who had apostatized from the faith. And so we are led to one of those
   passages which sensitive spirits have turned to their own torment and
   anguish; just as men will distil the rankest poison from some of the
   sweetest flowers.


   HOW FAR WE MAY GO, AND YET FALL AWAY. These apostate disciples had been
   enlightened (ver. 4). They had been led to see their sin and danger,
   the temporary nature of Judaism, the dignity and glory of the Saviour.
   Other Hebrews might be ignorant, the folds of the veil hanging heavily
   over their sight; but it could never be so with them, since they had
   stood in the midst of the Gospel's meridian light, and had been
   enlightened.

   So may it be with us. Not like the savage, crouching before his fetish,
   or roaming over the wild; not like the follower of Confucius, Buddha,
   or Mahomet, groping in the twilight of nature or religious guess-work;
   not like myriads in our own land, whose hearts are as dark as the chaos
   into which God commanded the primeval beam to shine: we have been
   enlightened. We may know that we are sinners; we may have learnt from
   childhood the scheme of salvation; we may be familiar with the
   mysteries of the kingdom of heaven, into which angels desire to look:
   and yet we may fall away.

   These Hebrews, here referred to, had also tasted of the heavenly gift.
   What gift is that? I hear a voice, which we know well, speaking from
   the well of Sychar, and saying: "The water that I shall give shall be
   in thee, springing up into everlasting life." It is the life of God in
   the soul; it is Christ himself; and he is willing to be in us, like a
   perennial spring, unstanched in drought, unfrozen in frost, leaping up,
   in fresh and living beauty, like some warm spring that makes a paradise
   in the arctic circle.

   But some are content not to receive it, only to taste it. This is what
   these persons did. They sipped the sweetness of Christ. They had a
   passing superficial glimpse into his heart. Like Gideon's soldiers,
   they caught up a few drops in their hands from the river of God, and
   hastened on their way. So we may have some pleasure in thoughts of
   Christ. His sufferings touch; his beauty attracts; his history moves
   and inspires. But it is only a taste; and yet we may fall away. They
   had also been made partakers of the Holy Ghost. It is not said that
   they had been converted, regenerated, or filled by the Holy Ghost. The
   expression is a very peculiar one, and it is used because the sacred
   writer could not affirm any of these things of them, and yet Was
   anxious to show that they had been brought under his gracious
   influences. For instance, he had convinced them of sin, had striven
   with them, had plied them with warning and entreaty, with fear and
   hope. And they had so far yielded to him as to give up some of their
   sins and assume the outward guise of Christianity.


   Moreover, they had tasted the good Word of God, and the powers of the
   world to come. The first of these is obviously the Scriptures; and the
   second is the usual expression for the age in which we live, and which,
   with all its spiritual forces, was beginning to thrill the hearts of
   men when these words were penned. They liked a good sermon; the Bible
   was full of interest and charm; they had heard the prophets, and seen
   the apostles of the Pentecostal age. All these had been analyzed,
   weighed, and counted; and yet they were in peril of going back. Let us,
   therefore, beware!


   WHAT 15 IT TO FALL AWAY? It is something more than to fall. The real
   child of God may fall, as David or as Peter did; but there is a vast
   difference between falling and falling away. This latter experience can
   no more come to a real believer than a second flood of waters to the
   earth; but it will certainly find out the counterfeit and the sham.

   To fall away is to go back from the outward profession of Christianity,
   not temporarily, but finally; not as the result of some sudden sin, but
   because the first outward stimulus is exhausted, and there is no true
   life beating at the heart, to repair or reinvigorate the wasting
   devotion of the life. It is to resemble those wandering planets, which
   never shone with their own light, but only in the reflected light of
   some central sun; but which, having broken from its guiding leash, dash
   further and further into the blackness of darkness, without one spark
   of life or heat or light. It is to return as a dog to its vomit, and as
   a sow to her filth; because the reformation was only outward and
   temporary, and the dog or sow natures were never changed through the
   gracious work of the Holy Spirit. It is to be another Judas; to commit
   the sin against the Holy Ghost; to lose all earnestness of feeling, all
   desire for better things, all power of tender emotion; and to become
   utterly callous and dead, as the pavement on which we walk, or the
   rusty armor hanging on the old castle's walls.


   WHY IT IS IMPOSSIBLE TO RESTORE SUCH TO REPENTANCE. Notice, there is
   nothing said here of what God can do. The only question is as to the
   limits of human power, and the ordinary methods of influencing human
   wills. Also notice, we are not told that God could not save those who
   had fallen away; but that it is impossible to hope that a man who has
   passed through the experiences just described, and has nevertheless
   apostatized, can be reached or touched by any of those arguments or
   motives which are familiar weapons in the Gospel armory. If the
   mightiest arguments have been brought to bear on the conscience in
   vain; if after some slight response, which gave hopes of better things,
   it has relapsed into the stupor and insensibility of its former state,
   there remains nothing more to be done. There is nothing more potent
   than the wail of Calvary's broken heart, and the peal from Sinai's
   brow; and, if these have been tried in vain, no argument is left which
   can touch the conscience and arouse the heart. If these people had
   never been exposed to these appeals, there would have been some hope
   for them; but what hope can there be now, since, in having passed
   through them without permanent effect, they have become more hardened
   in the process than they were at first?

   Here is a man dragged from an ice-pond, and brought into the infirmary.
   Hot flannels are at once applied; the limbs are chafed; every means
   known to modern science for restoring life is employed. At first it
   seems as if these appliances will take effect, there are twitchings and
   convulsive movements; but, alas! they soon subside, and the surgeon
   gravely shakes his head. "Can you do nothing else?" "Nothing," he
   replies; "I have used every method I can devise; and if these fail, it
   is impossible to renew again to life."

   This passage has nothing to do with those who fear lest it condemns
   them. The presence of that anxiety, like the cry which betrayed the
   real mother in the days of Solomon, establishes beyond a doubt that you
   are not one that has fallen away beyond the possibility of renewal to
   repentance. If you are still touched by Gospel sermons, and are anxious
   to repent, and are in godly fear lest you should be a castaway, take
   heart! these are signs that this passage has no bearing on you. Why
   make yourself ill with a sick man's medicine? But if you are growing
   callous and insensible under the preaching of the Gospel, look into
   this passage and see your doom, unless you speedily arrest your steps.


   THE NATURAL ILLUSTRATION (ver. 7). Behold that field, well situated,
   prepared by careful culture and arduous toil: the good seed is
   scattered with lavish hand; the rain comes oft upon it; the sunshine
   kisses it; the seasons, as they pass, woo it to bear fruit. At first it
   would appear as if it were about to answer the expectations freely
   entertained. But see, the show of green which covers its face turns out
   to be a crop of briars and thorns. The owner for whom it was dressed
   comes to visit it. "What," cries he, "have you done all you could,
   this, and that, and the other?" "All," is the reply. Then the decision
   comes back, stern and sad, "It is useless to expend more time or care.
   Leave it to its fate. Let no fruit grow on it henceforth and forever."

   We may resemble that field; and yet, whilst there is a spark of
   devotion, a thrill of holy longing, a sigh after a better life, a
   yearning to be penitent and holy, there is still hope. The great
   Husbandman will not cast us off, so long as there is one redeeming
   feature in our condition. He will not break the bruised reed, nor
   quench the smoking flax. He will not fail, nor be discouraged, until he
   has made the desert into a garden, and the wilderness like the paradise
   of God.
     __________________________________________________________________

                         XV. THE ANCHORAGE OF THE SOUL.



    "Be followers of them who through faith and patience inherit the
    1)promises."

   HEBREWS vi. 12.



   THE PROMISES OF GOD! That is a key-word here. Inherit the promises
   (ver. 12); God made promise (ver. 13); he obtained the promise (ver.
   15); the heirs of promise (ver. 17). But perhaps the reiteration of the
   word does not awaken the interest or stir the heart of those who read
   it. We are so familiar with it; and, above all, we are not in
   circumstances which make the divine promises specially precious. The
   night of sorrow must obscure our sky, or we can never descry or
   appreciate the stars of promise that sparkle as gems in the firmament
   of Scripture. Those who are rich and increased in goods and have need
   of nothing cannot realize what the promises of God really mean.

   Possessed of a good income, guaranteeing the supply of every need, it
   is of little moment that God has pledged himself to provide all needful
   things for those who seek his kingdom first. Environed by troops of
   faithful friends, like so many successive lines of defense intrenched
   in the strong fortress of position and rank, there is less interest in
   the assurance that God will be the shield and buckler, the munition of
   rocks, the refuge from the storm for his saints. But when riches
   dwindle, and friends fail, and health declines, and difficulty,
   persecution, and trial threaten, then the soul betakes itself to the
   promises of God, and cons them over, studying them by the hour
   together, until it wakes up to find mines of treasure under pages which
   were blank as the moorlands beneath which coal-beds lie. It would be
   well for some of us if God would strip us of all those things in which
   we place such confidence; so that we might be compelled, perhaps for
   the first time in our lives, to seek in himself all that we are now
   wont to seek in his gifts. Oh, blessed loss, which should teach us our
   true wealth! Oh, happy deprivation, which should reveal our
   inexhaustible resources! Oh, loving discipline, which should break the
   cisterns that hold the brackish rain-water, and compel us to betake
   ourselves to the river of God, which proceeds from the throne of God
   and the Lamb!

   The lax and cursory manner in which we read pages begemmed with divine
   promise is largely due to the fact that we have never been put into
   such straits of sorrow and privation as to appreciate their value. One
   crushing trial would open up whole tracts of promise, which are now
   like the shut doors of a corridor in a royal palace. This is one reason
   why such a man as the Christian hero, Gordon, would spend hours over
   the Word of God, counting his Father's promises, holding them up as
   jewels in the sunshine, and rejoicing over them as great spoil; such
   men as he have had little else; they have had no other resources to
   fall back upon; they were driven to lay hold on them for very
   existence. And thus they fulfilled the enigma of the Apostle, "Having
   nothing, yet possessing all things." Those who are conscious of their
   poverty are they who become rich in faith, and heirs of the Kingdom.

   It was in precisely such a condition that the Hebrews here addressed
   were found. Their goods had been spoiled; they had endured a great
   fight of affliction; they had been made a gazing stock both by
   reproaches and afflictions; all on which men are accustomed to rely had
   been swept from them; and therefore the Holy Ghost, in these pages,
   directs their minds to the exceeding great and precious promises, in
   which God pledged himself to supply all their need; and to furnish from
   his own treasuries all, and more than all, that they had lost; not
   giving them these things in visible possession, but supplying them as
   they were needed, and in proportion to their faith. It was surely a
   good exchange, to lose all, and to recover all in God!


   GOD'S PROMISES ARE RELIABLE. A good man's word is his bond. And when
   such a one has given a promise our anxiety is allayed, our fears are
   quieted, we have strong consolation. But if, in addition to the
   promise, our friend has solemnly bound himself by an oath, calling
   heaven and earth to witness, and God to ratify, the asseveration is so
   momentous, the appeal so awful, the impression made on the mind so
   deep, that, whatever happens, the soul shelters itself in the
   immutability of his decision. It is doubly impossible for him to change
   or deceive. And this is the bond by which God has bound himself.

   When dealing with Abraham, God gave him repeated promises, first of the
   land, then of the seed, also of the blessing which should accrue to all
   generations of men through him. On one occasion he went through the
   form of covenant making in vogue among the surrounding peoples (Gen.
   xv. 17). But, on Mount Moriah, when the faithful patriarch had given
   the one stupendous evidence of faith and obedience, even unto death,
   God sware, and "because he could sware by no greater, he sware by
   himself." "By myself have I sworn, saith the Lord', (Gen. xxii. 16).

   And so it is with us. We who by faith are the spiritual seed of Abraham
   are blessed with him. "The promise is sure to all the seed; not to that
   only which is of the law, but to that also which is of the faith of
   Abraham, who is the father of us all" (Rom. iv. 16). All the promises
   of God are Yea and Amen. He is not a man that he should lie, nor the
   son of man that he should repent. He has well calculated his resources,
   before he has pledged himself; and when once he has done so it is
   impossible that he should fail. Fall flat on the divine promises; cling
   to them as a shipwrecked sailor to the floating spar; venture all on
   them; their fulfillment is guaranteed by covenant and oath; by blood
   and agony and death; by the light of the resurrection morning and the
   glory of the ascension mount; by the experience of myriads, who have
   never found them fail. If any man living has found one promise
   untrustworthy, let him publish it to the world; and the heavens will
   clothe themselves in sackcloth, and the sun and moon and stars will
   reel from their seats, the universe will rock, and a hollow wind moan
   through creation, bearing the tidings that God is mutable, that God can
   lie. And that voice will be the herald of universal dissolution. But it
   can never, never be. Heirs of promise! God's power Is eternal, his
   counsel is immutable. Heaven and earth may pass away, but his word
   shall never pass away. Ye therefore may have strong consolation; though
   ye lose all else, your heritage in the word and oath of God shall be
   unimpaired, world without end.


   GOD'S PROMISES, THUS ASSURED, MAKE AN ANCHORAGE FOR THE SOUL. Few
   things are more important for the mariner than to secure a good
   anchorage ground, where the soil will not give before the weight of the
   vessel and the strain of the storm. And with all those inclinations
   toward drifting which we have already considered, we urgently need to
   discover something permanent, unchanging, and satisfying, with which we
   may grapple by the anchor of our hope.

   The faculty of hope in a Christian is not different to that of a
   worldly man. It is the same faculty or quality in each. But there is a
   vast difference in the ground in which the anchor is fixed. In the case
   of the worldly man, it is the loose, light, unreliable soil of
   peradventures and speculations. In the case of the Christian, it is the
   unyielding, immutable promise and oath of the Eternal God. Therefore
   the former is often darkened with mis-giving and fear; while the latter
   cries, without a shadow of doubt, "I know whom I have believed, and am
   persuaded."


   Hope is something more than faith.  Faith accepts and credits
   testimony; hope anticipates. Faith says the fruit is good; hope picks
   and eats. Faith is bud; hope blossom. Faith presents the check; hope
   lays out the amount received. And such hope is the anchor of the soul.
   The comparison between hope and an anchor is familiar even to heathen
   writers, and it is easy to see how fit it is. It steadies the soul.
   Take an illustration from common life. A young man pledges his troth to
   a poor but noble girl. He is drafted for foreign service, and says
   farewell for long years. Meanwhile she is left to do as well as she can
   to maintain herself. Work is scanty, wages low, she is sometimes
   severely tempted and tried. But, amidst all, she is kept true to her
   absent lover, and to her nobler self, by the little strand of hope
   which links her to a happy and united future. So, when suffering or
   tempted or discouraged, our hope goes forward into the blessed future,
   depicted on the page of Scripture in glowing colors, and promised by
   the word of him who cannot lie; and the anticipation of it fills the
   soul with courage and patience, so as to endure the trials of time, in
   view of the certain blessedness of eternity.


   THE ANCHORAGE IN THE PROMISES HAS A THREEFOLD VALUE. It is sure, there
   is no fear of its failing; sure as the sure mercies of David; sure as
   the "everlasting covenant, ordered in all things and sure"; sure as God
   can make it. It is steadfast, its influence on the soul is to keep it
   steady: "Steadfast, unmovable, always abounding in the work of the
   Lord." It entereth into that within the veil. In the ancient world,
   when there was not water enough to float a ship into the harbor, a man
   would carry the anchor over the shoals, and fix it in the calm waters
   of the inner basin. In some such way as this, our Lord Jesus, when,
   like the high-priest in the Jewish Tabernacle, he passed through the
   blue veil that hides the celestial world from ours, took our hope with
   him, and holds it there. The Lord Jesus is our hope (1 Tim. i.1 ; 1
   John iii. 3). He is our forerunner. He has preceded us into his
   Father's presence, the first fruits of them that slept. He has gone
   thither as our Representative and Priest. When he majestically passed
   from the sight of his disciples, and was hidden from the eyes that
   longingly followed him, he entered within the veil. There he ever
   liveth; and because of it our hopes follow him, center in him, and
   connect us already with that bright home of which he is the radiant
   center.


   THERE ARE CERTAIN QUALITIES WHICH WE MUST LEARN TO EXERCISE. Faith and
   patience can alone inherit the promises (ver. 12). Abraham had
   patiently to endure before he received the promise (ver. 15). It is not
   easy to wait, or to let patience have her perfect work; and it is only
   possible to faith. There is no sublimer instance of long waiting than
   the history of Abraham, for which his faith nerved him, and to whom the
   promise was literally fulfilled. And so shall it be again. Patience
   weary, eager hearts. The time shall come when you shall lay hands on
   your capital; but be content in the meanwhile to enjoy the interest.
   The auspicious moment hastens when you shall know and taste all the
   blessedness of Paradise regained; but feast in the interim on the
   grapes of Eshcol, the pomegranates and other produce of the land. Claim
   the patience of Christ, of which the last of the apostles, who had need
   of it to sustain him in the long delay, so sweetly speaks (Rev. i. 9).
   "Be ye patient; stablish your hearts; for the coming of the Lord
   draweth nigh." "Let us run with patience the race set before us,
   looking unto Jesus." Thus shall we manifest "the patience of the
   saints"; and thus shall we, like those who have preceded us, finally
   inherit the promises.
     __________________________________________________________________

XVI THE PRIESTHOOD OF CHRIST




    "Thou art a Priest forever after the order of Melchizedek."-HEBREWS vii. 17.



   VARIOUS fancies have gathered around the person of Melchizedek,
   investing him with extraordinary qualities; but it is better far to
   think of him simply as the head or chieftain of a large family or clan,
   which gathered around the site to be known, in after years, as the holy
   city." Already its name was shadowed forth in the term "Salem," which
   designated the clustered rude huts or tents. Amid the almost universal
   lawlessness and depravity which swept over Palestine, righteousness and
   peace seem to have fled for shelter to this little community, where
   alone due reverence was given to the Most High God, possessor of heaven
   and earth.

   How this oasis had come into existence amid the surrounding moral
   desert we cannot tell; but it may have been due to the commanding
   personal influence of the king, who, according to patriarchal custom,
   as father of the family, was not only the ruler of the family life, but
   leader in the family devotions; and thus, while Melchizedek was king of
   Salem, he was also priest of the Most High. Moreover, it would appear
   that he bore a special commission, and was raised up for a specific
   purpose, as the ordained messenger between God and men; and as
   embodying a striking portraiture of the priesthood to be exercised for
   man by the Son of God.

   Note the significance of the words, made like unto the Son of God (ver.
   3). Christ's eternal Priesthood vias the archetypal reality, after the
   similitude of which that of Melchizedek was fashioned. It was as if the
   Father could not await the day of his Son's priestly entrance within
   the veil but must needs anticipate the marvels of his ministry by
   embodying its leading features in miniature. Let us now study some of
   them.


   CHRIST IS KING AS WELL AS PRIEST (ver. 1). History gives its unanimous
   judgment against the temporal and the spiritual power being vested in
   the same man. In Israel the two offices were kept rigorously separate;
   and when, on one occasion, a king passed the sacred barrier, and,
   snatching up a censer, strode into the inner court, he was at once
   followed by the remonstrances of the priestly band, whilst the white
   brand of leprosy wrote his doom upon his brow; "and he himself hastened
   to go out, because the Lord had smitten him." But the simple monarch of
   whom we write, living before gathering abuses forbade the union,
   combined in his person the royal scepter and the sacerdotal censer. And
   herein he foreshadowed the Christ.


   Jesus is King and Priest. He is King because he is a priest. He is
   highly exalted, demanding homage from every knee, and confession from
   every lip, because he became obedient to the death of the cross. He
   bases his royal claims, not on hereditary descent, though the blood of
   David flowed in his veins; not on conquest or superior force; not on
   the legislation that underpins the kingdom of heaven among men: but on
   this, that he redeemed us to God by his blood. He is the King of glory,
   because he is the Lamb of God which taketh away the sin of the world.
   The cross was the stepping-stone to his throne.


   And he cannot fulfill his office as Priest unless he be first
   recognized as King. Many fail to derive all the blessing offered to men
   through the Priesthood of Christ, because they are not willing to admit
   his claims as King. They do not reverence and obey him. They do not
   open the whole of the inner realm to his scepter. They endeavor to
   serve two masters; and to stand well with empires as different as light
   and darkness, heaven and hell, God and Satan. There must be
   consecration before there can be perfect faith; coronation before
   deliverance; the King before the Priest.


   The order is invariable first King of Righteousness, and after that
   also King of Peace (ver. 2). " Peace, give us peace!" is the
   importunate demand of men; peace at any price; by all means peace. But
   God, in the deep waters, lays the foundation of righteousness; "and the
   work of righteousness shall be peace, and the effect of righteousness
   quietness and assurance forever." It is of no use to heal the wound
   slightly, saying, "Peace, peace," when there is none. Infinitely better
   is it to probe to the bottom, and to build up from a sound and healthy
   foundation to the surface of the flesh. And the King of Peace will
   never enter your soul until you have first acknowledged him as King of
   Righteousness, submitting yourself to his righteous claims, and
   renouncing the righteousness which is of the law for that which is by
   faith.

   It is lamentable to find how few Christians, comparatively, are
   realizing the full meaning or power of Christianity. Joyless,
   fruitless, powerless, they are a stumbling block to the world, and a
   mockery to devils. And is not the reason here? They are not right. They
   are harboring traitors and aliens in their souls. They constantly
   condemn themselves in things that they allow. No doubt they excuse
   themselves, and invent special reasons to palliate their faults, so
   that what would be inadmissible with others is pardonable in them. What
   special pleading! What ingenious arguments! What gymnastic feats are
   theirs! But all in vain. Let any such who read these lines learn that
   it is peremptory to make Christ King, and King of Righteousness, before
   ever they can appreciate the peace which accrues from his Priesthood on
   our behalf.


   CHRIST'S PRIESTHOOD WAS NOT INHERITED (ver. 3). This also comes out
   clearly in the history of the priest-king of Salem. The Levitical
   priest had carefully to trace his connection with Aaron, and hence the
   elaborate genealogies of which some parts of the Bible are full. The
   priests, at the time of the return from Babylon, who could not prove
   their pedigree, were suspended until a priest arose with Urim and
   Thummim. But Melchizedek's priesthood had evidently nothing to do with
   his descent. He was independent of priestly pedigree. Of course it is
   not necessary to infer that he really had no human parentage and that
   he knew neither birth nor death. This is neither stated nor assumed.
   The argument is simply built on the omission of any reference to these
   events in ordinary human life; and aims to prove that, therefore, this
   old-world priesthood was quite independent of those conditions which
   were of prime importance in the Levitical dispensation. It was of an
   entirely different order from that which officiated in the Jewish
   Temple; and was, therefore, so capable to represent Christ's.

   As God, our Lord had no mother. As man, no father. He did not Spring
   from a family of priests; for it is evident that our Lord sprang out of
   Judah, of which tribe Moses spake nothing concerning the priesthood.
   What was allegorically true of Melchizedek was literally true of Jesus;
   who has had neither beginning of days nor end of life. His Priesthood,
   therefore, is utterly unique. He stands amongst men unrivaled. There
   have been none like him before nor since. His functions derived from
   none, shared by none, transmitted to none. Made what he was from all
   eternity by the foreknowledge and counsel of God.

   There never was a beginning to the priestliness of our Saviour's heart.
   There is no date in heaven's calendar for the uprising within him of
   mercy and pity, and of the intention to stand as the Advocate and
   Intercessor for our race. Before the mountains were brought forth, or
   the heavens and earth were made, there was already in his thoughts the
   germ of that marvelous drama which is slowly unfolding before the gaze
   of the universe. He was Priest, as well as the Lamb slain, from before
   the foundation of the world. Love is eternal. Sacrifice is one of the
   root principles of the being of God. Priesthood is part of the texture
   of the nature of the Second Person in the adorable Trinity. There need
   be no fear, therefore, that he will ever desert his office; or lay it
   aside for some other purpose; or cease to have compassion on the
   ignorant and erring, the tempted and fallen.


   CHRIST'S PRIESTHOOD IS CONTINUAL (ver. 3). The priests of Aaron's line
   were not suffered to continue by reason of death. But of him "it is
   witnessed that he liveth" (ver. 8). Hallelujah! a Priest has arisen
   "after the power of an endless life" (ver. 16). "The Lord sware and
   will not repent, Thou art a Priest forever" (ver. 21). "Because he
   abideth forever, his Priesthood is unchangeable" (ver. 24). "He ever
   liveth to make intercession" (ver. 25). "Consecrated forevermore" (ver.
   28). What explicit and abundant testimony! Our High-Priest shall never
   ascend Mount Hor to be stripped of his robes of office and die. The
   secrets confided to him need never be told again to his successor. The
   tender love which links him and us shall never be snapped or cut in
   death. No one else will ever be called in to take his place in the
   superintendence of our souls.


   This teaching rebukes two errors-(1) The error of those who teach
   sinlessness in the flesh. It is impossible to exaggerate the mischief
   which is being wrought just now by some who take advantage of the
   universal yearning for a higher experience, and are holding out to
   credulous souls the prospect of reaching a position in which they will
   no longer need to confess sin, no longer require perpetual cleansing in
   the blood of Christ, no longer be sensible of their sinnership.

   They who speak thus confound sin and sins. They apply the term
   infirmity to acts and dispositions which the Word of God calls by
   blacker, darker names. This teaching lowers a man's standard of sin to
   suit the erroneous doctrine which he has imbibed. It is contrary to the
   distinct teaching of Scripture that the flesh in the believer may yet
   lust for the upper hand. It is in Opposition to all deeper experience
   of the Christian life, which goes to show that, even when we know
   nothing against ourselves, yet are we not hereby justified; because
   there may be many evils of which, for want of clearer light, we are
   completely ignorant, but which stand out patent enough to the eye of
   him who judges us, the Lord who searches the heart and reins.


   The error of those who teach the perplexity if sacrificing priesthood.
   Of course all believers are priests, in the sense of offering the
   sacrifice of praise and prayer, the offerings of self-denying love. But
   there are many among us who persist in affirming that they are called,
   in addition, constantly to offer the perpetual sacrifice of Calvary, in
   the elements of the Lord's Supper. Amid the ceremonial of the mass, as
   offered in too many of our English churches by professed Protestants,
   claiming to be priests, it is hard to see any trace of the simple
   institution of the Lord's Supper. And it makes one tingle with
   righteous indignation to see the way in which these blind leaders of
   the blind are deceiving the multitudes to the ruin of their soul
   Sometimes one longs for the withering sarcasm of an Erasmus, the sturdy
   common sense of a Latimer, the vehemence of a Knox, to show up the
   unscriptural pretensions of these men, tricked out in the gaudy finery
   of pagan costumes, and going through mummeries which would provoke to
   laughter, if the whole system were not so inexpressibly sad. "How long,
   Lord, how long!"

   But, after all, the true way to meet these errors is to insist upon our
   Lord's continual and unchangeable intercession and priesthood. Surely
   if he lives and continues his work, it is a piece of impertinent and
   arrogant folly to intrude upon his functions. We must revert to the
   earlier methods of Scriptural interpretation and exposition before ever
   we shall be able to forearm our young people against the monstrous
   errors of our times, or win back those who have been so disastrously
   led astray.
     __________________________________________________________________

                   XVII. THE SUPERLATIVE GREATNESS OF CHRIST.



    "Able to save them to the uttermost that come unto God by him, seeing he
    ever liveth to make intercession for them."-HEBREWS vii. 25.



   THIS chapter needs to be read under a deep sense of sin, to be properly
   understood and appreciated. It is the conscious sinner who needs the
   Priest. We can do very well with Christ as Teacher, Philanthropist,
   Ideal Man, until we see ourselves as we are in the sight of God; but
   when that vision is given to us, our hearts cry out with an exceeding
   great and bitter cry for the Priest, who can stand for us with God, and
   for God with us.

   There is urgent need for a fresh consciousness and conviction of our
   sinnership, both amongst unbelievers and professing Christians. Light
   views of sin give slight views of the sacrifice of Calvary, of the need
   for propitiation, and of the dread future penalty on willful
   wrong-doing. Did men really understand what sin is, they would not talk
   so glibly of their complete deliverance from it; confounding as they do
   the few sins of which they are cognizant with the mass of evil that
   lies still in their nature, like the mud at the bottom of a pellucid
   lake, only needing to be stirred to show itself. And if men really felt
   their sins, there would be a unanimous rush to the precious Blood and
   to the only priest for absolution and pardon.

   It is hardly likely that these poor words can affect the set of the
   current; yet, if it were possible to reach the great mass of the
   preachers of the present day, one would urge them to lay aside their
   literary essays, their arguments with evolutionists, their poetry and
   rhetoric, and to bring the trenchant teaching of God's Word to bear on
   human consciences and lives. Let them attack sin as sin. Let them deal
   with the sins of their congregations specifically, as the Boer marks
   his man for his bullet. Let them show what God thinks of the sins which
   we treat so lightly. And as soon as we get back to the old fashioned
   style of preaching, we shall see a revival of old fashioned
   conversions. It is of no use complaining, when we are ourselves to
   blame. Human nature is unaltered. The law of God is unchanged. The cry
   of the conscience is stifled, not silenced. Again shall we hear of
   multitudes pierced to the heart, and crying for mercy. And then the
   Priesthood of Christ, as described here, will acquire a new
   preciousness.

   HE IS A GREAT HIGH-PRIEST (ver. 4). How great, appears from the episode
   here referred to. Flushed with victory, bringing with him all the
   captives and goods which Chedorlaomer had swept away from Sodom, the
   patriarch Abraham had nearly reached his own camp. But as he drew nigh
   to Salem, where peace and righteousness dwelt beneath the rule of
   Melchizedek, he was met by this saintly figure, bearing in his hands
   the sacred emblems of bread and wine: meet type of him who often
   accosts us on the road of life, when weary with conflict, or when
   entering into subtle temptation, and refreshes us with the bread of his
   flesh, and the wine of his blood. And Abraham knelt to receive a
   blessing at his hand, and gave him tithes of all (Gen. xiv. 19, 20).

   Does not this prove the greatness of Melchizedek? The Levites and
   priests were indeed permitted to take tithes of their brethren; but
   this glorious priest feels no compunction to take tithes of one of
   another race. He rose above the narrow boundaries of race or blood, and
   was prepared to do his office with equal care for an alien as for his
   own. This unsectarian, cosmopolitan, large-hearted view of his
   obligations to man as man is a true mark of greatness. And in this he
   manifests a trait of the greatness of our dear Lord, whose Priesthood
   overleaps the limits which might be set by nationality or birth, and
   deals with man as man; with thee, reader, and me, if only we will come
   to him.

   Besides this, since the greater must bless the less, it is obvious that
   Abraham, great and good though he was, the friend of God, and the
   recipient of the promises, must have felt that Melchizedek was his
   superior, or he would never have treated him with such marked respect
   (Heb. vii. 6, 7). Surely, then, this holy man was a fit representative
   of our blessed Lord, to whom all the noblest in heaven and earth bow
   the knee; confessing that he is Lord; and consecrating to him, not a
   tenth only, but the whole of what they have and are.


   HE IS A GREATER HIGH-PRIEST THAN AARON OR HIS SONS. When Abraham knelt
   beneath that royal and priestly hand, he did not do so for himself
   alone, but as a representative man. First and head of his race, his
   descendants were identified with him in his deed. Levi, therefore, who
   receiveth tithes paid tithes in the patriarch; and, in doing so,
   forevermore took up the second place as inferior, and second best.

   "Stop," cries an objector; "if you affirm this inferiority of the
   Jewish priesthood to that of Melchizedek, you are making an assertion
   so far-reaching in its results as to need some further corroboration.
   Are you quite sure that this is as you say?"

   "Certainly," is the reply; "else, why should there be so emphatic an
   announcement made in David's Psalms of the coming of another Priest
   long after the Jewish priesthood had been in operation? 'If perfection
   were by the Levitical priesthood, what further need was there that
   another Priest should arise after the order of Melchizedek and not be
   called after the order of Aaron?'"

   "But stay," again interposes the objector; "if you are going to
   supersede the Levitical priesthood, you are of necessity making a
   change in all that ceremonial law which rested on the priesthood as an
   arch upon its keystone. Are you prepared to sweep away a system so
   venerable, so religiously maintained, the bulwark of religion, the
   institution of God?"

   "I am prepared for this," is the reply; "the previous commandments that
   relate to sacrifices and rites and ceremonies will have to go. They
   were temporary and imperfect. Types, not realities; molds, not the real
   vessels; shadows, not the substance. They made nothing perfect. Their
   office was to bring in a better hope; but, now that this is come, they
   may be annulled and laid aside."

   It seems a light thing to us; but it was of the gravest import to those
   who were here addressed. To them the Jewish priesthood and ceremonial
   were more than a state religion; they were religion itself. Tradition,
   custom, ancestral veneration, personal admiration, and adherence, all
   these ties had to be rudely snapped, as they were compelled to admit
   the cogency of this inspired and irresistible argument. If Jesus were
   indeed the Priest spoken of by David in Psalm cx.- and of this there
   seemed no doubt because it was so often applied to him (Matt. xxii. 44;
   Acts ii. 34)- then there could be no doubt that his Priesthood was
   better than Aaron's; and that the whole system of which the Levitical
   priesthood was the essential characteristic must pass away before that
   system which gathers around the person and work of the Lord Jesus.

   We must distinguish between the moral and the ceremonial law: the
   latter is transient, and was fulfilled in Jesus Christ; the former, of
   course, is of permanent and eternal force, written on the conscience of
   man and the government of the world.

   We can only stay for a moment here to show how absurd it is for either
   the Roman or the Anglican priest to base his pretensions on the example
   of the Old Testament. To do so is to confess their inferiority to the
   only Priesthood which is recognized in the present age. They are in
   evil case. Press them for their warrant of existence. If they quote
   Rev. i. 6, then we all have an equal right to wear their dress and
   fulfill their office. If they quote Leviticus, then are they hopelessly
   undone; for that priesthood has been superseded. The time is coming
   when all his people will have to disavow connection with those men
   whose pretensions are baseless, or worse, delusive; and an
   unwarrantable intrusion into the sacred offices of Christ. Alas I poor
   souls, deluded and fleeced by them!

   HE IS THE GREATEST OF HIGH-PRIESTS. Because he was made priest by the
   oath of God (vv. 20, 21). Ordinary priests had no such sanction to
   their appointment; but he by an oath. Jehovah sware, and will not
   change his mind. His appointment is final, absolute, immutable. It
   never can be superseded, as that of Aaron has been. Heaven and earth
   may pass away, but it will not pass away.


   Because he continueth ever. His is the Priesthood in which throbs the
   power of an endless life (ver. 16). It is witnessed of him, that he
   liveth. "Behold," said he, "I am alive forevermore." What a contrast to
   all human priests, on whose graves this epitaph may ever be inscribed,
   "Not suffered to continue by reason of death." One by one they grow old
   and die: the eye, often filmed with tears, is closed; the heart stands
   still; the hands, often raised in absolution, crossed meekly on the
   breast, as if asking for pardon. But he ever liveth. And of this
   perpetual life there are two blessed results. On the one hand, he has
   an untransferable Priesthood (ver. 24); on the other hand, he is able
   to save them to the uttermost that come unto God by him (ver. 25).
   There is no limit to his salvation, no barrier beyond which he may not
   pass. Uttermost in time, and in character, and in desperation, you may
   be at one of the ends of the earth; yet you shall be lifted to the
   uttermost degree of glory. To the uttermost-from sins of thought as
   well as of word and deed; to the uttermost, in cleansing the thoughts
   and intents of the heart.


   Because of his blameless character. Holy toward God; harmless toward
   man; undefiled in heart; separate from sinners in life. Not needing to
   offer up sacrifice for himself, as the priests did always before
   offering for the congregation; not requiring to make a daily or yearly
   repetition of that perfect sacrifice and oblation which was once made
   on the cross (vv. 26, 27).


   Because of the dignity of his Person (ver. 28). The office of mediation
   is no longer intrusted to a man, or set of men, encompassed by
   infirmities. See! through the shining ranks of being there advances the
   Son, Light of Light, Fellow of Jehovah, Co-equal with God, One with
   Father and Spirit in the ever-blessed Trinity. He is solemnly
   consecrated to this task of reconciling and saving sinners. All heaven
   hears and ratifies the oath. And surely we may well ponder what must be
   our worth in the thought of God, and what our destiny, when our case is
   undertaken, amid such solemnities, by One so August, so glorious, so
   divine, as the High-Priest, who now awaits the appeal of the humblest
   penitent of the human race. "Such a High-Priest became us."


   "To THE UTTERMOST." Eyes may light on these words, weary with weeping,
   of those who have been reduced well-nigh to despair through the
   greatness and virulence of their sins. Not only does the record of the
   past seem too black to be forgiven, but old habits are perpetually
   reasserting themselves; ridiculing the most steadfast resolutions, and
   smiting the inner life of the soul down to the ground. At such times we
   are disposed to envy the vegetable and animal creation, which are not
   capable of sin; or the myriads of sweet children who have been taken
   home to God before the time of conscious rebellion and war could rend
   their infant hearts. But the greatness of our sin is always less than
   the greatness of God's grace. Where the one abounds, the other much
   more abounds. If we go down to the bottoms of the mountains and touch
   the heart of the deep, deeper than all is the redeeming mercy of God.
   The love and grace and power of Jesus are more than our unutterable
   necessities. Only trust him, he is "able to save unto the uttermost";
   and he is as willing as able.

   There are many in these days filled with questionings about the clean
   heart, the extent to which we may be delivered from sin, and such like
   speculations. To these we say: Cease to think of cleansing, and
   consider the Cleanser; forbear to speculate on the deliverance, and
   deal with the Deliverer; be not so eager as to the nature of the
   salvation, but let the Saviour into your heart; and be sure that so
   long as he is in possession, he will exert so salutary an effect, that
   sin, however mighty, shall instantly lose its power over the
   tempest-driven soul that comes through him to God, the source of
   holiness.
     __________________________________________________________________

                           XVIII. THE TRUE TABERNACLE



     "According to the pattern showed to thee in the mount."-HEBREWS viii. 5.




   THERE were three stages by which Moses, the man of God, ascended into
   the Mount. To the first, he went in company with Aaron, Nadab, and
   Abihu, and seventy elders of the children of Israel, the chosen
   representatives of the people. "And they saw the God of Israel; and
   there was under his feet as it were a paved work of a sapphire stone,
   and as it were the body of heaven in his clearness; they saw God, and
   did eat and drink" (Exod. xxiv. 10, 11). This eating and drinking was
   evidently a symbol of friendship and peace, based upon the shedding of
   the blood, which is recorded in the previous verses. We, too, may see
   God, and eat of the flesh and drink of the blood of the Son of Man, on
   the basis of that precious blood by which we have been made nigh.

   When this feast was over, the voice of God called Moses up to a higher
   range, a further steep. He first bade the elders tarry where they were;
   and then, accompanied only by Joshua, he rose up, and went into the
   mount of God, on which the cloud brooded, steeped and bathed in the
   glory of the Lord, like the long bars of cloud in the brilliance of a
   setting sun.

   But on the seventh day, even Joshua was left behind. God called unto
   Moses out of the cloud. And Moses went up further into the mount,
   deeper and yet deeper into the heart of the burning glory. All his
   senses were keenly awake to the scenes around him, and entranced; each
   the channel for tides of rapturous enjoyment, without pain, without
   self-consciousness, without the paralysis of fear, as if one were borne
   ever onward by a tide of glory and music, each movement of which was
   rapture. "And Moses was in the Mount forty days and forty nights."

   During that time minute instructions were given Moses concerning the
   Tabernacle, which was to be erected on the plains below. Those
   instructions are given in Exod. xxv., xxvi., xxvii., and are
   exceedingly minute. But nothing was left to human fancy. Beginning with
   the ark and its mercy-seat as the throne of God, the instructions pass
   through the table of shittim wood, the candlestick with its seven
   branches, the boards and curtains and hangings, until they end at the
   great brazen altar in the court of the Tabernacle, where God and the
   sinner met. Is not this also the path trodden by the Lord himself, the
   substance of all these types, who came from the bosom of the Father to
   the cross of Calvary, the brazen altar where he put away the sins of
   men?

   But, in addition to the minute description thus given, there appears to
   have been presented to the mind of Moses some representation of the
   things which he was bidden to construct. It was as if the eternal
   realities which had dwelt forever in the mind of God took some visible
   shape before his vision. The unseen became visible. The eternal took
   form. A pattern was shown him. He trod the aisles of the true
   Tabernacle. He beheld the heavenly things themselves. And it was after
   this pattern that he was repeatedly urged and commanded to build.
   "According to all that I show thee, after the pattern of the
   Tabernacle, and the pattern of all the instruments thereof, even so
   shall ye make it" (Exod. xxv. 9, 40; xxvi. 30; xxvii. 8).


   THE JEWISH RITUAL DESERVES DEVOUT STUDY. It is always interesting to
   study methods of religious worship, even though the rites have become
   obsolete, the altars deserted, and the dust of priest and votary has
   long since mingled in the sand of the desert or the verdure of the
   glade. Who can look unmoved at the gigantic monuments which rear
   themselves in the dense forests of Central Mexico, the remnants of an
   age of giants who have passed away, giving no clew to the symbols or
   hieroglyphs which they have carved? Who can walk unmoved through the
   stone circles of Stonehenge, Keswick, or Penmaenmawr, and not fall into
   pensive musings?

   For this reason, if for no other, the Levitical ritual would ever be
   possessed of intrinsic interest. When we think of the noble spirits who
   have bequeathed us our most precious religious records, who sang in the
   Psalms, and wept in the Lamentations, and flashed with the ecstasy of
   Messianic prediction and prophecy; and all of whom were trained in the
   system of which the Tabernacle was the focus and heart, we cannot fail
   to examine it with holy and reverent curiosity, as if one should visit
   the nursery or schoolhouse where loved and honored teachers spent their
   earliest years.

   But there is a yet deeper interest here. For we are told that these
   things were made after the pattern of things in the heavens. Every
   knob, and tache, and curtain, and vessel, and piece of furniture, had
   some analogue, some spiritual counterpart of which it was the rude and
   material expression. Through these examples and shadows there is no
   doubt that the ancient saints caught glimpses of the eternal realities.
   We infer this, because there is such a similarity between their
   religious life, as expressed in their writings, and our own. But if
   they, who had nothing but the type to guide them, were able to discern
   so many deep and holy lessons through its medium, how much more
   evidently should we be able to see the grand principles of redemption
   in the ancient ritual, when before us have passed the scenes of
   Bethlehem, Calvary, the Garden of Arimathea, and the Ascension Mount!

   Sometimes in a shadow we may see details of workmanship which otherwise
   in the substance we might have missed. One of the most wonderful
   achievements of the present day is sun-photography, by which
   photographs are obtained of the sun-disk under certain conditions. And
   it is obviously much easier to investigate the nature of the sun from
   such photographs than to study it amid the unbearable glory of his
   presence. The eye may quietly pursue its investigations undazzled and
   unabashed. So we may better understand some of the details of Christ's
   work, as we study Leviticus, than when we stand with the apostles amid
   the marvels of the cross, or with the Seer amid the supernal blaze of
   Apocalyptic vision.

   Turn not lightly then from the Book of Leviticus, which shadows forth
   the Gospel; and, indeed, gives much of the terminology, the phrases and
   symbols, to be afterward employed. Beneath the teaching of the same
   Holy Spirit as taught Moses of old we explore the sacred meanings which
   underlie ark and propitiatory; fine twined linen and blue; candlestick
   and table; altar of incense and altar of burnt-offering; basin and
   vessel and snuffer. Each is like a hook in the divine household, to
   which God has attached a sacred meaning, and which will yield up its
   secret to those who reverently ask and seek and knock. Adapting some
   memorable words, we may say: "The invisible things of God, from the
   construction of the Tabernacle, are clearly seen, being understood by
   the things that were made, even his eternal purpose of redemption."


   THE TRUTHS OF THE GOSPEL ARE ETERNAL REALITIES. We must not think that
   they are ever destined to pass away, as the Jewish types did. They
   cannot. They are the heavenly things themselves. They are the true, the
   ideal, the divine. They have always been what they are. They always
   will be what they are. We may yet have to see much deeper into them; we
   may need to be taught them in yet higher methods of divine
   communication. We may have to be lifted on to a loftier region of
   experience in order to comprehend them. But they are essentially and
   forever settled, the granite of eternal fact. Any structure built on
   them shall last forever. The Jews had only the example, we have the
   reality; they the picture, we the person; they the shadow, we the
   substance.

   It is interesting to feel that Moses saw no other truth in God's
   revelation than what Paul saw; though to Moses it shaped itself in the
   Tabernacle with its layers of skins, whilst to Paul it took shape in
   glowing trains of splendid argument and rhetoric. But ever in the mind
   and thought of God there has been the same distinction between holiness
   and sin; ever the need of sacrifice, even unto death; ever the demand
   for shed life, as the only means through which the sinner may approach
   his holy Majesty; ever the requirements of the incense of praise, the
   bread of obedience, the light of an illuminated character; ever the
   priest to make intercession; and ever the aisles and courts and spaces
   dedicated to worship and intercourse, lofty as the fellowship between
   the Father and the Son.

   Calvary is no novelty, nor the Priesthood, nor the work of Jesus; they
   represent the shining forth of eternal facts in the deepest nature of
   God. To ignore them is to miss union with God on the most fundamental
   laws and processes of his being. The Lamb was slain before the
   foundation of the world: and lie appears in heaven still bearing the
   marks of his death, "a Lamb as it had been slain."


   OUR PLACE OF WORSHIP. We must needs assemble ourselves in places of
   assembly with fellow Christians; but in point of fact not one of them
   is essential to true worship. The type has passed, and we know that the
   Jewish Tabernacle is no more. But what do we see? Men are trying to
   reproduce it, or to invent a substitute for it. Ah, how greatly they
   misconceive our true position! We certainly neither need the Jewish
   Tabernacle nor any substitute; because we are constituted priests of
   the heavenly tabernacle, which no human hand ever reared, and which is
   the meeting place between God and all true hearts, yea, of all who love
   God. "Neither in this mountain, nor yet at Jerusalem, shall ye worship
   the Father." When we meet a company of our fellow Christians, we are
   not to think of them as the whole of those with whom we worship. The
   true worshiper is one of a great festal throng, which is filling the
   spiritual temple. We are but part of a congregation consisting of all
   the sainted dead, and the believing living, in all communions, and
   throughout the universe of God. The prisoner, the traveler, the
   invalid, the mother, the nurse- a11 meet there in unison, and worship
   God together. All are priests, and yonder is the High-Priest, who has
   passed through the heavens and ever lives to make intercession. "A
   minister of the true tabernacle." How ridiculous do those appear to
   such an assembly who arrogate to themselves priestly pretensions, and
   who would make us believe that they are repeating the sacrifice of
   Christ! In this temple at least they are not wanted, for Christ is here
   to offer the sacrifice himself.


   THE TRUE PATTERN OF OUR LIFE IS SUGGESTED HERE. We have many plans and
   schemes and patterns; but how often abortive and disappointing! Would
   that we could spend long periods with God in the mount, getting his
   pattern of our life and work! There is nothing higher for us than to
   build up some resemblance to God's eternal thought. All structures
   built on that scheme will stand forever. And God will ever find
   material, more than enough, for those who dare to be singular, because
   they are true to the pattern which he shows on the mount. And if it be
   asked what that pattern is which God will show us in the mount of
   communion, we may reply: it is the life and character and work of Jesus
   Christ our Lord; the model and exemplar and pattern of all that is true
   and just and pure and lovely and of good report. See that thou make thy
   life on this pattern, which God waits to show thee in the mount. God
   calls thee to it, and he will enable thee to perform.
     __________________________________________________________________

                             XIX. THE TWO COVENANTS


    "I will be to them a God, and they shall be to me a people." HEBREWS viii.
    10.




   NEW word comes into this marvelous treatise which may repel some, as
   having a theological sound; and yet it contains new depths of meaning
   and interest for us all. It is the word Covenant. We all understand
   pretty clearly the covenants into which men enter with each other with
   respect to property, or other matters of daily business. One man
   undertakes to do certain things, on condition that another pledges
   himself to do certain other things. When these respective undertakings
   are settled, they are engrossed on parchment, signed, and sealed; and
   from that moment each party is honorably bound to perform his share in
   the transaction.

   In some such way, adapting himself to our methods of thought and
   practice, the eternal God has entered into covenant with faithful and
   obedient souls. Nor is it possible to overestimate the condescension on
   his part, or the honor and advantage placed within our reach, by such
   relationship. It seems too wonderful to be true; yet it must be true,
   for on no other grounds than its revealed truthfulness could it ever
   have become a matter of human statement or debate. The covenant between
   a prince and a beggar, or between a man like William Penn and the rude
   dark skins of America, is dwarfed into utter insignificance and
   paltriness when mentioned in the same day as the covenant between God
   and the soul of man.

   Theologians have detected several different kinds of covenant in the
   course of human history, and as depicted in the Bible. But it is
   sufficient for us to notice the two covenants, Old and New, mentioned
   in this paragraph. And the basis of the whole argument is contained in
   Jer. xxxi. 31-34, in which there is a distinction made between the
   covenant made with the fathers-when God took them out of the land of
   Egypt, and that new covenant, which in the days of Jeremiah, was still
   future. Moses was the mediator of the first, as Jesus is of the second.


   THE MOSAIC COVENANT. It was often reiterated in very gracious and
   searching tones. Take, for instance, that scene which took place as the
   vast host defiled into the plain beneath the brow of Sinai, in the
   third month of the Exodus. As yet there was no cloud or fire on Sinai's
   crest; but a proposition was made to the people by Moses, that if they,
   on their side, would obey God's voice and keep his word, God, on his
   side, would do two things: he would regard them as his peculiar
   treasure above all people; and he would take them to himself as a
   kingdom of priests, and a holy nation (Exod. xix. 5, 6). And the
   people, little counting the cost, or realizing all that was involved,
   cried with one glib, unanimous voice, "All that the Lord hath spoken
   will we do." They thus entered into covenant.

   Shortly after, when the Ten Commandments had been given, the terms of
   the covenant on God's part were very much enlarged. On the fulfillment,
   on the part of the people, of the old condition of obedience, God went
   further than ever before in his promises, which comprehended a vast
   variety of need, and consisted of many parts (Exod. xxiii. 22-31). And
   again the people gave one mighty, unanimous shout of assent (xxiv. 3).

   Nor was this all; for when, with the intention of recording these
   solemn engagements, they were entered in the Book of the Covenant, and
   read publicly, amid the solemn ratification of sprinkled blood, the
   people again said, "All that the Lord hath said will we do, and be
   obedient" (xxiv. 7). But how little they knew themselves! Within a week
   or two they were dancing wildly around the golden calf; and within a
   few months there was not one who dared affirm that he had kept the
   covenant in every jot and tittle. Nay, on the contrary: "which my
   covenant they brake, saith the Lord." What else could be expected of
   them! although Moses did write them a second and detailed statement of
   the conditions of the covenant in the Book of Deuteronomy, with the
   reiterated demand, that occurs like a refrain, "Ye shall observe to
   do."

   There were two great defects in that old covenant, which arose out of
   the weakness of poor human nature; in the first place, it gave no
   power, no moral dynamics, to enable the human covenanters to do what
   they promised; and, secondly, it could not provide for the effectual
   putting away of those sins which arose from their failure to carry into
   effect their covenanted vows (Heb. ix. 9).

   Surely the majority of men, aiming after a religious life, pass through
   an experience like this. When first we are redeemed by the blood of the
   Lamb, and brought out into the new life, we seem to stand again under
   Mount Sinai; or, better still, our conscience becomes our Sinai, and
   from its highest point we seem to hear the voice of God, engaging
   himself to be a God to us if we will in all things obey his voice. And
   this we immediately pledge ourselves to do. We are not insincere, we
   really mean to perform it; we are enamoured at the ideal of life
   presented to us. It is not only desirable as the condition of
   blessings, but it is eminently attractive and lovely.

   But we make a profound mistake in pledging ourselves; for we are
   undertaking a matter which is totally beyond our reach. As well might a
   paralyzed man undertake to climb Mount Blanc, or a bankrupt to pay his
   debts. We soon learn that sin has paralyzed all our moral motor nerves.
   The good we would, we do not: the evil we would not, we do. We are
   brought into captivity to the law of sin in our members, which wars
   against the law of our mind. We go out to shake ourselves, as at other
   times; but we wist not that razors have passed over our locks of
   strength, leaving us powerless and helpless.

   It seems a pity that each has to learn the uselessness of these
   attempts for himself, instead of profiting by the experience of others
   and the records of the past. Yet so it is. One after another starts to
   earn the privilege of God's presence and smile and blessing by being
   good and obedient and punctilious in complying with rules and forms and
   regulations. It goes on well for a little while, but soon utterly
   breaks down. We are baffled and beaten, as sea-fowl who dash themselves
   against a lighthouse tower in the storm, and then fall wounded into the
   yeasty foam beneath. We are slow to learn that, as we receive
   justification, so must we receive sanctification, from the hands of God
   as his free gift.

   If any reader of these lines is trying to keep up a friendly
   relationship with God on this principle of try and do and keep, the
   sooner that soul realizes the certainty of failure, not for want of
   will, but through the weakness of the moral nature, and yields itself
   to the grace revealed in the second and better covenant, the more
   quickly will it find a secure and happy resting place, from which it
   will not be disturbed or driven, world without end.


   THE BETTER COVENANT. It is so much better than that of Moses, in this
   way: while it pledges God to even better promises (ver. 6) than those
   of the earlier covenant, promises which for a moment demand our
   attention, there is no pledge or undertaking of any kind demanded from
   us. There are no ifs; no injunctions of observe to do; no conditions of
   obedience to be fulfilled. From first to last it consists of the f
   wills of the Most High. Count them up in this marvelous enumeration
   (vv. 10, II, 12), and then dare to claim that each should be fulfilled
   in your personal experience; because this is the covenant under which
   we are living, and through which we have access to God.


   "I will write my laws into their minds."  That refers to the
   intellectual faculty, which thinks, remembers, argues. It will be of
   inestimable value to have them there for constant reference; so that
   they shall always stand inscribed on the side posts and lintels of the
   inner life, demanding reverence, and compelling daily attention.


   "I will write them upon their hearts." That is the seat of the
   emotional life and of the affections. If they are written there, they
   must engage our love. And what a man loves, he is pretty certain to
   follow and obey. "A little lower," said the dying veteran, as they
   probed for the bullet, which had sunk deep down into his breast, "and
   you will find the Emperor"; and in the case of the Christian who has
   been taken into covenant with God, the law is inscribed on the deepest
   affections of his being. He obeys because he loves to obey. He stays in
   his Master's service, not because he must, but because he chooses it
   for himself, saying, as his ear is bored to the door, "I love my
   Master, I will not go out free."


   "I will be to them a God, and they shall be to me a people."  The last
   clause is even better than the first, because it implies the keeping
   power of God. His chosen people so wandered from him that he once
   called them "LoAmmi" Not my people (Hos. i.). But if we are ever to be
   his people; people for his peculiar possession then it can only result
   from the operation of his gracious Spirit, who keeps us, as the sun
   restrains the planets from dashing off into space to become wandering
   stars.


   "All shall know me." Oh, rapture of raptures! can it be? To know God!
   To know the deep things of God. To know him, or to be known of him. To
   know him as Abraham did, to whom he told his secrets; as Moses did, who
   conversed with him face to face; or as the Apostle John did, when he
   beheld him in the visions of the Apocalypse. And that this privilege
   should be within reach of the least!


   "I will be merciful to their unrighteousness." In the old covenant
   there was little room for mercy. It was a matter of voluntary
   agreement; if one of the covenanting parties failed in the least
   particular, there was no obligation on the other to remain faithful to
   their mutual agreement. The failure of one party neutralized the whole
   covenant. But there is no such stringency here. On the contrary, mercy
   is admitted into the relationship, and exercises her gracious sway.


   "I will remember their sins and iniquities no more." As a score is
   forgotten when blotted from a slate, so shall sin be, as if obliterated
   from the memory of God. It will be forgotten, as a debt paid years ago.
   It will be so entirely put out of mind that it shall be as if it had
   never been. If sought for, not found. The handwriting nailed through.
   The stone dropped into ocean depths. The cloud absorbed by the summer
   heat, as it fades from the deep blue sky. Joseph's brethren, in their
   last approach to Joseph, after their father's death, betrayed a fear
   that though his resentment was cloaked, it was not thoroughly
   relinquished. But their fears were entirely groundless. They discovered
   that the offense had utterly passed from their brother's thought, and
   Joseph wept when they spake unto him." In some such way as this God
   ceases to consider our sins, and grieves if we do not believe the
   thoroughness of his abundant pardon.

   Are you enjoying the terms of this covenant in your daily experience?
   God is prepared to fulfill them to the letter. Count on him to do as he
   has promised. Reckon on his faithfulness. Claim that each pledge shall
   be realized in you to the fullest limits of his wealth, and your need.
   Do not try to invent conditions or terms not laid down by him; but
   gladly accept the position of doing nothing to earn or win, and of
   accepting all that God gives, without money and without price.

   Do you ask how God can call this a covenant, in which there is no
   second covenanting party? The answer is easy: Jesus Christ has stood in
   our stead, and has not only negotiated this covenant, but has fulfilled
   in our name, and on our behalf, all the conditions which were necessary
   and right. He has borne the penalty of human weakness and
   transgression. He has met all demands for a perfect and unbroken
   obedience. He has engaged to secure, by the gift of the Holy Spirit, a
   holiness in us which could never have been obtained by our own efforts.
   And as he has become our Sponsor and Surety, so God is able to enter
   into these liberal terms with us, saying nothing of all the cost to his
   Son, but permitting us to share all the benefits; on this condition
   only, that we identify ourselves with him by a living faith, intrusting
   all spiritual transactions into his hands, and abiding by the decisions
   of his will. This is the new and better covenant, which has replaced
   the old.
     __________________________________________________________________

XX. THE HEAVENLY THINGS THEMSELVES.



    For there was a tabernacle made."HEBREWS ix. 2.




   THE eye is quicker than the ear. And there is therefore no language so
   expressive as the language of symbols. The multitude will better catch
   your meaning by one apt symbol than by a thousand words. The mind
   shrinks from the intellectual effort of grappling with the subtle
   essences of things, and loves to have truth wrapped up in a form which
   can easily be taken in by the eye, the ear, the sense of touch.

   This explains why there is such a tendency toward ritualism in the
   Romanish and Anglican Churches. Where man's spiritual life is strong,
   it is independent of the outward form; but when it is weak it leans
   feebly on external aids. And it was because the children of Israel were
   in so childish a condition that God enshrined his deep and holy
   thoughts in outward forms and material shadows. The untutored people
   must have spiritual truth expressed in symbols, which appealed to the
   most obtuse. For fifteen hundred years, therefore, the Jewish worship
   gathered round the most splendid ceremonial that the world has ever
   seen

   ceremonial which these Hebrew Christians sadly missed when they passed
   into the simple ordinances of some bare upper room.

   Let us for a moment study those ancient symbols.

   Choose an expanse of sand; mark out an oblong space forty-five feet
   long by fifteen feet broad. Lay all along upon your outlines a
   continuous belt of silver sockets, hollowed out so as to hold the ends
   of the planks that form the walls of the Tabernacle. Now fetch those
   boards themselves, beams of acacia wood fifteen feet high, covered with
   the choicest gold, and fastened together by three long bars of gold,
   running from end to end. The entrance doorway must face the east,
   composed of five golden pillars, over which fall the folds of a rich
   and heavy curtain. Then measure thirty feet from this, and let another
   curtain separate the holy from the most holy place. Now fetch more
   curtains to make the ceiling, and to hang down on either side over the
   gilded acacia beams that form the outer walls; first, a gorgeous
   curtain wrought with brilliant hues, and covered with the forms of
   cherubim; next, a veil of pure white linen; third, a strong curtain of
   rams' skins, dyed red; and, lastly, to defend it from the weather, a
   common and coarse covering of badgers' skins. The court is constituted
   by heavy curtains that hang around and veil the movements of the
   priests within.

   Let us cast a brief glance at each item as we briefly pass from the
   outer to the inner shrine.


   THE BRAZEN ALTAR, with its projecting horns, to which animals
   designated for sacrifice were tied (Psalm cxviii. 27), or on which the
   fugitive laid hold for sanctuary and shelter (Exod. xxi. 14), stood in
   the outer court. There were offered the sin offering, the burnt
   offering, and the peace offering. It was deemed most holy (Exod. xxix.
   37.) And well it might be; for it was the symbol of the cross of
   Calvary, that wondrous cross where Jesus offered himself as a sacrifice
   for sin; himself both priest and victim and altar too.

   None could enter the holy place, save by passing this sacred emblem,
   any more than we could ever have entered into fellowship with God,
   unless there had been wrought for us upon the cross that one
   all-sufficient sacrifice and oblation for sins, which purges our heart
   from an evil conscience. The longer we live, and the more we know of
   God, the more precious and indispensable does that cross appear: our
   hope in sorrow, our beacon in the dark, our shelter in the storm, our
   refuge in hours of conviction, our trysting-place with God, our pride
   and joy.


   Blest cross! blest sepulcher! blest rather be

   The Man that there was put to death for me."


    And if the brazen altar speaks of the one sacrifice, once for all, of
   Calvary, the laver speaks of the daily washing of the stains of our
   wilderness journeyings, as Jesus washed the feet of his disciples (John
   xiii).


   THE SEVEN-BRANCHED CANDLESTICK, from which the light was shed which lit
   up the holy place, would first arrest the eye of the priest, who might
   cross the threshold for the first time. Its form is familiar to us from
   the bas-relief upon the Arch of Titus. How eloquently does it speak of
   Christ! The texture of beaten gold, on every part of which the hammer
   strokes had fallen, tells of his bruisings for us (Exod. xxv. 36). The
   union of the six lesser lamps, with the one tall Center one, betokens
   the mystery of that union in light-giving which makes the Church one
   with her Lord forevermore in illuminating a dark world. The golden oil,
   stealing through the golden pipes that needed to be kept clean and
   unchoked, shows our dependence on him for supplies of the daily grace
   of the Holy Spirit (Zech. iv. 2). And the very snuffers, all of gold,
   used wisely by the high-priest to trim the flame, are significant of
   those processes by which our dear Lord is often obliged to cut away the
   unevenness of the wick, and to cause us a momentary dimming of light
   that we may afterward burn more clearly and steadily. His life is the
   light of men. In his light we see light. He sheds light on hearts and
   homes and mysteries and space; and hereafter the Lamb shall be the
   light of heaven.


   THE GOLDEN SHEWBREAD TABLE must not be over looked, with its array of
   twelve loaves of fine flour, sprinkled with sweet smelling
   frankincense, and eaten only by the priests, when replaced on the
   seventh day by a fresh supply. Here again, as in the last symbol, is
   that mysterious blending of Christ and his people. Christ is the true
   bread of presence. He is the bread of God. Jehovah finds in his
   obedience and life and death perfect satisfaction; and we too feed on
   him. His flesh is meat indeed. We eat his flesh and live by him. The
   table was portable, so as to be carried in the journeyings of the
   people; and we can never thrive without taking him with us wherever we
   go. This is the heavenly manna; our daily bread; our priestly
   perquisite. But the people also were represented in those twelve
   loaves, as they were in the twelve stones of the breastplate. And
   doubtless there is a sense in which all believers still stand ever
   before God in the purity and sweetness of Christ; "for we, being many,
   are one bread and one body, for we are all partakers of that one
   bread." Oh, is it possible for me to give aught of satisfaction to God?
   To believe this would surely instill a new meaning into the most
   trivial acts of life. Yet this may be so.

   THE CENSER, OR ALTAR OF INCENSE, is classed with the most holy place;
   not because it stood inside the veil, but because it was so closely
   associated with the worship rendered there. It was as near as possible
   to the ark (Exod. xxx. 6). It reminds us of the golden altar which was
   before the throne (Rev. viii. 3). No blood ever dimmed the luster of
   the gold; the ashes that glowed there were brought from the altar of
   burnt offering; and on them were sprinkled the incense, which had been
   compounded by very special art (Exod. xxx. 34-38). That precious
   incense, which it was death to imitate, speaks of his much merit, in
   virtue of which our prayers and praises find acceptance. Is not this
   his perpetual work for us, standing in heaven as our great High
   Priest?  ever living to make intercession, catching our poor prayers,
   and presenting them to his Father, fragrant with the savor of his own
   grace and loveliness and merit?


   THE VEIL, passed only once a year by the high-priest, carrying blood,
   reminded the worshipers that the way into the holiest was not yet
   perfect. There were degrees of fellowship with God to which those rites
   could give no introduction. "The way into the holiest was not yet made
   manifest." "The veil, that is to say, his flesh" (Heb. x. 20). Oh, fine
   twined linen, in thy purity, thou wert never so pure as that body which
   was conceived without sin! Oh, exquisite work of curious imagery, thou
   canst not vie with the marvelous mysteries that gather in that human
   form! Yet, till Jesus died, there was a barrier, an obstacle, a veil.
   It was bespattered with blood, but it was a veil still. But at the hour
   when he breathed out his soul in death, the veil was rent by mighty
   unseen hands from top to bottom, disclosing all the sacred mysteries
   beyond to the unaccustomed eyes of any priests who at that moment may
   have been burning incense at the hour of prayer, while the whole
   multitude stood without (Luke i. 9). It is a rent veil now, and the way
   into the holiest lies open. It is new and living and blood-marked; we
   may therefore tread it without fear or mistake, and pass in with holy
   boldness to stand where angels veil their faces with their wings in
   ceaseless adoration (x. 19, 20).


   THE ARK. A box, oblong in shape, 4 ft. 6 in. in length, by 2 ft. 8 in.
   in breadth and height; made of acacia wood, overlaid with gold; its
   lid, a golden slab, called the mercy-seat, on which cherubic forms
   stood or knelt, with eyes fixed on the blood stained golden slab
   between them; for it was on the mercy-seat that the blood was copiously
   sprinkled year by year, and there the Shekinah light ever shone. In the
   wilderness wanderings the ark contained the tables of stone, not broken
   but whole, the manna, and the rod. But when it came to rest, and the
   staves were drawn out, the manna, food for pilgrims, and the rod, which
   symbolized the power of life, were gone; only the law remained.

   The law can never be done away with. It is holy, just, and good. Not
   one jot or tittle can pass away from it. It is at the heart of all
   things. Beneath all surfaces, below all coverlets, deeper than the foam
   and tumult and revolution of the world, rests righteous and inexorable
   law. We must all yield to its imperial sway. Even the atheist must
   build his walls according to the dictates of the plumb-line, or they
   will inevitably crumble to ruin.


   But law is under love. The golden mercy-seat exactly covered and hid
   the tables, as they no longer leaped from crag to crag, but lay quietly
   beneath it. An ark without a covering, and from which tables of stony
   law looked out on one, would be terrible indeed. But there need be no
   dread to those who know that God will commune with them from above a
   mercy-seat which completely meets the case and is sprinkled with blood.
   We are told by the Apostle, who had well read the deepest meaning of
   these types, that "God hath set forth Christ Jesus as a mercy seat,
   through faith in his blood" (Rom. iii. 24, 25). Jesus has met the
   demands of law by his golden life and his death of blood; and we may
   meet God's righteousness in him. Our own righteousness would be an
   insufficient covering, too narrow and too short; but our Substitute has
   met every possible demand. "Who is he that condemneth ? It is Christ
   that died." Grace reigns through righteousness unto eternal life.

   But ah, no blood of goat or calf can speak the priceless value of his
   blood, by which we have access into the holiest. Oh, precious blood!
   which tells of a heart breaking with love and sorrow; which betrays a
   life poured out like water on the ground in extremest agony; which
   gathers up all the meaning of Leviticus and its many hecatombs of
   victims; the pledge of tenderest friendship, the purchase money of our
   redemption, the wine of life: thy scarlet thread speaks to us from the
   windows of the past in symbols of joy and hope and peace and immortal
   love. The precious blood of Christ!
     __________________________________________________________________

                           XXI. TEACHING BY CONTRAST



    "How much more shall the blood of Christ, who through the Eternal Spirit
    offered himself without spot to God, purge your conscience from dead works
    to serve the living God! "HEBREWS ix. 14.


    IN this marvelous paragraph (vv. 6-14) there are five striking and
   well-defined contrasts between the picture symbols of Leviticus, and
   the realities revealed in the New Testament Scriptures. And to their
   consideration we will at once proceed, thanking God as we do so that we
   live in the very midst of the heavenly things themselves, rather than
   in the shadows, which, though they doubtless helped and nourished the
   devout souls of an earlier age, were confessedly inadequate to supply
   the deeper demands of man's spiritual life.


   THE FIRST TABERNACLE IS CONTRASTED WITH THE TRUE (vv. 6, 8, 11). It
   must have been a fair and lovely sight to behold, when first, on the
   plains of Sinai, the Tabernacle was reared, with its golden furniture
   and sumptuous drapery. The very angels may have desired to look into
   it, and trace the outlines of thoughts, which perhaps were only
   beginning to unfold themselves to their intelligence. But fair though
   it was, it had in it all those traces of imperfection which necessarily
   attach to human workmanship, and make even a needle-point seem coarse
   beneath the microscope. It was "made with hands." Besides which it was
   destined to grow old, and perish beneath the gnawing tooth or fret of
   time. Already it must have shown signs of decay when it was carefully
   borne across the Jordan; and, in David's days, its venerable
   associations could not blind him to the necessity of replacing it as
   soon as possible.

   How different to this is the true tabernacle, of which it was the type,
   which is so much "greater and more perfect." What is that tabernacle?
   and where? Sometimes it seems to pious musing as if the whole universe
   were one great temple; the mountains its altars; the seas and oceans,
   with their vast depths, its lavers; the heavens its blue curtains; the
   loftier spaces, with their stars and mystery of color, and fragrant
   incense-breath and angel worship, its holy place; whilst the very
   throne-room of God, where the Seer's eye beheld the rainbow-circled
   throne, corresponds to the most holy place in which the light of the
   Shekinah glistened over the blood-stained mercy seat.

   But such poetic flights are forbidden by the sober prose which tells us
   that the true tabernacle is not "of this creation" (ver. 11). It is no
   part of this created world, whether earth or heaven; it would exist,
   though all the material universe should resolve itself into primeval
   chaos; it is a spiritual fabric, whose aisles are trodden by saintly
   spirits in their loftiest experiences, when, forgetting that they are
   creatures of time, they rise into communion with God, and enjoy
   rapturous moments, which seem ages in their wealth of blessed meaning.
   Such is the true tabernacle which the Lord pitched, and not man (viii.
   2).


   THE HIGH-PRIESTS ARE CONTRASTED WITH CHRIST (vv.7,11). The outer court
   of the sanctuary might be trodden, under certain conditions, by
   ordinary Israelites; but for the most part they were excluded, and
   service was rendered by Levites and priests, at the head of whom stood
   the high-priest, radiant in his garments of glory and beauty. The
   garment of fine white linen worn next his person; the linen girdle girt
   about his loins fitting him for ministry (John xiii. 4); the robe of
   the ephod, woven all of blue, and fringed with scarlet tassels in the
   form of pomegranates; the ephod itself, composed of the same materials
   as constituted the veil; and on his breast the twelve precious stones,
   engraven with the names of Israel. How grand a spectacle was there!

   And yet there were two fatal flaws. He was not suffered to continue by
   reason of death (vii. 23); and he was a sinful man, who needed to offer
   sacrifice for himself (ix. 7). On the great day of atonement, it was
   expressly stated that he was not to go within the veil to plead for the
   people, until he had made an atonement for himself and his house by the
   blood of the young bullock, which he had previously killed (Lev. xvi.
   11, 12, 13).

   In these respects, how different is our High-Priest, after the order of
   Melchizedek! Death tried to master him; but he could not be holden of
   it; and by death he destroyed him that hath the power of death. "He
   continueth ever." "He ever liveth." His priesthood is unchangeable. "He
   is a priest forever." All this was clearly proved in the seventh
   chapter. But now it is asserted that he was "without spot" (ver. 14).
   He was well searched; but none could convince him of sin. Judas tried
   to find some warrant for his treachery, but was compelled to confess
   that it was innocent blood. Caiaphas and Annas called in false
   witnesses in vain; and at last condemned him on words uttered by his
   own lips, claiming divine authority and power. Pilate repeatedly
   asseverated, even washing his hands in proof, that he could find in him
   no fault at all.

   Nay, the Lord himself bared his breast to the Father in conscious
   innocence; unlike the saintliest of men, who, in proportion to their
   goodness, confess their sinnership. "Such a High-Priest became us, who
   is holy, harmless, undefiled, and separate from sinners, who needeth
   not daily to offer up sacrifice for his own sins.


   THE VEILED WAY INTO THE HOLIEST IS CONTRASTED WITH OUR FREEDOM TO ENTER
   THE PRESENCE OF GOD. We have the positive assurance of these words that
   the Holy Spirit meant to signify direct spiritual truth in the
   construction of the Jewish Tabernacle (ver. 8). He who revealed divine
   truth by inspired prophets, revealed it so in the structure of the
   material edifice. The methods of instruction might vary; the teacher
   was the same. Indeed, the whole ritual was a parable for the present
   time (ver. 9).

   Every well-taught child is aware of the distinction between the holy
   place, with its candlesticks, incense-table, and shew-bread, and the
   holy of holies, with its ark, and cloud of glory. The first tabernacle
   was separated from the second by heavy curtains, which were never drawn
   aside except by the high-priest, and by him only once a year, and then
   in connection with an unusually solemn ritual. Surely the dullest
   Israelite must have understood the meaning of that expressive figure;
   and have felt that, even though his race might claim to be nearer to
   God than all mankind beside, yet there was a depth of intimacy from
   which his foot was checked by the prohibition of God himself. "The way
   into the holiest was not yet made manifest."

   For us, however, the veil is rent. Jesus entered once into the holy
   place, and as he passed the heavy folds were rent in twain from the top
   to the bottom. Surely no priest that witnessed it could ever forget the
   moment, when, as the earth trembled beneath the temple floor, the
   thickly woven veil split and fell back, and disclosed the solemnities
   on which no eyes but those of the high-priest dared to gaze. Surely the
   most obtuse can read the meaning signified herein by the Holy Ghost.
   There is no veil between us and God but that which we weave by our own
   sin or ignorance. We may go into the very secrets of his love. We may
   stand unabashed where angels worship with veiled faces. We may behold
   mysteries hidden from before the foundation of the world. The love of
   God has no secrets for us whom he calls friends.

   Oh, why are we so content with the superficial and the transient, with
   the ephemeral gossip and literature of our times, with the outer courts
   in which the formalists and worldly Christians around us are contented
   to remain? when there are such heights and depths, such lengths and
   breadths, to be explored in the very nature of God. Why do men in our
   time bring back that veil, though they call it "a screen"? Alas, they
   are blind leaders of the blind.


   THE RITES OF JUDAISM ARE CONTRASTED WITH CONSCIENCE-CLEANSING
   ORDINANCES OF THE GOSPEL. They stood in meats and drinks and divers
   washings, which at the best were carnal ordinances imposed until a time
   of reformation; and though they rendered the worshiper ceremonially
   clean, they left his conscience unappeased.

   A great many of the offenses which required to be put away in those
   olden days arose from the breach of ceremonial laws. A man who touched
   the dead or the unclean became ceremonially defiled. For any such thing
   he must undergo the appointed rites of cleansing, ere he could enter
   the courts of the Lord's house. The ceremonial laws were quite
   competent to deal with delinquencies like these; but they failed in
   providing atonement or in securing pardon for acts of sin. "They could
   not make him that did the service perfect, as pertaining to the
   conscience."

   The unsatisfactory nature of sacrifices was even patent on the great
   day of atonement, which is here evidently referred to. Laying aside the
   gorgeous robes in which he was usually arrayed, the high-priest clothed
   himself in simple linen. The animals to be offered during the day were
   next presented at the door of the Tabernacle; and lots were cast as to
   which of the two bullocks was to be for himself, and which of the two
   goats was to be slain. Then for the first time he entered the most holy
   place amid the fumes of fragrant incense, and sprinkled the blood of
   the bullock to make an atonement for the sins of himself and his house.
   A second time he entered with the blood of the goat, to make an
   atonement for the sins of the people, who, meanwhile, stood without in
   penitential grief. And when all was over, the nation's sins were
   confessed over the head of the living goat, which was sent into the
   land of forgetfulness. Still, no one could suppose that the slaying of
   the one goat or the sending of the other into the wilderness actually
   expiated the offense of the whole people. There was a remembrance of
   sins made once a year; but not necessarily entire remission for all who
   stood in that vast silent crowd. And many must have turned away in
   doubt and misgiving. David expressed their feeling when he sang the
   Fifty-first Psalm beneath the impression of his own sinnership (see
   also Micah vi. 6).

   But how different is all this now! Our consciences are purged (ver.
   14). We have no more conscience of sins. We feel that the death of our
   Lord Jesus is an adequate expiation for them all, and that he has so
   fully taken them from us and put them away that they cannot be found;
   they are as though they had never been; they have ceased from the very
   memory of God. True, there are works which are constantly rendering our
   conscience unclean, as of old the flesh of the Israelite was rendered
   unclean by the touch of death. But the blood of Jesus does for our
   conscience what the ashes of the heifer did for the flesh of the
   ceremonially unclean. "The blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanseth us
   from all sin." We have therefore no longer an evil conscience resulting
   from unexpiated sin.


   THE BLOOD OF ANIMALS IS CONTRASTED WITH THE BLOOD OF CHRIST. Hecatombs
   of victims are not of equal value with one man; how much less with the
   Son of God! Rivers of the blood of beasts are not equivalent to one
   drop of his. They offer no standard by which to apprise his precious
   blood. This is too obvious to need further comment here, and we shall
   need to defer to another chapter our estimate, however inadequate, of
   the value of that blood.

   But in the meanwhile, let us notice that it was through the Eternal
   Spirit that Christ offered himself without spot to God. It was not, as
   some falsely affirm, that the Father forced an innocent man to suffer
   for sins he had never done, or that our Saviour suffered to appease the
   Father's wrath; but that the eternal nature of God came out in the
   sacrifice of Calvary. "God was in Christ, reconciling the world unto
   himself." When God determined to save men, he did not delegate the work
   to angels, nor did he permit a sinless man to sink beneath the
   intolerable burden of a world's sin; but in the person of his Son, he
   took home to himself the agony and curse and cost of sin, and by
   bearing them, wiped them out forever. It is, therefore, eternal
   redemption (ver. I 2).

   The death of the cross was a voluntary act; "he offered himself; "
   Priest and victim both. And it was an act in which the Eternal Trinity
   participated; the manifestation in time of an eternal fact of the
   divine nature.

   And how can we ever show our gratitude, except by serving the living
   God (ver. 14). We are redeemed to serve; bought to be owned absolutely.
   Who can refuse a service so reasonable, fraught with blessedness so
   transcendent? Head! think for him whose brow was thorn-girt. Hands!
   toil for him whose hands were nailed to the cross. Feet! speed to do
   his behests whose feet were pierced. Body of mine! be his temple whose
   body was wrung with pains unspeakable. To serve him-this is the Only
   true attitude and behavior, as those who are not their own, but his.
     __________________________________________________________________

XXII. THE BLOOD OF CHRIST


    Without shedding of blood is no remission." -HEBREWS ix. 22.



   ROUND and round this ancient window into the past (vv. 15-28) is bound
   the red cord of blood. Twelve times at the very least does this solemn,
   this awful, word occur. The devil himself seems to admit that it is
   invested with some mystic potency; else why should he compel so many of
   his miserable followers to interlard each phrase they utter by some
   reference to it? Man cannot look on or speak of blood without an
   involuntary solemnity; unless, indeed, he has done despite to some of
   the deepest instincts of his being, or through familiarity has learned
   con-tempt. And we feel whilst reading this chapter, as if we have come
   into the very heart of the deepest of all mysteries, the most solemn of
   all solemnities, the most awful of all tragedies or martyrdoms or
   sacrificial rites. Take off the shoes from your feet; for the place on
   which we stand together now is holy ground.

   Blood is becoming increasingly recognized as one of the most important
   constituents of the human body. Scientific and other research is more
   and more inclined to verify the ancient sayings, which may have been
   broken in the colleges of Egypt, where Moses learned the most advanced
   science of his time, before ever they were stamped with the imprimatur
   of inspiration, "the blood is the life"; "the life of the flesh is in
   the blood" (Deut. xii. 23; Lev. xvii. ii). We know that the red
   corpuscles of the blood play an important function in carrying the
   oxygen of the air to consume the decaying tissues, and to light fires
   in every part of the human frame. But who can tell all the mysterious
   functions of the numberless colorless disks which float along the
   currents of the blood, and which may be intimately connected with the
   very essence of our vitality? Certain it is that impoverished blood
   means decrepit life; tainted blood means corruption and disease; ebbing
   blood means waning life. The first effort of the physician is to feel
   the pulse of the blood; whilst the most fatal disease is the poisoning
   of the blood. The blood is the life. And shed blood is life poured
   forth from its source and fountain-head.

   There is nothing, therefore, in man more precious than blood. If he
   gives that, he gives the best he has to give. His blood is his life-his
   all; and it is a noble act when a man is ready to make this supreme
   gift for others. It is this which lights up the devilry of war, and
   sheds a transient gleam of nobility on the coarsest, roughest soldiery,
   that they are prepared to sacrifice their lives in torrents of blood,
   to beat the foeman back from hearth and home and fatherland. This is
   why women have treasured up handkerchiefs dipped in the blood that has
   flowed on the heads-man's block from the veins of martyrs for liberty
   or religion. This is why men point without a shudder to the stains of
   blood on blades that have been drawn in freedom's holy cause; or on
   tattered banners which led the fight against the battalions of Paganism
   or Popery. This is why the historian of the Church does not feel too
   dainty to make frequent reference to the blood which flowed in rivers
   on the eve of the Sicilian Vespers, and on the day of black St.
   Bartholomew. No, we glory in the blood which noble men have poured out
   as water on the ground. None of us is too sensitive to dwell with
   exultation on the phrase.

   Why, then, should we hesitate to speak of the blood of Christ? It was
   royal blood. "His own" (ver. 12); and he was a King indeed. It was
   voluntarily shed: " He offered himself" (ver. 14). It was pure
   "innocent blood," "without spot" (ver. 14). It was sacrificial. He died
   not as a martyr, but as a Saviour (ver. 26). It flowed from his head,
   thorn-girt, that it might atone for sins of thought; from his hands and
   feet, fast nailed, that it might expiate sins of deed and walk; from
   his side, that it might wipe out the sins of our affections, as well as
   tell us of his deep and fervent love, which could not be confined
   within the four chambers of his heart, but must find vent in falling on
   the earth. Why should we be ashamed of the blood of Christ? No other
   phrase will so readily or sufficiently gather up all the complex
   thoughts which mingle in the death of Christ. Life; life shed; life
   shed violently; life shed violently, and as a sacrifice; life passing
   forth by violence, and sacrificially, to become a tide of which we must
   also all stoop down and drink, if we desire to have life in ourselves
   (John vi. 53-56).

   "This is he that came by water and blood; not by water only, but by
   water and blood" (1 John v. 6). Oh, precious words, recalling that
   never-to-be-forgotten incident when, following the rugged point of the
   soldier's spear, there came out blood and water from the Saviour's
   broken heart (John xix. 34). Had it been water only, we had been
   undone. Water might do for respectable sinners-fifty-pence debtors,
   Pharisees, who are not sinners as other men. But some of us feel water
   would be of no avail at all. Our sins are so deep-dyed, so inveterate,
   so fast, that nothing but blood could set us free. Blood must atone for
   us. Blood must cleanse us. In other words, life must be shed to redeem
   us, such life as is poured from the very being of the Son of God.

   But there is a deep sense in which that blood is flowing, washing,
   cleansing, and feeding soul, all down the age. Like the stream of
   desert, it follows us. "It speaketh" pleading with God for man, and
   with man for God (xii. 24). "It cleanseth," not as a single past act,
   but as a perpetual experience in the believer's soul, removing recent
   sin, and checking the uprisings of our evil nature (1 John i. 7). It is
   the drink of all devout souls; and its perennial presence and efficacy
   is well symbolized by the appearance still on the communion table of
   the church of the wine, which tells the worshiper that the blood of
   Calvary, once shed, and never shed again, is a s fresh and efficacious
   as ever, or as the wine poured freshly into the cup. Let men say what
   they will, the shedding of the blood of Christ is an embodiment of an
   eternal fact in the Being of God, and is an essential condition of the
   healthy life of man.


   It purges the defiled conscience more completely than the ashes of a
   heifer purged of flesh of the ceremonially unclean (ver. 14). Why,
   then, do you carry about the perpetual consciousness of sin? Confess
   sin instantly, of ever you are aware of it. Claim the blood of
   sprinkling, and go at once top serve the living God.


   It put away the sin of previous dispensation. It was in virtue of the
   death to be suffered on Calvary that the holy God was able to forgive
   the offences and accept the imperfect services of Old Testament saints.
   The shadow of the cross fell backward, as well as forward. And it is
   because of what Jesus did that all have been saved, who have passed
   within the pearly gate, or shall pass it (ver. I 5, and compare Rom.
   iv. 24).

   It ratifies the covenant. No covenant was ratified in the old time,
   except in blood. When God entered into covenant with Abraham, five
   victims were divided in the midst, making a lane, down which the
   fire-symbol of the divine presence passed. "There is of necessity the
   death of the covenant maker." And in pursuance of this ancient custom,
   the first covenant was solemnly sealed by blood (vv. i8, 19). How sure
   and steadfast must that covenant be into which God has entered with our
   Surety on our behalf! The blood of Jesus is an asseveration which
   cannot be gain-said or transgressed. All God's will is opened to us
   since Jesus died. We may claim what we will. We are his heirs, the
   heirs of the wealth of our Elder Brother, Jesus.


   It opens the way into the holies. What the high-priest did every year
   in miniature, Christ has done once (vv. 24, 25, 26). "He died unto sin
   once." By virtue of his own shed blood, he went once for all into the
   real holiest place, appearing in the presence of God for us as our
   High-Priest, and leaving the way forever open to those who dare to
   follow. "The heavenly things themselves" need cleansing; not because of
   any intrinsic evil in themselves, but because they are constantly being
   used and trodden by sinful men. Now, however, though that is so, there
   is an efficacy in the work of Jesus which is always counterveiling our
   impurity, and making it possible for us to draw near to God with
   boldness and acceptance.


   It put away sin. "Once for all." " Once in the end of the world." Not
   for each dispensation, but for all dispensations. Not for one age, but
   for all ages Not for a few, but for the "many," comprehending the
   vastness of the number which no man can compute of the great family of
   man. As the year's sin of a nation was borne away into the desert by
   the scapegoat, and put away, so was the whole sin of the race centered
   on the head of Jesus. He was made sin. As a physician might be imagined
   drawing on himself all the maladies of his patients, so did Jesus draw
   to himself and assume all the sins of mankind. He was the propitiation
   for the whole world. And when he died, he dropped sin as a stone into
   the depths of oblivion. And he put away sin. The Greek word is very
   strong; annihilated, made nothing of made as though it had never been.
   Sin, in the mind and purpose of God, is as entirely done away as a debt
   when it is paid. Hallelujah! in heaven and on earth (Rev. v. 9; 1. 5).
   But whilst this is an eternal truth with him who knows not our
   distinctions of time, yet it will avail only as a fact when each
   individual sinner lays claim to this wonderful provision, confesses his
   sin, and realizes that there is now no longer condemnation, because the
   Lamb of God has borne away his sin and the world's. Will you now dare
   to reckon this to be true for you, not because you feel it, but because
   God says it? Dare to repeat 1 Peter ii. 24, and Isaiah liii. 5,
   substituting "my" for "our.

   "What marvelous appearances are these three! He appeared once in the
   end of the world as a sacrifice. He appears now in heaven as a Priest.
   He will appear the second time without sin unto salvation; as of old
   the high priest, at the close of the day of atonement, came out with
   outstretched hands to bless the people. Oh, to be looking for him, that
   we may not miss the radiant vision or the tender blessing of peace!
     __________________________________________________________________

                                 XXIII. "ONCE"




    "Once in the end of the world hath he appeared, to put away sin by the
    sacrifice of himself." HEBREWS ix. 26. (See a130 ix. 27,28; x. 2, 10.)"




    THERE is a word here which recurs, like a note on an organ beneath the
   tumult of majestic sound. Five times, at least, it rolls forth its
   thunder, pealing through all ages, echoing through all worlds,
   announcing the finality of an accomplished redemption to the whole
   universe of God "ONCE!"

   And there is another phrase which we must couple with it, spoken by the
   parched lips of the dying Saviour, yet with a loud voice, as though it
   were the cry of a conqueror: "When Jesus, therefore, had received the
   vinegar, he said, 'It is finished'; and he bowed his head and gave up
   the ghost." It is very seldom that man can look back on a finished
   life-work. The chisel drops from the paralyzed hand ere the statue is
   complete; the chilling fingers refuse to guide the pen along another
   line, though the book is so nearly done; the statesman must leave his
   plans and far-reaching schemes to be completed by another, perhaps his
   rival. But as from his cross Jesus Christ our Lord looked upon the work
   of redemption which he had undertaken, and in connection with which he
   had suffered even to the hiding of his Father's face, he could not
   discover one stitch, or stone, or particle deficient. For untold
   myriads for thee and me and all there was done that which never needed
   to be done again, but stood as an accomplished fact forevermore.


   THE "ONCE" OF A COMPLETED WORK (ix. 26). In these words there is a sigh
   of relief. A thought had for a moment flashed across the sunlit page of
   Scripture, which had suggested an infinite horror. In pursuing the
   parallels between the incidents of the great day of atonement and the
   great day when Jesus died, we had been suddenly reminded of the fact
   that the solemn spectacle was witnessed once a year " The high-priest
   entereth into the holy place every year with blood of others" (ver.
   25). Every year the same rites performed, the same blood shed, the same
   propitiation made. Suppose that, after the same analogy, Jesus had
   suffered every year! Every year the agony of the shadowed garden! Every
   year the bitter anguish of the cross! Every year the burial in the
   garden tomb! Then earth would have been overcast with midnight, and
   life would have been agony! Who could bear to see him suffer often!

   But there was no necessity for him to suffer more than once; because
   repetition means imperfection, of which, in his work, there is no sign
   or trace. There petition of the sacrifices of the Jewish law meant that
   they could not take away sin, or make the comers thereunto perfect.
   Again and again the crowd of pious Jews gathered, driven to seek
   deliverance from the conscience of sins, which brooded deeply and
   darkly over their souls. Perhaps they would receive momentary respite
   as they saw the elaborate ceremonial, and felt that they were included
   in the high-priest's confession and benediction. And so they wended
   their way homeward; but ere long a weary sense of dissatisfaction would
   again betake them: they would reflect on the inadequacy of the
   atonement which stood only in the offering of the life of slain beasts.
   Sins were remembered, but not put away; it was impossible that the
   blood of bulls and goats could do that (x. 4). And so, doubtless, in
   the more thoughtful, hearts must have failed, and consciences moaned
   out their weary plaint unsatisfied. Therefore the sacrifices had to be
   presented continually.

   On the other hand, Christ's work needs no repetition. It is final
   because it is perfect. Its perfection is attested, because it has never
   been repeated. "In that he died, he died unto sin once." Our Saviour
   set his hand to save us: he did not mean to faith he came into our
   world with this distinct purpose; he died to do it; and, having done
   it, he went home to God. But if from the vantage-ground of the throne,
   reviewing his work, he had discerned any deficiency or flaw, he would
   have come back to make it good; and, inasmuch as he has not done so, we
   may be sure that the death of the cross is perfectly satisfactory. "Now
   once, in the end of the ages, hath he appeared to put away sin by the
   sacrifice of himself." Oh, ponder these wondrous words!  Once. He
   liveth forevermore; and shall never again pass for a moment under the
   dark shadow of death.


   He hath appeared (or been manifested). What then? He must have existed
   previously. The incarnation was but the embodiment in visible form of
   One who existed before all worlds; and the death of the cross was the
   unfolding in a single act of eternal facts in the nature of God. As the
   great sun-disk may be mirrored in a tiny mountain tarn, so in the one
   day of crucifixion, there were set forth to men, angels, and devils,
   love, sacrifice, and redeeming mercy, which are part of the very
   essence of God. Marvelous, indeed, the rending of the veil, by which
   such marvels are revealed.


   In the end of the world (or of the ages). God is called the King of
   Ages. Time is probably as much a creation as space or distance or
   matter. It is an accommodation to finite thought; a parenthesis in
   eternity; a rainbow flung across the mighty age of deity. We break time
   into hours; God breaks it into ages. There are ages behind us, and ages
   before. We stand on a narrow neck of land between two seas. The first
   age of which we know anything is that of creation. The second, of
   Paradise. The third, of the world before the flood. The fourth, of the
   Patriarchs. The fifth, of Moses, ending with the fall of Jerusalem, and
   the death of the Messiah. The sixth, of the Gentiles, in which we live.
   And before us, we can dimly descry the forms of the Age of Millennium;
   the Age of Regeneration and Restitution; the Age of Judgment; and the
   Age in which the kingdom shall be delivered to the Father. There is
   thus a complete analogy between the creation of the material world, and
   the creation of the new heavens and earth.

   Geologists love to enumerate the strata of the earth's formation
   through which the processes of world -building were carried; and we
   shall probably discover some day that God has been building up the new
   creation through successive ages of history and development. Christ's
   death is here said to have happened at the end of the ages; and we
   should at once see the force of this, even though there may remain
   several great ages to be fulfilled, ere time run out its course, if
   only we knew how many ages have preceded. Compared to the number that
   have been, this is the end, the climax, the ridge of the weary climb;
   what lies beyond are the miles of level surface, to the sudden dip down
   of the cliffs in face of the ocean of eternity.


   He hath put away sin. Oh, marvelous word! It might be rendered to
   annihilate, to make as if it had never been. The wreath of cloud may
   disappear, but the separated drops still float through space. The
   bubble may break on the foam-tipped wave, but the film of water has
   gone to add its attenuated addition to the ocean depth. But Jesus has
   put sin away as when a debt is paid, an obligation is canceled, or a
   sin-laden victim was slain, burned, and buried in the old days of
   Moses. All sin, the sin of the world, the accumulated sin of mankind
   was made to meet in Jesus. He was made sin. He stood before the
   universe as though he had drawn upon himself all the human sin which
   has ever rent the air or befouled the earth, or put the stars of night
   to the blush; and, bearing the shame, the horror, the penalty during
   those dread hours which rung from him the cry of desolate forsakenness,
   he put it away, and wiped it out forever; and, in doing this, he has
   put away the penal results of Adam's fall.

   The inherited tendencies to evil remain in all the race; but the
   spiritual penalty which Adam incurred for himself and all of us, as our
   representative and head, has been canceled by the sufferings and death
   of our glorious representative and head, the Second Adam, the Lord from
   heaven. Men will still have to suffer the penalty of sins which they
   voluntarily commit, and for which they do not seek forgiveness and
   cleansing through the blood; but men will not have to suffer the
   penalty which otherwise must have accrued to them, as members of a
   fallen race-fallen with their first parents and father, because Jesus
   put away that when he died. And thus it is that the multitudes of sweet
   babes, idiots, and others who belong to Adam's race, but have had no
   opportunity of personal transgression, are able to enter without let or
   hindrance into the land where there entereth nothing which defileth.


   By the sacrifice of himself. Not by his example, fair and lovely though
   it was. Not by his teaching, though the food of the world. Not by his
   works, the source and fountain-head of modern philanthropy. But by his
   death, and by his death as a sacrifice. If you want to understand a
   writer, you must know the sense in which he uses his characteristic
   words, and you must carefully study the definitions which he gives of
   them. And if you would understand the meaning of Christ's death, you
   must go back to the definitions, given in minute detail in Leviticus,
   of the meaning of sacrifice, atonement, and propitiation, by which that
   death is afterward described; and Only so much you dare to interpret.
   Whatever sacrifice meant in Leviticus, it means when applied to the
   death of the cross. And surely there can be no controversy that of old
   it stood for the substitution of the innocent for the guilty; the
   canceling of deserved penalty because it had been borne by another; the
   wiping out of sin by the shedding of blood. All this it must mean when
   applied to the death of Christ, with this difference, that of old the
   suffering was borne and death endured involuntarily; but in the case of
   our blessed Redeemer, God in him took home to himself, voluntarily and
   freely, the accumulated results of a world's sin, and suffered them,
   and made them as if they had never been. "He put away sin by the
   sacrifice of himself."

   What was the death of Christ? "A martyrdom," cries modern thought. "A
   mischance in an unenlightened age," replies the reviewer. "An outcome
   of all such efforts to battle with evil," says the broad-church
   teacher.


   "A SACRIFICE!" thunders this Book. A voluntary sacrifice! A voluntary
   sacrifice by which sin has been borne and put away. Here we rest,
   content to abide, in a world of mystery, at the foot of one mystery
   more, which, despite all its mystery, answers the cry of a convicted
   conscience, and sheds the peace of heaven through our hearts.


   THE "ONCE" OF MORTALITY (ix. 27). With a few exceptions mentioned on
   the page of Scripture, where miracles of raising are recounted, men die
   but once. For those there was one cradle, two coffins; one birth, two
   burials. But for most it is mercifully arranged that the agony and pain
   of dissolution should be experienced only once. And this, which is the
   ordinary lot of humanity, also befell Jesus Christ. He could not die
   often, because he was literally man, and it would have been
   inconsistent to violate in his case the universal law. He must become
   man, because only through the portal of birth could he reach the bourne
   of death; but, having been born, and assumed our nature, he must obey
   the laws of that nature, and die but once.


   THE "ONCE" OF DEITY (ix. 28). There must have been something more than
   mortal in him, who in his one death could bear away the sins of many.
   Good and great men have died, who would have done anything to cancel or
   atone for the sins of their nation, their family, and their beloved;
   but in vain. How marvelous then must be his worth, whose sufferings and
   death will counterveil for a world's sin!

   And we can see the imperious necessity that our Saviour should be God
   manifest in the flesh; and that he who became obedient to the death of
   the cross should be also he who was in the form of God, and thought it
   not robbery to be God's equal. If it be true that his death "once" has
   put away sin, then, bring hither your songs of worship, your wreaths of
   empire, your ascriptions of lowliest adoration; for he must be God. No
   being of inferior make could do for man what, in that brief but
   dreadful darkness, he has done once for all, and forever.


   THE "ONCE" OF A PURGED CONSCIENCE (x. 2). We are not in the position of
   the Jews, needing to repeat their sacrifices year by year, in sad
   monotony; our sacrifice has been offered once for all. Therefore, we
   have not, like them, the perpetual conscience of sins. Our hearts are,
   once and forever, sprinkled from an evil conscience (ver. 22).

   There is no necessity to ask repeatedly for forgiveness for the sins
   that have been once confessed and forgiven. God does not accuse us of
   them; we need not accuse ourselves. God does not remember them; we may
   well forget them, save as incentives to gratitude and humility. There
   is daily need for fresh confession of recent sin; but when once the
   soul realizes the completeness of Christ's work on its behalf, it cries
   with great joy: "As far as the east is from the west, so far hath he
   removed our transgressions from us."


   THE "ONCE" OF A FULFILLED PURPOSE (x. io). Space forbids our lingering
   longer. In our next chapter we may show how completely the purpose of
   God has been realized in Jesus, and, therefore, that there is no
   necessity for a repetition of his sacrificial work. The will or purpose
   of God for man's redemption asks for nothing more than that which is
   given it in the life and death of our Saviour. Nothing more is required
   for the glory of God, for the accomplishment of the divine counsels, or
   for the perfect deliverance and sanctification of those who believe.

   "Once for all, sinner, receive it!

   Once for all, hrother, believe it!

   Cling to the cross, the burden will fall;

   Christ has redeemed us, once for all""
     __________________________________________________________________

                         XXIV. AN ANCIENT HEBREW CUSTOM


    "Sacrifice and offering thou wouldest not; but a body hast thou prepared
    me." - HEBREWS x. 5.



   IN that old Hebrew world that lies now so far back in the dim twilight
   of the past, there were several customs, of more than transient
   interest, one of which claims our thought as it glistens for a moment
   beneath the touch of this Epistle, as a wave far out to sea, when
   smitten for a moment by the sunlight.

   It appears that if an Israelite, through the stress of bad seasons and
   disappointing harvests, were to fall into deep arrears to some rich
   neighboring creditor-so much so that he owed him even more than the
   land of his inheritance was worth-he was permitted not only to alienate
   his land till the year of jubilee, but to sell his own service so as to
   work out his debt. It must have been a very painful thing for the
   peasant proprietor to say farewell to his humble home and endeared
   possessions, in which his forefathers had lived and thriven, and to go
   forth into the service of another. Very affecting must have been the
   farewell walk around the tiny plot, which he and his might not live to
   revisit. And yet the bitterness of the separation must have been
   greatly mitigated and lessened by the instant freedom from anxiety
   which ensued. No more dark forebodings for the future; no eager
   questioning of how to keep the wolf from the door; no unequal struggle
   with the adverse seasons. All responsibility-for the payment of other
   creditors, for supplies of food and clothing for himself and his wife
   and children-from henceforth must rest on the shoulders of another.

   So the appointed six years passed away, and at their close the master
   would call the laborer into his presence, to give him his discharge.
   But at that moment he might, if he chose, bind himself to that master's
   service forever. If he shrank from facing the storms of poverty and
   difficulty; if he preferred the shelter and plenty of his master's home
   to the struggle for existence from which he had been so happily
   shielded; if, above all, he loved his master, and desired not to be
   separated from him again, he was at liberty to say so" I love my
   master, I will not go out free." Then, solemnly, and before the judges,
   that the choice was deliberately ratified, his master bored his ear
   through with an awl to the doorpost, leaving a permanent and indelible
   impression of the relationship into which they had entered. "And he
   shall serve him forever" (Exod. xxi. 6). This custom was-


   ALLUDED TO BY THE PSALMIST (Psalm xl. 6). Living amid the routine of
   daily, monthly, and yearly sacrifices, this saint felt deeply their
   inability to take away sin, and saw that the true offering to God must
   be of another kind. What could he do adequately to express his sense of
   the wonderful works and countless thoughts of God! Surely the offered
   sacrifice of flour or blood, the burnt-offering or sin offering could
   not be the highest expression of human love and devotion; and then he
   bethought him of a more excellent way. He will come to God, bearing in
   his hand the volume of the book of his will; his heart shall dote upon
   that holy transcript of his Father's character; yea, he will translate
   its precepts into prompt and loving obedience. "I delight to do thy
   will, my God; yea, thy law is within my heart." " This shall please the
   Lord better than an ox or bullock that hath horns and hoofs."

   Nor is this all; recalling the ancient usage to which we have alluded,
   he imagines himself repeating the vow of the Hebrew bond-servant, and
   standing meekly and voluntarily at God's door, while his ear is bored
   to it forever. Henceforth he may almost cry with the Apostle, "From
   henceforth let no man trouble me; for I bear branded on my body the
   marks of Jesus." "Mine ears hast thou bored." "Truly I am thy servant,
   thou hast loosed my bonds."

   We need not wonder at the glad outburst which succeeds (ver. io). As
   with emphatic and repeated phrase the Psalmist avows his intention of
   telling the great congregation his discoveries of the love of God, we
   can well understand the reason of his exultation. There is no life so
   free as that which has escaped all other masters in becoming the
   bond-slave of Jesus. There is no nature so exuberant with joy and peace
   unspeakable as that which has felt the stab of the awl, has been tinged
   with the blood of self-sacrifice for his dear sake, and has passed
   through the open doorway to go out nevermore. There is no rest so
   unutterable as that which knows no further care; since all care has
   been once and forever laid on him who can alone bear the pressure of
   sorrow and sin, responsibility and need.


   APPROPRIATED BY THE LORD JESUS. In his incarnation our blessed Lord has
   realized all the noblest aspirations and assertions which had ever been
   spoken by the lips of his most illustrious saints. The very words used
   by them can, therefore, be literally appropriated by him, without
   exaggeration, save where they falter with the broken confessions of sin
   and mortal weakness. Amongst others, when he came into the world, he
   could take up those olden words of the Fortieth Psalm, and, through
   them, fulfill the meaning of the ancient Hebrew custom.

   The sacrifices of Leviticus had served a very necessary purpose in
   familiarizing men with the thoughts of God as to the true aspect in
   which our Saviour's death was to be viewed; but it was evident that
   they could not exhaust his idea, or fill up the measure of his
   redeeming purpose. His will went far beyond them all, and, therefore,
   they could not be other than incomplete; and, on account of their very
   incompleteness, they needed incessant repetition; and even then, though
   repeated for centuries, they could not accomplish the purposes on which
   the divine nature was set. As well fill up the ocean with cartloads of
   soil, as accomplish the measure of God's will by the blood of bulls and
   goats.

   But when Jesus came into the world he at once set himself to accomplish
   that holy will. This was his constant cry: "Lo, I come to do thy will,
   God! "And he not only essayed to do God's will in every minute
   particular and detail of his life, but especially where it touched the
   removal of sin, the redemption of men, the sanctification and
   perfecting of those who believe. It was to accomplish God's will in
   these respects that the Saviour died on the cross. And it is because he
   perfectly succeeded, cutting out the entire pattern of the divine mind
   in the cloth of his obedience, that the ineffective sacrifices of
   Judaism have been put an end to; whilst his own sacrifice has not
   required the addition of a single sigh or tear or hour of darkness or
   thrill of agony. By the offering of his body once for all we have been
   sanctified, i.e., our judicial standing before God is completely
   satisfactory. And by one offering he bath perfected forever them that
   are being sanctified, i.e., he has accomplished all the objective work
   of our redemption in such wise as that in him we stand before God as
   accepted saints, though much more has yet to be done in our subjective
   inward experience (Heb. x. 10, 14).

   The entire submission of our Lord to his Father's will comes out very
   sweetly in a slight change here made in quoting the ancient Psalm. It
   may be that some older version, or various reading, is given, with the
   sanction of the divine Spirit. Instead of saying "Mine ear hast thou
   opened," the Lord is represented as saying, "A body hast thou prepared
   for me." In point of fact, though the ear carried the body with it,
   because it is notoriously difficult to move hand or foot so long as the
   ear is a captive, yet the Hebrew slave only gave his ear to the
   piercing awl in token of his surrender. But our Lord Jesus gave, not
   his ear only, but his whole body, in every faculty and power. He held
   nothing back, but yielded to God the Father the entirety of that body
   which was prepared for him by the Holy Ghost in the mystery of the holy
   incarnation. Ah! blessed is our lot, that God's holy redemptive purpose
   has been so utterly and so efficiently fulfilled, through the offering
   of that body once for all nailed, not to the doorpost, but to the
   cross.


   APPLICABLE TO OURSELVES. There is a strong demand amongst God's people
   in the present day for that "more abundant life" which the Good
   Shepherd came to bestow. Out of this demand is springing a mighty
   movement, which if it obey the following rules and conditions, will
   surely be a blessing to the Church.


   It must be natural. The saintliness that cannot romp and laugh with
   little children, and looks askance on the great movements in the world
   around, and shuts itself up in cloistered seclusion, is not the ideal
   of Jesus Christ, who watched the children playing in the market places,
   and called them to his arms, and mingled freely at the dinner-tables of
   the rich. It is easier, perhaps, than his, but it is a profound mistake
   to suppose that it will satisfy his heart. No; the saintliness of the
   true saint must find its home in the ordinary homes and haunts of men.


   It must be humble. Directly a man begins to boast of what he has
   attained, you may be sure that he makes up in talk for what he lacks in
   vital experience. The tone with which some speak of perfection
   indicates how far they are from it. To brag of sinlessness is to yield
   to pride, the worst of sins. No face truly shines so long as its owner
   wists it. No heart is childlike which is conscious of itself.


   It must lay stress on the objective side of Christ's work. There must
   be introspection for the detection and removal of anything that lies
   between the soul and God; just as there must be sometimes a discharge
   of gunpowder to dislodge the accumulated soot of a foul chimney. But
   when the necessary work of introspection and confession is over, there
   should be an instant return to God, with the devout outlook of the soul
   on the person and work of the Lord Jesus. We must never encourage the
   introspection, except with the view of a more uninterrupted vision of
   Jesus.

   If these three conditions are complied with, the movement now afoot
   cannot but be fraught with blessing to the universal Church; and it
   will probably have the effect of leading multitudes to pass through an
   experience like that indicated in the Psalm. Previously they may have
   acted merely from a sense of legalism and duty, giving sacrifices and
   offerings as appointed by the law. But from the glad hour that they
   realize all the claims of Jesus on their emancipated and surrendered
   natures, they will exclaim, "We love our Master; we will not go out
   free; bore our ears to his door, that we may serve him forever; we
   delight to do his will; his law is within our hearts; we are eager to
   do all things written in the roll of the book of his will."

   Have you ever uttered words like these? Has your life been only a
   monotonous round of unavoidable service, of which the key-word has been
   "must"? Alas! you have not as yet tasted how easy is his yoke, how
   light his burden. But if only from this moment you would open your
   whole heart to the work of the Holy Spirit, yielding fully to him, he
   would shed the love of God abroad within you, kindling your love to
   him; and, at once, you would do from love what you have done from law:
   you would be so knit to Christ that you would not be free from him,
   even though you could do without him; you would have forever the scar
   of the slavery of Jesus wrought into your very nature.

   There is nothing in the world that gives so much rest to the soul as to
   do the will of God; whether it speaks on the page of Scripture, or
   through the inspirations of the Holy Spirit within the shrine of the
   heart, or in the daily routine of ordinary or extraordinary Providence.
   If only we could always say, "I delight to do thy will; I come, I
   come!" if only we could offer up to God, as Jesus did, the bodies which
   he has prepared for us, though to the very bitterness of the cross, if
   only we were as intent on finishing the work given us to do by him, as
   men are in achieving the ends of personal ambition: then the spirit of
   heaven, where the will of God is done, would engird our barren, weary
   lives, as the Gulf Stream some wintry shore, dispelling the frost and
   mantling the soil with flowers of fairest texture and fruits of
   Paradise. Do not try to feel the will of God: will it, choose it, obey
   it; and as time goes on, what you commenced by choosing you will end by
   loving with ardent and even vehement affection.
     __________________________________________________________________

                               XXV. DRAWING BACK



    "The just shall live by faith; but if any man draw back, my soul shall have
    no pleasure in him."-HEBREWS x. 38.  (Read verses 19- 39.)


   THE Epistle has been for some time glowing with ever-increasing heat;
   and now it flames out into a vehement expostulation, which must have
   startled and terrified those Hebrew Christians who were still wavering
   between Judaism and Christianity. As we have had more than one occasion
   to remark, it had become a great question with some of them whether
   they should go back to the one, or go on with the other. The splendid
   ceremonial, venerable age, and olden associations of Judaism, were
   fighting hard to wean them away from the simplicity and spiritual
   demands of the later faith. But surely the retrograde movement would be
   arrested, and the impetus toward Christ accelerated, by these sublime
   and soul-stirring remonstrances.


   THE THREEFOLD CONCLUSION ALREADY ARRIVED AT IS summed up in three
   momentous propositions.


   We may boldly enter the holiest by the blood of Jesus. The holiest was
   the chamber of innermost communion with God. To enter it was to speak
   with God face to face. And its equivalent for us is the right to make
   our God our confidant and friend, into whose secret ear we may pour the
   whole story of sin and sorrow and need. Nor need the memory of recent
   sin distress us; because the blood of Jesus is the pledge of the
   forgiveness and acceptance of those who are penitent and believing. We
   may go continually, and even dwell, where Israel's high priests might
   tread but once each year.


   Jesus has inaugurated a new and living way. The veil of the Temple was
   rent when Jesus died, to indicate that the way to God was henceforth
   free to man, without let or hindrance, and without the intervention of
   a human priest. Priests have tried to block it, and to compel men to
   pay them toll for Opening it. But their pretensions are false. They
   have no such power. The way stands open still for every trembling
   seeker. It is new, because, though myriads have trodden it, it is as
   fresh as ever for each new priestly foot. It is living, because it is
   through the living Saviour that we come to God. "No man cometh unto the
   Father but by me." Stay here to note that the veil, with its curious
   workmanship, was a symbol of the body of Christ. "The veil, that is to
   say, his flesh." We get near to God through the death of that Son of
   man who, in real human sorrow, hung on the cross for us.


   We have a Great priest. We belong to the household of God by faith; but
   we need a Priest. Priests need a Priest. And such a one we have, who
   ever liveth to make intercession for us, and to offer our prayers on
   the golden altar, mingled with the much incense of his own precious
   merit. These are the three conclusions which recapitulate the positions
   laid down and proved up to this point.


   THE THREEFOLD EXHORTATION FOUNDED ON THE PREVIOUS CONCLUSIONS, "Let us
   draw near" (ver. 22). "Let us hold fast" (ver. 23). "Let us consider
   one an-other" (ver. 24). And each of these three exhortations revolves
   around one of the three words which are so often found in combination
   in the Epistles-Faith, Hope, and Love (R.V).

   FAITH consists of two parts belief, which accepts certain declarations
   as true; and trust in the person about whom these declarations are
   made. Neither will do without the other. On the one hand, we cannot
   trust a person without knowing something about him; on the other hand,
   our knowledge will not help us unless it leads to trust, any more than
   it avails the shivering wretch outside the Bank of England to know that
   the vaults are stored with gold. A mere intellectual faith is not
   enough. The holding of a creed will not save. We must pass from a
   belief in words to trust in the Word. By faith we know that Jesus
   lives, and by faith we also appropriate that life. By faith we know
   that Jesus made on the cross a propitiation for sin; and by faith we
   lay our hand reverently on his dear head and confess our sin. Faith is
   the open hand receiving Christ. Faith is the golden pipe through which
   his fullness comes to us. Faith is the narrow channel by which the life
   that pulses in the Redeemer's heart enters our souls. Faith is the
   attitude we assume when we turn aside from the human to the divine.

   We ought not to be content with anything less than the full assurance
   of faith. The prime method of increasing it is in drawing near to God.
   In olden days the bodies of the priests were bathed in water and
   sprinkled with blood ere they entered the presence of God. Let us seek
   the spiritual counterpart of this. Relieved from the pressure of
   conscious guilt, with hearts as sincere and guileless as the flesh is
   clean when washed with pure water, let us draw near to God and keel) in
   fellowship with him; and in that attitude faith will grow exceedingly.
   It will no longer sit in the dust, but clothe itself in beautiful
   garments. It will wax from a thread to become a cable. No longer the
   trembling touch of a woman's hand, it will grasp the pillars of the
   Temple with a Samson's embrace.

   HOPE is more than faith, and has special reference to the unknown
   future which it realizes, and brings to bear on our daily life. The
   veil that hides the future parts only as smitten by the prow of our
   advancing boat; it is natural, therefore, that we should often ask what
   lies beyond.

   Foreboding is the prophet of ill; Hope of good. Foreboding cries, "We
   shall certainly fall by the hand of; Hope replies, "No weapon that is
   formed against us shall prosper." Foreboding cries, "Who shall roll
   away the stone? " Hope sings merrily, "The Lord shall go before us, and
   make the crooked places straight." Foreboding, born of unbelief, cries,
   "The people are great and tall, and the cities walled up to heaven";
   Hope already portions out the land and chooses its inheritance. But
   Christian hope is infinitely better and more reliable than that of the
   worldling. In ordinary hope there is always the element of uncertainty;
   it may be doomed to disillusion and disappointment; things may not turn
   out as we expect: and so, being the characteristic of youth, it dies
   down as the years advance. But Christian hope is based on the promise
   of God, and therefore it cannot disappoint; nay, it is the anchor of
   the aged soul, becoming brighter and more enduring as the years pass
   by, because "he is faithful that promised."

   But how may we increase our hope, so as never to let it slip, but to
   hold it fast with unwavering firmness? There is nothing which will
   sooner strengthen it than to consider his faithfulness whose promises
   are hope's anchorage. Has he ever failed to fulfill his engagements? Do
   not the stars return to their appointed place to a hairbreadth of their
   time? Have not good men given a unanimous testimony to the fidelity of
   the covenant-keeping God? He has never suffered his faithfulness to
   fail-and never will. Our hope, therefore, need not falter, but be
   strong and very courageous.

   LOVE comes last. She is queen of all the graces of the inner life. Love
   is the passion of self-giving. It never stays to ask what it can
   afford, or what it may expect to receive; but it is ever shedding forth
   its perfume, breaking its alabaster boxes, and shedding its heart's
   blood. It will pine to death if it cannot give. It must share its
   possessions. It is prodigal of costliest service. Such love is in the
   heart of God, and should also be in us; and we may increase it
   materially by considering one another, and associating with our
   fellow-believers. Distance begets coldness and indifference. When we
   forsake the assembly of our fellow- Christians we are apt to wrap
   ourselves in the chill mantle of indifference. But when we see others
   in need, and help them; when we are willing to succor and save; when we
   discover that there is something attractive in the least lovable; when
   we feel the glowing sympathy of others-our own love grows by the
   demands made on it, and by the opportunities of manifestation.

   Let us seek earnestly these best gifts; and that we may have them and
   abound, let us invoke the blessed indwelling of the Lord Jesus, whose
   entrance brings with it the whole train of sweet Christian graces.


   THE THREEFOLD REMONSTRANCE. Go forward! otherwise penally (ver. 26). If
   a man unwittingly broke Moses' law, he was forgiven; but if he
   willfully despised it, he died without mercy. What then can be expected
   by those who sin willfully, not against the iron obligations of Sinai,
   but against the gracious words which distill from the lips of the dying
   Saviour! The heart that can turn from the love and blood-shedding of
   Calvary, and ignore them, and trample them ruthlessly under foot, is so
   hard, so hopeless, so defiant of the Holy Spirit as to expose itself to
   the gravest displeasure of God, and can expect no further offering for
   its sins. There is no sacrifice for the atonement of the sin of
   rejecting Calvary.


   Go forward! otherwise past efforts nullified (ver. 32). These Hebrew
   Christians had suffered keenly on their first entrance into the
   Christian life. The martyrdom of the saintly Stephen; the great havoc
   wrought in the Church by Saul of Tarsus; the terrible famines that
   visited Jerusalem, causing widespread destitution. They had become even
   a gazing-stock by reproaches and afflictions. But they had taken
   joyfully the spoiling of their goods, not shrinking from the ordeal. To
   go back to Judaism now would annul the advantages which otherwise might
   have accrued from their bitter experience; would miss the harvest of
   their tears; would counterwork the respect with which they were being
   regarded; and would rob them of the reward which the Lord might give to
   them, if they only endured to the end. "Cast not away your boldness,
   which hath great recompense of reward."


   Go forward! the Lord is at hand (ver. 36). Jesus was about to come in
   the fall of Jerusalem, as lie will come ere long to close the present
   age; and every sign pointed to the speedy destruction of the Jewish
   polity by the all-conquering might of Rome. How foolish then would it
   be to return to that which was on the eve of dissolution: to the Temple
   that would burn to the ground; to sacrifices soon to cease; to a
   priesthood to be speedily scattered to the winds!

   There was only one alternative: not to go back to certain perdition, to
   the ruin of all the nobler attributes of the soul, to disgrace and
   disappointment and endless regret; but to go on through evil and good
   report, through sorrow and anxiety and blood, until the faithful
   servant should be vindicated by the Lord's approval, and welcomed into
   the realms of endless blessedness.

   Are we amongst those who go on to the saving of the soul? Here, as so
   often, the salvation of the soul is viewed as a process. True, we are
   in a sense saved when first we turn to the cross and trust the
   Crucified. But it is only as we keep in the current that streams from
   the cross, only as we remain in abiding fellowship with the Saviour,
   only as we submit ourselves habitually to the gracious influences of
   the divine Spirit, that salvation pervades and heals our whole being.
   Then the soul may be said to be gained (R.V., marg.), i.e., restored to
   its original type as conceived in the mind of God before he built the
   dust of the earth into man, and breathed into him the breath of life,
   and he became a living soul.
     __________________________________________________________________

XXVI. FAITH AND ITS EXPLOITS



    Now faith is the substance of things hoped for, the evidence of things not
    seen." HEBREWS xi. 1.


   SOCIETY rests on the faith which man has in man. The workman, toiling
   through the week for the wage which he believes he will receive; the
   passenger, procuring a ticket for a distant town, because he believes
   the statements of the time-tables; the sailor, steering his bark with
   unerring accuracy in murky weather, because he believes in the
   mercantile charts and tables; the entire system of monetary credit, by
   which vast sums circulate from hand to hand without the use of a single
   coin-all these are illustrations of the immense importance of faith in
   the affairs of men. Nothing, therefore, is more disastrous for an
   individual or a community than for its credit to be impaired, or its
   confidence shaken.

   There seem to be three necessary preliminaries in order to faith.
   First, some one must make an engagement or promise. Second, there must
   be good reason for believing in the integrity and sufficiency of the
   person by whom the engagement has been made. Third, there follows a
   comfortable assurance that it will be even so; in fact, the believer is
   able to count on the object promised as being not less sure than if it
   had already come into actual possession. And this latter frame of mind
   is precisely the one indicated by the writer of this Epistle, when,
   guided by the Holy Spirit, he affirms that faith is the assurance of
   things hoped for, the persuasion or conviction of things not seen. In
   other words, faith is the faculty of realizing the unseen.

   These three conditions are fulfilled in Christian faith. The same
   faculty is called into action with respect to the things of God. At the
   outset we are sure that a Voice has spoken to man from the page of
   Scripture; not voices, but a Voice. Next, we are sure that this Speaker
   is infinitely credible. Our assurance rests on several grounds: we find
   that his words have ever come true in the experience of past
   generations; we have seen them accompanied by the introduction of
   miraculous phenomena, indicating in their beneficence and power the
   goodness and glory of the Worker; we discover in our own hearts the
   assent of our moral nature to their evident truth: and for all these
   reasons we hold that the Voice which speaks deserves our credence. And
   therefore, lastly, we calculate on whatever has been promised as surely
   as if we saw it, and may reckon on it as certainly ours.

   Let us emphasize again what has been said. We look on the words which
   God speaks to us from the Scriptures as being altogether different from
   any other words which may claim our attention from the lips of men; not
   only because of the character of the miracles which accompany them, but
   because they touch us as no other words do, and elicit the spontaneous
   assent and consent of our moral nature, though sometimes in
   condemnation of ourselves. That must be the Book of God which so
   exactly coincides with the best emotions and intuitions of our moral
   nature; and not of ours only, but of the noblest and best of our race

   "The mighty God, the Lord hath spoken, and called the earth from the
   rising of the sun to the going down of the same." And if we are once
   assured of this, then there is no limit to the restful confidence,
   which not only counts the promise as credible, but actually begins to
   enjoy in anticipation the boons they offer. The maxim of human
   experience runs thus: Seeing is believing; but with the child of God
   the reverse is true: Believing is seeing. We are as sure of what God
   had promised as we would be if we saw it already before our eyes. Our
   vision could not make us more sure than we are that God loves us; that
   there is a Father's house with its many mansions; and that some day our
   mortality is to put on immortality, so as to live forever in a state of
   existence which is absolutely sinless, sorrowless, and nightless.

   Such faith as this is begotten in our souls, primarily by the study of
   God's Word; appealing, as we have seen, to our moral consciousness,
   which, as it is more and more developed, is more and more satisfied
   with the Book which called it into being, and has done so much for its
   education. But sometimes faith seems to be given us in respect of some
   special matter which is not directly indicated in Scripture, but which
   we feel able to claim, yes, and as we pray and think over it we are
   still more able to claim it; and when we find such a conviction forming
   in our hearts, we may be perfectly sure of it. "Whosoever shall say to
   this mountain, Be thou removed, and be thou cast into the sea; and
   shall not doubt in his heart, but believe that those things which he
   saith shall come to pass, he shall have whatsoever he saith." Thus the
   child of God may begin to praise for blessings of which there is no
   outward sign; being as sure of them as though they had risen above the
   horizon, like the little cloud, no bigger than a man's hand, to
   Elijah's prayer. "We have the petitions that we desired of him."

   Do you want a greater faith? then consider the promises, which are its
   native food! Read the story of God's mighty acts in bygone days. Open
   your heart to God, that he may shine in with his own revealing
   presence. Ask him to give you this wondrous faculty to which nothing is
   impossible. Put away from you aught which might clash with the growth
   of your heart in faith and love.


   FAITH GREATENS MEN. Run through this roll-call of heroes. You must
   admit that those whose names are mentioned stand in the first ranks of
   our race, shining as stars. But their claim to be thus regarded was
   certainly not natural genius. Enoch, for instance, and his line, being
   Sethites, may have been inferior to many of the family of Cain, so far
   as mere intellectual or artistic attainment went. But his faith lifted
   him out of the ranks of mediocrity to a species of primacy amongst men;
   and should faith become the master-principle of your life and mine, it
   would similarly enlarge and enrich our whole being.


   FAITH MIGHTILY AFFECTS OUR ORDINARY HUMAN LIFE. With most men you can
   determine pretty nearly how they will act in given circumstances; you
   can enumerate the influences at work, and their value. But you can
   never be sure in the case of the Christian, because his faith is making
   real much of which the world around takes no thought whatever. The
   tyrant, anxious to save some young Christian confessor, approaches him
   with flatteries and promises, things that attract the young, and is
   surprised to find that they have no charm; he then approaches with
   suffering, obloquy, and death, things that sadden young hearts, and is
   equally astonished to discover that they cause no alarm. The cause is
   inexplicable, and is set down to obstinacy; but in point of fact the
   eyes of the young heart are opened on a world of which the tyrant has
   formed no conception. Faith is not careless of time, but more mindful
   of eternity. Faith does not underrate the power of man, but she
   magnifies omnipotence. Faith is not callous of present pain, but she
   weighs it against future joy. Against ill-gotten gains, she puts
   eternal treasure; against human hate the recompense of reward; against
   the weariness of the course, the crown of amaranth; against the tears
   of winter sowing, the shoutings of the autumn sheaves; against the
   inconvenience of the tent, the permanent city. None of these men would
   have lived the noble lives they did, had it not been for the recompense
   of reward and the gleams given them of the golden city amid the sorrows
   and straits of their lives.


   FAITH IS POSSIBLE TO ALL CLASSES. In this list are women as well as
   men. Sarah and Rahab, as well as Abraham and Joshua; the widow of
   Shunem, and the mighty prophet who brought her son back to life; Moses,
   the student of Egypt's wisdom; Gideon, the husbandman; Isaac, the
   grazier; Jacob, the shrewd cattle breeder; Barak, the soldier; David,
   the shepherd; and Samuel, the prophet. Their Occupations and
   circumstances varied infinitely; but there was not one of them that did
   not live under the influence of this master-principle. Whatever may be
   a man's lawful calling, he may abide therein with God, under the
   influence of faith. Like the fir or pine, faith flourishes in any soil.


   FAITH IS CONSISTENT WITH VERY DIFFERENT DEGREES OF KNOWLEDGE. It would
   be difficult to enumerate more varieties of religious knowledge than
   are summarized in. this catalogue of names. Abel's idea of sacrifice
   would differ widely from David's. The degree of acquaintance with God
   would be much intenser with Moses than Samson. And, compared with the
   clear views of truth held by these Hebrew Christians, those of the
   world's gray fathers were but as baskets full of fragments. But,
   notwithstanding all these differences, the same principle of faith
   leaped upward from each heart. And the woman who touched the hem of the
   garment was animated with the same spirit as that which in her sister
   elicited the wonder of Jesus: " woman, great is thy faith!"


   FAITH CAN MASTER INSUPERABLE DIFFICULTIES. It is difficult to be
   singular; but faith enabled Abel to offer a more excellent sacrifice
   than Cain. It is difficult to walk constantly with God, when wickedness
   is great on the earth, and all flesh has corrupted its way; but it is
   not impossible, for Enoch walked with God on the very margin of the
   Flood, and obtained the testimony that he pleased him. It is difficult
   to lead a pilgrim life, and such difficulties would be probably as
   keenly felt by the patriarchs; but what faith did for them it will do
   for others. It is difficult, amid the cares of business or public
   office, to keep the heart fresh, devout, and young; but it is not
   impossible to faith, which maintained the spirit of patriotism and
   devotion in the heart of Joseph, though sorely tempted to sink into an
   Egyptian grandee. It is difficult to face the loss of all things, and
   the displeasure of the great; but Moses did both, under the spell of
   faith in the unseen.

   There are many difficulties before us all. Stormy seas forbid our
   passage; frowning fortifications bar our progress; mighty kingdoms defy
   our power; lions roar against us; fire lights its flaming barricade in
   our path; the sword, the armies of the alien, mockings, scourgings,
   bonds, and imprisonment-all these menace our peace, darken our horizon,
   and try on us their power; but faith has conquered all these before,
   and it shall do as much again. We will laugh at impossibility; we will
   tread the shores of the seas, certain they must make us a way; we will
   enter the dens of wild beasts and the furnaces of flame, sure that they
   are impotent to injure us; we shall escape the edge of the sword, out
   of weakness become strong, turn to flight armies of aliens, and set at
   nought all the power of the enemy: and all because we believe in God.
   Reckon on God's faithfulness. Look not at the winds and waves, but at
   his character and will. Get alone with him, steeping your heart and
   mind in his precious and exceeding great promises. Be obedient to the
   utmost limit of your light. Walk in the Spirit, one of whose fruits is
   faith. So shall you be deemed worthy to join this band, whose names and
   exploits run over from this page into the chronicles of eternity, and
   to share their glorious heritage.
     __________________________________________________________________

                         XXVII. STRIPPING FOR THE RACE



    "Wherefore, seeing we also are compassed about with so great a cloud of
    witnesses, let us lay aside every weight, and the sin which doth so easily
    beset us, and let us run with patience the race that is set before us;
    looking unto Jesus, the author and finisher of our faith." HEBREWS Xii. 1,
    2.


    WHEN, in his Egyptian campaign, the Emperor Napoleon was leading his
   troops through the neighborhood of the Pyramids, he pointed to those
   hoary remnants of a great antiquity, and said, "Soldiers, forty
   centuries look down on you!" Similarly there have been summoned before
   our thought in the preceding chapter the good and great, the martyrs,
   confessors, prophets, and kings of the past. We have been led through
   the corridors of the divine mausoleum, and bidden to read the names and
   epitaphs of those of whom God was not ashamed. We have felt our faith
   grow stronger as we read and pondered the inspiring record; and now, by
   a single touch, these saintly souls are depicted as having passed from
   the arena into the crowded tiers, from which to observe the course
   which we are treading to-day. They were witnesses to the necessity,
   nature, and power of faith. They are witnesses also of our lives and
   struggles, our victories and defeats, our past and present.

   And they are compared to a cloud. One of the finest pictures in the
   world is that of the Madonna de San Sisto at Dresden, which depicts the
   infant Saviour in the arms of his mother, surrounded by clouds, which
   attracted no special notice until lately; but when the accumulated dust
   of centuries was removed, they were found to be composed of myriads of
   angel faces. Surely this is the thought of the inspired writer when he
   speaks of "so great a cloud of witnesses."

   In some of the more spacious amphitheaters of olden times, the
   spectators rose in tier above tier to the number of forty or fifty
   thousand; and to the thought of the combatant as he looked around on
   this vast multitude of human faces, set in varied and gorgeous
   coloring, these vast congregations of his race must have appeared like
   clouds, composed of infinitesimal units, but all making up one mighty
   aggregate, and bathed in such hues as are cast on the clouds at sunrise
   or sunset by the level sun.

   If before this time these Hebrew Christians had been faltering, and
   inclined to relinquish their earnestness, they would have been
   strangely stirred and quickened by the thought that they were living
   under the close inspection of the spirits of the mighty dead. To us
   also the same exhortation applies.


   THE SPEED OF THE CHRISTIAN LIFE. "Let us run." We must not sit still to
   be carried by the stream. We must not loiter and linger as children
   returning from a summer's ramble. We must not even walk as men with
   measured step. We must run. Nor are we only to run as those who double
   their pace to an easy trot; we must run as men who run a race. The idea
   of a race is generally competition; here it is only concentration of
   purpose, singleness of aim, intensity.

   Life in earnest-that is the idea. But how far do we seem from it! And
   what a contrast there is between our earnestness in all beside, and in
   our devotion to God and man! We are willing enough to join in the rush
   of business competition, in the race for wealth, in the heated
   discussion of politics, and in social life in the pursuit of pleasure;
   but, ah! how soon we slacken when it becomes a question of how much we
   are willing to do for God! How earnest men are around us! Newton poring
   over his problems till the midnight wind sweeps over his pages the
   ashes of his long-extinguished fire. Reynolds sitting, brush in hand,
   before his canvas for thirty six hours together, summoning into life
   forms of beauty that seemed glad to come. Dryden composing in a single
   fortnight his Ode for St. Cecilia's Day. Buffon dragged from his
   beloved slumbers to his more beloved studies. And the biographer who
   records these traits himself rising with the dawn to prepare for the
   demands of his charge.

   In a world like this, and with a theme like ours, we ought not to be
   languid and supine; but devoted, eager, consumed with a holy love to
   God, and with a passion for the souls of men. Then should we make
   progress in the knowledge of the Word of God, and enter into the words
   of one of the greatest spiritual athletes that ever lived:  "This one
   thing I do . . . I press toward the goal for the prize of the high
   calling in Christ Jesus."


   WE MUST RUN FREE OF WEIGHTS. This speed can only be maintained when we
   run unencumbered and free. Now, of course we would all admit the
   necessity of divesting ourselves of sins; but in all our lives there
   are weights which are not sins. A sin is that which in its very nature,
   and always, and by whomsoever perpetrated, is a transgression of God's
   law, a violation of God's will. But a weight is something which in
   itself or to another may be harmless, or even legitimate, but in our
   own case is a hindrance and an impediment.

   Every believer must be left to decide what is his own special weight.
   We may not judge for one another. What is a weight to one is not so to
   all. But the Holy Spirit, if he be consulted and asked to reveal the
   hindrance to the earnestness and speed of the soul's progress in divine
   things, will not fail to indicate it swiftly and infallibly. And this
   is the excellence of the Holy Spirit's teaching: it is ever definite.
   If you have a general undefined feeling of discouragement, it is
   probably the work of the great enemy of souls; but if you are aware of
   some one hindrance and encumbrance which stays your speed, it is almost
   certainly the work of the divine Spirit, who is leading you to
   relinquish something which is slackening your progress in the spiritual
   life.

   No man would think of maintaining a high speed encompassed with
   weights. The lads who run for a prize litter the course with garments
   flung away in their eager haste. There would be little difficulty in
   maintaining an intense and ardent spirit if we were more faithful in
   dealing with the habits and indulgences which cling around us and
   impede our steps. Thousands of Christians are like water-logged
   vessels. They cannot sink; but they are so saturated with
   inconsistencies and worldliness and permitted evil that they can only
   be towed with difficulty into the celestial port.

   Is there anything in your life which dissipates your energy from holy
   things, which disinclines you to the practice of prayer and Bible
   study, which rises before you in your best moments, and produces in you
   a general sense of uneasiness and disturbance? something which others
   account harmless, and permit, and in which you once saw no cause for
   anxiety, but which you now look on with a feeling of self-condemnation?
   It is likely enough a weight."

   Is there anything within the circle of your consciousness concerning
   which you have to argue with yourself, or which you do not care to
   investigate, treating it as a bankrupt treats his books into which he
   has no desire to enter, or as a votary of pleasure treats the first
   symptoms of decaying vitality which he seeks to conceal from himself?
   We so often allow in ourselves things which we would be the first to
   condemn in others. We frequently find ourselves engaged in discovering
   ingenious reasons wily a certain course which would be wrong in others
   is justifiable in ourselves. All such things may be considered as
   weights. It may be a friendship which is too engrossing; a habit which
   is sapping away our energy as the tap-root the fruit bearing powers of
   a tree; a pursuit, an amusement, a pastime, a system of reading, a
   method of spending time, too fascinating and too absorbing, and
   therefore harmful to the soul-which is tempted to walk when it should
   run, and to loiter when it should haste.

   But, you ask, Is it not a sign of weakness, and will it not tend to
   weakness, always to be relinquishing these and similar things? Surely,
   you cry, the life will become impoverished and barren when it is
   stripped in this way of its precious things. Not so. It is impossible
   to renounce anything at the bidding of the inner life without adding
   immensely to its strength; for it grows by surrender, and waxes strong
   by sacrifice. And for every unworthy object which is forsaken there
   follows an immediate enrichment of the spirit, which is the sufficient
   and unvarying compensation. The athlete gladly foregoes much that other
   men value, and which is pleasant to himself, because his mind is intent
   on the prize; and he considers that he will be amply repaid for all the
   hardships of training if he be permitted to bear it away, though it be
   a belt he will never wear, or a cup he will never use. How much more
   gladly should we be prepared to relinquish all that hinders our
   attainment, not of the uncertain bauble of the athlete, but the certain
   reward, the incorruptible crown, the smile and "well-done" of our Lord!

   There is an old Dutch picture of a little child dropping a cherished
   toy from its hands; and, at first sight, its action seems
   unintelligible, until, at the corner of the picture, the eye is
   attracted to a white dove winging its flight toward the emptied
   outstretched hands. Similarly we are prepared to forego a good deal
   when once we catch sight of the spiritual acquisitions which beckon to
   us. And this is the true way to reach consecration and surrender. Do
   not ever dwell on the giving-up side, but on the receiving side. Keep
   in mind the meaning of the old Hebrew word for consecration, to fill
   the hand. There will not be much trouble in getting men to empty their
   hands of wood, hay, and stubble if they see that there is a chance of
   filling them with the treasures which gleam from the faces or lives of
   others, or which call to them from the page of Scripture. The world
   pities us, because it sees only what we give up; but it would hold its
   sympathy if it could also see how much we receive "good measure,
   pressed down, and running over given into our bosoms."


   WE MUST LAY ASIDE BESETTING SIN. "Let us lay aside the sin which doth
   so closely cling to us" (R.V.). We often refer to these words; no
   sentence of the Bible is more often on our lips; but do we not misquote
   them in divorcing them from their context? We should read them as part
   of the great argument running through the previous chapter, and of
   which they are the culmination and brilliant climax. That argument has
   been devoted to the theme of faith. Case after case has been adduced of
   the exploits of the heroes of Hebrew story; and it has been shown that
   in each faith was the secret motive and the sufficient power. The close
   connection between that glowing panegyric and the opening words of the
   following chapter is shown by the word "Wherefore," which even defies
   the wanton intrusion of the division forced upon us in our English
   version. And surely it is most natural to hold that the sin which so
   closely clings to us is nothing else than the sin of unbelief, which is
   the opposite pole to the faith so highly eulogized.

   If that be a correct exegesis, it sheds new light on unbelief. It is no
   longer an infirmity, it is a sin. Men sometimes carry about their
   doubts, as beggars a deformed or sickly child, to excite the sympathy
   of the benevolent. But surely there is a kind of unbelief which should
   not meet with sympathy, but rebuke. It is sin which needs to be
   repented of as sin, to be resisted as sin, and to receive as sin the
   cleansing of Christ.

   Unbelief may, as in the case of Thomas, spring from intellectual and
   constitutional difficulties. But these will not lead the soul to vaunt
   itself as surpassing others in insight; or to relinquish the society of
   others with happier constitutions; or, above all, to forego the habit
   of secret prayer. It will rather induce a temper of mind the very
   opposite of that self-confident, arrogant spirit which prevails so much
   in the unbelievers of our time.

   But much unbelief springs from moral causes. The soul gets wrong with
   God, and says that it is not sure whether there is a God. The windows
   are allowed to be covered with grime, and then it doubts whether the
   sun is shining. The faculties of the inner life are clogged with
   neglect, and refuse to do their appointed office in revealing the
   spiritual and the unseen. We should be wiser if we dealt with much of
   the unbelief of our time as a disease of the spiritual life, rather
   than of the intellectual. Its source is largely moral. Do not set
   agnostics to study evidences; but show them that their temper of heart
   is the true cause of their darkness and unbelief. God has given each of
   us powers of discerning his truth, which will certainly perceive and
   love it; and where the reverse is the case, it is often due to some
   moral obliquity, to some beam in the eye, to some secret indulgence,
   which is destructive of all spiritual perception. Put away known sin.
   Read the Bible, even though you doubt its inspiration. Wait. Pray. Live
   up to all the light you have. And unbelief will drop away as the old
   leaves from the evergreens in spring.

   There will, of course, be difficulties in all our lives to impede our
   heavenward progress: difficulties from the opposition of our foes;
   difficulties from within our own hearts. We shall need patience and
   long forbearance as we tread our appointed track. But there are two
   sources of comfort open to us.

   Let us remember that the course is set before us by our heavenly
   Father, who therefore knows all its roughness and straitness, and will
   make all grace abound toward us, sufficient for our need. To do his
   will is rest and heaven.

   Let us "look off unto Jesus." Away from past failure and success; away
   from human applause and blame; away from the gold pieces scattered on
   the path, and the flowers that line either side. Do not look now and
   again, but acquire the habit of looking always, so that it shall become
   natural to look up from every piece of daily work, from every room,
   however small, from every street, however crowded, to his dear, calm,
   sweet face; just as the sojourner on the northern shores of Geneva's
   lake is constantly prone to look up from any book or work on which the
   attention may have been engaged, to behold the splendor and glory of
   the noble range of snow-capped summits on the further shores. And if it
   seems hard to acquire this habitual attitude, trust the Holy Spirit to
   form it in your soul.

   Above all, remember that where you tread there your Lord once trod,
   combating your difficulties and sorrows, though without sin; and ere
   long you shall be where he is now. Keep your eye fixed, then, on him as
   he stands to welcome and reward you; and struggle through all, animated
   by his smile, and attracted to his side, and you will find weights and
   unbelief dropping off almost insensibly and of themselves.

   This is the only way by which souls can be persuaded. Argue with them;
   urge them; try to force them-and they will cling the closer to the
   encumbrances which are clogging their steps. But present to them Jesus
   in the beauty and attractiveness of his person and work, and there will
   be a natural loosening of impediments; as the snow which had been
   bending the leaves to the earth drops away when the sun begins to
   shine. And God never takes aught from us, without giving us something
   better. He removes the symbol, to give us the reality; breaks the type,
   to give the substance; releases us from the natural and human, to give
   us the divine. Oh, trust him, soul: and dare to let go, that thou
   mayest take; to be stripped, that thou mayest become clothed!
     __________________________________________________________________

XXVIII. CHASTISEMENT




    Whom the Lord loveth he chasteneth, and scourgeth every son whom he
    receiveth."

   HEBREWS xii. 6.



    IT is hardly possible to suppose that any shall read these lines who
   have not drunk of the bitter cup of affliction. Some may have even
   endured a great fight of afflictions. Squadron after squadron has been
   drawn up in array, and broken its regiments on the devoted soul. It has
   come to us in different forms, but in one form or another it has come
   to us all. Perhaps our physical strength and health have been weakened
   in the way; or we have been racked with unutterable anguish in mind or
   body; or have been obliged to see our beloved slowly slipping from the
   grasp of our affection, which was condemned to stand paralyzed and
   helpless by. In some cases, affliction has come to us in the earning of
   our daily bread, which has been procured with difficulty and pain,
   whilst care has never been long absent from our hearts, or want from
   our homes. In others, homes which were as full of merry voices as the
   woods in spring of sweet-voiced choristers are empty and silent. Ah,
   how infinite are the shades of grief! how extended the gamut of pain!
   How many can cry with the Psalmist, "All thy waves and thy billows are
   gone over me!

   We can see clearly the reason of all this suffering. The course of
   nature is out of joint. Man's sin has put not himself only, but the
   whole course of nature into collision with the will and law of God; so
   that it groans and travails in its pains. Selfishness has also
   alienated man from his fellows, inciting him to amass all that he can
   lay hands on for himself, oblivious to the bitter sufferings of those
   around him, and careless of their woes. Whilst behind the whole course
   of nature there is the incessant activity of malignant spirits, who, as
   in the case of Job, may be plotting against us, reveling in any
   mischief, which, for some great reasons, they are permitted to work to
   our hurt.

   There are different ways in which affliction may be borne. Some despise
   it (ver. 5). They refuse to acknowledge any reason in themselves for
   its infliction. They reject the lesson it was designed to teach. They
   harden themselves in stoical indifference, resolving to bear it with
   defiant and desperate courage. Some faint under it (ver. 5). They
   become despondent and dispirited, or lose heart and hope. Like Pliable,
   they are soon daunted, and get out of the Slough of Despond with as
   little cost as possible to themselves; or, like Timorous and Mistrust,
   turn back from the lion's roar. We ought to be in subjection. Lifting
   the cup meekly and submissively to our lips; calmly and trustfully
   saying "Amen"to every billow and wave; lovingly trying to learn the
   lesson written on the page of trial; and bowing ourselves as the reeds
   of the river's edge to the sweeping hurricane of trial. But this,
   though the only true and safe course, is by no means an easy one.

   Subjection in affliction is only possible when we can see in it the
   hand of the Father of spirits (ver. 9). So long as we look at the
   second causes, at men or things, as being the origin and source of our
   sorrows, we shall be filled alternately with burning indignation and
   hopeless grief. But when we come to understand that nothing can happen
   to us except as our Father permits, and that, though our trials may
   originate in some lower source, yet they become God's will for us as
   soon as they are permitted to reach us through the defense of his
   environing presence, then we smile through our tears; we kiss the dear
   hand that uses another as its rod; we realize that each moment's pain
   originates in our Father's heart; and we are at rest. Judas may seem to
   mix the cup, and put it to our lips; but it is nevertheless the cup
   which our Father giveth us to drink, and shall we not drink it? Much of
   the anguish passes away from life's trials as soon as we discern our
   Father's hand; then------

   Affliction becomes chastisement. There is a great difference between
   these two. Affliction may come from a malignant and unfriendly source;
   chastisement is the work of the Father, yearning over his little
   children, desiring to eliminate from their characters all that is
   unlovely and unholy, and to secure in them entire conformity to his
   character and will. But, before you can appropriate the comfort of
   these words, let me earnestly ask you, my reader, whether you are a
   child? None are children in the sense of which we are speaking now,
   save those who have been born into the divine family by regeneration,
   through the grace of the Holy Spirit. Of this birth, faith is the sure
   sign and token; for it is written: "Those that believe on his name are
   born, not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of
   man, but of God." Are you a child? Does the Spirit witness with your
   spirit that you are born of God? Can you look up into his face and cry,
   "Abba, Father"? If so, you are surrounded by your Father's tender,
   loving care. Nothing can reach you without passing through the cordon
   of his protection. If, therefore, affliction does lay its rough hand
   upon your arm, ;arresting you, then be sure that it must first have
   obtained permission from One who loves you infinitely, and who is
   willing to expose both you and himself to pain because of the vast
   profit on which he has set his heart.

    All chastisement has a Purpose. There is nothing so absolutely
   crushing in sorrow as to feel one's self drifting at the mercy of some
   chance wave, sweeping forward to an unknown shore. But a great calm
   settles down upon us when we realize that life is a schoolhouse, in
   which we are being taught by our Father himself, who sets our lessons
   as he sees we require them. The drill-sergeant has a purpose in every
   exercise; the professor of music, an object in every scale; the farmer,
   an end in every method of husbandry. "He does not thresh fitches with a
   sharp threshing instrument, neither is a cart-wheel turned about upon
   cummin; but the fitches are beaten out with a staff, and the cummin
   with a rod." So God has a purpose in every pain he permits us to feel.
   There is nothing fortuitous or empirical or capricious in his dealings
   with his own.

   The purposes which chastisement subserves are very various. Of course
   we know that the penalty of our sins has been laid on the head of our
   great Substitute; and that, therefore, we are forever relieved from
   their penal consequences. But though that is so, yet often chastisement
   follows on our wrong-doing; not that we expiate the wrong-doing by
   suffering, but that we may be compelled to regard it in its true light.
   Amid the pain we suffer we are compelled to review our past. The
   carelessness, the unwatchfulness, the prayerlessness which have been
   working within us pass slowly before our minds. We see where we had
   been going astray for long months or years. We discover how deeply and
   incessantly we had been grieving God's Holy Spirit. We find that an
   alienation had been widening the breach between God and our souls,
   which, if it had proceeded further, must have involved moral ruin.
   Perhaps we never see our true character until the light dies off the
   landscape, and the clouds overcast the sky, and the wind rises
   moaningly about the house of our life.

   Times of affliction lead to heart-searchings, and we become
   increasingly aware of sins of which we had hardly thought at all. And
   even though the offense may be confessed and put away, so long as
   affliction lasts there is a subdued temper of heart and mind, which is
   most favorable to religious growth. We cannot forget our sin so long as
   the stroke of the Almighty lies on our soul; and we are compelled to
   maintain a habit of holy watchfulness against its recurrence.

   It is also in affliction that we learn that fellowship with the
   sufferings of Christ and that sympathy for others which are so lovely
   in true Christians. That is not the loftiest type of character which,
   like the Chinese pictures, has no background of shadow. Even Christ
   could only learn obedience by the things that he suffered, or become a
   perfect High-Priest by the ordeal of temptation. And how little can we
   enter into the inner depths of his soul, unless we tread the shadowed
   paths, or lie prostrate in the secluded glades of Gethsemane! We who
   attempt to assuage the griefs of mankind must ourselves be acquainted
   with grief, and become men of sorrows.

   Be sure, then, that not one moment's pain is given you to bear that
   could have been dispensed with. Each has been the subject of divine
   consideration before permitted to come, and each will be removed
   directly its needed mission is fulfilled.

   Special discipline is evidence of special love (ver. 6). It costs us
   much less to fling our superfluities on those we love than to cause
   them pain. Indulgence is a sign not of intense but of slender love. The
   heart that really and wisely loves will bear the pain of causing pain,
   will incur the risk of being misjudged, will not flinch from
   misrepresentation and reproach; from all of which a less affection
   would warily shrink. It is because our Father loves us that he chastens
   us. He would not take so much trouble over us if we were not dear to
   his heart. It is because we are sons that he sets himself to scourge
   us. But oh, how much he suffers as he wields that scourge of small
   cords! Yet, hail each blow; for each sting and smart cries to thee that
   thou art being received into the inner circle of love.

   When suppliants for his healing help came to our Lord, for the most
   part he hastened to their side. But on one occasion he lingered yet two
   days in the place where he was. He dared to face the suspicion of
   neglect and the loving impeachment of bereaved love, because he loved
   Martha and her sister and Lazarus. He loved them too much to be
   satisfied with doing small things for them, or revealing only fragments
   of his great glory. He longed to enrich them with his precious
   revelation of resurrection life. But his end could only be reached at
   the cost of untold sorrow, even unto death. Lazarus must die, and lie
   for two days in the grave, before his mightiest miracle could be
   wrought. And so he let the thunder-cloud break on the home lie loved,
   that he might be able to flash on it light which broke into a rainbow
   of prismatic glory.

   If you are signally visited with suffering, such as you cannot connect
   with persistence in carelessness or neglect, then take it that you are
   one of Heaven's favorites. It is not, as men think, the child of
   fortune and earthly grace, dowered with gifts in prodigal profusion,
   who is best beloved of God; but oftenest the child of poverty and pain
   and misfortune and heart-break. "If ye be without chastisement, whereof
   all are partakers, then ye are bastards and not sons." Oh, ye who
   escape the rod, begin seriously to ask whether indeed ye be born again!


   Pain is fraught with precious results (vv. 10, ii). " Not joyous but
   grievous: nevertheless afterward." How full of meaning is the
   "afterward." Who shall estimate the hundredfold of blessing from each
   moment of pain? The Psalms are crystallized tears. The Epistles were in
   many cases written in prison. The greatest teachers of mankind have
   learned their most helpful lessons in sorrow's school. The noblest
   characters have been forged in a furnace. Acts which will live forever,
   masterpieces of art and music and literature, have originated in ages
   of storm and tempest and heart-rending agony. And so also is it with
   our earthly discipline. The ripest results are sorrow-born.  "The path
   of sorrow, and that path alone, Leads to the land where sorrow is
   unknown."

   Holiness is the product of sorrow, when sanctified by the grace of God.
   Not that sorrow necessarily makes us holy, because that is the
   prerogative of the divine Spirit; and, as a matter of fact, many
   sufferers are hard and complaining and unlovely. But that sorrow
   predisposes us to turn from the distractions of earth to receive those
   influences of the grace of God which are most operative where the soul
   is calm and still, sitting in a veiled and darkened room, whilst
   suffering plies body or mind. Who of us does not feel willing to
   suffer, if only this precious result shall accrue, that we may be
   "partakers of his holiness" ?

   Fruit is another product (ver. 11). Where, think you, does the
   Husbandman of souls most often see the fruit he loves so well, and hear
   the tones of deepest trust? Not where his gifts are most profuse, but
   where they are most meager. Not within the halls of successful ambition
   or satiated luxury, but in cottages of poverty, and rooms dedicated to
   ceaseless pain. Genial almost to a miracle is the soil of sorrow.
   Necessary beyond all count is the pruning-knife of pain.

   Count, if you will, the precious kinds of fruit. There is patience,
   which endures the Father's will; and trust that sees the Father's hand
   behind the rough disguise; and peace, that lies still, content with the
   Father's plan; and righteousness, that conforms itself to the Father's
   requirements; and love, that clings more closely than ever to the
   Father's heart; and gentleness, which deals leniently with others,
   because of what we have learned of ourselves.

   Nor is it for very long. Jesus, who endured the cross and shame and
   spitting, is now set down on the right hand of the throne of God. Ere
   long we too shall come out of the great tribulation, to sit by his
   side. Every tear kissed away; every throb of anguish stayed; every
   memory of pain allayed by God's anodyne of bliss. The results will be
   ours forever. But sorrow and sighing, which may have been our daily
   comrades to the gates of the celestial city, will flee away as we step
   across its threshold, unable to exist in that radiant glory. "And God
   shall wipe away all tears from their eyes; and there shall be no more
   death, neither sorrow nor crying; neither shall there be any more
   pain." "For I reckon that the sufferings of this present time are not
   worthy to be compared with the glory which shall be revealed in us."
   "For our light affliction, which is but for a moment, worketh for us a
   far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory." "Wherefore lift up the
   hands that hang down, and the feeble knees."
     __________________________________________________________________

                              XXIX. THE IDEAL LIFE



    "Follow peace with all men, and holiness, without which no man shall see the
    Lord: looking diligently lest any man fail of the grace of God; lest any
    root of bitterness springing up trouble you, and thereby many be
    defiled."-HEBREWS xii. 14, 15.



   How beautiful and solemn are these words, like the swelling cadence of
   heaven's own music. Evidently they do not emanate from this
   sorrow-stricken and warring world; they are one of the laws of the
   kingdom of heaven, intended to mold and fashion our life on earth. It
   is quite likely that those who elect to obey them may not achieve name
   and fame amongst men; but they will win something infinitely better-the
   beatitude of blessedness, the smile of the Saviour, and the vision of
   God.

   There are souls among us of whom the world is not worthy; yet for whom
   the world, when it catches sight of them, prepares its bitterest venom;
   who have withdrawn their interest from the ambitions and schemes, the
   excitements and passions of their fellows, and who live a retired life,
   hidden with Christ in God, content to be unknowing and unknown; eager
   only to please God, to know him, or rather to be known of him, and to
   preserve the perfect balance of their nature with him, as its center
   and pivot and final cause. Such souls, perhaps, will best understand
   the infinite meaning and beauty of these deep and blessed words.

   THERE IS OUR ATTITUDE TOWARD GOD. " Follow after holiness." In the
   Revised Version this is rendered sanctification." And this in turn is
   only a Latin equivalent for "setting apart ", as Sinai among mountains;
   the Sabbath among the days of the week; the Levites among the Jews; and
   the Jews among the nations of the earth.

   But after all there is a deeper thought. Why were people, places, and
   things set apart? Was it not because God was there? He came down in
   might and glory on Sinai; therefore they needed to set bounds around
   its lower declivities. He chose to rest on the seventh day from all his
   work; therefore it was hallowed and sanctified. He selected the Jews to
   be his peculiar people, and the Levites to be his priests; therefore
   they were isolated from all beside. He appeared to Moses in the bush,
   glowing with the light of the Shekinah; therefore the spot was holy
   ground, and the shepherd needed to bare his feet. In other words, it is
   the presence of God which makes holy. There is only one Being in all
   the universe who is really holy. Holiness is the attribute of his
   nature, and of his nature only. We can never be holy apart from God;
   but when God enters the spirit of man, he brings holiness with him.
   Nay, the presence of God in man is holiness.

   A room or public building may be full of delicious sunlight. But that
   sunlight is not the property of the room. It does not belong to it. You
   cannot congratulate it upon its possession. For when the shadows of
   evening gather, and curtain the face of the sun, the chamber is as dark
   as possible. It is light only so long as the sun dwells in it. So the
   human spirit has no holiness apart from God. Holiness is not a
   perquisite or property or attribute to which any of us can lay claim.
   It is the indwelling of God's light and glory within us. He is the holy
   man in whom God dwells. He is the holier in whom God dwells more fully.
   He is the holiest who, however poor his intellect and mean his earthly
   lot, is most possessed and filled by the presence of God through the
   Holy Ghost. We need not wonder at the Apostle addressing believers as
   saints, when he was able to say of them: "Your body is the temple of
   the Holy Ghost, which is in you" (1 Cor. iii. 16; vi. 19).


   Why, then, does the sacred writer bid us "follow after holiness," as
   though it were an acquisition? Because, though holiness is the
   infilling of man's spirit by the Spirit of God, yet there are certain
   very important conditions to be observed by us if we would secure and
   enjoy that blessed gift.


   Give self no quarter. It is always asserting itself in one or other of
   its Protean shapes. Do not expect to be rid of it. Even if you say you
   have conquered it, then it lurks beneath the smile of your
   self-complacency. It may show itself in religious pride, in desire to
   excel in virtue, in the satisfaction with which we hear ourselves
   remarked for our humility. It will need incessant watchfulness, because
   where self is there God cannot come. He will not share his glory with
   another. When we are settling down to slumber, we may expect the cry,
   "Thine enemy is upon thee; "for it will invade our closets and our
   places of deepest retirement.

   It is impossible to read the Epistles of the Apostle Peter without
   being impressed with the solemn and awful character of the Christian
   life, the constant need of watchfulness, the urgency for diligence,
   self-restraint, and self-denial. Oh for this holy sensitiveness! always
   exercising the self~watch; never sparing ourselves; merciful to others
   because so merciless to self; continually exercising ourselves to
   preserve a conscience void of offense toward God and men.


   Yield to God. He is ever seeking the point of least resistance in our
   natures. Help him to find it; and when found, be sure to let him have
   his blessed way. "Whatsoever he saith unto you, do it." Work out what
   God works in. Translate the thoughts of God into the vernacular of
   daily obedience. Be as plastic to his touch as clay in the hands of the
   potter, so that you may realize every ideal which is in his heart. Be
   not as the horse and mule, but let your mouth be tender to every motion
   of the divine purpose concerning you. And if you find it difficult to
   maintain this attitude, be sure to tell your difficulty to the Holy
   Spirit, and trust him to keep your heart steadfast and unmovable, fixed
   and obedient.


   Take time to it. "Follow after." This habit is not to be acquired in a
   bound or at a leap. It can be formed in its perfection only after years
   of self-discipline and watchful self-culture. To abide ever in Christ,
   to yield to God, to keep all the windows of the nature open toward his
   gracious infilling, to turn naturally to him, and first, amid peril and
   temptations, in all times of sorrow and trial, this is not natural, but
   it may become as second nature by habitual diligence.

   But it must necessarily be the work of time ere the sense of effort
   ceases and the soul naturally and spontaneously turns to God "in every
   hour of waking thought." And if we are to acquire this blessed and
   perpetual attitude of soul, we must take time to acquire it, as to
   acquire aught else which is really precious. It must be no by~play; nor
   the work of off or leisure hours; nor a pastime: but the serious object
   of life, the purpose which shall thread all the varied beads of life's
   chain, and give a beautiful unity to all.


   To such a character there shall be the vision of God. "Blessed are the
   pure in heart; for they shall see God." Had you been beside Moses
   during his forty days in the heart of the cloud, when he saw God face
   to face, you would not have seen him if you had not been holy. Had you
   stood beside the martyr Stephen when he beheld the glory of God, and
   the Son of man standing beside him, your eyes would have discerned
   nothing if you had not been holy. Yea, if it were possible for you
   without holiness to pass within the pearly gate, you would not see the
   sheen, as it were, of sapphire; you would carry with you your own
   circumference of darkness, and the radiant vision would vanish as you
   approached. "Without holiness no man shall see the Lord."

   The heart has eyes as well as the head; and for want of holiness these
   become seriously impaired, so that the wise in their own conceits see
   not, whilst those who are simple, humble, and pure in heart behold the
   hidden and prepared things of God. The one condition for seeing God in
   his Word, in nature, in daily life, and in closet-fellowship, is
   holiness of heart wrought there by his own indwelling. Follow after
   holiness as men pursue pleasure; as the athlete runs for the prize; as
   the votary of fashion follows in the wake of the crowd.


   THERE IS OUR ATTITUDE TOWARD MEN. " Follow after peace." The effect of
   righteousness is always peace. If you are holy, you will be at peace.
   Peace is broken by sin; but the holy soul takes sin instantly to the
   Blood. Peace is broken by temptation; but the holy soul has learned to
   put Christ between itself and the first breath of the tempter. Peace is
   broken by care, dissatisfaction, and unrest; but the Lord stands around
   the holy soul, as do the mountains around Jerusalem, which shield off
   the cruel winds, and collect the rain which streams down their broad
   sides to make the dwellers in the valleys rejoice and sing. Others may
   be fretful and feverish, the subjects of wild alarms; but there is
   perfect peace to the soul which has God, and is satisfied.

   When a man is full of the peace of God, he will naturally become a son
   of peace. He will follow after peace with them that call on the Lord
   out of a pure heart (2 Tim. ii. 22). He will endeavor to keep the unity
   of the Spirit in the bond of peace (Eph. iv. 3). He will sow harvests
   of peace as he makes peace (James iii. 18). All his epistles, like
   those of the great Apostle, will breathe benedictions of peace; and his
   entrance to a home will seem like a living embodiment of the ancient
   form of benediction: Peace be to this house. He will have a wonderful
   power of calling out responses from like-minded men; but where that is
   not the case, his peace, white-robed and dove-winged, shall come back
   to him again.

   But there must be a definite following after peace. The temperaments of
   some are so trying. They are so apt to look at things in a wrong light,
   to put misconstructions on harmless actions, and to stand out on
   trifles. Hence the need of endeavor and patience and watchfulness, that
   we may exercise a wholesome influence as peacemakers.


   Avoid becoming a party to a quarrel. It takes two to make a quarrel;
   never be one. A soft answer will often turn away wrath, and where it
   does not, yield before the wrong-doer, give place to wrath, let it
   expend itself unhindered by your resistance; it will soon have vented
   itself, to be succeeded by shame, penitence, and regret.


   If opposed to the malice of men, do not avenge yourselves. Our cause is
   more God's than it is our own. It is for him to vindicate us; and he
   will. He may permit a temporary cloud to rest on us for some wise
   purpose; but ultimately he will bring out our righteousness as the
   light, and our judgment as the noonday. The non-resistance of evil is
   the dear teaching of Christ (Matt. v.39; Rom. xii. 19; 1 Pet. ii. 21).
   Stand up for the true, the holy, the good, at all costs; but think very
   little of standing up for your own rights. What are your rights? Are
   you anything better than a poor sinner who has forfeited all? You
   deserve to be treated much worse than you were ever treated at the
   worst. Leave God to vindicate you.


   Do not give cause of offense. If you are aware of certain
   susceptibilities on the part of others, where they may be easily
   wounded and irritated, avoid touching them, if you can do so without
   being a traitor to God's holy truth. And if thy brother has any true
   bill against you, rest not day nor night, tarry not even at the
   footstool of divine mercy; but go to him forthwith, and seek his
   forgiveness, and make ample restitution, that he may have no cause of
   reproach against thy professions, or against thy Lord (Matt.v.23).

   Oh for more of his peace! -in the face never crossed by impatience; in
   the voice never rising above gentle tones; in the manner never excited
   or morose; in the gesture still and restful, which acts as oil poured
   over the raging billows of the sea when they foam around the bulwarks
   of the ship and are suddenly quelled.


   THERE IS OUR ATTITUDE TOWARD OUR FELLOW CHRISTIANS. "Looking diligently
   lest any man fail of the grace of God." It is a beautiful provision
   that love to common Lord attracts us into the fellowship of his
   disciples; and as no individual life truly develops in Solitariness, so
   no Christian is right or healthy who isolates himself from the
   communion of saints. But we go not there only for selfish
   gratification, but that we may look after one another, not leaving it
   to the officers of the host, but each doing our own share.

   There are three dangers. The laggards. This is the meaning of "fail."
   The idea is borrowed from a party of travelers, some of whom lag
   behind, as in the retreat from Moscow, to fall a prey to Cossacks,
   wolves, or the awful sleep. Let us who are in the front ranks, strong
   and healthy, go back to look after the weaklings who loiter to their
   peril.


   The root of bitterness. There may be some evil root lurking in some
   heart, hidden now, but which Will bear a terrible harvest of misery to
   many. So was it in Israel once, when Achan conceived thoughts of
   covetousness, and brought evil on himself, and mourning on the host
   whose defeat he had brought about. If we can discover the presence of
   such roots of bitterness, let us, with much searching of our own souls,
   humility, and prayer, root them out ere they can spring up to cause
   trouble.


   The profane and early-minded. Of these Esau is the type, "who for one
   morsel of meat sold his birthright." Alas are there not many such? For
   one momentary gratification of the flesh, they forfeit not their
   salvation perhaps (we are not told that even Esau forfeited that); but
   their power to lead, to teach, to receive and hand on blessing to the
   Church.

   Are any such reading these words? Let them beware! Such choices are
   sometimes irrevocable. So was it with Esau. He wept and cried like some
   trapped animal; but he could not alter the destiny he had made for
   himself. The words "place for repentance" do not refer to his personal
   salvation, but to the altering of the decision which he had made as a
   young man, and which his father ratified. He could not undo. What he
   had written, he had written. And so there may come a time when you
   would give everything you possess to have again the old power of
   blessing and helping your fellows; but you will find that for one
   moment's sensual gratification, the blessed prerogative has slipped
   from your grasp-never-never-never to return. Wherefore, let us eagerly
   and diligently look both to ourselves and our fellow-believers in the
   Church of God.
     __________________________________________________________________

XXX. SINAI AND SION




    "Ye are come unto Mount Sion, and unto the city of the living God, . . . and
    to an innumerable company of angels; to the general assembly and church of
    the firstborn; . . and to God the Judge of all; and to the spirits of just
    men made perfect; and to Jesus; and to the blood of sprinkling, that
    speaketh better things than that of Abel. "-HEBREWS xii. 22-24.



   To how great splendor had these Hebrew Christians been
   accustomed-marble courts, throngs of white-robed Levites, splendid
   vestments, the state and pomp of symbol, ceremonial, and choral psalm!
   And to what a contrast were they reduced-a meeting in some hall or
   school, with the poor, afflicted, and persecuted members of a despised
   and hated sect! It was indeed a change, and the inspired writer knew it
   well; and in these magnificent words, the sublime consummation and
   crown of his entire argument, he sets himself to show that, for every
   single item they had renounced, they had become possessed of a
   spiritual counterpart, a reality, an eternal substance, which was
   compensation told over a thousand fimes.


   "Ye are come." He refuses to admit the thought of it being a future
   experience, reserved for some high day, when the heavenly courts shall
   be thronged by the populations of redeemed and glorified spirits. That
   there will be high days of sacred festivity in that blessed state is
   clear from the Apocalypse of the beloved Apostle. But it is to none of
   them that these words allude. Mark that present tense, "Ye are come."
   Persecuted, weary, humiliated, these Hebrew Christians had already come
   to Mount Sion, to the city of the living God, and to the festal throngs
   of the redeemed. That they saw not these by the eye, and could not
   touch them by the hand of sense, was no reason for doubting that they
   had come to these glorious realities. And what was true of them is true
   of each reader of these lines who is united to the Lord Jesus by a
   living faith.


   WE BELONG TO MOUNT SION. "Ye are not come unto the mount that might be
   touched and that burned with fire, . . . but ye are come unto Mount
   Sion." At the bidding of these two words two mountains rise before us.
   First, Sinai, stern and naked, rifted by tempest, cleft by earthquake,
   the center and focus of the vast sandstone passages which conducted the
   pilgrim host, stage above stage, until it halted at its foot.

   But, grand as Sinai was by nature, it must have been grander far on
   that memorable day in which all elements of terror seemed to converge.
   There was the flash of the forked lightning out of the blackness of the
   brooding clouds. There was the darkness of midnight; the peal of
   thunder, the reverberations of which ran in volumes of sound along
   those resounding corridors; the whirlwind of tempest, and the voice of
   words which they entreated they might not hear any more. And all was
   done to teach the people the majesty, the spirituality, and the
   holiness of God. The result was terror, struck into the hearts of
   sinners, trembling at the contrast between the greatness and holiness
   of God and their own remembered murmurings and shortcomings. Even Moses
   said: "I exceedingly fear and quake."

   In contrast with this stands Mount Sion, the gray old rock on which
   stood the palace of David and the Temple of God-sites sacred to Jewish
   thought for holy memories and divine associations. "The Lord hath
   chosen Sion, he hath desired it for his habitation. This is my rest
   forever; here will I dwell; for I have desired it." To the pious Jew,
   Mount Sion was the joy of the whole earth, the mountain of holiness,
   the city of the Great King. Her palaces, gray with age, were known to
   be the home and haunt of God. The very aspect of the hoary hills must
   strike panic into the heart of her foes. And her sons walked proudly
   around her ramparts, telling her towers, marking her bulwarks,
   considering her palaces, whilst fathers told to their children the
   Stories of her glory which in their boyhood they too had received
   (Psalm xlviii.).

   The counterpart of this city is ours still, ours forever. The halo of
   glory has faded off those ancient stones, and has passed on to rest on
   the true city of God, of which the foundations are Righteousness, the
   walls Peace, and the gates Praise; which rises beyond the mists and
   clouds of time, in the light that shines not from the sun or moon, but
   from the face of God. In other words, somewhere in this universe there
   is a holy society of souls, pure and lovely, the elite of the family of
   man, gathered in a home which the hand of man has never piled, and the
   sin of man has never soiled. Its walls are jasper, its gates pearl.
   Into it nothing can enter that defiles or works abomination, and deals
   in lies.

   The patriarchs caught sight of that city in their pilgrimage; it
   gleamed before their vision, beckoning them ever forward, and
   forbidding their return to the country from which they had come out.
   And the Seer of Patmos beheld it descending from God out of heaven,
   bathed in the divine glory.

   To that city we have come. It has come down into our hearts; day by day
   we walk its streets; we live in its light, we breathe its atmosphere,
   we enjoy its rights. We have no counterpart in our experience of Mount
   Sinai, with its thunder and terror; but, thank God, we have the reality
   of Mount Sion, with its blessed and holy privileges. Sinai is the law,
   temporary and intermediate; Sion, the Gospel, eternal and abiding.
   Sinai is full of human resolutions and vows, made to be broken; Sion is
   the election of grace. Sinai is terrible with the thunder of law; Sion
   is tender with the appeals of the love of the heart of God.


   WE BELONG TO A GREAT FESTAL THRONG. The converted Jew might miss the
   vast crowds that gathered at the annual feasts, when the tribes of the
   Lord went up; whilst kinsfolk and acquaintance took sweet counsel
   together, as they went to the house of God in company. But, to the
   opened eye of faith, the rooms where they knelt in worship were as full
   of bright and festal multitudes as the mountain of old was full of
   horses and chariots of fire. And these are for us also.


   There is an innumerable company of angels. Myriads. Thousand thousands
   minister to our Lord; ten thousand times ten thousand stand before him.
   When, therefore, the saintly spirit ascends the altar steps of true
   devotion, it passes through a vast host of sympathetic spirits, all of
   whom are devoted to the same Master, and are joining in the same act of
   worship. Listen! Do you not hear the voice of many angels around the
   throne as you draw nigh?


   There is also the general assembly and Church of the first-born. We
   meet the Church of the redeemed each time we sincerely worship God. We
   may belong to some small section of the visible Church, unrecognized
   and unknown by the great bulk of our fellow-believers. We may be
   isolated from all outward fellowship and communion with the saints,
   imprisoned in the sick-chamber, or self-banished to some lone spot for
   the sake of the Gospel; but nothing can exclude us from living
   communion with saintly souls of all communions and sects and
   denominations and names.

   Your name may be written on no communicants' roll, or church register.
   But is it written in the Lamb's Book of Life in heaven? If so, then
   rejoice! This is more important than if the spirits were subject to
   you. And, remember, whenever you worship God you are ascending the
   steps of the true temple, in company with vast hosts of souls, whether
   on this side or on the other of the veil of sense. Neither life nor
   death nor rite nor church order can divide those who, because they are
   one with Christ, are forever one with each other.


   There are also the spirits of just men made perfect. If the former
   phrase rather speaks of the New Testament believers, this may be taken
   to describe the Old Testament saints. Or, if the one designates those
   who are still serving God on earth, the other probably refers to those
   who have passed into the presence of God, and have attained their
   consummation and bliss.

   Who can be lonely and desolate, who can bemoan the past, who can
   disparage the present, when once the spirit is able to realize that
   rejoicing company, in earth and heaven, circling around the Saviour as
   planets around the central sun, and sending in tides and torrents of
   love and worship? Yea, who can forbear to sing, as the ear detects the
   mighty harmonies of every creature which is in heaven, and on the
   earth, and under the earth, saying, "Blessing, and honor, and glory,
   and power, be unto him that sitteth upon the throne, and unto the Lamb
   forever."


   WE ARE COME TO THE BLOOD OF JESUS. We dare not approach the august
   Judge of all, were it not for the Mediator between God and men, Jesus
   Christ the righteous. Nor would he avail for his chosen work, unless he
   had shed his most precious blood, which has ratified the new covenant,
   and cleansed away our sins, and now ever avails to sprinkle us from an
   evil conscience, removing each stain of guilt so soon as the soul
   confesses and seeks forgiveness, with tears of penitence and words of
   faith.


   It speaks better things than Abel's. That was the blood of martrydom;
   this of sacrifice. That accursed, as it cried from the ground; this
   only pleads for mercy. That denounced wrath; this proclaims reconciling
   love. That led to punishment which branded the murderer; this issues in
   salvation. That was unto death; this is unto life.

   All blood has a cry. Listen to the cry of the blood of Jesus. It speaks
   to man for God. It speak~ to God for man. It tells us that there is no
   condemnation, no wrath, no judgment; because the thunderstorm broke and
   exhausted itself on Calvary. And when we go to our Father, it pleads
   for us from the wounds of the Lamb as it had been slain.

   Oh, precious blood! if better than that of Abel, how much better than
   all the blood of all the beast1 ever slain; than all the sacrifices
   ever offered; than al1 the tears or prayers ever presented in the
   strength of human virtue:  we cannot, we will not refuse thee, or turn
   away from thy pleading cry, or reject him who once spake from the
   cross, and now speaks from heaven!
     __________________________________________________________________

                     XXXI. THE THINGS THAT CANNOT BE SHAKEN



    This word, Yet once more, signifieth the removing of those things that are
    shaken, as of things that are made; that those things which cannot be shaken
    may remain."-HEBREWS xii. 27.



   WHAT majesty there is in these words! They bear the mint mark of Deity.
   No man could presume to utter them; but they become the august speaker.
   Their original setting is even more magnificent, as we find them in the
   Book of Haggai: "Thus saith the Lord of hosts; Yet once, it is a little
   while, and I will shake the heavens, and the earth, and the sea, and
   the dry land; and I will shake all nations, and the Desire of all
   nations shall come."

   These words were first spoken to encourage the Jewish exiles on their
   return from Babylon to their ruined Temple and city. The elder men wept
   as they thought of the departed glories of earlier days, and God
   comforted them, as he delights to comfort those who are cast down. "Be
   comforted," said he in effect, "there is a crisis coming, which will
   test and overthrow all material structures; and in that convulsion the
   outer form will pass away, however fair and costly it may be, whilst
   the inner hidden glory will become more apparent than ever; nay, amid
   all the sounds of wreck and change, there will come the Desire of all
   nations, the substance of which these material objects are but the
   fading and incomplete anticipation."

   These Hebrew Christians were living in the midst of a great shaking. It
   was a time of almost universal trial. God was shaking not earth only,
   but also heaven. The Jewish tenure of Palestine was being shaken by the
   Romans, who claimed it as their conquest. The interpretation given to
   the Word of God by the rabbis was being shaken by the fresh light
   introduced through the words and life and death of Jesus. The supremacy
   of the Temple and its ritual was being shaken by those who taught that
   the true Temple was the Christian Church, and that all the Levitical
   sacrifices had been realized in Christ. The observance of the Sabbath
   was being shaken by those who wished to substitute for it the first day
   of the week.

   The first symptoms of this shaking began when Jesus commenced to teach
   and preach in the crowded cities of Palestine, and all people flocked
   about him. The successive throes became more obvious when the Jewish
   leaders sought to silence the Apostles and stay the onward progress of
   the Church. The Book of the Acts of the Apostles, and the Epistles, are
   full of evidence of the intensity of that revolution which must have
   made many godly people tremble for the Ark of God. And the climax of
   all came in the fearful siege of Jerusalem, when, once and forever, the
   Jewish system was shattered, the Temple burned, the remaining vessels
   sunk in the Tiber, and the Jews were driven from the city which was
   absolutely essential for the performance of their religious rites. The
   whole New Testament is witness to the throes of one of the mightiest
   spiritual revolutions that ever happened; as great in the spiritual
   sphere as the French Revolution was in the temporal.

   It was amidst these fires that this Epistle was written. "Take heart,"
   says the inspired writer; "these shakings come from the hand of God."
   Listen to his own words, I shake. And they shall not last forever, yet
   this once; nor will they injure anything of eternal worth and truth. He
   shakes all things, that the material, the sensuous, and the temporal
   may pass away; leaving the essential and eternal to stand out in more
   than former beauty. But not a grain of pure metal shall be lost in the
   fires; not a fragment of heaven's masonry shall crumble beneath the
   shock.


   In such a time we are living now. Everything is being shaken and
   tested. But there is a divine purpose in it all, that his eternal truth
   may stand out more clearly and unmistakably, when all human traditions
   and accretions have fallen away, unable to resist the energy of the
   shock. And who will bewail this too bitterly? Who shall weep because
   the winds strip the trees of their old dead leaves, if only the new
   spring verdure may be able to show itself? Who shall lament that the
   heavy blow shatters the mold, if only the perfect image shall stand out
   in complete symmetry? Who shall mourn over the passing away of the
   heaven and the earth, if, as they break up, they reveal beneath them
   the imperishable beauty of the new heavens and the new earth in which
   dwells Righteousness?


   THEOLOGICAL SYSTEMS ARE BEING SHAKEN. There was a time when men
   received their theological beliefs from their teachers, their parents,
   or their Church without a word of question or controversy. There was
   none that moved the wing, or opened the mouth, or chirped. It is not so
   now; the air is filled with questionings. Men are putting into the
   crucible every doctrine which our forefathers held dear. There is no
   veneration shown for time honored creeds or theological distinctions or
   doctrinal formularies. The highest themes, such as the Nature of the
   Atonement, the Necessity of Regeneration, the Duration of Future
   Punishment, are being criticised in the public press.

   Many children of God are very distressed about this, and fear for the
   truth of the Gospel. They speak as if there were no other agents in the
   conflict but those of mortal birth. They lose sight of the eternal
   issues at stake, and the unseen forces which are implicated in the
   conflict. Is it likely that God will allow his precious Gospel to be
   overshadowed or robbed of all essential elements? Has he maintained it
   in its integrity for these ages, and is he now suddenly become a mighty
   man who cannot save? When it seemed as if evangelical doctrine had died
   out of the world in the sixteenth century, because it lingered only
   amid some obscure and humble saints, he raised up one man, who rolled
   back the tides of error, and reared once more the standard of Gospel
   truth; and can he not do it again?

   In these terrible shakings, not one jot or tittle of God's Word shall
   perish; not one grain of truth shall fall to the ground; not one stone
   in the fortress shall be dislodged. But they are permitted to come,
   partly to test the chaff and wheat as a winnowing-fan; but chiefly that
   all which is temporal and transient may pass away, whilst the simple
   truth of God becomes more apparent, and shines forth unhidden by the
   scaffolding and rubbish with which the builders have obscured its
   symmetry and beauty. "The things which cannot be shaken shall remain.


   ECCLESIASTICAL SYSTEMS ARE BEING SHAKEN. It is not enough that any
   religious system should exist; it is asked somewhat rudely to show
   cause why it should continue to exist. The spirit of the age is
   utilitarian, and is reluctant to consider any plea for mercy which is
   not based on a clear evidence of service rendered to its pressing
   necessities.

   The signs of this are abundantly evident. Now it is the
   Disestablishment of the Church which is proposed; a proposal which
   fills with horror those who regard it as necessary for the maintenance
   of Christianity in our midst. Teachers of religion are challenged to
   show reason for assuming their office, or of claiming special
   prerogatives. Methods of work are being weighed in the balances;
   missionary plans trenchantly criticised; religious services
   metamorphosed. Change is threatening the most time-honored customs; and
   all this is very distressing to those who have confused the essence
   with the form, the jewel with the casket, the spirit with the temple in
   which it dwells. But let us not fear. All this is being permitted for
   the wisest ends. There is a great deal of wood, hay, and stubble in all
   our structures which needs to be burned up; but not an ounce of gold or
   silver will ever be destroyed. The waves may wash off the weed which
   has attached itself to the harbor wall; but they will fail to start one
   constituent stone. The simplicity of early Church life has been
   undoubtedly covered over with many accretions which hinder the progress
   of the Church and impede her work; and we may hail any visitation,
   however drastic, which shall set her free. But the Church herself is
   founded on a rock, and the gates of hell shall never prevail against
   her.

   Well was it for the Church of Christ when the days of persecution lay
   sorely on her. Never was she so pure, so spiritually powerful, as then.
   And if such days should ever be allowed to return, and God were to
   shake her fabric with the fierce whirlwinds of martyrdom, there would
   be no need for anxiety. The time-servers, the mere professors, the
   creatures of fashion would stand revealed; but those who had
   experienced the work of God in their souls would endure to the end, and
   their true character would be manifested. "The things that cannot be
   shaken will remain."


   OUR CHARACTERS AND LIVES ARE CONSTANTLY BEING SHAKEN. What a shake that
   sermon gave us which showed that all our righteousnesses, on which we
   counted so fondly, were but withered leaves! What a shake was that
   commercial disaster which swept away in one blow the savings and credit
   of years, that were engrossing the heart, and left us only what we had
   of spiritual worth! What a shake was that temptation which showed that
   our fancied sinlessness was an empty dream, and that we were as
   sensitive to temptation as those over whom we had been vaunting
   ourselves.

   What has been the net result of all these shakings? Has a hair of our
   heads perished? The old man has perished; but the inward man has been
   daily renewed. The more the marble has wasted, the more the statue has
   grown. As the wooden centers have been knocked down, the solid masonry
   has stood out with growing completeness. "The things which could not be
   shaken have remained."

   "Go on, great Spirit of God: shake with thine earthquakes even more
   violently these characters of ours, that all which is not of thee, but
   of us, and therefore false and selfish, may be revealed and overthrown,
   so that we may learn our true possessions. And as we see them saved to
   us from the general wreck, we shall know that, having been given us by
   thyself, they must partake of thine own permanence and eternity. Let us
   learn the worst of ourselves, that we may learn to prize thy best."  At
   the most these shakings are temporary. "Only this once," child of God!
   Then, nevermore!


   THERE ARE A FEW THINGS WHICH CANNOT BE SHAKEN. God's Word. Heaven and
   earth may pass away; but God's Word-never! All flesh is grass, and all
   the glory of man, his opinions, his pretensions, his pomp and pride, as
   the flower of grass, beautiful, but evanescent; but the Word of the
   Lord shall stand forever, and this is the Word which by the Gospel is
   being preached. Let us not fear modern criticism; it cannot rob us of
   one jot or tittle of God's truth. Scripture will shake it off, as the
   Apostle did the viper which fastened on his hand, and felt no hurt.


   God's Love. Our friends' love may be shaken by a rumor, a moment's
   neglect, a change in our estate; but God's love is like himself,
   immutable. No storm can reach high enough to touch the empyrean of his
   love. He never began to love us for anything in ourselves, nor will he
   cease to love us because of what he discovers us to be. The love of
   God, which is in Jesus Christ our Lord, is unassailable by change or
   shock.


   God's Eternal Kingdom. "We receive a kingdom which cannot be shaken."
   Amid all our revolutions and political changes that Kingdom is coming.
   It is assuming body and shape and power. It is now in mystery, but it
   shall soon be revealed. And it cannot be touched by any sudden attack
   or revolt of human passion. "The God of heaven shall set up a kingdom,
   which shall never be destroyed."

   Let us count up our inalienable and imperishable treasures; and though
   around us there is the terror of the darkness or the pestilence of the
   noontide, we shall be kept in perfect peace; as when some petty
   sovereign eyes with equanimity the mob arising to sack his palace,
   because long ago he sent all his treasures to be kept in the strong
   cellars of the Bank of England.

   This world of change and earthquake is not our rest or home. These
   await us where God lives, in the city which hath foundations, and in
   the land where the storm rages not, but the sea of glass lies
   peacefully at the foot of the throne of God. We may well brace
   ourselves to fortitude and patience, to reverence and Godly fear; since
   we have that in ourselves and yonder which partakes of the nature of
   God, and neither thieving time can steal it, nor moth corrupt, nor
   change affect.

   It is out of a spirit like this that we are able to offer service that
   pleases God. Too often there is a self-assumption, a vainglory, an
   energy of the flesh, that must be in the deepest degree objectionable
   to his holy, loving eye. It partakes so much of the unrest and chafe of
   the world around. But when once we breathe the Spirit of the Eternal
   and Infinite, our hand becomes steadier, our heart quieter, and we
   learn to receive his grace. We do not agonize for it; we claim and use
   it, and we serve God with acceptance, through the merits of Jesus
   Christ our Lord.
     __________________________________________________________________

                          XXXII. GOD A CONSUMING FIRE.


    Our God is a consuming fire."-HEBREWS xii. 29.



   THIS is one of the shortest texts in the Bible. It takes rank with
   those other three brief sentences which declare the nature of God: God
   is Light, God is Love, God is Life. But to many it is one of the most
   awful sayings in the whole of Scripture. It rankles in the memory;
   recurs continually to the uneasy conscience; and rings its wild tocsin
   of alarm in the ear of the anxious inquirer. And yet there is an aspect
   in which it may be viewed which will make it one of the most
   comforting, precious passages in the whole range of inspiration.

   Fire is indeed a word significant of horror. To be awakened from sleep
   by that one awful cry will make the flesh tremble and the heart stand
   still. A baby's cradle wrapped in flame; a beloved form suddenly
   enveloped in a burning fiery furnace; a ship on fire amid the wild
   expanse of the homeless ocean, and slowly burning down to the level of
   the waves-in any of these figures you have a suggestion of almost
   unparalleled horror.

   And yet, for all that, what comfort and homelikeness and genial
   blessedness there are in the kindly glow of firelight! There is no sign
   of more abject poverty than the fireless grate. And however warm the
   rooms may be in Russia or France, the traveler greedily longs for the
   blaze of the open fireplace of his native land. Besides, what should we
   do without this strong, good-natured giant, which toils for us so
   sturdily? It draws our carriages along the metal track. It drives the
   machinery of our factories. It disintegrates the precious ore from its
   rocky matrix. It induces a momentary softness in our toughest metals,
   so that we can shape them to our will. The arts of civilized life would
   be impossible but for this Titan worker.

   It is obvious, therefore, that whilst Fire is the synonym for horror
   and dismay, yet it is also full of blessing and good-will. It is the
   former only when its necessary laws are violated. It is the latter when
   those laws are rigorously and reverently observed. Yes, and are not
   destruction and ruin the strange and unnatural work of fire? whilst its
   chosen mission is to bless and beautify and enrich; consuming only the
   dross and thorns and rubbish, so that there may be a clearer revelation
   of the enduring realities over which it has no power.

   When, therefore, our God is compared to fire, is it only because of the
   more terrible aspects of his nature, which are to be dreaded by
   transgressors? Is there not also, and perhaps more largely, a
   suggestion of those beneficent qualities which are needed for our
   purity and comfort? Surely there is a strong flavor of such
   characteristics in the assurance given to us by the prophet Isaiah,
   "The light of Israel shall be for a fire, and his Holy One for a flame:
   and it shall burn and devour his thorns and his briers in one day"
   (Isa. x. 17).


   Fire in the Word of God is not always terrible. When of old God came
   down on Sinai, its upper peaks were veiled with impenetrable folds of
   smoke, like the smoke of a furnace. And in the heart of the smoke there
   was the appearance of devouring fire. There is dread here! Bounds had
   been set to keep the people back; but a special message must be see fit
   to warn them against breaking through to gaze, lest the fire should
   break forth upon them. But there was no harm so long as they kept
   without the barriers; and when Moses entered into the very heart of it,
   it did not singe a hair of his head, and injured him no more than when
   it played round the fragile acacia bush, which burned with fire without
   being consumed, not a leaf shriveled, nor a twig scorched. It is quite
   true that in the desert pilgrimage there was much of the punitive
   aspect in the divine fire; as when there came out a fire from the Lord,
   and consumed the two hundred and fifty men with censers who had joined
   in Korah's rebellion, and had spoken contemptuously of God's anointed
   servants: but, on the other hand, it did not hurt one other soul; and
   these were destroyed, awfully indeed, but almost too suddenly to feel
   the keen smart of pain. And surely that fire did a beneficent work in
   staying the further progress of evil, which would have honeycombed the
   whole nation and led to their destruction as a people.

   In the days of Elijah the fire of God consumed two captains and their
   fifties; but the captains and their troops were full of wanton
   insolence. There was no hurt done to him who knelt at the mountain
   foot, beseeching the man of God with reverence and humility. And when,
   shortly afterward, the great prophet was to go home, it was a chariot
   of fire in which he sat himself, as in some congenial and friendly
   element, to waft him to his home.

   And on the day of Pentecost when each head bent low beneath the sound
   as of a mighty rushing wind, a moment afterward each was girt with
   fire. Apostles, disciples, and women alike experienced this sacred
   investiture; but it hurt them not. They were far from being perfect
   characters; and yet there was evidently nothing to fear in the descent
   of that fiery baptism. They were baptized with the Holy Ghost, but they
   were unconsumed.

   Do not these instances shed light upon our text?


   OUR GOD IS A CONSUMING FIRE; AND THERE IS TERROR IN THE SYMBOL. But the
   terror is reserved for those who unceasingly and persistently violate
   his laws and despise his love. For those who willfully follow courses
   of sin, after they have received the knowledge of the truth, there is
   doubtless a fearful looking for of judgment and fiery indignation. On
   those who will not obey the Gospel of the Lord Jesus, clearly presented
   to them, vengeance will be taken in flaming fire. No words can
   exaggerate the terror, the anguish, the dreadfulness of their fate. Sin
   is no light matter. In this world even it is fearfully avenged. Walk
   through certain wards in our hospitals, and tell me if anything could
   exceed the horror, the agony, of the penalty which is being inflicted
   on those who have flagrantly violated the laws of nature. And, so far
   as we can see, the physical penalties which follow upon wrongdoing are
   not unto life and restoration, but unto death and destruction. It is
   necessary that these sufferings should be veiled from the eye of man;
   but surely they must be taken into account when we estimate God's
   treatment of sin. And if such pain, keen as fire, consumes those who
   violate physical law, surely we must admit that there is a still more
   awful doom for those who violate the laws of God's love and grace and
   pleading mercy.

   God forbid that we should say one word to lessen men's dread of the
   penal consequences of sin. There is a great danger lest, amid our
   growing conceptions of the love of God, we should come to think that he
   is altogether such a one as we are inclined to be in our dealings with
   our children, soft, easy, and indulgent. God is love; and yet he
   permits the little child to be burned, if it plays heedlessly with
   flame. God is love; but he permits bodies to rot in loathsome disease,
   without hope of cure, if men persistently do despite to his law. God is
   love; but he allows the whole course of a life to be blasted by one
   yielding to transgression and sin. And thus, though God is love, it is
   possible for sins to be punished with sufferings, bitter as the gnawing
   worm, keen as the fire that is not quenched.

   If once we realized these things (and we should realize them if we
   would quietly consider the clear statements of the Word of God on such
   matters), we should come to understand much better the desperate nature
   of sin; and to yearn with deeper compassion over those who obstinately
   resist the grace of God, either following the evil courses suggested by
   their own hearts, or led captive by the devil at his will.

   O disobedient soul, who hast read these words thus far, stop and
   bethink thee of thy danger! Beware lest thou be as the chaff or thorns,
   which are burned up with unquenchable fire, on the part of the Lord
   himself. Be quick to turn to him and live. Yet if thou suffer
   irretrievable ruin, remember thou wilt have only thyself to blame;
   because thou hast broken the elementary laws of thy nature, and hast
   set thyself in opposition to the God who loves thee, and would redeem
   thee, but whom thou hast refused and defied. If only thou wouldst bend
   thy stubborn neck and sutbmit to shelter thyself in the person and work
   of Jesus, God's perfect holiness would bring thee, not hurt, but
   blessing and help.


   OUR GOD IS A CONSUMING FIRE; AND THERE IS COMFORT AND BLESSING IN THE
   THOUGHT.  When we yield to God's love, and open our hearts to him, he
   enters into us, and becomes within us a consuming fire; not to
   ourselves, but to the evil within us. So that, in a very deep and
   blessed sense, we may be said to dwell with the devouring fire, and to
   walk amid the eternal burnings.


   Fire is warmth. We talk of ardent desire, warm emotion, enthusiasm's
   glow and fire; and when we speak of God being within us as fire, we
   mean that he will produce in us a strong and constant affection to
   himself. Do you long for more love? you really need more of God: for
   God is love; and when he dwells in the heart, love dwells there in
   power. And there is no difficulty in loving him or loving men with the
   love which has entered in majestic procession in the entrance of God.
   Live in God, make room for God to live in you; and there will be no
   lack to the love which shall exemplify in daily action each precept of
   the holy psalm of love (1 Cor. xiii.).


   Fire is light. We are dark enough in our natural state; but when God
   comes into the tabernacle of our being, the shekinah begins to glow in
   the most holy place, and pours its waves of glory throughout the whole
   being: so that the face is suffused with a holy glow, and there is an
   evident elasticity and buoyancy of spirits which no world joy can
   produce or even imitate. The light that shone on the face of Moses was
   different from that which shone on the face of Jesus. That was flung on
   it from without; this welled up from within. But the latter rather than
   the former is the true type of the blessed effect produced on that
   nature which becomes the temple of the indwelling God.


   Fire is purity. " How long, think you, would it take a workman with
   hammer and chisel to get the ore from the rocks in which it lies so
   closely imbedded? But if they are flung into the great cylinder, and
   the fires fanned to torrid heat, and the draught roars through the
   burning mass, at nightfall the glowing stream of pure and fluid metal,
   from which all dross and rubbish are parted, flows into the waiting
   mold." This is a parable of what God will do for us. Nay, more: he will
   burn up the wood, hay, and stubble, the grit and dross, the selfishness
   and evil of our nature; so that at last only the gold and silver and
   precious stones shall remain. The bonds that fetter us will be
   consumed; but not a hair of our heads shall fall to the ground.

   "The Lord shall sit as a refiner of silver." He the refiner, and he the
   fire. Contact with God, being bathed in his Holy Spirit, the perpetual
   yielding of the nature to him, will work a marvelous change upon us. At
   first the face of the melting metal may be dark and lurid-deep orange
   red, over which a flickering flame shall pass; but, as the process is
   pursued, the color will become lighter, the dark fumes will pass off,
   and the metal shall bear the appearance of the highly polished mirror,
   reflecting the beholder's face. The process may be long; but the result
   is sure.

   Is not fire painful and terrible, though applied by infinite love? It
   may be so; but he will not ply us with more than we can bear, and he
   will enable us to endure. And it will be more than a compensation, as
   we find one after another of the old evils losing its power. We shall
   never in this life be free from a sinful tendency, which seems part of
   our human nature. Nor shall we ever, on this side of heaven, be
   perfect; but we may expect to be growingly transformed into the image
   of the Son of God.

   God, who art as fire, be thou a consuming fire to our inbred sins; burn
   deeply into our inmost hearts, until all that grieves thee is compelled
   to yield to the holy intensity of thy grace, and our whole being, made
   free from sin, begins to serve thee in holiness and righteousness,
   through Jesus Christ, who came to kindle thy Sacred Fire on the earth!
     __________________________________________________________________

                         XXXIII. THE UNCHANGING SAVIOR

    "Jesus Christ, the same yesterday, and to-day, and forever." HEBREWS xiii.
    8.



   THREE times over in this chapter, the closing chapter of an Epistle the
   study of which has been so pleasant and helpful, the sacred writer
   urges his readers to think kindly of those who ruled over them. The
   full force of the Greek word is better represented by the marginal
   rendering guide, than by the word rule. But in any case he referred to
   those who were the spiritual leaders and teachers of the flock. The
   three injunctions are-Remember (ver. 7); Obey (ver. '7); Salute (ver.
   23).

   It is a proud name for the Christian minister to be called a leader.
   But unless he has some other claim to it than comes from force of
   character, eloquence, or intellectual power, his name will be an empty
   sound, the sign of what he might be rather than of what he is. Those
   who are qualified to lead other men must be themselves close followers
   of Christ; so that they may be able to turn to others and say, "Be ye
   followers of me, even as I also am of Christ;"  "Be followers together
   with Me."

   But the Christian minister must also watch for souls (ver. 17). He is
   not sent to his charge to preach great sermons, to elaborate brilliant
   orations, or to dazzle their intellects; but to watch over their souls,
   as the shepherd watches over his flocks scattered upon the downs, while
   the light changes from the gray morning, through the deep tints of the
   noon, into the last delicate flush of evening far up on the loftiest
   cliffs. He must indeed keep careful watch, for he must give an account
   in the evening; of his hand every missing one will be required.

   It is told of the holy Melville, that his wife would sometimes find him
   on his knees in the cold winter night; and on asking him to return to
   bed, he would reply, "I have got fifteen hundred souls in my charge,
   and fear that it is going ill with some of them." It is not difficult
   to remember or obey or salute men like that. They carry their Master's
   sign upon their faces. They are among Christ's most precious gifts to
   his Church.

   But there is this sorrow connected with all human leaders and teachers.
   However dear and useful they are, they are not suffered to continue by
   reason of death. One after another they pass away into the spirit
   world, to enter upon their loftier service, to give in their account,
   to see the Master whom they have loved. The last sermon lies unfinished
   on the study table; but they never come there to complete it. The final
   word is spoken. The closing benediction is given. The ministry is done.
   But what a relief it is to turn from men to Christ: from the constant
   change in human teachers to the unchanging Master; from the
   under-shepherds who are here today but gone tomorrow, to the chief
   Shepherd and Bishop of souls who watches his sheep in the evening
   shadows of this era, equally as in the first bright beams of its
   Pentecostal morning!

   This is the meaning of our writer (ver. 7). The verb is in the past
   tense: "Remember them which had the rule over you, such as spoke unto
   you the word of God: the end of whose life considering, imitate their
   faith." Evidently they had been lately called to witness the end of the
   life and ministry of some who had been very precious to them. And, as
   their hearts were sorrowing, their attention was turned from the
   changing guide and leader to the ever-living, unchanging Lord, Jesus
   Christ, who is the same yesterday, to-day, and forever.


   WHAT IS DENIED. It is denied that either time or mood or circumstances
   or provocation or death can alter Jesus Christ our Lord.


   Time changes us. Your portrait, taken years ago, when you were in your
   prime, hangs on the walls of your home. You sometimes sadly contrast it
   with your present self. Then the eye flashed with fires which have been
   quenched with many tears. Then the hair was raven and thick, which is
   now plentifully streaked with the gray symptoms of decay. Then the face
   was unseamed by care, unscarred by conflict; but now how weary and
   furrowed! The upright form is bent, the step has lost its spring.

   But there is a greater difference between two mental and two physical
   portraitures. Opinions alter. The radical becomes conservative; temper
   changes, and affections cool. Names and faces which used to thrill are
   recalled without emotion. Faded chaplets lie where once flowers of
   rarest texture yielded their breath in insufficient adoration. Thus is
   it with those who are born of woman. Time does for them what hardship
   and authority and suffering would fail to effect. And sometimes the
   question arises, Can time alter him whose portrait hangs on the walls
   of our hearts, painted in undying colors by the hands of the four
   Evangelists?

   Of course, time takes no effect on God, who is the f AM; eternal and
   changeless. But Jesus is man as well as God. He has tenses in his
   being: the yesterday of the past, the to-day of the present, the
   to-morrow of the future. It is at least a question whether his human
   nature, keyed to the experiences of man, may not carry with it, even to
   influence his royal heart, that sensitiveness to the touch of time
   which is characteristic of our race. But the question tarries only for
   a second. The moment it utters itself it is drowned by the great
   outburst of voices which exclaim, "He is the same in the meridian day
   of the present as he was in the yesterday of his earthly life; and he
   will be the same when to-morrow we shall have left far behind us the
   shores of time and are voyaging with him over the tideless, stormless
   depths of the ocean of eternity."

   If we could ask the blessed dead if they had found him altered from
   what they had expected him to be from the pages of the holy Gospels,
   they would reiterate the words of the angels-this same Jesus; they
   would tell us that his hair is white as snow, not with age, but with
   the light of intense purity; that his face shines still as the sun in
   his strength, with no sign of westering; and that his voice is as full
   as when he summoned Lazarus from the grave, as mellifluous as when it
   called Mary to recognize him. Time is foiled in Jesus. He has passed
   out of its sphere, and is impervious to its spell.


   Moods change us. We know people who are like oranges one day and lemons
   the next; now a summer's day, and, again, a nipping frost; rock and
   reed alternately. You have to suit yourself to their varying mood,
   asking to-day what you would not dare to mention to-morrow; and thus
   there is continual unrest and scheming in the hearts of their friends.

   But it is not so with Jesus. Never tired, or put out, or variable.
   Without shadow cast by turning. In his earthly life, wherever we catch
   sight of him-on the mountainside, on the waters of the lake, beneath
   the olive trees in the evening; in the synagogue, or alone; at work in
   the sunlight, at prayer in the moonlight, at supper in the upper room,
   he was always the same Jesus. And the apparent exceptions when, for a
   certain purpose, he entered his manner and made himself strange, only
   brought his essential sameness into stronger relief. And so is he
   to-day. And we shall become happy and strong when we remove from all
   thought of others' moods or our own, and settlt down under the
   unchanging empyrean of his love.


   Circumstances change us. Men who in poverty and obscurity have been
   accessible and genial, become imperious and haughty when they become
   idolized for their genius and fawned on for their wealth. The butler
   who would have done any favor for Joseph in the prison forgot him when
   he was reinstated in the palace. New friends, new spheres, new
   surroundings, alter men marvelously.

   What a change has passed over Jesus Christ since mortal eyes beheld
   him! Crowned with glory and honor; seated at the right hand of the
   Father; occupied with the government of all worlds; worshiped by the
   loftiest spirits. Can this be he who trod our world, confessing his
   ignorance of times and seasons, surrounded by a handful of the poor and
   despised, an outcast and a sufferer? It is indeed he. But surely it
   were too much to expect that he should be quite the same! Nay, but he
   is. And one proof of it is that the graces which he shed on the first
   age of the Church were of exactly the same quality as those which we
   now enjoy.

   We know that the texture of light is unaltered; because the analysis of
   a ray, which has just reached us from some distant star, whence it
   started as Adam stepped across the threshold of Eden, is of precisely
   the same nature as the analysis of the ray of light now striking on
   this page. And we know that Jesus Christ is the same as he was; because
   the life which throbbed in the first believers resulted in those very
   fruits which are evident in our own hearts and lives, all having
   emanated from himself. He has to govern the worlds; but he is still as
   accessible to the vilest, as gentle and tender-hearted, as humble and
   lovely, as when that Jewish woman could not restrain her envy of the
   mother who had borne him, and when he sat to rest amid the sycamores of
   Bethany, and the sisters rested by his feet.


   Sin and provocation change us. We forgive seven times, but draw the
   line at eight. Our souls close up to those who have deceived our
   confidence. We are friendly outwardly, but there is frost within. We
   forgive, but we do not forget; and we are never the same afterward as
   before. But sin cannot change Christ's heart, though it may affect his
   behavior. If it could do so, it must have changed his feelings to
   Peter. But the only apparent alteration made by that sad denial was an
   increased tenderness and considerateness. "Go, tell my disciples, and
   Peter, that I am risen." "He was seen of Cephas, then of the twelve."
   "He said unto Peter, Lovest thou me?"

   Your sins may be many and aggravated; and you are disposed to think
   that you should give up all profession of being his at all. But you do
   not know him. He is not oblivious to your sins; he has noticed each one
   with sharp pangs of pain. His eye has followed you in all your way ward
   wanderings; but he is absolutely unchanged. You are as dear to him as
   when, in the first blush of your young hope, you knelt at his feet, and
   were clothed, as the old warriors used to be, by a stainless tunic over
   your armor of proof. Naught that you have said or done has lessened his
   love by a single grain, or turned it aside by a hair's-breadth. He
   loved you in eternity; he foreknew all that you would be before he set
   his heart upon you; he cannot be surprised by any sudden outburst of
   your evil. You may be, but he cannot be; and he laid his account for
   this, and more, when he undertook to redeem. Your sins, child of God,
   can no more alter your Lord's heart than can the petulance of a child
   alter its mother's.


   WHAT IS AFFIRMED. He is the same in his Person (Heb. i. 12). His
   vesture alters. He has exchanged the gaberdine of the peasant for the
   robes of which he stripped himself on the eve of his incarnation; but
   beneath those robes beats the same heart as heaved with anguish at the
   grave where his friend lay dead. We shall yet see, though in
   resurrection glory, the face on which stood the bead-drops of bloody
   sweat; and touch the hands that were nailed to the cross; and hear the
   voice of the Son of man. What does the mystery of the forty days teach
   us, except this, that he carried with him from the grave, and upward to
   his home, the identical body of his incarnation-though the corruptible
   had put on incorruption, and the mortal had put on immortality? Thus he
   is the same as "Jesus."


   He is also the same in his once (Heb. vii. 24). Aaron died on Hor, and
   all his successors in mystic procession followed him. Ancient
   burying-grounds are closely packed with the remains of priests, abbots,
   and fathers. The ashes of the shepherds are mingled with those of their
   flocks. The office remains, but the occupants pass. But Christ, as the
   Anointed Priest, is ever the same. Unweariedly he pursues his chosen
   work as the Mediator, Priest, and Inter cessor of men. He does not
   fail, nor is he discouraged. Though the great world of men neither
   knows nor heeds him, yet does he bear it up upon his heart, as when he
   first pleaded for his murderers from his cross. "Forgive them, Father,
   forgive them !" is his unwearying constant cry. And though the age be
   black with tempest and red with blood, his pity wells up like one of
   those perennial fountains which heat cannot scorch, nor cold freeze;
   because they draw their supplies from everlasting sources. He is the
   same as "Christ."


   WHAT IT IMPLIES. It implies that he is God. It implies, too, that the
   Gospels are a leaf out of his eternal diary, and may be taken as a true
   record of his present life. What he was, he is. He still sails with us
   in the boat; walks in the afternoon with us to Emmaus; stands in our
   rnidst at nightfall, opening to us the Scriptures. He wakes our
   children in the morning with his "Talitha cumi"; calls the boys to his
   knees; watches them at their play; and rebukes those who would forbid
   their Hosannas. He feeds us with bread and fish; lights fires on the
   sands to warm us; shows us the right side of the ship for our nets; and
   interests himself with the results of our toils. He takes us with him
   to the brow of the Transfiguration Mount, and into the glades of
   Gethsemane.

   When we are slow to believe, he is slower still to anger. He teaches us
   many things, graduating his lessons, according to our ability to
   understand. When we cannot bear more, he shades the light. When we
   strive for high places, he rebukes. When soiled, he washes our feet.
   When in peril, he comes across the yeasty waves to our help. When
   weary, he leads us aside to rest.

   Oh, do not read the Gospels as a record merely of the past, but as a
   transcript of what he is ever doing. Each miracle and parable and trait
   is a specimen of eternal facts, which are taking place by myriads, at
   every moment of the day and night; the achievements of the ever-
   living, ever-working Lord. No lake without that figure treading its
   waters. No storm without that voice mightier than its roar. No meal
   without that face uplifted in blessing, or that hand engaged in
   breaking. No grave without that tender heart touched with sorrow. No
   burden without those willing shoulders to share the yoke.

   Oh, take me not back through the long ages to a Christ that was! He is!
   He lives! He is here! I can never again be alone, never grope in the
   dark for a hand, never be forsaken or forlorn. Never need a Guide, a
   Master, a Friend, or a Husband to my soul. I have him, who suffices for
   uncounted myriads in the dateless noon of eternity. He who was
   everything in the yesterday of the past, and who will be everything in
   the to-morrow of the future, is mine to-day; and at each present moment
   of my existence-here, and in all worlds.

   The Revised Version adds a significant yea to this verse, to bring out
   the emphatic accentuation which the writer lays upon the
   unchangeableness of Jesus. It is well placed. And with what a thunder
   of assent might that word be uttered! All who are of this opinion
   answer YEA. First, the innumerable company of angels utters it; then
   the spirits of just men made perfect reaffirm it; then the universe of
   created things, the regularity of whose laws and processes is due to
   it, bursts forth with one great Amen. God himself says Amen; "for how
   many soever be the promises of God, in him is the yea: wherefore also
   through him is the Amen, unto the glory of God.
     __________________________________________________________________

                          XXXIV. THE ESTABLISHED HEART



    "It is a good thing that the heart be established with grace; not with
    meats, which have not profited them that have been occupied therein."
    HEBREWS xiii. 9.



   IT is a good thing to have an established heart. With too many of us
   the inner life is variable and fickle. Sometimes we have days of deep
   religious earnestness, when it seems impossible for us to spend too
   long a time in prayer and fellowship with God. The air is so clear that
   we can see across the waters of the dividing sea, to the very outlines
   of the heavenly coasts. But a very little will mar our peace, and bring
   a veil of mist over our souls, to enwrap us perhaps for long weeks. Oh
   for an established heart!

   Now there is one thing which will not bring about this blessed state of
   establishment. And that is indicated by the expression, "meats"; which
   stands for the ritualism of the Jewish law. There is ever a tendency in
   the human heart toward a religion of rites. It is so much easier to
   observe the prescriptions of an outward ceremonial than to brace the
   soul to faith and love and spiritual worship. Set the devotee a round
   of external observance, it matters little how rigorous and searching
   your demands, and the whole will be punctually and slavishly performed,
   with a secret sense of satisfaction in being thus permitted to do
   something toward procuring acceptance and favor with God.

   There is a great increase of ritualistic observance amongst us. We
   behold with astonishment the set of our times toward genuflexions; the
   austerities of Lent; the careful observance of prolonged and incessant
   services; and all the demands of a severe ritual. People who give no
   evidence in their character or behavior of real religion are most
   punctilious in these outward religious rites. Young men will salve
   their consciences for a day of Sabbath-breaking by an early
   celebration. In many cases these things are revivals of ancient
   Babylonish customs, passed into the professing Church in the worst and
   darkest days of its history. But their revival points to the strong
   religious yearnings of human nature, and the fascination which is
   exerted by outward rites in the stead of inward realities.

   But "meats" can never establish the inner life. The most ardent
   ritualist must confess to the sense of inward dissatisfaction and
   unrest, as the soul is condemned to pace continually the arid desert of
   a weary formalism, where it comes not to the green pastures or the
   waters of rest. "They have not profited them that have been occupied
   therein."

   Another obstruction to an established heart arises from the curiosity
   which is ever running after divers and strange doctrines. In all ages
   of the Church, men have caught up single aspects of truth, distorting
   them out of the harmony of the Gospel, and carrying them into
   exaggerated and dangerous excess; and directly any one truth is viewed
   out of its place in the equilibrium of the Gospel, it becomes a heresy,
   leading souls astray with the deceitfulness of the false lights that
   wreckers wave along the beach. And when once we begin to follow the
   vagaries and notions of human teachers, apart from the teaching of the
   Spirit of God, we get into an unsettled, restless condition, which is
   the very antipodes to the established heart.

   There is only one foundation which never rocks, one condition which
   never alters. "It is good that the heart be established with grace."
   Primarily, of course, the established heart is the gift of God. "He
   which stablisheth us with you in Christ is God." "The Lord shall
   establish thee an holy people unto himself." "The God of all grace make
   you perfect, stablish, strengthen, settle you." We need therefore to
   pray to him to give us the heart established in grace. But there are
   certain conditions also indicated in this context with which we do well
   to comply.


   WE MUST FEED ON CHRIST. The very denial of the tenth verse proves that
   there is an altar whereof we have a right to eat. Not the Jews only,
   but Christians also, lay stress on eating; but ah, how different the
   food which forms their diet ! In the case of that ancient system out of
   which these Hebrew Christians had just emerged, the priests ate a
   considerable portion of the sacrifices which the people offered on the
   altar of God. This was the means of their subsistence. In consideration
   of their being set apart wholly to the divine service, and having no
   inheritance in the land, "they lived by the altar." But we, who are
   priests by a &viner right, have left behind us the Tabernacle, with its
   ritual and sacrifices, and cannot feed on these outward meats without
   betraying the spirituality of the holy religion we profess.

   Our altar is the cross. Our sacrifice is the dying Saviour. Our food is
   to eat his flesh. "This is the bread which cometh down from heaven,
   that a man may eat thereof, and not die." "The bread is my flesh, which
   I will give for the life of the world."

   Eating consists of three processes: apprehension, mastication, and
   assimilation; and each of these has its spiritual counterpart in that
   feeding upon Christ which is the very life of our life. We, too, must
   apprehend him, by the careful reading of the Word of God. The Word is
   in the words. His words are spirit and life. We need not be always
   reading them, any more than we should be always eating. But just as a
   good meal will go on nourishing us long after we have taken it, and
   indeed when we have ceased to think about it, so a prolonged prayerful
   study of the Word of God will nourish our souls for long afterward.

   We, too, must fulfill the second process of eating by meditating long
   and thoughtfully on all that is revealed to us in the Word of the
   person and work of the Lord Jesus. It is only by allowing our heart and
   mind to dwell musingly on these sacred themes that they become so real
   as to nourish us. Better read less and meditate more, than read much
   and meditate little.

   We too must assimilate Christ, until he becomes part of our very being,
   and we begin to live, yet not we, because Christ lives in us, and has
   become our very life. Our Lord told his disciples that he lived by the
   Father; and said that, if they desired to live in the same dependent
   state on himself, they must "eat him " (John vi. 57). In Christ's own
   case his being had reached such a pitch of union with his Father's that
   to see or hear or know him was to see and hear and know God. And if we
   would only spend more time alone with him in prayerful, loving
   fellowship, a great change would pass over us also, and we should be
   transformed into his likeness in successive stages of glory upon glory.

   At regular intervals we meet around the table of the Lord to eat the
   bread and drink the wine. But our feeding on him ought to be as
   frequent as our daily ordinary meals.

   Why should we feed the spiritless than we do the body? Alas! how we
   pamper the latter, and starve the former, until we get past the sense
   of desire! We spoil our appetite by feeding it with the cloying
   sweetmeats and morsels of sense. We are content to live as parasites on
   the juices of others, instead of acquiring nourishment at first hand
   for ourselves. What wonder that we are carried about by every wind of
   doctrine, and lack the established heart? And perhaps there would be
   nothing better for the whole of us Christian people than a revival of
   Bible study, a fresh consecration of the morning hour, a regular and
   systematic maintenance of seasons of prolonged fellowship with our
   Master and Lord.


   IF WE WOULD FEED ON CHRIST, WE MUST GO WITHOUT THE CAMP. In the solemn
   ritual of the great Day of Atonement it was ordained that the bodies of
   all the victims which had suffered death as sin-offerings, and of which
   the blood had been sprinkled before the mercy-seat, should be burned
   Without the camp (Lev. xvi. 27). And in this mysterious specification,
   two truths were probably symbolized: first, that in the fullness of
   time, Jesus, the true sin-offering of the world, would suffer outside
   the city gate; and secondly, that men must leave the principles and
   rites of earthly systems behind them, if they Would realize all the
   blessedness of acceptance with God through the sacrifice of Christ.

   If, then, we would have Jesus as our food, our joy, our life, we must
   not expect to find him in the camps which have been pitched by men of
   this world. We must go forth from all such; from the camp of the
   world's religiousness equally as from that of its sensuality; from the
   tents of its formalism and ritualism, as well as from those of its
   vanity.

   The policy of going forth without the camp is the only safe course for
   ourselves, as it is the only helpful one for the world itself. There
   are plenty who argue that the wisest policy is to stop within the camp,
   seeking to elevate its morals. They do not realize that, if we adopt
   their advice, we must remain there alone; for our Lord has already
   gone. It is surely unbefitting that we should find a home where he is
   expelled. What is there in us which makes us so welcome, when our
   Master was cast out to the fate of the lowest criminals? Besides, it
   will not be long before we discover that, instead of our influencing
   the camp for good, the atmosphere of the camp will infect us with its
   evil. Instead of our leveling it up, it will level us down.

   The only principle of moving the world is to emulate Archimedes in
   getting a point without it. All the men who have left a mark in the
   elevation of their times have been compelled to join the pilgrim host
   which is constantly passing through the city gates, and taking up its
   stand by the cross on which Jesus died. Looking back on that memorable
   spot, we seem to see it thronged with the apostles, martyrs, reformers,
   and prophets of every age, who invite us to join them. It remains with
   us to say whether we will linger amid the luxury and fascinations which
   allure us to the camp; or whether we will dare to take up our cross,
   and follow our Master along the Via Dolorosa, bearing his reproach. Ah,
   young hearts, secret disciples, halters between two opinions, the issue
   of such a choice cannot be doubtful! With the cry, Deus vult, you will
   join this new crusade, and take your stand with Jesus, at the
   trysting-place of his cross.


   IF WE GO OUTSIDE THE CAMP, WE MUST BEAR HIS REPROACH. It is related of
   the good Charles Simeon, of Cambridge, that, at the commencement of his
   career as an evangelical clergyman at Cambridge, he encountered such
   virulent abuse and opposition that his spirit seemed on the point of
   being crushed. Turning to the Word of God for direction and
   encouragement, his eye lighted on the following passage: " As they came
   out they found a man of Cyrene, Simon by name; him they compelled to
   bear his cross." The similarity of the name to his own arrested him,
   and he was moved to new courage with the thought of his oneness with
   the sufferings of Jesus. So is it with us all. If we are reproached for
   the name of Jesus, happy are we; and we should rejoice, inasmuch as we
   are partakers of Christ's sufferings, that, when his glory is revealed,
   we also may be glad with exceeding joy.

   How marvelous is it to learn the closeness of the bonds by which we are
   bound to the saints of the past When we are reproached for being
   Christians, we know something of what Moses felt when taunted in the
   royal palace of Egypt with his Hebrew origin; but "he esteemed the
   reproach of Christ greater riches than all the treasures of Egypt,
   because he had respect unto the recompense of reward."


   BUT WHILST BEARING CHRIST'S REPROACH, WE SHALL FIND THE ONLY CONTINUING
   CITY. It is very remarkable that, as we tear ourselves away from the
   gate of the city, and say farewell to what had seemed to be a symbol of
   the most enduring fabrics of earthly permanence, we are really passing
   out of the transient and unreal to become citizens of the only enduring
   and continuing City.

   The greatest cities of human greatness have not continued. Babylon,
   Nineveh, Thebes, the mighty cities of Mexico-all have passed. Buried in
   mounds, on which grass grows luxuriantly; while wild beasts creep
   through the moldering relics of the past. But, amid all, there is
   arising from age to age a permanent structure, an enduring City, a
   confederation which gathers around the unchanging Saviour, and has in
   it no elements of decay. Do we enough live in this City in our habitual
   experience? It is possible to tread its golden streets as we plod along
   the thoroughfares of earth's great cities; to mingle in its blessed
   companies, and share its holy exercises, though apparently we spend our
   days in dark city offices, and amid money-loving companions. The true
   pilgrim to tho City really lives in the City. It will not be long, and
   it shall not be only an object for faith and spiritual vision, it shall
   become manifest. See, it comes! it comes! the holy City out of heaven
   from God, radiant with his light, vocal with song, the home of saints,
   the metropolis of a redeemed earth, the Bride of the Lamb, for whom the
   universe was made.
     __________________________________________________________________

                            XXXV. THE CLOSING PRAYER


    "Now the God of peace, that brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus, that
    great Shepherd of the sheep, through the blood of the everlasting covenant,
    make you perfect in every good work to do his will, working in you that
    which is well pleasing in his sight, through Jesus Christ; to whom be glory
    forever and ever. HEBREWS xiii. 20, 21.


   THROUGHOUT this Epistle, the inspired writer has been appealing to man.
   Through successive paragraphs he has poured forth a burning stream of
   argument, remonstrance, or appeal; now opening the full peal of Sinai's
   thunders, and now the wail of Calvary's broken heart, and finally
   summoning the most honored names in Hebrew story to enforce his words.

   All this is over now. He can say no more. The plowing and sowing and
   harrowing are alike complete. He must turn from earth to heaven, from
   man to God; and leave his converts and his work with that glorious
   Being whose cause he had striven so faithfully to plead, and who alone
   could crown his labors with success. There are many splendid outbursts
   of prayer beginning these Epistles; but amongst them all, it is
   impossible to find one more striking or beautiful than this.


   THE BURDEN OF THE PRAYER is that these Hebrew Christians may be made
   perfect to do God's will. The word "perfect" means to set in joint, or
   articulate. Naturally, we are out of joint, or, at the best, work
   stiffly; but the ideal of Christian living is to be so perfectly "set"
   that God's purposes may be easily and completely realized in us.

   There is no higher aim in life than to do the will of God. It was the
   supreme object for which our Saviour lived. This brought him from
   heaven. This determined his every action. This fed his inner life with
   hidden meat. This cleared and lit up his judgment. This led him with
   unfaltering decision into the valley of death. This was the stay and
   solace of his spirit as he drank the bitter cup of agony. Throughout
   his mortal life his one glad shout of assurance and victory was, "I
   delight to do thy will, my God; yea, thy law is within my heart." And
   human lives climb up from the lowlands to the upland heights just in
   proportion as they do the will of God on earth as it is done in heaven.
   If every reader of these lines would resolve from this moment to do the
   will of God in the very smallest things-with scrupulous care, counting
   nothing insignificant, shrinking from no sacrifice, evading no
   command-life would assume entirely a new aspect. There might be a
   momentary experience of suffering and pain; but it would be succeeded
   by the light of resurrection, and the new song of heaven, stealing like
   morning through the chambers of the soul.

   God is love; to do his will is to scatter love in handfuls of blessing
   on a weary world. God is light; to do his will is to tread a path that
   shines more and more unto the perfect day. God is life; to do his will
   is to eat of the Tree of Life, and live forever, and to drink deep
   draughts of the more abundant life which Jesus gives. God is the God of
   hope; to do his will is to be full of all joy and peace, and to abound
   in hope. God is the God of all comfort; to do his will is to be
   comforted in all our tribulation by the tender love of a mother. God is
   the God of peace; to do his will is to learn the secret inner calm,
   which no storm can reach, no tempest ruffle. God is the God of truth;
   to do his will is to be on the winning side, and to be assured of the
   time when he will bring out our righteousness as the light, and our
   judgment as the noonday.

   Why will you not, my readers, who have followed these chapters thus far
   to the last, resolve from this moment that your will shall henceforth
   say "Yes"to God's will, and that you will live out what be wills and
   works within? Probably, at the very outset, you will be tested by your
   attitude to some one thing. Do not try to answer all the suggestions or
   inquiries that may be raised tumultuously within, but deal immediately
   and decisively with that single item. Dare to say, with respect to it,
   "I will thy will, my God." And immediately the gate will open into the
   rapture of a new life. But remember that his will must be done in every
   work to which you put your hands; and then every work will be good.

   We cannot tell how the mysterious promptings of our will are able to
   express themselves in our limbs and members. We only know that what we
   will in ourselves is instantly wrought out through the wonderful
   machinery of nerve and muscle. And we are quick to perceive when,
   through some injury or dislocation, the mandate of the will fails to be
   instantly and completely fulfilled. Nor do we rest content until the
   complete communication is restored.

   But in all this there is a deep spiritual analogy. We are members,
   through grace, of the body of Christ. The will lies with him; and if we
   were living as we ought, we should be incessantly conscious of its holy
   impulses, withdrawing us from this, or prompting us to that. Our will
   would not be obliterated, but would elect to work in perpetual
   obedience and subordination to the will of its King. Alas! this is not
   our case. We are too little sensible of those holy impulses. On rare
   occasions we realize and yield to them. But how many of them fail to
   reach or move us, because we are out of joint! What prayer could better
   befit our lips than that the God of peace, the true surgeon of souls,
   would put us in joint, to do his will, with unerring accuracy,
   promptitude, and completeness!


   MARK THE GUARANTEES THAT THIS PRAYER SHALL BE REALIZED. The appeal is
   made to the God of peace. He whose nature is never swept by the storms
   of desire or unrest; whose one aim is to introduce peace into the heart
   and life; whose love to us will not brook disappointment in achieving
   our highest blessedness, he must undertake this office; he will do it
   most tenderly and delicately; nor will he rest until the obstruction to
   the inflow of his nature is removed, and there is perfect harmony
   between the promptings of his will and our immediate and joyous
   response.


   He brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus, that great Shepherd of
   the sheep. To have given us a Shepherd was much; but to have given us
   so great a Shepherd is marvelous. He is the great Shepherd who died,
   just as he is the good Shepherd who knows his flock, and the chief
   Shepherd who is coming again. He is great, because of the intrinsic
   dignity of his nature; because of his personal qualifications to save
   and bless us; because of the greatness of his unknown sufferings; and
   because of the height of glory to which the Father hath exalted him.
   The words "brought again" are very expressive. They contain the idea of
   "brought up." More is meant than the reanimation of the dead body of
   Christ. There is included, also, his exaltation by the right hand of
   God, to be a Prince and a Saviour. And, surely, if our God has given us
   such a Shepherd, and raised him to such a glory, that he may help us
   the more efficiently, there is every reason why we should confidently
   count on his doing all that may needed in us, as he has done all that
   was needed for us.


   He will certainly respect the everlasting covenant, which has been
   sealed with blood.   God has entered into an eternal covenant with us
   to be our God and Friend. That covenant, which does not depend on
   anything in us, but rests on his own unchanging nature, has been
   ratified by the precious blood of his Son. As the first covenant was
   sealed by the sprinkled blood of slain beasts, so the second was sealed
   by the precious blood of Christ. "This is my blood of the new
   testament, which is shed for many for the remission of sins." Thus
   spoke our Saviour on the eve of his death, with a weight of meaning
   which this Epistle was needed to explain. And is it likely that he who
   has entered into such a covenant with our souls-a covenant so
   everlasting, so divine, so solemn-will ever go back from it, or allow
   anything to remain undone which may be needed to secure its perfect and
   efficient operation? It cannot be! We may count, without the slightest
   hesitation, on the God of peace doing all that is required to perfect
   us in every good work to do his will.


   THE DIVINE METHOD will be to work in us. It is necessary first that we
   should be adjusted so that there may be no waste or diversion of the
   divine energy. When that is done, then it will begin to pass into and
   through us in mighty tides of power. "God working in you." It is a
   marvelous expression! We know how steam works mightily within the
   cylinder, forcing up and down the ponderous piston. We know how sap
   works mightily within the branches, forcing itself out in bud and leaf
   and blossom. We read of a time when men and women were so possessed of
   devils that they spoke and acted as the inward promptings led them.
   These are approximations to the conception of the text, which towers
   infinitely beyond.

   Have we not all been conscious of some of these workings? They do not
   work in us mightily as they did in the Apostle Paul, because we have
   not yielded to them as he did. Still, we have known them when the
   breath of holy resolution has Swept through our natures; or we have
   conceived some noble purpose; or have been impelled to some deed of
   self-sacrifice for others. These are the workings of God within the
   heart, not in the tornado only, but in the zephyr; not in the thunder
   alone, but in the still small voice. Every sigh for the better life,
   every strong and earnest resolution, every determination to leave the
   nets and fishing-boats to follow Jesus, every appetite for fellowship,
   every aspiration heavenward-all these are the result of God's
   in-working.

   How careful we should be to gather up every divine impulse, and
   translate it into action! We must work out what he works in. We must
   labor according to his working, which works in us mightily. We must be
   swift to seize the fugitive and transient expression, embodying it in
   the permanent act.

   It does not seem so difficult to live and work for God when it is
   realized that the eternal God is energizing within. You cannot be
   sufficiently patient to that querulous invalid, your patience is
   exhausted; but God is working his patience within you: let it come out
   through you. You cannot muster strength for that obvious Christian
   duty; but God is working that fruit in your innermost nature; be
   content to let it manifest itself by you. You are incompetent to
   sustain that Christian work, with its manifold demands; but stand
   aside, and let the eternal God work in and through you, to do by his
   strength what you in your weakness cannot do.

   The Christian is the workshop of God. In that mortal but renewed nature
   the divine Artisan is at work, elaborating products of exquisite beauty
   and marvelous skill. Would that we might be less eager to give the
   world ourselves, and more determined that there should be a
   manifestation through all the gateways of our being of the wondrous
   in-working of the God of peace! Then we might say, with some approach
   to the words of our Lord, to such as demand evidences of his
   resurrection and life, "How sayest thou, Prove to me the resurrection
   of Jesus? the words which I speak, I speak not of myself; but my
   Saviour, who dwelleth in me, he doeth the works."


   THE RESULT will be that we shall be well-pleasing in his sight, through
   Jesus Christ. Our good works can never be the ground of our acceptance
   or justification. The very best of them can only please God through
   Jesus Christ. Our purest tears need washing again in his blood. Our
   holiest actions need to be cleansed ere they can be viewed by a holy
   God. Our best prayers and gifts need to be laid on the altar which
   sanctifies all it touches. We could not stand before God for a moment,
   save by that one sufficient substitutionary sacrifice, once offered by
   Jesus on the cross, and now pleaded by him before the throne.

   At the same time, our Father is pleased with our obedient loyalty to
   his will. He gives us this testimony, that we please him; as Enoch did,
   who walked with him before the flood. And it should be the constant
   ambition of our lives so to walk as to please him, and to obtain from
   him a faint echo of those memorable words which greeted our Saviour as
   he stepped upon the waters of Baptism: "This is my beloved Son, in whom
   I am well pleased."


   To him be glory forever and ever! Directly the soul is right with God,
   it becomes a vehicle for God; and thus a revenue of glory begins to
   accrue to God, which ceases not, but augments as the years roll by. And
   the time will never come when the spirit shall not still pour forth its
   glad rejoicings to the glory of him to whom is due the praise of all.

   If your life is not bringing glory to God, see to it that at once you
   set to work to ascertain the cause. Learning it, let it be dealt with
   forthwith. Hand yourself over to God to make you and keep you right.
   And thus begin a song of love and praise, which shall rise through all
   coming ages, to the Father who chose you in Christ, to the Saviour who
   bought you with his blood, and to the Spirit who sanctifies the heart;
   one adorable Trinity, to whom be the glory forever and ever, Amen.
     __________________________________________________________________

                                    Indexes
     __________________________________________________________________

Index of Scripture References

   Genesis

   [2]1:26-28   [3]1:27   [4]1:28   [5]14:19-20   [6]15:17   [7]22:16

   Exodus

   [8]16   [9]17   [10]19:5-6   [11]21:6   [12]21:14   [13]23:22-31
   [14]24:10-11   [15]25:9   [16]25:36   [17]25:40   [18]26:30
   [19]27:8   [20]29:37   [21]30:6   [22]30:34-38

   Leviticus

   [23]2   [24]16:11-13   [25]16:27   [26]17

   Numbers

   [27]13

   Deuteronomy

   [28]12:23   [29]33:2

   2 Kings

   [30]7:8

   Job

   [31]7:17   [32]7:20

   Psalms

   [33]2   [34]8   [35]8:4   [36]8:5-6   [37]40:6   [38]45   [39]48
   [40]68:17   [41]90   [42]95:7   [43]97:7   [44]102   [45]104:4
   [46]106:24-26   [47]110   [48]110   [49]118:27   [50]144:3

   Isaiah

   [51]10:17   [52]53:5

   Jeremiah

   [53]31:31-34

   Hosea

   [54]1

   Micah

   [55]6:6

   Zechariah

   [56]4:2

   Matthew

   [57]5   [58]22:44

   Mark

   [59]16:19

   Luke

   [60]1:9   [61]10:9   [62]24   [63]24:20

   John

   [64]1   [65]1:3   [66]1:12   [67]2   [68]3:2   [69]5   [70]6:53-56
   [71]6:57   [72]6:63   [73]12:31   [74]13   [75]13:4   [76]16   [77]17
   [78]19:34

   Acts

   [79]2:34   [80]2:34   [81]4   [82]7:53   [83]7:53   [84]27:23-24

   Romans

   [85]3:24-25   [86]4:16   [87]4:24   [88]5   [89]8:34   [90]12:19
   [91]42:11-12

   1 Corinthians

   [92]1   [93]3:16   [94]13   [95]15:24-26

   Galatians

   [96]3:19

   Ephesians

   [97]1:3   [98]2:8   [99]4:3

   Philippians

   [100]2:7-8   [101]2:8-9

   Colossians

   [102]1:16

   1 Timothy

   [103]1:1

   2 Timothy

   [104]2:22   [105]3

   Hebrews

   [106]1:1-2   [107]1:3   [108]1:3-4   [109]1:4   [110]1:12   [111]2:1
   [112]2:2   [113]2:5-9   [114]2:6   [115]2:8   [116]2:10   [117]2:10
   [118]2:14-15   [119]2:17   [120]3:12   [121]4:9   [122]4:12
   [123]4:16   [124]5:7-8   [125]6:4-6   [126]6:12   [127]6:17-18
   [128]7:6-7   [129]7:17   [130]7:24   [131]7:25   [132]8:5   [133]8:10
   [134]9:2   [135]9:9   [136]9:14   [137]9:22   [138]9:26   [139]10:5
   [140]10:10   [141]10:14   [142]10:20   [143]10:38   [144]11:1
   [145]12:1-2   [146]12:6   [147]12:14-15   [148]12:22-24   [149]12:27
   [150]12:29   [151]13:8   [152]13:9   [153]13:20-21

   James

   [154]3:18

   1 Peter

   [155]1   [156]2:21   [157]2:24

   2 Peter

   [158]1:3   [159]1:11

   1 John

   [160]1:7   [161]3:3   [162]5:6

   Revelation

   [163]1:5   [164]1:6   [165]1:9   [166]3:17-20   [167]5:9   [168]8:3
   [169]21:12
     __________________________________________________________________

Index of Scripture Commentary

   Hebrews

   [170]1:1-2   [171]1:3-4   [172]1:4   [173]2:1   [174]2:5-9
   [175]2:10   [176]2:14-15   [177]2:17   [178]3:12   [179]4:9
   [180]4:12   [181]4:16   [182]5:7-8   [183]6:4-6   [184]6:12
   [185]7:17   [186]7:25   [187]8:5   [188]8:10   [189]9:2   [190]9:14
   [191]9:22   [192]9:26   [193]10:5   [194]10:38   [195]11:1
   [196]12:1-2   [197]12:6   [198]12:14-15   [199]12:22-24   [200]12:27
   [201]12:29   [202]13:8   [203]13:9   [204]13:20-21
     __________________________________________________________________

            This document is from the Christian Classics Ethereal
               Library at Calvin College, http://www.ccel.org,
                   generated on demand from ThML source.

References

   1. mailto:rlarryh@teleport.com
   2. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=1&scrV=26#i.vi-p12.1
   3. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=1&scrV=27#i.vi-p13.1
   4. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=1&scrV=28#i.vi-p14.1
   5. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=14&scrV=19#i.xviii-p8.1
   6. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=15&scrV=17#i.xvi-p12.1
   7. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=22&scrV=16#i.xvi-p12.2
   8. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=16&scrV=0#i.x-p19.1
   9. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=17&scrV=0#i.x-p20.1
  10. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=19&scrV=5#i.xx-p9.1
  11. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=21&scrV=6#i.xxv-p7.1
  12. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=21&scrV=14#i.xxi-p13.2
  13. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=23&scrV=22#i.xx-p10.1
  14. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=24&scrV=10#i.xix-p6.1
  15. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=25&scrV=9#i.xix-p10.1
  16. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=25&scrV=36#i.xxi-p21.1
  17. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=25&scrV=40#i.xix-p10.1
  18. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=26&scrV=30#i.xix-p10.1
  19. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=27&scrV=8#i.xix-p10.1
  20. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=29&scrV=37#i.xxi-p13.3
  21. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=30&scrV=6#i.xxi-p24.1
  22. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=30&scrV=34#i.xxi-p24.3
  23. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=2&scrV=0#i.xxiii-p5.2
  24. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=16&scrV=11#i.xxii-p11.1
  25. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=16&scrV=27#i.xxxv-p20.1
  26. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=17&scrV=0#i.xxiii-p5.2
  27. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=13&scrV=0#i.x-p21.1
  28. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=12&scrV=23#i.xxiii-p5.1
  29. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=33&scrV=2#i.v-p12.1
  30. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=7&scrV=8#i.xiii-p6.1
  31. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=7&scrV=17#i.vi-p9.2
  32. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=7&scrV=20#i.vi-p9.2
  33. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=2&scrV=0#i.iii-p13.1
  34. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=8&scrV=0#i.vi-p7.1
  35. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=8&scrV=4#i.vi-p9.3
  36. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=8&scrV=5#i.vi-p11.1
  37. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=40&scrV=6#i.xxv-p9.1
  38. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=45&scrV=0#i.iv-p19.1
  39. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=48&scrV=0#i.xxxi-p12.1
  40. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=68&scrV=17#i.iv-p5.2
  41. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=90&scrV=0#i.x-p9.1
  42. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=95&scrV=7#i.xi-p9.1
  43. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=97&scrV=7#i.iv-p7.2
  44. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=102&scrV=0#i.iv-p11.1
  45. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=104&scrV=4#i.iv-p7.1
  46. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=106&scrV=24#i.x-p21.2
  47. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=110&scrV=0#i.iv-p21.1
  48. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=110&scrV=0#i.xviii-p17.1
  49. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=118&scrV=27#i.xxi-p13.1
  50. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=144&scrV=3#i.vi-p9.1
  51. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=10&scrV=17#i.xxxiii-p8.1
  52. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=53&scrV=5#i.xxiii-p18.3
  53. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=31&scrV=31#i.xx-p7.1
  54. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=1&scrV=0#i.xx-p24.1
  55. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Mic&scrCh=6&scrV=6#i.xxii-p22.1
  56. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Zech&scrCh=4&scrV=2#i.xxi-p21.2
  57. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=0#i.xxx-p30.1
  58. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=22&scrV=44#i.xviii-p17.2
  59. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=16&scrV=19#i.iv-p21.3
  60. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=1&scrV=9#i.xxi-p26.2
  61. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=10&scrV=9#i.viii-p18.1
  62. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=24&scrV=0#i.iii-p14.1
  63. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=24&scrV=20#i.vii-p8.1
  64. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=0#i.iii-p4.1
  65. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=3#i.iv-p9.2
  66. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=12#i.vii-p11.1
  67. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=2&scrV=0#i.viii-p17.1
  68. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=2#i.v-p6.2
  69. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=0#i.iii-p5.1
  70. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=53#i.xxiii-p7.1
  71. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=57#i.xxxv-p16.1
  72. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=63#i.xii-p15.1
  73. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=12&scrV=31#i.viii-p17.1
  74. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=13&scrV=0#i.xxi-p19.1
  75. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=13&scrV=4#i.xxii-p10.1
  76. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=16&scrV=0#i.viii-p17.1
  77. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=17&scrV=0#i.vi-p21.1
  78. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=19&scrV=34#i.xxiii-p8.2
  79. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=2&scrV=34#i.iv-p21.2
  80. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=2&scrV=34#i.xviii-p17.3
  81. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=4&scrV=0#i.iii-p13.2
  82. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=7&scrV=53#i.iv-p5.1
  83. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=7&scrV=53#i.v-p12.2
  84. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=27&scrV=23#i.iv-p4.2
  85. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=3&scrV=24#i.xxi-p31.1
  86. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=4&scrV=16#i.xvi-p13.1
  87. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=4&scrV=24#i.xxiii-p13.1
  88. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=5&scrV=0#i.vi-p18.1
  89. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=34#i.iv-p17.1
  90. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=12&scrV=19#i.xxx-p30.2
  91. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=42&scrV=11#i.v-p6.3
  92. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=0#i.v-p6.1
  93. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=16#i.xxx-p9.1
  94. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=13&scrV=0#i.xxxiii-p22.1
  95. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=24#i.iv-p22.1
  96. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=3&scrV=19#i.v-p12.3
  97. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=3#i.xiii-p6.2
  98. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=2&scrV=8#i.v-p5.1
  99. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=3#i.xxx-p25.2
 100. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=7#i.vi-p21.2
 101. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=8#i.iv-p20.1
 102. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=1&scrV=16#i.iv-p9.1
 103. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=1&scrV=1#i.xvi-p20.1
 104. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=2&scrV=22#i.xxx-p25.1
 105. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=3&scrV=0#i.ii-p15.1
 106. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=1&scrV=1#i.ii-p1.2
 107. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=1&scrV=3#i.vi-p20.1
 108. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=1&scrV=3#i.iii-p2.2
 109. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=1&scrV=4#i.iv-p1.2
 110. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=1&scrV=12#i.xxxiv-p27.1
 111. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=2&scrV=1#i.v-p2.2
 112. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=2&scrV=2#i.v-p12.4
 113. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=2&scrV=5#i.vi-p1.2
 114. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=2&scrV=6#i.vi-p9.4
 115. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=2&scrV=8#i.vi-p15.1
 116. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=2&scrV=10#i.vi-p21.3
 117. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=2&scrV=10#i.vii-p3.1
 118. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=2&scrV=14#i.viii-p1.2
 119. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=2&scrV=17#i.ix-p0.4
 120. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=3&scrV=12#i.x-p2.2
 121. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=4&scrV=9#i.xi-p0.4
 122. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=4&scrV=12#i.xii-p1.2
 123. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=4&scrV=16#i.xiii-p2.2
 124. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=5&scrV=7#i.xiv-p2.2
 125. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=6&scrV=4#i.xv-p2.2
 126. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=6&scrV=12#i.xvi-p3.1
 127. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=6&scrV=17#i.v-p10.1
 128. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=7&scrV=6#i.xviii-p10.1
 129. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=7&scrV=17#i.xvii-p3.2
 130. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=7&scrV=24#i.xxxiv-p29.1
 131. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=7&scrV=25#i.xviii-p2.2
 132. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=8&scrV=5#i.xix-p2.2
 133. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=8&scrV=10#i.xx-p1.2
 134. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=9&scrV=2#i.xxi-p2.2
 135. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=9&scrV=9#i.xx-p12.1
 136. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=9&scrV=14#i.xxii-p2.2
 137. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=9&scrV=22#i.xxiii-p1.2
 138. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=9&scrV=26#i.xxiv-p3.2
 139. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=10&scrV=5#i.xxv-p1.2
 140. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=10&scrV=10#i.xxv-p15.1
 141. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=10&scrV=14#i.xxv-p15.1
 142. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=10&scrV=20#i.xxi-p26.1
 143. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=10&scrV=38#i.xxvi-p2.2
 144. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=11&scrV=1#i.xxvii-p2.2
 145. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=12&scrV=1#i.xxviii-p2.2
 146. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=12&scrV=6#i.xxix-p4.1
 147. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=12&scrV=14#i.xxx-p2.2
 148. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=12&scrV=22#i.xxxi-p3.2
 149. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=12&scrV=27#i.xxxii-p2.2
 150. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=12&scrV=29#i.xxxiii-p1.2
 151. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=13&scrV=8#i.xxxiv-p0.4
 152. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=13&scrV=9#i.xxxv-p2.2
 153. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=13&scrV=20#i.xxxvi-p1.2
 154. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=3&scrV=18#i.xxx-p25.3
 155. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=0#i.ii-p15.2
 156. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=21#i.xxx-p30.3
 157. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=24#i.xxiii-p18.2
 158. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=3#i.xiii-p6.3
 159. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=11#i.viii-p24.1
 160. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=1&scrV=7#i.xxiii-p9.1
 161. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=3&scrV=3#i.xvi-p20.2
 162. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=5&scrV=6#i.xxiii-p8.1
 163. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=1&scrV=5#i.xxiii-p18.1
 164. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=1&scrV=6#i.xviii-p19.1
 165. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=1&scrV=9#i.xvi-p22.1
 166. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=3&scrV=17#i.xiii-p5.1
 167. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=5&scrV=9#i.xxiii-p18.1
 168. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=8&scrV=3#i.xxi-p24.2
 169. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=21&scrV=12#i.iv-p4.1
 170. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=1&scrV=1#i.ii-p0.1
 171. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=1&scrV=3#i.iii-p0.1
 172. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=1&scrV=4#i.iv-p0.1
 173. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=2&scrV=1#i.v-p0.1
 174. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=2&scrV=5#i.vi-p0.1
 175. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=2&scrV=10#i.vii-p0.1
 176. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=2&scrV=14#i.viii-p0.1
 177. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=2&scrV=17#i.ix-p0.1
 178. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=3&scrV=12#i.x-p0.1
 179. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=4&scrV=9#i.xi-p0.1
 180. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=4&scrV=12#i.xii-p0.1
 181. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=4&scrV=16#i.xiii-p0.1
 182. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=5&scrV=7#i.xiv-p0.1
 183. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=6&scrV=4#i.xv-p0.1
 184. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=6&scrV=12#i.xvi-p0.1
 185. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=7&scrV=17#i.xvii-p0.1
 186. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=7&scrV=25#i.xviii-p0.1
 187. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=8&scrV=5#i.xix-p0.1
 188. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=8&scrV=10#i.xx-p0.1
 189. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=9&scrV=2#i.xxi-p0.1
 190. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=9&scrV=14#i.xxii-p0.1
 191. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=9&scrV=22#i.xxiii-p0.1
 192. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=9&scrV=26#i.xxiv-p0.1
 193. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=10&scrV=5#i.xxv-p0.1
 194. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=10&scrV=38#i.xxvi-p0.1
 195. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=11&scrV=1#i.xxvii-p0.1
 196. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=12&scrV=1#i.xxviii-p0.1
 197. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=12&scrV=6#i.xxix-p0.1
 198. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=12&scrV=14#i.xxx-p0.1
 199. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=12&scrV=22#i.xxxi-p0.1
 200. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=12&scrV=27#i.xxxii-p0.1
 201. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=12&scrV=29#i.xxxiii-p0.1
 202. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=13&scrV=8#i.xxxiv-p0.1
 203. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=13&scrV=9#i.xxxv-p0.1
 204. file:///ccel/m/meyer/into_holiest/cache/into_holiest.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=13&scrV=20#i.xxxvi-p0.1
