     __________________________________________________________________

           Title: The General Epistles: James, Peter, and Judas
      Creator(s): Moffat, James, D.D.
          Rights: Public Domain
   CCEL Subjects: All; Bible
      LC Call no: BS2341.M6 vol. 17
     LC Subjects:

                  The Bible

                  New Testament

                  Works about the New Testament
     __________________________________________________________________

   The

                                    MOFFATT

                            NEW TESTAMENT COMMENTARY

   Based on The New Translation by the

   REV. PROFESSOR JAMES MOFFATT, D.D. (Oxon)

   and under his Editorship

THE GENERAL EPISTLES

   The Moffatt

   New Testament Commentary

   Now Ready

   THE GOSPEL OF MATTHEW

   BY THEODORE H. ROBINSON, M.A., D.D.

   THE GENERAL EPISTLES BY JAMES MOFFATT, D.D.

   In Preparation

   LUKE

   BY W. MANSON, D.D., NEW COLLEGE,

   EDINBURGH

   JOHN

   BY G. H. C. MACGREGOR, D.D.,
   GLASGOW

   EPHESIANS

   BY E. F. SCOTT, D.D., UNION THEOLOGICAL SEMINARY,
   NEW YORK

   PHILIPPIANS

   BY J. H. MICHAEL, D.D., VICTORIA COLLEGE,
   TORONTO

   Other Volumes to follow
     __________________________________________________________________

   THE MOFFATT BIBLE

   A NEW TRANSLATION OF THE BIBLE
   BY JAMES MOFFATT, D.D.

   In One Volume

   Also NEW TESTAMENT separately

   VARIOUS EDITIONS

THE

GENERAL EPISTLES

JAMES, PETER, AND JUDAS

   BY

   JAMES MOFFATT

   D.D. (Oxon), LL.D., D.Litt.

   Washburn Professor of Church History
   Union Theological Seminary
   New York

  HARPER AND BROTHERS PUBLISHERS

    NEW YORK AND LONDON
     __________________________________________________________________

EDITOR'S PREFACE

  EVERYMAN'S NEW TESTAMENT COMMENTARY

   The aim of this commentary is to bring out the religious meaning and
   message of the New Testament writings. To do this, it is needful to
   explain what they originally meant for the communities to which they
   were addressed in the first century, and this involves literary and
   historical criticism; otherwise, our reading becomes unintelligent. But
   the New Testament was the literature of the early church, written out
   of faith and for faith, and no study of it is intelligent unless this
   aim is kept in mind. It is literature written for a religious purpose.
   These are written that ye might believe that Jesus is the Christ, the
   Son of God.' That is the real object of the New Testament, that
   Christians might believe this better, in the light of contemporary life
   with its intellectual and moral problems. So with any commentary upon
   it. Everything ought to be subordinated to the aim of elucidating the
   religious content, of showing how the faith was held in such and such a
   way by the first Christians, and of making clear what that faith was
   and is.

   The idea of the commentary arose from a repeated demand to have my New
   Testament translation explained; which accounts for the fact that this
   translation has been adopted as a convenient basis for the commentary.
   But the contributors have been left free to take their own way. If they
   interpret the text differently, they have been at liberty to say so.
   Only, as a translation is in itself a partial commentary, it has often
   saved space to print the commentary and start from it.

   As everyman has not Greek, the commentary has been written, as far as
   possible, for the Greekless. But it is based upon a first-hand study of
   the Greek original, and readers may rest assured that it represents a
   close reproduction of the original writers' meaning, or at anyrate of
   what we consider that to have been. Our common aim has been to enable
   everyman to-day to sit where these first Christians sat, to feel the
   impetus and inspiration of the Christian faith as it dawned upon the
   minds of the communities in the first century, and thereby to realize
   more vividly how new and lasting is the message which prompted these
   New Testament writings to take shape as they did. Sometimes people
   inside as well as outside the church make mistakes about the New
   Testament. They think it means this or that, whereas its words
   frequently mean something very different from what traditional
   associations suggest. The saving thing is to let the New Testament
   speak for itself. This is our desire and. plan in the present
   commentary, to place each writing or group of writings in its original
   setting and allow their words to come home thus to the imagination and
   conscience of everyman to-day.

   The general form of the commentary is to provide a running comment on
   the text, instead of one broken up into separate verses. But within
   these limits, each contributor has been left free. Thus, to comment on
   a gospel requires a method which is not precisely the same as that
   necessitated by commenting on an epistle. Still, the variety of
   treatment ought not to interfere with the uniformity of aim and form.
   Our principle has been that nothing mattered, so long as the reader
   could understand what he was reading in the text of the New Testament.

   James Moffatt.
     __________________________________________________________________

THE EPISTLE OF ST. JAMES
     __________________________________________________________________

  INTRODUCTION

   THE epistle of St. James is a pastoral or homily addressed to
   Christians in general (see on i. 1). The author is a teacher of the
   church, who writes this tract for the special purpose of recalling
   Christians to the agenda of their faith. But who they were, and who he
   was, no tradition explains. Neither is there any internal evidence that
   enables us to place the homily, except within broad limits. It is
   fairly plain that the writer was acquainted with First Peter, and also
   with the teaching of the Pauline epistles; it is also more than
   probable that our tract was known to Hermas, who in the second century
   composed The Shepherd. If it could be shown that Clement of Rome,
   towards the end of the first century, used James, this would fix the
   date of James still further, as being not later than about A.D. 90.
   Provisionally it may be placed between about 70 and 90 (110).

   It was addressed to churches which were still governed by presbyters;
   they and teachers are the only officials mentioned, and the lack of any
   reference to bishops proves that it was either written prior to the
   development marked by Ignatius, or composed for communities which were
   as yet unaffected by the change to a monarchical episcopate. One
   country which would answer to this is Egypt, and there are some minor
   indications that point to an Egyptian origin for James, e.g. the use of
   Alexandrian books like Sirach and Wisdom, and the fact that the first
   author to quote it is Origen.

   Even Origen shows hesitation about citing it as canonical, and down to
   the fourth century its place in the N.T. canon was both limited and
   disputed. Thus Eusebius (Hist. Eccles. ii. 33) records the opinion that
   it was composed by James the brother of Jesus, but adds candidly, I
   must observe that it is considered spurious. Certainly not many writers
   of antiquity have mentioned it.' Evidently there was no tradition
   linking it to the apostle James; indeed the western Church seems to
   have ignored it altogether until the second half of the fourth century.
   Jerome believed it was the work of the apostle James, but he records
   another, older view that it was pseudonymous, ab alio quodam sub nomine
   eius edita, licet paulatim tempore procedente obtinuerit auctoritatem.'
   There are still critics who maintain this theory, although it is not
   easy to see why a writer who desired to float his tract under the flag
   of the apostle James did not make more , use of the apostolic name and
   prestige.

   The alternative theories are (a) that it was really written by the
   apostle James, either before or after St. Paul, or (b) that it was
   composed by some teacher of the church called James, of whom we know
   nothing. The latter upon the whole meets the facts of the case
   adequately; it is no longer needful to discuss the hypothesis that the
   tract was originally a Jewish document, interpolated by a Christian in
   i. 1 and ii. 1, etc. The address of the letter, in i. 1, does not claim
   apostolic authorship, indeed; but as no homily could gain entrance,
   into the canon apart from some claim to apostolic inspiration, it was
   natural, as it was fortunate, that the church came to read James, a
   servant of God and the Lord Jesus Christ,' as an allusion to James the
   apostle. In this way the homily won a tardy and partial footing in the
   canon, which its own merits might not have secured.

   And its merits are marked. James, as Zahn remarks, is a preacher who
   speaks like a prophet . . . in language which for forcibleness is
   without parallel in early Christian literature, excepting the
   discourses of Jesus.' The style is pithy and terse, often aphoristic;
   in 108 verses there are no fewer than 54 imperatives. This corresponds
   to the spirit of the writer. He has met Christians who--


   In self-belyings, self-deceivings roll,

   And lose in action, passion, talk, the soul.

   His arguments and appeals are directed against abuses of popular
   Christianity as it developed in circles where worldliness was infecting
   the faith, and where misconceptions of belief were prevalent. There is
   no problem of Jew and Christian present to his mind; it is only a
   misinterpretation of passages like ii. 2 and 21 that has led to the
   idea that the tract was designed for Jewish Christians of the primitive
   period. The situation presupposed in the homily is that of oecumenical
   Christianity, exposed to the ordinary trials and temptations which met
   the later stages of the apostolic age.

   The homily begins with five paragraphs loosely strung; upon the thread
   of trial or temptation (i. 1-16), followed by reflections on the true
   word and worship (i. 17-27), which open up into a denunciation of some
   abuses in contemporary worship (ii. 1-13, iv. 11-12). Then comes an
   indignant refutation of a merely formal faith (ii. 14-26, iv. 17). But
   excess of words is as fatal as lack of deeds in religion, and James now
   proceeds to expose the vices of the tongue (iii. 1-12), dosing with a
   passage on the true wisdom of life (iii. 13-18), as opposed to the
   factiousness and worldliness which are rampant in the church (iv.
   1-10). He then censures scheming traders (iv. 13-16) and oppressive
   landlords (v. 1-6), and exhorts the poor, patient Christians to be of
   good cheer (v. 7-11). Some scattered counsels (v. 12, 13, 14-18, 19-20)
   conclude the homily.

   The tone of its advice and the very structure of its paragraphs recall
   the gnomic Hellenistic literature. For it is plain that the writer's
   mind is steeped in the teaching of Sirach and the Wisdom of Solomon,
   two products of Egyptian Judaism, which were much read by primitive
   Christians. Sirach may have been known to Jesus himself; at anyrate, it
   was familiar to the authors of the gospels, and perhaps to Paul;
   sometimes it even was included among the canonical scriptures. As for
   the Wisdom of Solomon, it was probably known to Paul. In the Muratorian
   canon of the second century (an Egyptian list of N.T. scriptures) it is
   accepted in the catholic church' along with the epistle of Judas and
   two of the Johannine epistles. The homily of James shows us on every
   page how instinctively the writer drew upon these books for his
   exposition of the Christian wisdom or practical philosophy of life. [1]
   He knows of course the other books of the Greek Bible, and some current
   writings which have not come down to us (see on iv. 5-6).

   Twice in literature James has been robbed of his due. Elijah was a man
   with a nature just like our own. Pascal cites this in his Pensées. Thus
   dit saint Pierre,' he observes, pour désabuser les Chrétiens de cette
   fausse idée qui nous fait rejeter l'exemple des saints, comme
   disproportionné à notre état. "C'étaient des saints, disons-nous, ce
   n'est pas comme nous." Que se passait-il donc alors? Saint Athanase
   était un homme appelé Athanase, accusé de plusieurs crimes, condamné en
   tel et tel concile, pour tel et tel crime; tous les évêques y
   consentaient, et le pape enfin.' Editors correct Pierre' to Jacques,'
   but Pascal wrote Pierre' by some lapse of memory. English literature
   has a similar instance in Tennyson's Queen Mary. Cranmer is on the
   scaffold, in the fourth act of the drama, and speaks his final words to
   the people:

     God grant me grace to glorify my God!

     And first I say it is a grievous case,

     Many so dote upon this bubble world,

     Whose colours in a moment break and fly,

     They care for nothing else. What saith St. John:

     Love of this world is hatred against God'?

   But it was James, not St. John, who wrote, The world's friendship means
   enmity to God.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [1] See Professor H. A. A. Kennedy's paper in The Expositor (8th
   Series), vol. ii, pp. 39-52.
     __________________________________________________________________

  THE EPISTLE OF ST. JAMES

   The salutation or address is shorter than any other in the N.T.
   letters, closer to the form commonly employed in ordinary
   correspondence.

   1     James, a servant of God and the Lord Jesus Christ, to the twelve
   tribes in the Dispersion: greeting.

   Three features in this address are singular. (a) Paul calls himself or
   is called in the addresses of his epistles sometimes a servant of Jesus
   Christ' (or of Christ Jesus'), or a servant of God,' while Judas calls
   himself a servant of Jesus Christ,' but a servant of God and the Lord
   Jesus Christ is unique. Any Christian might be termed a servant of God,
   but it was applied to outstanding personalities like prophets. Here
   servant has its general religious sense (see on Judas 1). It
   corresponded specially to Lord, as the Greek term kurios meant master'
   of slaves or servants in ordinary usage. James does not describe God as
   the Father of Jesus Christ, but the collocation here and the phrase in
   ii. 1 imply a divine authority for Christ. (b) The readers are not
   described as exiles of the Dispersion, though Dispersion means what
   Peter (1 Peter i. 1) and other writers had popularized; they are the
   twelve tribes in the Dispersion, a figurative term for catholic
   Christianity as the true Israel, living for the time being in a strange
   world, far from its true Fatherland. In the second century Hermas
   (Similitudes ix. 17) explains that the twelve mountains in his vision
   are the twelve tribes who inhabit the whole world, to whom the Son of
   God was preached by the apostles'; otherwise the only parallel to this
   interesting form of the metaphor is perhaps the indirect allusion in
   Revelation vii. 4 f., xiv. 1. Literally the twelve tribes was a synonym
   for Israel as a whole, which could by no means be described as in the
   Dispersion. To James of course it was a matter of supreme indifference
   what had become of the original ten tribes, and he could therefore coin
   this bold, double metaphor for the Christian community throughout the
   world as the People of God. It is an archaic metaphor, the first of
   several equally daring, in his homily. Apart from Peter's earlier usage
   it would be meaningless, but unlike Peter he makes no further use of
   the figure. Nor does he add a word about the readers' religious
   position; he simply closes (c) with a stereotyped epistolary term,
   greeting (as in Acts xv. 23 and xxiii. 26). An ancient Greek letter
   began with the name of the sender, the name of those to whom the letter
   was sent, and this word (sends) greeting; early Christians usually
   turned it or any equivalent into a prayer or pious wish, but James
   adheres to the formal word.

   However, by playing on the word, he introduces his first counsel (2-4)
   on bearing trials.

   2     Greet it as pure joy, my brothers, when you come across any sort
   of trial, ^3 sure that the sterling temper of your faith produces
   endurance; ^4 only, let your endurance be a finished product, so that
   you may be finished and complete, with never a defect.

   2

   Greeting and greet as (a reason for) pure joy are an attempt to bring
   out the play on words in the original, where the courteous chairein
   (greeting) is echoed by charan (joy); such a device was not uncommon in
   letters. The call to joy here is the first of several proofs that he
   was familiar with the Stoic ethics of the age. Thus Seneca tells
   Lucilius to avoid hoping (James never speaks of hope') and to make this
   your chief business, learn to rejoice . . . . Believe me, real joy is a
   serious thing' (Epp. xxiii.), for it has to meet experiences like
   poverty, temptation, trials, and death. James baptizes this moral joy
   into religion. The opening sentence of his homily resembles the
   teaching of 1 Peter i. 6-7, where sterling faith exposed to trials is
   compared to gold being tested by fire, though Peter means the passing
   trials of persecution, while James thinks of more general hardships.
   Both go back to what is said in Sirach ii. 1-5: My son, if you come
   forward to serve the Lord God, prepare yourself for trial . . . for
   gold is tested in fire, and men acceptable to God in the furnace of
   adversity' (adversity being the same word as James renders in ver. 9 by
   being lowered).

   But James strikes an heroic note. He assumes, or rather he calls upon
   his readers to be sure to realize, that character is the chief concern;
   it is so for God and it must be so for His People, not outward calm or
   prosperity, but the inward ripening of the soul, the relationship of
   man to God. You will then rejoice, with a kind of stern cheerfulness or
   satisfaction, in whatever forwards that, however trying the dealings
   and discipline of God may be. For trial advances the interests of the
   soul, if it be bravely and faithfully undergone. But all depends on how
   we take it or think of it. James (vers. 13 f.) hastens to repudiate the
   idea that in trial God is deliberately trying to break down human
   faith. The true view of faith is that any sort of trial (the same words
   as Peter uses for various trials), hardship, or misfortune of any kind
   or degree, is an opportunity for proving our mettle; God's meaning in
   it is our training in courage and patience. Therefore, however
   unwelcome it may be to flesh and blood, it ought to be actually
   welcomed as a test and training of our powers.

   The divine reward is explained later, in ver. 12 and in v. 10-11; here
   James indicates that the ordeal of faith brings out endurance, the
   staying power of life. This is not mentioned by Peter, though it had
   been by Paul in Romans v. 3 (we triumph even in our troubles, knowing
   that trouble produces endurance'); but James uses this cardinal virtue
   of Jewish and Stoic ethic to rally his brothers, i.e. here as always in
   the homily his fellow-members of the church as a brotherhood (see on 1
   Peter ii. 17). Only trial can prove what we are made of, whether we
   possess this supreme quality of stedfastness or constancy to our
   convictions. And trial does attest and ripens this, if we let the
   discipline attain its end, instead of rendering it incomplete by
   impatience or repining. 4 It is a moral process which results normally
   in a finished and complete character, faultless and perfect; there is
   no immaturity about such constant souls, nothing inadequate or
   defective. Such is the prospect set before the stedfast Christian by
   James; like Wordsworth's Happy Warrior, he is--


   More able to endure

   As more exposed to suffering and distress,

   and through his endurance set on the way to be a ripened character,
   with never a defect.

   This is the ideal. But in real life some may not always be quite sure
   of themselves, able to maintain this exacting vision of what trial
   means or to carry it out in practical conduct. Besides, it requires a
   higher power than man's. The sterling temper of faith must depend upon
   God. James recollects teaching like that of Wisdom ix. 6 (Even if one
   be a finished character in the eyes of men, should the wisdom that
   comes from thee be lacking, he shall be accounted nothing') and viii.
   21 (Perceiving that I could not enjoy wisdom unless God gave it, I
   besought the Lord and prayed to him'), and at once adds a word on
   prayer to God as one expression of genuine faith, during the process of
   discipline and development. I understand that you possess a mind
   blameless and unhesitating in endurance,' says Ignatius to the church
   at Tralles. This is the temper which James commends and demands in 5-8.

   5     Whoever of you is defective in wisdom, let him ask God who gives
   to all men without question or reproach, and the gift will be his. ^6
   Only, let him ask in faith, with never a doubt; for the doubtful man is
   like surge of the sea whirled and swayed by the wind; ^7, 8that man
   need not imagine he will get anything from God, double-minded creature
   that he is, wavering at every turn.

   5

   Wisdom throughout this homily is the insight which enables a Christian
   to understand and practise and advance the religious life that is in
   keeping with the law of God. James does not use the term and idea in
   connexion with God's work in creation and providence, or as a medium of
   revelation, as the Wisdom literature does; for him it is purely a human
   endowment, which comes from God but which operates in human life, i.e.
   in the common life of the Christian Church (iii. 13-18). In the Wisdom
   literature goodness is considered as wisdom rather than as holiness.
   Under the breath of the Greek spirit it came to mean a life which
   interpreted the divine law as the rule for faith and morals; the
   emphasis fell on moral and spiritual requirements rather than on ritual
   or dogmatic considerations, and this was what commended it to James, as
   he expounded the Christian religion. Wisdom denoted an absorbing
   interest in human relationships and responsibilities, actuated by
   humble reverence for God's law. This he found in the Wisdom literature,
   and he carried it over into the vocabulary of the church. Our English
   term wisdom is almost as inadequate a rendering of the Greek, as the
   Greek was of the original Hebrew word; it calls up misleading
   associations of learning and expert science. But there is no better.
   What James means by it is the divine endowment of the soul by which the
   believing man recognizes and realizes that divine rule of life called
   righteousness (see i. 20, iii. 18), either in intercourse with others
   or, as here, in the management of his own conduct. Now, while God may
   inflict trial, He is ever ready to give wisdom, or, as the devout
   Alexandrian Philo had said, to give anything needful. God is called
   everlasting,' Philo argued, as being One who does not bestow favour at
   one time and withhold it at another, but is ever, uninterruptedly
   bestowing benefits'; there is no giver like God, none so prompt and
   generous. Sirach warns men against the ugly habit of accompanying a
   gift with some contemptuous remark: After making a gift, never reproach
   the recipient' (xli. 22, also xviii. 15 f., xx. 14 f.) either with his
   poverty or with the sneer that it is not likely to be repaid in whole
   or part. God never so taunts our prayers. Nor does He ask questions
   before He gives wisdom, but gives outright. There is nothing
   ungracious, no thought of self, in His giving; God, as Tindal puts it
   vigorously, casteth no man in the teeth.' He bestows on us what we need
   without raising embarrassing questions about our deserts, and without a
   hard word, never harping on the benefit or treating prayer as
   presumption. There is no jealousy of this mean kind (see on iv. 5), no
   grudging or reluctance on His part.

   6

   The prayer of faith (see v. 15 f.) on man's part must be equally
   unhesitating. A doubtful or half-hearted man prays, but he is secretly
   not quite sure of God's goodwill and there-fore is always wavering or
   fickle in his practical allegiance; a man who is thus in two minds
   about the rule of life, now acting on faith and now living as though
   faith were insufficient, rising and falling constantly like sea-waves
   between reliance on God and sceptical uncertainty, divided between
   faith and the world (iii., iv. 4), must not dream of getting any prayer
   answered. 7This half-and-half character is familiar in the Wisdom
   literature, where it is the opposite of endurance. Thus in Sirach ii.
   12 f., Woe to the sinner who goes two ways, woe to the faint heart for
   it has no faith, woe to you who have lost your endurance.'

   8

   Wavering or unstable is often illustrated by a sea-simile. Thus the
   Greek orator Demosthenes (De Falsa Legatione 383) calls democracy
   wavering and compares its shifting, un-reliable policy to winds at sea.
   It is perhaps an undesigned coincidence that the rebuke of Jesus to the
   disciples, Where is your faith?' (in Luke viii. 24, 25) comes after the
   only other use of the Greek word for surge in the N.T. (he checked the
   wind and the surf,' or surge). But James (here and in iv. 8) introduced
   the word wavering to the vocabulary of Christianity. It suited his
   demand for the Christian life being all of a piece. Later, he returns
   to the reason why prayers are not heard by God; here his point is that
   the success of prayer depends on personal conduct, and that the one
   condition of having prayer answered unconditionally lies in
   single-mindedness.

   Up to this point the line of thought is unbroken. Whenever you
   encounter trials, treat them as opportunities. Calamity is the occasion
   for valour,' said Seneca (De Providentia 4); great souls sometimes
   rejoice in adversities, much as brave soldiers rejoice in wars.'
   Christians, says James, always ought to meet troubles in this heroic
   spirit. But do not, he adds, shut up the lesson-book of endurance too
   soon, as though you had learned all the lessons God meant you to
   acquire; and recollect that as to know God is complete righteousness'
   (Wisdom xv. 3), so this wisdom of true religion will be imparted freely
   to those who show by their undivided allegiance to God's purpose that
   they really hold this to be the sole concern in life. What follows (in
   9-11) seems abrupt and isolated. But there is a thread of connexion,
   which is more than verbal, indicated in Sirach, where wisdom exalts the
   poor' (the wisdom of one in low position raises his head,' xi. 1), and
   where the warning, approach not the Lord with double heart,' is
   followed by, raise not yourself up, lest you fall and bring disgrace
   upon yourself, and the Lord cast you down in your meeting' (same words
   as in James ii. 2). The paragraph is therefore a pendant loosely
   attached to what has been said in vers. 2-4, 5-8.

   9

   9     Let a brother of low position exult when he is raised; ^10 but
   let one who is rich exult in being lowered; for the rich will pass away
   like the flower of the grass--^11 up comes the sun with the scorching
   wind and withers the grass, its flower drops off, and the splendour of
   it is ruined; so shall the rich fade away amid their pursuits.

   9

   When some man of obscure position, like the poor man in ii. 2 f., not
   only attended a Christian meeting but received the gospel, he was
   raised to high rank by his faith; was he not one of the pious poor whom
   God had chosen to be rich in faith and heirs of the realm which he has
   promised to those who love him? Well might he exult in his inward
   elevation, however mean his social sphere in the world might be. Though
   he may belong to the lower classes, he is not low in the sight of God.
   Far from it. Therefore, however little he may possess in the way of
   outward comforts and possessions, let him be proud of what he has
   received from God. This is one way of reckoning the trials of life as
   pure joy, instead of resenting them as though he were badly used by God
   as well as by men.

   But James has more to say about the opposite case of a rich man who has
   become a Christian brother, perhaps after visiting the church (ii. 2
   f.), where at some meeting he found himself wishing himself like to
   those more rich in hope.' The. paradox for him is that he is to pride
   himself on being lowered, i.e. in what from the worldly point of view
   seems the humiliating position of membership in a poverty-stricken
   brotherhood where wealth is of no account in the sight of God, and
   where he has to associate with people the majority of whom are socially
   inferior. Let him exult in this, for thereby he has learned the real
   values of life. James does not say that he loses his wealth, though he
   may have less as he makes money honestly, pays better wages to his
   employees (iv. 13 f., v. 1-6), or parts with much of it in charity (ii.
   15 f.); the lowering of the rich brother is as inward as the raising of
   the poor brother. He is lowered from the false consideration and
   deference paid to him on account of his wealth, even (James indignantly
   remarks) by some Christians who ought to know better (ii. 2, 3); when
   he comes under the law of the gospel and humbly receives the word that
   regenerates, he no longer prides himself on his outward possessions.

   10

    And he is safer so, James adds. For the rich (i.e. the wealthy man who
   is bound up with his wealth, the unconverted worldly man of property)
   is to meet a swift, complete doom. In v. 1-6 James describes this fate
   as applying to rapacious and luxurious landowners, but here he puts the
   same thought more generally, using a simile from the book of Isaiah
   (xl. 6) which Peter had employed (1 Peter i. 24) in a different
   connexion. 11Syrian peasants knew how shortlived the patches of grass
   were, under the sirocco or scorching wind and blazing sun of a summer
   which made short work of the flowers and herbage. Such splendour does
   not last; it, fades and wilts. So with the rich (a generic singular in
   the original, as in v. 7) amid their pursuits. James uses for pursuits
   a term literally meaning journeys,' as turn in ver. 8 literally means
   way'; the word denotes the fortunes and occupations of the rich, but it
   seems as if he were specially thinking of wealthy traders, who made
   their money by travelling and business (iv. 13-16). In any case he
   expects a speedy settlement of God with the worldly rich, as in v. 1-6.
   Let the converted rich brother rejoice that he has escaped such a fate,
   as well as that he has learned how humiliation, the humiliation of
   becoming a Christian, is no real humiliation but a source of profound
   joy and pride. Let him be proud to endure the shame of bearing the name
   of Christian which is reviled by his class, as once by himself perhaps
   (ii. 7), proud to be less rich than he was, for conscience' sake, proud
   to undergo the trial of enduring sneers and social persecution on
   account of the unfashionable faith which he now values more highly than
   any rank or money in the world.

   James now adds another pendant, resuming the subject of trial (vers. 2
   f.), but from another side. Some are depressed by trials, but others
   are stung by them into a resentment which voices itself in blame of
   God; it is to this mood of self-justification that he addresses himself
   in the following paragraph (12-19a).

   12    Blessed is he who endures under trial; for when he has stood the
   test, he will gain the crown of life which is promised to all who love
   Him. ^13 Let no one who is tried by temptation say, My temptation comes
   from God'; God is incapable of being tempted by evil and he tempts no
   one. ^14 Everyone is tempted as he is beguiled and allured by his own
   desire; ^15 then Desire conceives and breeds Sin, while Sin matures and
   gives birth to Death. ^16 Make no mistake about this, my beloved
   brothers: ^17 all we are given is good, and all our endowments are
   faultless, descending from above, from the Father of the heavenly
   lights, who knows no change of rising and setting, who casts no shadow
   on the earth. ^18 It was his own will that we should be born by the
   Word of the truth, to be a kind of first fruits among his creatures.
   ^19 Be sure of that, my beloved brothers.

   12

   Blessed is he who endures is a reminiscence of the beatitude for the
   latter days in Daniel xii. 12, and is also eschatological; the strain
   will soon be over (v. 7 f.), when fortitude is crowned with life
   eternal from God. Endurance is a function and proof of love or devotion
   to God; to stand outward trial loyally, without breaking down under it,
   is a test that proves the sterling quality (ver. 3) of the religious
   life. And after probation comes reward, as in the similar passage in 1
   Peter i. 6, 7, the reward of real or lasting life. The only other
   reference to love for God is in ii. 5, where James speaks of the pious
   poor inheriting the realm which God has promised to those who love him;
   both passages recall Wisdom v. 15, 16, where the righteous live for
   ever, receiving the realm of splendour' (the word used by James in ver.
   11) and the diadem of beauty from the Lord's hand,' the diadem, like
   the crown (which is practically an equivalent) , being associated with
   royal or honourable position.

   13

   So much for trial cheerfully and courageously borne. But hardship is
   apt to start questions in the mind; it makes some people think, and
   think unfairly about God, as if He were to blame for the temptations to
   disloyalty stirred by trial. If trial involves probation, does it mean
   that God puts temptation deliberately in the way of man, or that He
   tries him too severely? When outward hardship rouses some inward
   impulse to give way, a man heavily tried by temptation may seek to
   excuse his weakness in yielding by putting the responsibility upon God;
   this temptation, which is too hard for me, comes from God.' Paul had
   met a similar objection in 1 Corinthians x. 13, by arguing that God
   never makes life too difficult for genuine faith. But James, as usual,
   deals with the question in the world of thought suggested by Sirach,
   where (xv. 11 f.) we read: Say not, It was owing to the Lord that I
   fell away. . . . He deceived me.' Sirach's reply is that a true view of
   God's nature rules out such a complaint (how could God make a man
   commit sin, when He hates sin?), and that freewill enables anyone to
   choose the right course. James also explains (a) that to tempt man
   would be inconsistent with God's nature, (b) and adds a word on the 13
   psychology of temptation and sin. (a) God stands in no relation to
   temptation, passive or active. James coins a word for incapable of
   being tempted, which means that the divine nature is utterly unversed
   in temptation; no one can tempt another to evil unless he himself has
   some experience (and, it is implied, enjoyment) in yielding to
   temptation. Marcus Aurelius put the same truth from the Stoic point of
   view, when he wrote (vi. 1): The Reason (Logos) which rules the
   universe has no cause in itself for doing wrong, for it has no malice,
   nor does it do evil to anything, nor is anything harmed by it.' James,
   however, feels that he needs to say more about man's responsibility (b)
   than about God's innocence. He can use popular religious language about
   resisting the devil (iv. 7), but here he ignores Satan as a source of
   temptation, and like Sirach concentrates upon a man's 14 own desire or
   lust (as the word is rendered in 2 Peter i. 4). If this inward
   inclination is indulged, it breeds disastrous consequences, the result
   of his own desire, for which he is therefore responsible himself.

   In the Imitatio Christi (i. 13) the rise of temptation is thus
   described: First there comes to mind a simple thought, then a strong
   imagination, afterwards delight and an evil movement and assent.' This
   corresponds to what James means by illicit desire, the imagination
   toying with a forbidden 15 idea, and then issuing in a decision of the
   will. The results of this embrace of evil are depicted graphically
   (Milton's famous expansion is in Paradise Lost, ii. 648 f.). James does
   not enter into the question, debated in contemporary rabbinic circles,
   as to how the evil desire or impulse in man arose, and how it could be
   connected with the creation of man in the likeness of God. As a
   practical religious teacher he is content to urge that temptations rise
   in our own nature, and that man, not God, is to blame for the presence
   of evil desire, sin, and death in the universe. Death is thus the
   mature or finished product (ver. 4) of sin. The wiles of evil desire,
   16 that seduce us, are not due to some malign or imperfect endowment of
   our being; 17 that notion is a serious mistake, for all we are given is
   good, and all our endowments are faultless. This reads like a hexameter
   line, perhaps quoted from some popular source; our faculties all come
   from a God of absolute generosity and goodwill, who bestows nothing
   except as a beneficent creator. Perhaps there is a side-allusion to
   fatalism in the Father of the heavenly lights, as the prevalent
   astrology ascribed the destinies of men to the influence of the stars;
   we have a God who is the maker of these luminaries, and our nature is
   swayed by Him, not by them.' But any of the readers who had been born
   and bred Jews would recollect the praise of God which prefaced the
   daily Shema of piety: Blessed art Thou, O Lord, creator of the
   luminaries.' James knew the traditional title of God as the Father (i.
   27, iii. 9), but he does not use it in describing the new birth of
   Christians (ver. 18), and here he takes it as an equivalent for
   Creator. However, the main thought is that of the modern Christian
   hymn:


   Light of the world! for ever, ever shining,

   There is no change in Thee.

   Light of the world, undimming and unsetting!

   James contrasts the periodic changes in luminaries like the sun and the
   moon with the changeless God, unvarying in His light shed on men, from
   whom no shadow of evil ever falls on the world of human life. The
   powers He bestows on us are, like Himself, free from anything low or
   uncertain or dark; no light that leads astray' is ever light from
   heaven,' and no providence that befalls Christians is designed to upset
   or mislead them. Sirach, oddly enough, employs the idea of the sun's
   changes to illustrate man's liability to err, the very point which
   James is controverting: What is brighter than the sun? Yet even the sun
   fails. And how much more man, with his inclination of flesh and blood?'
   (xvii. 31, i.e. why wonder that poor man has sometimes darkened phases
   of conduct?). But the conception of James was familiar in Jewish and
   ethnic circles. Thus the devout Philo (in his Legum Allegor., ii. 22)
   remarks that the only way in which one can believe God is to learn that
   while all things change, He alone is unchangeable.' Epictetus (i. 14.
   10) observes: If the sun can illuminate so large a part of the
   universe, leaving only unilluminated what the earth's shadow covers,
   cannot He who made the sun itself and causes it to revolve, perceive
   all things?' The Greek words for change and casting a shadow are both
   semi-astronomical terms, employed in a popular sense to suggest the
   irregularities and defects of the heavenly lights, as compared with
   their Maker. Whatever goes wrong on earth, He is not to be blamed, as
   though He failed to afford sufficient and undeviating light to men.
   Philo, in the treatise just quoted (ii. 19) , praises the true
   penitence involved in the confession of Numbers xxi. 7 (We have sinned,
   because we have spoken against the Lord'), since usually, whenever the
   mind has sinned and departed from goodness, it throws the blame upon
   things divine, attributing its own change to God.' This is what James
   has in mind here. Any deviations in human conduct are due to man
   himself, not to some imperfection in the life we owe to Him or in the
   providence under which our ordeal is set. 18 Changing the metaphor, to
   prove that man is neither unfairly handicapped nor left to his unaided
   powers, he reiterates that the very object of our being is to reproduce
   God's nature. Doubt God? Why, He deliberately willed to make us His own
   choice offspring; surely His high purpose in regenerating us proves
   that our faculties must be pure and perfect, as they are meant to
   contribute to this end? The Word of the truth as the regenerating
   medium had been already mentioned in 1 Peter i. 22 f., where Christians
   owe their faith or re-birth to the gospel message or revelation (see
   the note there). The Word, not the Wisdom, of God is for James the
   vital expression of His real purpose and life, as we have already seen.
   This preference for the Word, which is shared by the author of the
   Fourth Gospel, is deliberate; for him it was rendered more easy by, the
   fact that already in the Hellenistic theology of Egypt there had been a
   vague effort to think of some creative Word of God at work in the world
   of men, revealing and redeeming. At anyrate, this is James's equivalent
   for Paul's doctrine of grace,' a technical term which James never uses
   (see on iv. 6). When he wishes to emphasize the Christian truth of life
   beginning with God alone, of God's will underlying faith and
   fellowship, instead of speaking as Paul did about the Spirit (which
   again he never mentions), he chooses the language of birth into God's
   own life. Philo had sadly reflected (in his treatise De Mutatione
   Nominum 24), There are few whose ears are open to receive the divine
   words that teach us that it belongs to God alone to sow and give birth
   to what is good.' James puts a deeper content into this doctrine of
   regeneration, as bound up with our faith in the Lord Jesus Christ (ii.
   1), though he implies it instead of stating it. To God we owe our new,
   true life, to God's set purpose and to that alone; and--this is the
   implication which leads him to mention it--so He would be undoing His
   own work and defeating His own aim, were He to send temptation to us.
   Whenever man's lower desire is in question, there is a grim, ugly Birth
   (ver. 15); when God acts, there is a very different Birth and Breeding.

   We have been born anew, James concludes, to be a kind of first fruits
   among his creatures. The Greek term aparchê might mean gift' or
   sacrifice,' but not here; it is an archaic biblical phrase for the pick
   of creation,' Christians being the choicest product of the divine
   creative purpose in the world. Philo could speak of the Jews as being
   set apart from the entire human race as a kind of first fruits to their
   Maker and Father' (De Spec. Leg., iv. 6), and James takes over the
   honour for Christians as the real twelve tribes' of the Lord, in whom
   the divine purpose was to be realized in its choicest form. There is no
   allusion here to these Christians being the first of many to follow; it
   is the supreme honour of their position, the superlative rank of their
   relationship to God, not any primacy in order of succession, which is
   implied in first fruits. James does imply, of course, that they must
   live up to their exalted destiny from above; he is about to urge this
   in his next paragraph. Here he mentions their privilege in order to
   prove the lofty character of the God to whom some were being tempted to
   do less than justice as they felt their own weakness under the trials
   of life. Judge His Fatherly character from His purpose as shown in His
   work, and you will recognize it is good. Be sure of that, my beloved
   brothers. And with this crisp, emphatic word he shuts the question up.

   But the regenerating Word requires our co-operation: we have a duty
   towards the Word (19b-25), and our religion is not to be a religion of
   mere words' (26, 27). This is the sum of the next paragraph.

   19     Let everyone be quick to listen, slow to talk, slow to be
   angry--^20 for human anger does not promote divine righteousness; ^21
   so clear away all the foul rank growth of malice, and make a soil of
   modesty for the Word which roots itself inwardly with power to save
   your souls. ^22 Act on the Word, instead of merely listening to it and
   deluding yourselves. ^23 For whoever listens and does nothing, is like
   a man who glances at his natural face in a mirror; ^24 he glances at
   himself, goes off, and at once forgets what he was like. ^25 Whereas he
   who gazes into the faultless law of freedom and remains in that
   position, proving himself to be no forgetful listener but an active
   agent, he will be blessed in his activity. ^26 Whoever considers he is
   religious, and does not bridle his tongue, but deceives his own heart,
   his religion is futile. ^27 Pure, unsoiled religion in the judgment of
   God the Father means this: to care for orphans and widows in their
   trouble, and to keep oneself from the stain of the world.

   19

   The three opening counsels are common in ancient social ethics, and the
   following sentences are strung more or less closely upon them. Anger or
   bad temper is the theme of 20, 21; to listen and do nothing more is the
   danger marked in 22-25; and talk suggests the final admonition of 26,
   27. The transition from the previous paragraph is through the double
   sense of the Word as seed, which is put clearly in 1 Peter i. 23-ii. 1,
   a passage parallel to this. When James, like Peter, hastens to urge the
   moral and spiritual activities of Christians, he passes from the idea
   of the regenerating Word to the conception of the Word as seed which
   has to be cared for, if it is to thrive; indeed, he develops the 20
   metaphor more definitely than Peter. Give the divine seed a clean soil.

   21

   Clear away is the same word as that rendered in Peter off with, and
   both writers denounce virulent malice, though James does not contrast
   it with Christian love. Human anger, he begins, a man's animosity or
   irritation against his fellow-Christians, does not promote either in
   himself or in other people divine righteousness, i.e. the divine
   goodness and character, the devout life as lived under the scrutiny and
   standards of God, in fact the high purpose spoken of in ver. 18. He may
   be referring to the general sin of hot temper or sullen anger, which is
   so markedly branded in N.T. ethics, the sin of those who, like Pope's
   lady, are for ever in a passion or a prayer.' But he probably includes
   (as in iii. 14) sarcasm and angry argument on the part of earnest
   Christians, the anger which tried to justify itself as righteous
   indignation against offenders in the community, the mixture of personal
   animosity and religious zeal which discredits the faith, hasty wrath
   against those who differ from us in opinion, and so forth. All other
   hatred of sin which does not fill the heart with the softest, tenderest
   affections towards persons miserable in it, is the servant of sin, at
   the same time that it seems to be hating it,' says William Law in his
   Serious Call. This is the foul rank growth of malice (see on 1 Peter
   ii. 1) which gives no chance to the saving, vital power of the Word.
   The soil for the Word is modesty, i.e. submissiveness to God and at the
   same time gentle consideration for one's fellow-men. The Greek term had
   acquired this range of meaning in the Wisdom literature, where it is
   synonymous with docile humility,' that is, with a religious attitude of
   receptivity towards God which manifests itself, in human relationships,
   in self-restraint and patience of temper, in thoughtful consideration
   in the presence of men, or, in matters of importance, in slowness to
   speak' (A. B. Davidson, Biblical and Literary Essays, p. 52). What
   James had said about human nature did not mean that it was faultless;
   only as the divine Word was received humbly and allowed to root itself
   in good soil, cleansed from spitefulness and arrogance, could the
   saving work be accomplished, and Christians be first fruits for God.

   The Greek term rendered engrafted' in the A.V. originally meant
   innate,' but this meaning is impossible here; an innate or inborn Word
   cannot be received. James gave it the sense of engrafted' or which
   roots itself inwardly, that being the property of the divine
   revelation. There was an affinity between God's saving truth and the
   human nature; the seed suited the soil. But the seed was not innate in
   the soil; it entered into the soil, and had to be inwrought, as it
   were, or developed by a moral process. Here, as in ver. 18, James
   stresses the vital activity of the Word, even as he recalls the need
   for human activity, and this explains his application of the Greek term
   in an unusual sense.

   Be quick to listen was a common ethical maxim which applied to life in
   general; thus, to listen patiently to both sides of a case was better
   than to put in one's word hastily. But it specially denoted good
   listening to advice and instruction. James urged this, but he knew the
   danger of listening to the Word and doing no more. Jesus had put the
   warning against this peril in a parable of ancient house-building
   (Matthew vii. 24-27); here (22-25) the figure is different. 22Merely to
   listen to the preaching and teaching of the gospel is self-delusion; it
   seems reverent, it makes one feel comfortable and safe; but you must
   act on the Word, James insists, otherwise your eager attention is a
   form of self-deception. A teacher or preacher may give an eloquent
   address on the gospel, or explain ably some O.T. prophecy about Christ,
   but when the sermon is done, it is not done; something remains to be
   done by the hearers in life, and if they content themselves with
   sentimental admiration or with enjoying the emotional or mental treat,
   they need not imagine that this is religion. It does not lead to any
   lasting benefit of real self-knowledge. The attention to the Word which
   does not make a man act upon it by doing something to his life,
   altering his real self in obedience to what he has heard, is no
   equivalent for religion, whatever people may think. 23This is the point
   of the mirror-simile. Natural face is literally the face of his birth,'
   i.e. the face a man is born with. James uses the phrase to bring out
   the casual, superficial character of such religion. He is not
   necessarily censuring the man. A busy man cannot be thinking of his
   personal appearance; unless he is idle and conceited, he had better
   24forget what he looked like when he caught a casual glimpse of himself
   in a mirror, unless indeed he ought to have noticed some sign of
   disease or a mark of dirt on his face. James may be merely taking a
   common illustration of how a passing glance or casual impression in
   life leads to no permanent or practical result. But his simile was not
   unfamiliar to ethics, though it was ethnic rather than Jewish.
   Moralists had actually advocated the use of a metal mirror as a means
   of self-discipline. Thus Socrates told young men to look at themselves
   in the mirror; if they were handsome, it would remind them that an ugly
   life was out of keeping with good looks; and if they were
   plain-looking, they might remind themselves that handsome actions did
   much to counteract any impression of facial ugliness. This is quoted
   sophistically by Apuleius (Apologia 14), as he defends himself against
   alleged conceit and magical predilections in his use of a mirror.
   Seneca (Nat. Quaest., i. 17. 4) similarly declares that mirrors were
   invented to enable men to know themselves, not simply their outward
   appearance but their moral needs; and that a bad life left ugly traces
   on the face, the sight of which in a mirror ought to be a warning. So
   James may well be hinting that the moral use of a mirror resembles the
   true, thoughtful use of listening to the Word.

     We see time's furrows in another's brow,
     And death entrenched, preparing his assault,
     How few themselves in that just mirror see!

   25

   Whereas in closely examining the divine Word--a more just mirror' than
   that which ought to reveal to us any physical change and decay in our
   own natures, we win eternal profit. He who gazes with concentrated
   attention on this Mirror of the Word and remains in that position
   perseveringly, thereby proves himself to be no forgetful hearer but an
   active agent (literally a doer of work'). How? The figure of the mirror
   is not quite adequate here; the truth is too large for the
   illustration. The best of men cannot always remain in front of a
   mirror, scrutinizing their defects. But the obvious point is that such
   attention is no mere superficial interest; the man does something with
   what he has learned of his real self and duty, and acts upon the
   knowledge which he has thereby taken time and pains to acquire of the
   law imposed by the Word upon true hearers. Through his close care, as
   he keeps on looking at God's will for life, a moral obligation comes to
   bear upon his practical conduct, and in obedience to these deep and
   abiding impressions of the law he is blessed.

   This is the second beatitude of James. The first was pronounced on the
   passive mood of life (ver. 12), but this is on the active. The
   faultless or perfect law of freedom means that the gospel revelation as
   a rule for life is, like all the endowments of God, faultless (ver.
   17); there is none better; it meets all the needs of life, and (this is
   the fine paradox) it is a law of freedom, by obeying which men are
   truly free, emancipated from their passions (see 2 Peter ii. 19 and 1
   Peter ii. 16). Stoic moralists pled that only the wise man was free,
   obeying God, and devout Jews had claimed that the only real freedom was
   through obedience to the Mosaic law; James claims all this for the
   moral and spiritual law as fulfilled and embodied in the Christian
   gospel (ii. 8 f.). What is in his mind as he speaks of the law of
   freedom becomes plain in ii. 12, where the expression is again used
   deliberately in connexion with lovingkindness. Here, too, this context
   is implied (see vers. 20-21 and 26-27); the gospel revelation of the
   Word binds us to a service of practical love, which is at once an
   impulse and an obligation. It is in order to emphasize the truth that
   this service is both binding and spontaneous that he coins the striking
   phrase a law of freedom. Law' suggests something statutory and
   external; but, as a contemporary put it, the new law of our Lord Jesus
   Christ is free from any yoke of compulsion' (Barnabas ii. 6). The
   ethical hope of the age, in all quarters, was in the obedience of the
   inward life to the law of divine duty, expressed in some form or
   another, and James here puts this in terms of the Christian religion,
   as Jewish rabbis and Stoic teachers were trying to do in their own way
   around him.

   26

   Slow to talk suggests another form of self-deception, that of the
   religious worshipper who considers he is religious because he attends
   service and listens to the Word, and yet does not bridle his tongue.
   This was a flagrant temptation of teachers in the church, and James
   returns to it in iii. 2 f. But it was not confined to teachers. He is
   not referring to the habit of using pious phrases as a substitute for
   real religion, as in ii. 15, 16. Nor does he merely mean talking about
   religion to excess, though the talkative person is liable to become
   self-confident and arrogant in pouring out his opinions. To bridle the
   tongue is to curb the impulse to express malice (ver. 21) or contempt
   in words. James is thinking of people in the religious world who let
   their tongues run away with them in spiteful and hasty criticism of
   their neighbours, or in acrimonious discussion. It may sound and seem
   very religious to denounce the errors and failings of
   fellow-Christians, and to let oneself go in indignation against those
   whose views or conduct may appear unsatisfactory. So, people think,
   they are serving God (see ver. 20). But such so-called religion is
   futile, it makes no appeal to God the Father, whose judgment of
   religion is very different. James employs a term for religion (as for
   religious) which commonly suggests the expression of religious faith in
   reverence and worship. He does not deny the place of public worship
   (see ii. 2, v. 14) or of religious observances, but he explains that in
   God's sight a pure, unsoiled religion expresses itself 27 in acts of
   charity and in chastity--the two features of early Christian ethics
   which impressed the contemporary world.

   In Psalm lxviii. 5 God is called the father of orphans and the champion
   of widows,' but James need not be recalling this special allusion;
   orphans and widows in ancient society were the typical and outstanding
   instances of those who needed aid. No provision was made for them.
   Hence private charity was called out on their behalf, and Jewish as
   well as early Christian writers repeatedly urge their claims. Be as a
   father to orphans and as a husband to their mother, and so shalt thou
   be a son of the Most High,' says Sirach (iv. 10). To care for means to
   visit, i.e. to give personal service, and the thought is that expressed
   more fully in the trenchant passage on practical religion in Isaiah
   lviii. 2-12, or in Matthew xxv. 34-40, where the verb care for is
   rendered visit. In the Apocalypse of Peter (15) there is a Dantesque
   vision of the punishment in hell reserved for those who were rich and
   trusted in their riches and had no pity on orphans and widows, but
   neglected the commands of God'; but James does not confine the duty to
   the rich.

   The second expression of true religion is personal purity, the world
   being used as in iv. 4 and 2 Peter i. 4, ii. 20, for the corrupting
   life of pagan society; the term for unstained' recurs in 2 Peter iii.
   14 as unspotted from the contagion of the world's slow stain.' Perhaps
   James included the thought that to mix with the outside world, even in
   doing charitable actions, exposed one to the risk of moral
   contamination (the idea of Judas 23). In any case he implies that
   personal purity was not to be sought or gained by a selfish withdrawal
   from the common, kindly tasks of life. A white bird, she [his mother]
   told him once, looking at him gravely, a bird which he must carry in
   his bosom across a crowded public place--his own soul was like that'
   (Pater, Marius the Epicurean, ch. 11). This suggests a fastidious,
   dainty avoidance of human contact. A twofold sensitiveness, to the need
   and suffering of others and to personal purity amid the contaminating
   risks of the age, both coarse and refined--such is the moral ideal of
   James for anyone who claims to be devout.

   The thought of religion as worship, indeed as public worship, now
   suggests a word against another danger of religious services (ii. 1-4).

   ii.

   1     My brothers, as you believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, who is the
   Glory, pay no servile regard to people. ^2 Suppose there comes into
   your meeting a man who wears gold rings and handsome clothes, and also
   a poor man in dirty clothes; ^3 if you attend to the wearer of the
   handsome clothes and say to him, Sit here, this is a good place,' and
   tell the poor man, You can stand,' or Sit there at my feet,' ^4 are you
   not drawing distinctions in your own minds and proving that you judge
   people with partiality?

   1

   The Christian religion has hitherto been called The Word or The Word of
   truth or The faultless law of freedom; here it is more explicitly
   belief in the Lord Jesus Christ, who is the divine Glory--a striking
   term for Christ as the full manifestation of the divine presence and
   majesty. The Jews called this the shekinah; thus one contemporary rabbi
   (quoted in Pirke Aboth iii. 3) said that when two sit together and are
   occupied with the words of the Torah, the shekinah is among them.'

   Belief in Christ is incompatible with any social favouritism. Yet it is
   combined with such servile regard to certain persons in public worship
   as James proceeds to describe in vivid words. As Christians had no
   church-buildings at this period, 2 their place of meeting was usually
   some large room in the house of a wealthy member or a hall hired for
   the purpose (Acts xix. 9), where outsiders were free to attend the
   ordinary services, that is, pagans or Jews who were interested in the
   new faith (1 Corinthians xiv. 16, 23-25). They were to be welcomed, but
   welcomed without any servility or snobbery. No unseemly deference or
   obsequious politeness to a rich 3 stranger at the expense of a shabbily
   dressed visitor! There goes better with sit at my feet than with you
   can stand, in the direction for the poorer worshipper. The thought of
   such bad behaviour in a congregation rouses James to the first of his
   indignant questions. Does not this outward 4 behaviour prove that you
   are drawing invidious distinctions between people in your own minds and
   that you judge people with partiality--literally, that you use wrong
   criteria of judgment? Favouritism was a characteristic vice of Oriental
   judges (e.g. Deuteronomy i. 17).

   Instead of arguing that this is out of keeping with the character of
   God, who is no respecter of persons,' James declares that this
   truckling to the wealthy is contrary to the estimate of God (5-6a);
   besides, it is futile-- you gain nothing by it (6b-7). Finally, it is a
   fatal breach of the Christian law (8-13, iv. 11-12). The two former
   arguments hold together closely.

   5 Listen, my beloved brothers; has not God chosen the poor of this
   world to be rich in faith and to inherit the realm which he has
   promised to those who love him? ^6 Now you insult the poor. Is it not
   the rich who lord it over you and drag you to court? ^7 Is it not they
   who scoff at the noble Name you bear?

   5

   Poor people have a rich calling from God. James, for whom, as for some
   of the psalmists, poor' is practically synonymous with pious' and rich'
   with impious,' insists that they are far more likely to become
   Christians than the rich visitors to the congregational worship;
   possibly he recalled, though he does not quote, the beatitude of Jesus
   on the poor, or a word like that preserved in Luke xii. 21. Their
   inheritance in the next world is sure and ample (i. 12), for these
   poor, shabbily dressed people, to whom you behave so shabbily, belong
   to a class to which God has opened up rich prospects; you would do
   better to devote yourselves to them than to wealthy, elegant outsiders
   who repay your attentions by haling you to court. James knew cases like
   6 those which occur in modem India, where rich Hindus will bully and
   prosecute unjustly the poor pariahs who join the Christian church. He
   was speaking of and to communities which apparently were in the main
   composed of humbler-class members, labourers or tenants, perhaps in
   debt to wealthy pagans or Jews. Lord it over you seems to exclude the
   idea that the hardships were due to religious persecution; they were
   social in origin, and justice in the East was apt to be in favour of
   the rich, if they chose to take advantage of their influence with legal
   authorities. Some might come to Christian worship, but as a rule they 7
   derided the Name of Christian, noble as it was. This may be an allusion
   to prosecution of Christians on the ground of their religion (as in 1
   Peter ii. 12), but it includes more. Scurrilous abuse of Christians on
   account of their religious beliefs and practices went on, apart from
   direct interference with them; indeed the persecutions at this period
   usually started from the mob, not from the upper classes.

   The next paragraph is addressed to an objection which James anticipates
   (8 f.). Are you not making too much of this? Is such social deference
   so very serious ? After all, it is only a single offence.' It is a sin,
   he replies; indeed it is the sin of sins, for God's supreme Law is the
   law of brotherly love (8-13, iv. 11, 12).

   8     If you really fufil the royal law laid down by scripture, You
   must love your neighbour as yourself, well and good; ^9 but if you pay
   servile regard to people, you commit a sin, and the Law convicts you of
   transgression. ^10 For whoever obeys the whole of the Law and only
   makes a single slip, is guilty of everything. ^11 He who said, Do not
   commit adultery, also said, Do not kill. Now if you do not commit
   adultery but if you kill, you have transgressed the Law. ^12 Speak,
   act, as those who are to be judged by the law of freedom; ^13 for the
   judgment will be merciless to the man who has shown no mercy--whereas
   the merciful life will triumph in the face of judgment. iv. ^11 Do not
   defame one another, brothers; he who defames or judges his brother
   defames and judges the Law; and if you judge the Law, you pass sentence
   on it instead of obeying it. ^12 One alone is the legislator, who
   passes sentence; it is He who is able to save and to destroy; who are
   you, to judge your neighbour?

   8

   Like Paul (Romans xiii. 8-10), James held that love to
   fellow-Christians was the essence and summary of the moral Law; you
   cannot really fulfil it, if you behave as you are doing. As laid down
   by scripture refers to Leviticus xix. 18, i.e. in the Greek Bible used
   by Christians. He calls it the royal or supreme law, as it was the law
   for the royal realm (ver. 5), which the subjects of the King. were to
   obey (see iv. 11). 9 Any servile regard paid to the rich, which
   involved an unloving attitude towards the poor, is pronounced a breach
   of this law. You shall not be partial to a poor man, nor defer to a
   powerful man' (Leviticus xix. 15), is the strict injunction which
   precedes the Royal Law.

   But James is now passing away from the special case of invidious
   partiality with which he started, and dealing with the general question
   of harshness inside the Christian community. The illustration of
   callous conduct towards a poor visitor to the service is now dropped;
   he takes broader ground in attacking the unmerciful spirit, the
   censoriousness and hard temper, of which such conduct is one
   expression. 10 A sin perhaps, but only one breach of the Law,' is the
   plea lo met (in vers. 10 and 11) by the argument that the Law is a
   unity; a single slip (the term rendered stumble in Romans xi. 11, and
   slip in 2 Peter i. 10) or deliberate lapse makes the offender guilty of
   everything; you cannot pick and choose in the requirements of the Law.
   People may desire to--


   Compound for sins they are inclined to,

   By, damning those they have no mind to,

   but by more than damning such offences; they may complacently point to
   their freedom from one sin as condoning some lapse in another
   direction, or hold that obedience to certain primary laws is as good as
   obedience to the whole.

   11

   James selects as examples of this two precepts of the decalogue singled
   out by Jesus (in Matthew v. 21 f., 25 f.), and it would lend force to
   his argument if we could suppose that he had in mind Christ's
   interpretation of the sixth commandment, where the angry, unforgiving
   spirit is reckoned the essence, of murder. If he was conscious of this,
   however, or of any other view (see on v. 6), he does not put it into
   words, though the next sentences show that for him the Law was the
   embodiment of the divine will summed up in the supreme ethical
   principle of love to one's neighbour; the moral law of the O.T. runs up
   into this cardinal obligation as stated by Jesus, i.e. God's law as
   working inwardly on12 the conscience of Christians, the law of freedom
   (as in i. 25), not an external code of statutes. Specific commands rise
   out of the central unity of the law of brotherly love, to which
   Christians owe obedience and by which at the end they shall be judged.

   Two considerations are put forward. (a) The law of freedom is not
   laxity but a strict ethical rule of God, and we shall be judged by our
   adherence to its supreme principle of brotherly love or mercy, i.e.
   compassion for the sins and sufferings of our fellows. This had been
   already urged, in i. 20, 21 and 27. Jesus had demanded it from his
   followers; one of his favourite quotations from the prophets had been,
   I care for mercy, not for sacrifice,' and he had made the cold, inhuman
   spirit that would not forgive or that ignored human need, the damning
   sin. James puts this truth 13 dramatically; the judgment at the end
   will be merciless to the man who has shown no mercy. Which sums up the
   teaching of parables like those of Matthew xviii. 21-35 and Luke xvi.
   19 f., or of Sirach xxviii. 1-7. In the positive encouragement, the
   merciful life will triumph in the face of judgment, he personifies as
   usual; it is a daring expression of the thought expressed elsewhere,
   e.g. in v. 20 and 1 John iv. 17-21, that much will be forgiven to a
   loving spirit. Mercy or (as in 1 Peter iv. 8) love hides a host of
   sins; the life of brotherly love need not fear the judgment of God, for
   it has been true to the spirit and standards of Him who judges human
   life. This does not contradict what James has said about the unity of
   the Law, for brotherly love or mercy constitutes the essence of the
   Law; in fulfilling it, James implies, all other offences such as
   immorality and murder are avoided.

   The second consideration (b) is that the unbrotherly spirit is a piece
   of arrogant presumption towards the Law of God. At some early period
   the passage was misplaced; its proper and original position is here,
   not in iv. 11, 12. It is terse and epigrammatic rather than lucid, but
   James seems to be developing his charge that the unbrotherly and
   censorious dare to judge people at all (ver. 4). The Greek verb krinein
   iv. could mean not only judge in the widest sense, but 11 pass sentence
   on, and James avails himself of this to demand that harsh,
   irresponsible judgments on one's fellow-Christians (such as Jesus
   forbade in Luke vi. 37) must be stopped, as being implicitly a
   criticism of the Law itself and (12) an infringement of God's
   prerogative.

   The latter is plain, the former is not so clear at first. To defame one
   another is the sin of slander denounced in 1 Peter ii. 1, malicious
   insinuations and backbiting in the community; but James associates it
   with censoriousness, the sharp, critical temper which dares to mount
   the tribunal and lay down the law for others, generally in a hard
   spirit and often hastily, without pausing to make allowances or to be
   generous. The difficulty is to see how he who thus defames or judges
   his brother defames or judges the Law, unless it means either that such
   irresponsible fault-finding implies that the Law has to be supplemented
   by our verdicts (which would be a slander on it, an overt criticism of
   its adequacy), or that such a severe, unbrotherly attitude shows that
   we have misinterpreted the Law and so may be said to have defamed or
   slandered it, by failing to recognize that its fundamental truth for us
   is brotherly love. The former seems to under-lie the charge, you pass
   sentence on it, by assuming this superiority to its rule. In any case,
   James holds that to judge the faults and defects of a neighbour or
   fellow-Christian censoriously is to insult the Law of God. Similarly in
   the Testament of Gad (iv. 1-3) we read, Beware of hatred, for it works
   lawlessness even against the Lord himself; it will not listen to the
   words of His commands upon love to one's neighbour, and it sins against
   God. For, if a brother stumble, it is immediately eager to proclaim it
   to all men, and is eager for him to be judged and punished and put to
   death.' James declares that this temper reverses our true attitude
   towards the divine Law; to act thus is to pass sentence on it (probably
   by taking matters into your own hands, as though it were not severe
   enough), whereas our one duty is to obey it (implying perhaps that this
   will occupy all our time and attention). 12 Besides, it is impertinent.
   Ours only to obey; God's unshared prerogative is to pass sentence on
   human life. Legislator is used only here in the N.T.; able to save
   recalls i. 21; able to destroy may be an echo of the warning of Jesus
   (preserved in Matthew x. 28), fear Him who is able to destroy both soul
   and body.'


   Who made the heart, 'tis He alone

   Decidedly can try us.

   Who are you (the stern question comes, to which there is no answer), to
   judge your neighbour and encroach thus on the function of his God and
   yours?

   The next paragraph (ii. 14-26, iv. 17) is an equally pungent criticism
   of the religious belief which failed to fulfil itself in practical
   service and obedience. James states his thesis (14-17), replies to an
   objection (18-20), clinches his argument by proofs from scripture
   (21-25), and concludes by a couple of general statements about the
   vital importance of practical religion (26, iv. 17).

   ii.

   14

   My brothers, what is the use of anyone declaring he has faith, if he
   has no deeds to show? Can his faith save him? ^15 Suppose some brother
   or sister is ill-clad and short of daily food; ^16 if any of you says
   to them, Depart in peace! Get warm, get food,' without supplying their
   bodily needs, what use is that? ^17 So faith, unless it has deeds, is
   dead in itself.

   14

   Act on the Word, be an active agent, speak, act. James has already
   touched this string; he now strikes some resonant chords from it. Faith
   for him is religious belief' in the Christian revelation, in. the unity
   of God (ver. 19), in the divine Law or Word, and in Jesus Christ (ii.
   1). What is the use of such a profession of faith, if it is belief and
   no more? If a man has no deeds to show, no moral character and conduct
   corresponding to his religious belief, can his faith save him before
   the judgment of a God who is merciless to the man who has shown no
   mercy in his life?


   In deeds, in deeds He takes delight.

   No pious sentiments or talk avail.

   15

   In 1 John iii. 17, 18 a similar vignette of heartless conduct is drawn,
   but the sketch of James is more sharply etched. If you coolly dismiss a
   shivering, starving fellow-Christian by 16 saying, Depart in peace
   (good-bye), you had better get warm and get some food,' what use is
   that kind of faith? The truth that fine words need fine deeds to back
   them was common. Thus one character in a play of Plautus (Trinummus ii.
   4. 38 f.) says, You have his good wishes'; whereupon another observes
   sarcastically, "Good wishes" is an empty phrase unless the speaker does
   good deeds.' Movement and action are the proof of life; thus any
   religious belief not attended by deeds, by the practical action for
   which God 17 means it to be a vital impulse, is dead matter, dead in
   itself, dead, as we might say, at the very root and heart of it, no
   matter how voluble and orthodox it may be; it is inert, not simply
   because it is hindered, but because it lacks power and vitality.
   Epictetus (iii. 23. 27, 28) observes that a true philosopher like
   himself tells his hearers frankly their moral defects and requirements;
   if the philosopher's address does not drive this truth home, both
   speaker and speech are dead'--the point being that an ethical address,
   however cultured and finely phrased, is a dead thing, unless it
   produces a vital change in character and conduct. This illustrates the
   use of dead here. As high-sounding words and pious wishes are
   unavailing, apart from practical beneficence, so is religious belief
   apart from deeds. James uses deeds deliberately, as their range is
   wider than beneficence; the two examples he is going to cite from the
   O.T. were of actions inspired by faith which had no direct relation to
   the important duty of charity.

   He now meets curtly an objection to his view (18-20).

   18

   Someone will object, And you claim to have faith!' Yes, and I claim to
   have deeds as well; you show me your faith without any deeds, and I
   will show you by my deeds what faith is. ^19 You believe in one God?
   Well and good. So do the devils, and they shudder. ^20 But will you
   understand, you senseless fellow, that faith without deeds is dead?

   18

   James overhears an objector retorting, And you claim to have faith, you
   who talk so highly of deeds! What do you know of religious belief?' The
   reply is that the two are a unity; Yes, James answers his critic, I do
   claim to have faith and I claim to have deeds as well--which is more
   than you can do! I can show you by my deeds what faith is, the genuine
   religious belief which always comes out in living obedience to the will
   of God. (This is the equivalent in James for Paul's word on faith
   active in love; both writers are agreed that the first thing to do with
   faith is to live by it.) But can you show me your faith without any
   deeds? You cannot, he implies. All you can produce is a declaration or
   profession of faith, a mere statement. 19 Let me cross-examine you on
   it: You believe in one God? Well and good; it is the fundamental
   article of the creed, this monotheism; but such religious belief,
   devoid of any deeds, lifts you no higher than the devils or daemons.
   They believe in one God too, James ironically adds (recalling an old
   Orphic phrase, see on iii. 6), and they shudder; their faith is shown
   by their terror, an emotion of self-interest, but that does not save
   them!'

   He does not pursue the subject further; with a touch of 20 scorn for
   the senseless, empty-headed defender of a purely formal religious
   belief, he turns to show him two classical examples of the deeds which
   demonstrate what faith is. The next paragraph (21-25) is a scriptural
   proof of the challenge just maintained.

   21

   When our father Abraham offered his son Isaac on the altar, was he not
   justified by what he did? ^22 In his case, you see, faith co-operated
   with deeds, faith was completed by deeds, ^23 and the scripture was
   fulfilled: Abraham believed God, and this was counted to him as
   righteousness--he was called God's friend. ^24 You observe it is by
   what he does that a man is justified, not simply by what he believes.
   ^25 So too with Rahab the harlot. Was she not justified by what she
   did, when she entertained the scouts and got them away by a different
   road?

   21

   Abraham is our father, the ancestor of all true Christians; real
   believers are sons of Abraham. Paul had said this in a different
   connexion already (Galatians iii. 6, 7): the real sons of Abraham are
   those who rely on faith,' for Abraham had faith in God, and this was
   counted to him as righteousness,' i.e. it was counted to his credit by
   God, as ground of acceptance; in technical language, he was justified
   or saved by his faith. James draws another inference from the famous
   phrase in Genesis xv. 6. It had long ago been connected with the
   incident of the sacrifice of Isaac (Genesis xxii. 1-12); thus in 1
   Maccabees ii. 52 the devout are bidden remember the deeds of our
   fathers. . . . Was not Abraham found faithful in temptation [i.e. in
   the trying ordeal of having to sacrifice or be ready to sacrifice
   Isaac] and it was counted to him as righteousness?' Clement of Rome
   (xxxi.) also cites the sacrifice of Isaac, as he asks, Why was our
   father Abraham blessed? Was it not because he wrought righteousness and
   truth through faith?' James also takes this as the supreme
   manifestation of Abraham's faith. And note, he urges, it was a deed.
   Abraham acted on his faith. Was he not justified by what he did, not by
   a mere assertion or profession of his belief in God? 22 A telling proof
   that faith and deeds are a unity. In his case--and James regards it as
   typical and decisive--faith co-operated with deeds, faith was completed
   by deeds, ripening in the exercise of obedience to God.

   23

   In some early manuscripts of Genesis xviii. 17, God called Abraham my
   friend'; at least the text is so quoted by Philo, and to this
   tradition, rather than to the title as used in Isaiah xli. 8 or 2
   Chronicles xx. 7, James alludes, when he adds, he was called God's
   friend. This is by the way, however, for James continues passionately
   to drive home his teaching;24 you observe (he is speaking now to his
   hearers in general, no longer, as in ver. 22, to the supposed objector)
   it is by what he does that a man is justified, not simply by what he
   believes. Paul had argued that Abraham was justified by faith, not by
   obedience to the Law; but James knew nothing of deeds or works of the
   Law,' i.e. observance of the ritual and ceremonial Law as constituting
   a claim for merit before God. The notion that religious belief
   justified by itself arose out of a misapprehension of Paul's antithesis
   between faith and works. Whether James's readers were familiar with
   what Paul said, or not, James himself is attacking either some
   ultra-Paulinists or certain people who appealed to Paul's teaching
   about faith as justifying a religious belief which did not need moral
   exercise. Living and real faith, says Archdeacon Julius Hare (Victory
   of Faith, p. 26), is a practical power; nay, of all principles, of all
   powers, by which man can be actuated, the most practical; so that when
   it does not show forth its life by good works, we may reasonably
   conclude that it is dead; just as we infer that a body is dead, when it
   has ceased to move. Not that the works constitute the life of faith
   . . . any more than motion constitutes or imparts the life of the
   body. . . . On the contrary, it is from the living principle of faith
   that they must receive their life.' This is the idea of James (see
   vers. 17 and 26); it is also the idea of Paul, though he would have put
   it differently; he would have called, indeed he did call, such moral
   actions fruits of the Spirit rather than deeds, even while he would
   have agreed heartily with James that no mere assent to religious truth
   had any saving power. But for James the expression of faith in deeds is
   also spontaneous. Deeds do not reinforce faith, they are or ought to be
   the outcome of that relation to the regenerating Word which implies
   submission of life to the royal law of love (ii. 8 f.). This is bound
   up with true faith in Jesus Christ. The argument of i. 17 f. was that
   Christians must let their divine nature or birth have free play within
   them, and the present argument puts the same truth from another side.
   For James the exercise of obedience to God or of brotherly love, which
   is the unforced fulfilment of the law of the Lord, springs out of a
   vital relation to that Law or Word--that is, out of faith rightly
   conceived. Or, as he puts it here, what a man does verifies and
   completes, as nothing else can do, what he believes; his obedience to
   God is not the discharge of some additional obligation by means of
   which he makes up for something that mere faith in God has left undone,
   but the natural issue of what faith involved.

   25

   Like the author of Hebrews (xi. 17-19, 31), James cites Rahab, a, woman
   and a pagan, after Abraham; harlot as she was, before her conversion,
   from his point of view, her conduct was another proof of religious
   belief prompting active effort. She entertained the scouts (in the tale
   of Joshua ii. 1-21). One early Christian writer observed that Rahab the
   harlot was saved on account of her faith and hospitality' (Clem. Rom.
   xii.), but James is content to cite her actions as a proof that she was
   justified by what she did; she believed in God, and evinced her faith
   by the trouble she took in receiving the scouts and assisting them to
   escape, at the risk of her own life. No mere belief, this! You need not
   appeal to Abraham or Rahab in defence of your theory and practice of
   mere faith as enough!

   Two final applications follow, one in ver. 26, which really is a sequel
   to ver. 24 (ver. 25 being a sort of afterthought), the other in iv. 17,
   which originally lay here.

   26    For as the body without the breath of life is dead, so faith is
   dead without deeds. ^iv. 17Whoever, then, knows to do what is right to
   do and does not do it, that is a sin for him.

   ii.
   26

   Again, as in the previous paragraphs (17, 20), James strikes at a dead
   faith, a religious belief which never gets beyond intellectual assent
   or emotions or talk. This has been explained on ver. 24. iv.
   17 The second sentence clinches the whole argument of 14-26. Then, in
   view of what I have urged, you cannot plead ignorance; I have shown you
   what is right to do with your faith, and any failure is therefore a
   sin. Sins of omission are not venial. Often he who does not do a
   certain thing does wrong, not simply he who actually does something'
   (Marcus Aurelius, ix. 5). It is another terse maxim of James, a warning
   winged against religious knowledge that is satisfied with itself.

   Sins of speech: the might and mischief of the human tongue; this is the
   theme of iii. 1-5a, 5b-8, 9-12. James had already mentioned the peril
   of talkativeness and un-bridled speech (i. 19, 26), but he now deals
   vividly with the general temptations of the tongue in social life. He
   believed, as Sirach had said (v. 13), that a man's tongue is
   [responsible for] his fall.' Words may be a substitute for true
   religion (as in ii. 14), but here they are studied as explosions of bad
   temper and passion.

   iii.

   1

   My brothers, do not swell the ranks of the teachers; remember, we
   teachers will be judged with special strictness. ^2 We all make many a
   slip, but whoever avoids slips of speech is a perfect man; he can
   bridle the whole of the body as well as the tongue. ^3 We put bridles
   into the mouths of horses to make them obey us, and so, you see, we can
   move the whole of their bodies. ^4 Look at ships, too; for all their
   size and speed under stiff winds, they are turned by a tiny rudder
   wherever the mind of the steersman chooses. ^5a So the tongue is a
   small member of the body, but it can boast of great exploits.

   1

   The churches addressed by James had teachers, of whom he was one, as
   well as presbyters (v. 14). It was a position of repute and prestige in
   the early church, and evidently many felt called to this vocation, in
   which they could exercise above all their powers of rhetoric and
   culture, as they expounded the scriptures or exhorted the faithful on
   the truths of the faith. James found that this department of
   church-work had become extremely popular. Hence his warning about its
   serious responsibilities. God will judge us (ii. 12) on the last day
   with special strictness on account of our influence over others. The
   reference is not to erroneous doctrine but to the danger of
   talkativeness, of reckless statements, of frothy rhetoric, of abusive
   language, of misleading assertions, and the like. It is because the
   vocation of a Christian teacher or preacher was specially liable to
   this temptation that James starts from it to portray the perils of the
   tongue. Walter Bagehot once said of Cobden as an agitator that very
   rarely, if even ever in history,' had a man achieved so much by his
   words and yet spoken so little evil. There is hardly a word to be
   found, perhaps, which the recording angel would wish to 2 blot out.'
   James thinks a man might well be termed perfect, a finished character
   (it is the same adjective in Greek), if he could thus avoid the slips
   (see ii. 10 for these moral lapses) of speech to which all, teachers
   and taught alike, are prone, apart from other sources of sin. Indeed he
   seems for the moment to ignore Sirach's judgment (Many a man makes a
   slip, unintentionally; indeed who has not sinned with his tongue?' xix.
   i6) and to assume that this can be done. Such a perfect character (the
   only safe person to become a teacher in the church), a man who can
   control his tongue, has sell-command enough to control his entire body.
   This is an exaggeration; some of the most reticent men have by no means
   been able to control their sensual passions. But in his enthusiasm for
   the man who manages to control his 3 unruly tongue, James declares that
   to bridle (i. 26) the tongue is to master the whole of the body, the
   tongue being as effective as a 4 bridle for horses or a rudder for
   ships, and proportionately as small.

   These were fairly common metaphors in ancient ethical 5a writings. The
   uncommon touch comes at the close: so the tongue, small as it is, can
   boast of great exploits. Alas, they are often great disasters, the
   exploits of a mischievous force in human life! For imperfect men suffer
   cruelly from this pernicious and untameable organ of the body, as James
   now proceeds to describe (5b-8).

   5b

   What a forest is set ablaze by a little spark of fire! ^6 And the
   tongue is a fire, the tongue proves a very world of mischief among our
   members, staining the whole of the body and setting fire to the round
   circle of existence with a flame fed by hell. ^7 For while every kind
   of beast and bird, of creeping animals and creatures marine, is
   tameable and has been tamed by mankind, ^8 no man can tame the
   tongue--plague of disorder that it is, full of deadly venom!

   5b

   The forest-fire metaphor is familiar enough in ancient literature;
   Euripides in a fragment of his lost play on Ino, compares the
   incautious blabbing of a secret to a spark catching hold of a forest,
   but James probably means the spread of angry passions stirred by some
   ill-judged, angry 6 word. Staining the body recalls the phrase about
   the foul nature of malice in i. 21, but it breaks the unity of the
   metaphor. The round circle of existence is a rhetorical phrase like the
   orb of creation'; it belonged originally to the Orphic mysteries, where
   it meant technically the endless cycle or circle of death and rebirth.
   James uses it colloquially, as he had already recalled (ii. 19) another
   Orphic tag about God at whom the devils shudder.' Tindal renders it,
   all that we have of nature.' The sentence heaps up burning words to
   brand the ruinous effects of a loose, malicious tongue. A flame fed by
   hell comes from Judaism; hell renders the Greek term Gehenna, where the
   nether fires were supposed to burn. Reckless talk of this kind is
   simply hellish, as the spurious, quarrelsome wisdom is devilish (ver.
   15). 8 There is no taming this truculent, disorderly (see ver. 16),
   poisonous thing, he exclaims, in a hyperbole like the opposite
   exclamation in ver. 2. The deadly venom of misrepresentation, of
   rancorous or slanderous speech, was a familiar O.T. figure, as in the
   psalm cited by Paul in Romans iii. 13; the popular belief was that the
   hissing, forked tongue of a serpent darted poison, and this suggested a
   comparison with the human tongue of Orientals who were singularly
   gifted in abuse and malignity of utterance. The wisdom-literature
   abounds with warnings against venomous and vicious speech, but this
   outburst of James suggests that he had suffered from the strife of
   tongues in the religious world. Somehow and somewhere he had fallen on
   evil days and evil tongues.' His lanague is more than picturesque; it
   reads like a transcript of bitter experience.

   In one wisdom-passage on burning words (Sirach xxviii. 12) the writer
   remarks, If you blow upon a spark it burns up, but if you spit upon it
   the spark is quenched; and both come out of your mouth.' This resembles
   the idea of the closing words in 9-12.

   9

   With the tongue we bless the Lord and Father, and with the tongue we
   curse men made in God's likeness; ^10 blessing and cursing stream from
   the same lips! My brothers, this ought not to be. ^11 Does a fountain
   pour out fresh water and brackish from the same hole? ^12 Can a fig
   tree, my brothers, bear olives? Or a vine, figs? No more can salt water
   yield fresh.

   9

   To be consistent we should bless not only God but our fellow-men as
   made in God's likeness. Sirach (xvii. 1-14) declares that God created
   men in his own likeness' to praise Him, and also gave them a command
   concerning their neighbours' (i.e. to love them). This ethical
   obligation, derived from Genesis i. 26, was a marked feature of Jewish
   moral teaching; some contemporary rabbis connected 10 the command to
   love one's neighbour especially with the creation of man in the
   likeness of God, arguing that any sin against man was an attack on the
   divine likeness. 11 Such is the ethical motive employed here by James.
   The other figures (in 11-12) are taken from Greek and Roman proverbial
   lore, to bring out the unnatural habit of using the same tongue for
   piety and rancorous abuse, 12 though the last words are paralleled by
   this phrase from a contemporary Jewish apocalypse (Fourth Esdras v. 9),
   where the writer, in depicting the monstrous phenomena that herald the
   End, declares, Salt waters shall be found in the sweet, friends shall
   attack one another suddenly.' The general thought tallies with the
   Testament of Benjamin (vi. 5): The good mind has not two tongues, of
   blessing and cursing, of insulting and honouring, of quietness and
   confusion, of pretence and veracity.' The metaphors, however, picture
   life in the religious world of the day, where teachers and preachers
   uttered lofty sentiments and voiced spiritual truths before their
   congregations, and also gave way to bitterness in controversy, even
   cursing their opponents (see v. 12) or dull, slow hearers. Not that
   James confines the sins of the tongue to the officials. Talk about
   religion among ordinary members of the church might be wholesome, but
   the same people were guilty of spitefulness and scandal in social
   intercourse, inflaming the passions of others by cruel, careless words
   or poisoning the mind by insinuations. As Burke wrote to his son, A
   very great part of the mischiefs that vex the world arises from words.
   People soon forget the meaning, but the impression and the passion
   remain.'

   In the Wisdom literature (e.g. in Sirach xxiv. 30 f.) wisdom compared
   often to a stream whose waters benefit the hearers. After the metaphors
   of 11 and 12, it was natural for James therefore to pass to a searching
   analysis of the true wisdom which teachers of the church especially
   should covet and possess. Any wisdom or religious culture which
   fostered such bitter talk and thoughts was a caricature. He had already
   mentioned wisdom in i. 5; now (13-18) he explains its characteristics
   and criteria.

   13

   Who among you is wise and learned? Let him show by his good conduct,
   with the modesty of wisdom, what his deeds are. ^14 But if you are
   cherishing bitter jealousy and rivalry in your hearts, do not pride
   yourselves on that--and be false to the truth. ^15 That is not the
   wisdom which comes down from above, it is an earthly wisdom, sensuous,
   devilish; ^16 for wherever jealousy and rivalry exist, there disorder
   reigns and every evil. ^17 The wisdom from above is first of all pure,
   then peaceable, forbearing, conciliatory, full of mercy and wholesome
   fruit, unambiguous, straight-forward; ^18 and the peacemakers who sow
   in peace reap righteousnesss.

   In all (modes of) wisdom there is fulfilment of the Law, 13 but to be
   learned in wickedness is not wisdom' (Sirach xix. 20, 21). The Greek
   term for learned (which only occurs here in the N.T.) denotes a sage or
   expert. James is still dealing with teachers or would-be teachers in
   the church. Wisdom, in the sense already defined (on i. 5), was the
   badge and banner of this class; like religious belief (ii. 14), it must
   attest itself practically, in good conduct among fellow-Christians, and
   modestly. Words are not enough without deeds, and the deeds of service
   are not to be done in any spirit of passion or ostentation. The pursuit
   of opinions for opinion's sake, the motive of emulation in the study of
   knowledge, the plague of self-conceit which besets teachers and learned
   persons both within and without the church, the demoralizing absorption
   in rhetoric about morals and religion which the deeper spirits of the
   time, from Paul to Epictetus, denounced, and above all, perhaps, the
   ambition and intrigues of religious parties and party-leaders--these
   are the perils before the mind of James in this paragraph.

   The modesty (see i. 21) of wisdom is a paradox, till, as Paul told the
   Corinthians (1 Corinthians viii. 1 f.), 14 we understand what true
   wisdom means. It is out of keeping with the temper of bitter jealousy
   and rivalry (i.e. party-spirit, selfish ambition, factiousness). Do not
   pride yourselves on that, on the intensity and harsh zeal which lead to
   such unscrupulous partisanship, and which are sometimes justified as
   loyalty to the truth. This is really to be false to the truth (see on
   i. 18). The Greek verb might mean to lay false claims to (the truth),'
   but the other rendering preserves the profound thought that the truth
   of Christianity cannot be put forward or defended truly except in the
   Christian spirit; religious people may be extremely provoking, and
   defeat their own ends by overbearing methods; right views and sound
   counsels may lose their effect if they are expressed by men who are
   self-seeking partisans or 15 unscrupulous controversialists. Their
   so-called wisdom is no divine endowment (i. 17) or revelation, but
   earthly (or, as Paul said, the wisdom of this world'). Sensuous may
   have the technical sense of Judas 19, or the broader sense of
   unspiritual' (as Paul uses it in 1 Corinthians ii. 14). Devilish is the
   climax, as in ver. 6; malignant temper and strife, the restless spirit
   which disturbs and degrades human 16 life, is from below, utterly
   hostile to God. Disorder is a favourite term of the Stoics which James,
   like Paul (e.g. 2 Corinthians xii. 20), applies to the squabbles and
   disturbances of Christians in their fellowship, particularly in
   connexion with religious discussions and parties (see below, on ver.
   18). True knowledge of religious truth is, to begin with, pure, i.e.
   ethically. The Greek term has no connexion with doctrinal orthodoxy;
   James never enters into any question about the contents of the creed,
   he brings out the practical criteria of a genuine religious belief.

   17

   Wisdom originally and essentially was the knowledge of duties and
   dangers in the moral life, as revealed in the law of God, and as this
   study was directed to practical ends, it involved practical qualities
   in those who professed to teach it. The bearing of pure here is best
   seen in the use made of the verb in iv. 8 or by Peter in 1 Peter i. 22
   f. It suggests a life unsullied because it is inspired and influenced
   by God above, free from impure motives and methods, especially from
   aggressiveness and quarrelsomeness. Peaceable is the opposite of
   self-assertive; any statement or application of religious truth leads
   to differences of opinion and difficulties in handling other people,
   where a convinced man is apt to be pugnacious or to insist upon his own
   way inconsiderately, without being forbearing, i.e. fair and reasonable
   in meeting opponents, whether they are reasonable or unreasonable. No
   brusqueness, no pugnacity! Conciliatory (only here in N.T.) is the
   opposite of stiff and unbending. Manning, wrote Newman, wishes me no
   ill, but he is determined to bend or to break all opposition. He has an
   iron will and resolves to have his own way.' Full of mercy--not of
   deadly venom (ver. 8)--is elucidated by what was said in ii. 8-13.
   Wholesome fruit recalls (see ver. 13) the truth that genuine Christian
   wisdom is to be a benefit to other people, furthering their health and
   strength. The Christian teacher or indeed anyone who is interested in
   the study and progress of religious truth, requires what T. H. Green
   called openings into that active life of charity in which Christian
   faith is most readily realized'; he needs it for his own sake, and
   others need his insight and aid there. Two negative adjectives end this
   sevenfold catalogue of qualities. Unambiguous never occurs elsewhere in
   the N.T.; it means here free from ambiguity or uncertainty,' referring
   to the impression it makes upon others; you must know what to make of
   any statement, instead of being left doubtful about its bearing or
   meaning. Teaching in fact is not to be equivocal or evasive, but
   straightforward (literally, free from hypocrisy or pretence). Say what
   you judge to be best, only say it in a friendly, modest and
   straightforward manner.' (Marcus Aurelius, viii. 5), so that people
   know where they are and where you are in the matter (I do not know,'
   Newman wrote once to Manning, whether I am on my head or my heels when
   I have active relations with you'). These two last words rule out this
   habit of using speech to half reveal and half conceal the mind of the
   speaker, who has something (as we say) at the back of his mind all the
   time; any subtle reserve or disingenuous dealing in Christian
   intercourse is certain to create friction and misunderstanding.
   Whereas, James means, the qualities he has just been praising make for
   good feeling and mutual harmony in any community; 18 peace of this kind
   is the one way of promoting right relations with God see on (i. 20).
   The final clause which brings this out is remarkable for its double
   emphasis on peace; teachers who do their work in the spirit which has
   just been commended, to the exclusion of any selfish ends, are
   peacemakers, not leaders who stir up strife by their pugnacity and
   stubbornness and thereby spoil the soil for any real, religious growth
   (see i. 21). There is a similar phrase in Hebrews xii. 11, where an
   upright life is the same as righteousness here. The only activity which
   has any outcome in this divine direction is that of men purged from any
   taint of self-interest or private ambition, which leads to bitter
   jealousy and rivalry, since they are thinking more of their own
   reputation and party than of the interests of God. That means the reign
   of disorder, in which good seed can neither be sown nor ripen. No
   wholesome fruit or spiritual crop, James is urging, ever comes from
   quarrelling and controversy; to sow in peace is to instil and apply the
   truth as the royal law of love, which can only be done in the unselfish
   spirit of that law or wisdom.

   But how speak of peace to you,' James tells his churches, you
   wrangling, worldly crew? To your knees before God!' The thunder of this
   call to repentance rolls through vers. 1-10. The first part is couched
   in the short, sharp sentences of contemporary ethical treatises (1-6);
   the second is thrown into the rhythmical style of an O.T. prophet
   (7-10).

   iv.

   1

   Where do conflicts, where do wrangles come from, in your midst? Is it
   not from these passions of yours that war among your members? ^2 You
   crave, and miss what you want; you envy and covet, but you cannot
   acquire: you wrangle and fight--you miss what you want because you do
   not ask God for it; ^3 you do ask and you do not get it, because you
   ask with the wicked intention of spending it on your pleasures. ^4
   (Wanton creatures! do you not know that the world's friendship means
   enmity to God? Whoever, then, chooses to be the world's friend, turns
   enemy to God. ^5 What, do you consider this is an idle word of
   scripture?' He yearns jealously for the spirit he set within us.) ^6
   Yet he gives grace more and more: thus it is said,


   The haughty God opposes,
   but to the humble he gives grace.

   1

   The body,' says Socrates in Plato's Phaedo (66), fills us with desires
   and cravings . . . it is nothing but the body with its passions that is
   the cause of conflicts and factions and wrangles'; he explains that the
   conflicts of war are invariably due to material cravings. James also
   finds that the feuds by which Christians were being torn are
   manifestations of something wrong within. But he is not referring to
   military wars. What are conflicts and wrangles? The latter in Greek
   could mean disputes or pitched battles over doctrine, and this would
   carry on the argument of the previous paragraph against the factions
   and quarrels of Christians, especially Christian teachers and leaders.
   But he has more in mind than dissensions. The next four sections (iv.
   1-10, 13-16, v. 1-6, 7-11) show that he has begun to handle what a
   modem would call the social problems of religion. All, poor and rich
   alike, peasants, traders, and landowners, wanted more than they had.
   Sometimes they had a right to it. Sometimes they wanted it for wrong
   ends. Sometimes they wanted it and sought it along wrong ways. The
   economic aspects do not appeal to James, however; he does not raise the
   questions of commerce and property and wages. What occupies his mind as
   a Christian teacher is the moral aspect of the situation. Hence the
   passions and pleasures to be gratified must be more than the love of
   pre-eminence or conceit or any of the ugly desires to which the
   vocation of a teacher or preacher was specially liable. These may be
   included. But it is the wider craving for more of this world's goods
   that is responsible for Christians falling out with one another and
   clashing. Longinus writes sadly about the ruinous effects of those
   passions which in a sense garrison our present life, harrying it and
   plundering it' (De Sublim., xliv.), especially the love of pleasure and
   that debasing' passion, the love of money. James, from the religious
   side, uses a similar military metaphor. These passions of yours, he
   says, war among your members, again (as in i. 14 f.), tracing the
   outward manifestations of evil to their inward source. Your members are
   the members of the body, where the human personality is organized for
   outward action. Paul had spoken of the law of sin in my members which
   wars against the law of my mind and makes me a prisoner'; Peter spoke
   of the passions of the flesh that wage war on the soul' (1 Peter ii.
   12). James does not say what they attack. He remarks that they operate
   in and through the bodily members. Worldly appetites and interests act
   through eye, hand, foot, and voice, for example; the emotions come to
   physical expression; it is in the body that they are rampant.

   2

   Crave is quite general; the rendering lust' is too narrow. There are
   legitimate cravings for outward things, and if people miss their
   objects of desire, it does not follow that this is because they are
   bad, and therefore withheld by God. James comes back to this in a
   minute. Meantime, in breathless haste, he turns to selfish cravings.
   The text is obscure, perhaps corrupt. At an early period one word at
   anyrate was misread by copyists. The traditional text read kill
   (phoneuete), which cannot by any reasonable interpretation yield a
   relevant meaning; after kill, covet is a hopeless anticlimax. Erasmus
   was the first to guess that the original word must have been envy
   (phthoneuete). Envying and coveting the possessions or position of
   others fail; you cannot acquire what you want. Why this was so, James
   does not explain. Perhaps these people had not power to carry out their
   insurgent demands for a larger share of outward goods. Still, they
   seethed with the longings of unsatisfied desire and envious greed. You
   wrangle and fight, doing your best to acquire this or that, under the
   sway of these imperious inward cravings.

   3

   Here the text is broken, or James breaks off. Try prayer to God,' is
   his next word. But we do pray.' Yes, but you pray with a selfish,
   worldly motive, which prevents your prayers being answered.' This is
   the second reason which James offers for unanswered prayer (the first
   being in i. 7, 8). You do ask God for something (say, some more money),
   instead of trying to snatch it violently from the hands of a neighbour,
   and yet you do not get it. Why? Because you ask with the wicked
   intention of spending it, dissipating it, on your pleasures, on
   self-gratification. That proves you have secretly set your heart on the
   world, not on God; 4 if you ask Him for something which you mean to
   take away and lavish on His rival, how can you expect Him to let you
   have your wish? God looks to the intention of our prayers. He cannot
   bear to see us sharing our affection between Himself and the world; He
   cares for us far too deeply and passionately to be content with a
   divided allegiance.

   This is the drift of vers. 4 and 5, which are a sharp aside, suggested
   by the faithlessness implied in the perverted prayer of ver. 3. Some
   early scribes were puzzled by the abrupt Wanton creatures (literally,
   adulteresses), and put in adulterers,' to make it clear that the men of
   the church were being addressed as well as the women. But wanton
   creatures is, of course, figurative. In the O.T. the sin of forsaking
   the true God for idolatry was called adultery,' the nation being
   regarded as the wife of God. Thy Maker is thy Husband'; any apostasy is
   disloyalty to His love. James applies the same expression pungently to
   worldly Christians who have broken their baptismal vows to God,
   transferring their real interest and affection to the world; he uses
   the feminine form deliberately, for one turn of special contempt and
   scorn in the ancient world was to call a community or group by some
   feminine equivalent. Thus Theopompus the Greek historian denounced the
   adherents of Philip by saying, They were called Friends (hetairoi) of
   Philip, but they were his mistresses (hetairai).'

   5

   The fifth verse is extremely obscure. James had hailed the pattern
   believer Abraham as God's friend, but instead of urging Christians here
   to merit that title by devotion to God alone he quotes a scripture
   passage which seems to describe God's jealous yearning for the human
   soul. Friendship with Him and with the world is impossible; He cannot
   tolerate such a divided affection. You ask, But does He mind it so
   much? Are you right in saying that to be on good terms with the world
   would be seriously resented by God? Well, does He not set His heart on
   having us all for Himself?' That scripture is not idle or unmeaning.

   For the third time James cites inspired scripture explicitly (ii. 8,
   22). It is some unknown writing of the early church, which has not
   survived; possibly it was the Book of Eldad and Modat, which underlies
   the allusion in ver. 8 (see Introduction). A glance at the text and
   margin of the English versions will show that the interpretations of
   this puzzling quotation turn on the point whether spirit is in the
   nominative or the accusative case. The latter is more likely. To yearn
   jealously is an echo of the daring O.T. anthropomorphism which emerged
   from the idea of the People as the Bride of their God, who had an
   exclusive right to their affections and who grudged the world any share
   of the love due to Himself. James tacitly rejected the Greek thought of
   the jealousy of God (see on i. 5), but he could the more readily use
   language of this kind, as Christians were for him those who love God,
   and this is the nearest approach he makes to the truth that God loves
   them; he preferred to call God the Father, as in i. 17 and iii. 9, with
   special reference to creation, and so this quotation appeals to him
   with its allusion to the spirit or breath of life divine (ii. 26) which
   at creation God set within us. The inward life of man, instead of being
   abandoned to passions (ver. 1), ought to be surrendered to the original
   and intense love which throbs in God for the human soul so dear to Him,
   the soul He endows with such powers and faculties (i. 17). The
   seriousness of God's devotion is contrasted with the lack of
   seriousness shown by Christians who felt no scruple about using their
   religion in order to gratify their desires for the pleasant world
   around them.

   6

   Now James resumes the thought of ver. 3. All this preoccupation with
   worldly interests takes men away from the sphere in which God can
   freely and fully answer their prayers. Whatever is withheld, He never
   withholds grace any more than wisdom (i. 5); His favour and friendship
   are bestowed generously; He never grudges that. To ask grace is to get
   it more and more, for His goodwill can be given to one without another
   being the poorer, and He loves to give (see on i. 5). Grace of course
   does not means for James what it meant for Paul; he merely quotes a
   well-known text about grace from Proverbs (iii. 34), as Peter does (1
   Peter v. 5), to remind his readers of the conditions required for
   receiving God's help and favour. No wonder they had failed to get what
   they asked, for they had been too self-reliant, given over to the proud
   glory of life which another writer traced to the spirit of the world (1
   John ii. 16). Whereas only the humble can be helped and blessed. Here
   humble is a broader term than in i. 9; it is not social position, but
   the inward spirit of need and of reliance on God which is meant. The
   humble are those who are penitent and spiritual, who ask God for what
   they feel the deepest needs of life, who neither envy nor covet what
   their neighbours own, unlike the haughty or worldly who are so
   self-reliant that they give up prayer or attempt to use prayer coolly
   as a means of furthering some private and personal end. This
   haughtiness is for James a religious, or rather an irreligious, temper
   here; it is not insolence to one's fellow-men but primarily the
   preference of worldly prosperity to anything else. Such friendship with
   the world means that one is on a footing of hostility towards God, for
   it defies His will and despises His purpose; disguise it as one may, it
   is an implicit challenge to God, James argues, a position so dangerous
   that it must be abandoned entirely. Hence the pungent call to
   repentance in 7-10.

   7

   Well then, submit yourselves to God:

   resist the devil,

   and he will fly from you:

   8

   draw near to God,

   and he will draw near to you.

   Cleanse your hands, you sinners,

   and purify your hearts, you double-minded.

   8

   Lament and mourn and weep,

   let your laughter be turned to mourning,

   and your joy to depression;

   10

   humble yourselves before the Lord,

   and then he will raise you up.

   7

   Submissiveness to God instead of any jaunty self-confidence! Some
   circles in the early church were perplexed by wondering if
   post-baptismal sins on the part of Christians could be forgiven. Could
   any such sins be pardoned by God? If so, what sins, and how? James,
   with practical good sense, ignores this difficulty, and falls back
   simply on the duty and blessing of repentance. Resist the devil in 1
   Peter v. 9 means resistance to the supreme temptation of apostasy, in a
   time of persecution; here it is more general, the devil being the
   representative and ruler of the world over against God. As sin gave the
   devil a chance (Ephesians iv. 27), the one way to escape was to break
   his hold over the soul by repentance, turning to God. James assumes
   that the human will has this power. As the whole world lies in the
   power of the evil One (1 John v. 19), man must challenge that power; it
   is not irresistible. In the Testament of Naphthali (viii. 4: If you do
   what is good, the devil will flee from you and the Lord will love you')
   and of Simeon (iii. 5: If a man flee to the Lord, the evil spirit runs
   away from him') the same metaphor is employed, but James puts it more
   vigorously and hopefully, summoning his readers to check the evil
   spirit of self-will which had been allowed to set them against the will
   of God. In the Book of Eldad and Modat there was a text, The Lord is
   near to those who turn to him' (quoted in Hermas, Vis. iii. 4), which
   8James recalls in ver. 8. To draw near to God involved a moral
   purification and consecration of life to His service, which is
   expressed in the usual metaphors of ritual worship; the true worshipper
   who would enter the divine presence must have clean hands and a pure
   heart' (Psalm xxiv. 4). Hands and hearts denote (as in Sirach xxxviii.
   l0 and elsewhere) the whole of life, outward and inward. Purify your
   hearts (the phrase used in 1 Peter i. 22) signifies the consecration of
   life to God for His ends, instead of the world's, and this throws light
   upon the meaning of double-minded here; not, do this without any
   hesitation' (as in i. 8), but purify your hearts from false compromise
   between the world and God' (4, 5). When Jesus said, Blessed are the
   pure in heart,' he meant the single-minded or whole-hearted, whose
   devotion was free from any alloy of worldly motive or self-interest. So
   here. The double-minded are sinners, though they may not think so. It
   is a sin to combine worldliness and religion or to divide one's
   interest between God and any rival. Instead of being contented and
   cheerful in your worldly self-satisfaction, 9 instead of your gaiety of
   spirits, mourn sadly over your sins, then; James speaks in terms of the
   Hebrew prophets' language about the anguish of repentance, but lament
   after double-minded looks like another reminiscence of the Book of
   Eldad and Modat, if that be the scripture cited anonymously in Clem.
   Rom. xxiii. 3 (Far be that scripture from us where He says, "Wretched
   [the adjective corresponding to the verb lament] are the
   double-minded"'). Depression (only here in the N.T.) is the downcast,
   subdued expression of those who are ashamed and sorry.

   10

   James closes with the same assurance as Peter (1 Peter v. 6), but Peter
   refers to the relief granted by God to loyal Christians who were being
   oppressed by persecutors, while James means that God will raise up the
   penitent who have humbled themselves by deploring their offences. The
   true penitent, like the taxgatherer in the parable of Jesus, does not
   venture to lift up even his eyes to heaven'; there is nothing uplifted
   about him now, till God's pardon raises him to his feet. What James has
   already said about God raising the humble Christian (in i. 9) is
   therefore slightly different.

   Now for a special case of the pursuit of worldly gain which has just
   been exposed (1 f.)! Perhaps this is a note of some address to a mixed
   audience (ii. 3 f.), but there may have been traders in the church
   whose methods proved that they, left God out of account in their
   business plans (13-16).

   13

   Come now, you who say, To-day or to-morrow we are going to such and
   such a city; we shall spend a year there trading and making money'--^14
   you who know nothing about to-morrow! For what is your life? You are
   but a mist, which appears for a little and then vanishes. ^15 You ought
   rather to say, If the Lord will, we shall live to do this or that.' ^16
   But here you are, boasting in your proud pretensions! All such boasting
   is wicked.

   Both this and the next paragraph open with the brusque 13 Come now.
   These busy Greek traders have to make plans. James does not censure
   such foresight; what he denounces is their habit of ignoring God. Say
   is of course say to yourselves,' and the religious attitude of James is
   that of Proverbs xxvii. 1: 14 Boast not about to-morrow, for you never
   know what a day will bring.' Life is far too uncertain--for what? For
   forgetting your dependence upon the providence of God, James replies. A
   mist or cloud or vapour is one of the commonest figures in ancient
   writers for hump life as transient. It is the impious in Wisdom (ii. 4)
   who wail that their life will be scattered like mist before the rays of
   the sun,' but James means the life of man in general. Another of the
   quotations in Clem. Rom. (xvii.) which may have come from the Book of
   Eldad and Modat (see above, on ver. 8) is a plaint of Moses, I am as
   mist (or steam) from a pot'; the word for mist is the same as here, and
   human beings, not life, are compared to it, so that there is a
   possibility that James had read and recollected this.

   15

   If the Lord will had been used by Paul (in 1 Corinthians iv. i9 and
   Acts xviii. 21). It or some equivalent (if the gods will') was a
   familiar phrase of piety in pagan circles; the Jewish analogies are all
   later and derived. James recommends it as an antidote to presumption
   and an expression of humble submissiveness to God (6, 7). We shall live
   to do this or that is a characteristic touch; a trader who humbly owns
   the will of God over him can hope to live and do his work; as James
   himself says in another connexion,16 he will be blessed in his
   activity, for faith is always practical. But here you are in point of
   fact boasting (see iii. 14) in (i.e. as you make) your proud
   pretensions. This last word means in 1 John ii. 16 the proud glory of
   life, but here it is overweening self-confidence, as in Wisdom v. 8,
   where the impious at the end lament, What was the profit of our proud
   pretensions?' All such boasting, when life is so precarious, is worse
   than absurd, it is wicked, a positive sin, a specimen of the ungodly
   haughtiness (ver. 6) of which men should repent.

   Rich landowners are next attacked (v. 1-6) in a scathing outburst of
   indignation. The words sound like part of a sermon addressed to a mixed
   audience by James, an audience which included (see ii. 2) some wealthy
   proprietors. This outspoken teacher or preacher at anyrate does not
   toady to them. Indeed he holds out no prospect of repentance, nor does
   he summon them, as he did the traders, to mend their ways; this is a
   threat of doom, in the strain of prophets like Amos and Malachi. It may
   have been intended to shake some by fear out of their selfishness and
   injustice, but there is no direct evidence to prove that these
   plutocrats were members of the church; indeed the last word of the
   appalling denunciation indicates that it was their victims who belonged
   to the church, and that the cruelty was part of what Jews or pagans,
   who lorded it over humble Christian workers, made them suffer.

   v.

   1 Come now, you rich men, weep and shriek over your impending miseries!

   3b You have been storing up treasure in the very last days;

   2 your wealth lies rotting,
   and your clothes are moth-eaten;

   3a your gold and silver lie rusted over,
   and their rust will be evidence against you,
   it will devour your flesh like fire.

   4 See, the wages of which you have defrauded the workmen who mowed your
   fields call out,
   and the cries of the harvesters have reached the ears of the Lord of
   Hosts.

   5 You have revelled on earth and plunged into dissipation;
   you have fattened yourselves as for the Day of slaughter;

   6 you have condemned, you have murdered the righteous--unresisting.

   1

   As in iv. 7-10, the style resembles the rhythmical oracles of the
   Hebrew prophets, though similar threats of doom against the impious
   wealthy were a feature of the Wisdom literature and of apocalypses like
   Enoch. The nearest approach to the tone of James is in Luke vi. 24 (woe
   to you rich folk, you get all the comforts you will ever get') and xvi.
   19-31 (the parable of the rich man and Lazarus). The doom is depicted
   in highly coloured Jewish phrases, and the same immediate prospect of
   the End is held out as a threat to the rich: and as a consolation to
   the oppressed poor (in 7-11). Because it was imminent, there was no
   call to demand social justice for the victims; the whole order of
   things was to be swept away immediately, and the thought of any reform
   and redress on earth never entered the mind of James. He tells the rich
   to shriek or howl with anguish (in the demonstrative Oriental fashion
   of showing distress) over their impending miseries on the day of doom.

   3b

   The next clause got displaced at an early period, and must be recovered
   from ver. 3; you have had nothing better to do, have you, on the verge
   of doom! than to store up treasure? 2 Any eye can see it already ruined
   and proving your ruin! Raiment and coin were two chief forms of
   property for a wealthy Oriental: clothes rot and get moth-eaten
   (Matthew vi. 19, moth and rust corrode'), gold and silver get rusted
   over (he means, tarnished). With the prophetic eye James sees this rust
   bearing silent witness against the wealthy for their rapacity in
   hoarding up their money instead of giving it away. In Sirach xxix. 10
   we read, Lose your money to a brother and friend, and let it not rust
   hidden beneath a stone.' More than that, James adds, with a Dantesque
   touch of horror, the rust will devour (or corrode) your flesh like
   fire, you are so bound up with your greedy gains (see on i. 11); your
   wealth perishes and you perish with it and by it, eaten away in burning
   pain.

   4

   The second charge is fraudulent treatment of their farm-labourers. The
   Mosaic code ordered the wages to be paid every evening: You must pay
   him his wages by the day, nor let the sun go down upon it (for the man
   is poor and he wants his wages), lest he cries to the Eternal against
   you and you incur guilt' (Deuteronomy xxiv. 15). But these farmers,
   unlike the employer in the parable of Jesus (Matthew xx. 8), kept back
   the pay of the labourers on their farms or estates; defrauded covers
   this injustice, though it need not be confined to it. The cries of
   these harvesters, who have filled your barns for you, have reached the
   ears of the great God, though you would not listen to their protests
   and appeals. James appositely recalls the language of Isaiah's similar
   denunciation of selfish landowners; in the Greek version, which was the
   Bible of James and his readers (Isaiah v. 8-9), the cries of their
   victims reached the ears of the Lord of hosts (literally, as in the
   A.V., Sabaoth), the mighty Judge who avenges such crimes. James,
   however, makes the doom eschatological and immediate, though he does
   not hint here, as he does in the case of the two other charges (see
   vers. 3 and 5), how the imminent punishment was to be inflicted. One of
   the most relevant passages in the older literature on this charge is
   Tobit iv. 7-14, where the writer counsels a just and generous use of
   wealth. Give alms out of your possessions ungrudgingly . . . for thus
   you store up good treasure for yourself against the day of need' (i.e.
   the last day, when account is taken). This is the point which, in 1-3,
   James implies these rapacious estate-owners have forgotten, though he
   does not share the Jewish view of alms as meritorious. Tobit continues,
   in haughty scorn (i.e. of other people) ruin lies and great disorder
   (the word used by James in iii. 16) . . . let not the wages of any of
   your work-men remain in your possession, but pay them at once . . .
   give some of your clothes to those who are ill-clad' (see James ii. 15,
   v. 2).

   So much for the second charge. The third is wanton luxury, with its
   social cruelty (5, 6). Your dissipated self-indulgence has been merely
   preparing you, like the fatted cattle in your stalls, for the Day of
   slaughter. The phrase was coined by Jeremiah (xii. 3), but in the later
   apocalypses it became eschatological. One of the woes against the
   impious rich in Enoch (xciv. 8, 9) runs thus: Woe to you rich, for you
   have trusted in your riches, and from your riches you must be parted,
   because you have not remembered the Most High in the days of your
   riches. You have committed blasphemy and unrighteousness, and have
   become ready for the Day of slaughter, the day of darkness, the day of
   the last great judgment.' And this, says James grimly, is. what you
   have been unconsciously pampering yourselves for! You must pay with
   your lives for the wanton indulgence that has cost your victims their
   lives, the 6 victims of your social and judicial oppression. Condemned
   and murdered echoes what has been already said in ii. 6. Their luxury
   had been utterly unscrupulous, regardless of human life in its demands.
   Poor, pious people had been at their mercy, and had received no mercy.
   Murdered had a wider range in Jewish ethics familiar to James. Thus in
   Sirach xxxiv. (xxxi.) 24 f. a man who offers sacrifice which he has
   extorted from the moneys of the poor is as (bad as) a man who slays a
   son before his father's eyes. The poor have to live on scanty bread,
   and anyone who defrauds them of it is a man of blood. He murders his
   neighbour who deprives him of his living, and he who defrauds a
   hireling of his wages is a shedder of blood.' But, coming after
   condemned, it probably refers to judicial murders, against which the
   downtrodden victims could do nothing.

   The righteous is singular in Greek, the generic singular representing
   the class of those who are poor because they are pious--a usage
   stereotyped in the Wisdom literature, which often handled the question.
   A passage which probably was in the mind of James is the famous
   determination of the ungodly in Wisdom ii. 10 f.:


   Let us lord it over the poor righteous man. . . .

   Let us lie in wait for the righteous. . . .

   He calls the destiny of the righteous happy,

   And boasts that God is his Father. . . .

   Let us put him to the test with outrage and torture,

   That we may find out if he is patient,

   And judge his endurance of evil.

   Let us condemn him to a shameful death.'

   Unresisting (literally, and he does not resist') is a vivid climax; the
   helplessness of the victims aggravates the guilt of their oppressors.
   Like the defrauded labourers, these poor folk had no means of redress,
   so far as earth was concerned, and they submitted without a murmur to
   the suffering. But wait a little, James adds (7-11); heaven has not
   forgotten you. Resist' is the same word as oppose in iv. 6, and there
   is an allusion to that passage taken in a sterner and special sense; it
   is not for the patient, pious Christians to resist these overbearing
   tyrants of society, but to leave them and themselves to the God who is
   soon to intervene. This paves the way for the following counsel, which
   broadens out into the general thought of all that Christians may have
   to endure in ordinary life.

   7     Be patient, then, brothers, till the arrival of the Lord. See how
   the farmer waits for the precious crop of the land, biding his time
   patiently till he gets the autumn and the spring rains; ^8 have
   patience yourselves, strengthen your hearts, for the arrival of the
   Lord is at hand. ^9 Do not murmur against one another, brothers, lest
   you are judged; ^10 look, the Judge is standing at the very door! As an
   example of fortitude and endurance, brothers, take the prophets who
   have spoken in the name of the Lord. ^11 See, we call the stedfast
   happy; you have heard of the stedfastness of Job, and you have seen the
   end of the Lord with him, seen that the Lord is very compassionate and
   pitiful.

   7

   A word of encouragement to Christians (brothers) who are still being
   badly treated in these and other ways. James stirs no class-feeling,
   e.g. of labourers against their unjust employers; leave the wealthy
   oppressors to God's imminent vengeance on their cruelty. The religious
   attitude is what concerns him. The rightful spirit for the righteous in
   the circumstances, with the arrival of the Lord (explained on 2 Peter
   i. 16, iii. 12) so sure and speedy, is patient endurance of grievances
   and hardships that are soon to be removed, a stedfast courage which is
   content to wait for God without complaining. Bide your time like a
   farmer awaiting the autumn (Deuteronomy xi. 14) rain in October and
   November and the spring rain so anxiously expected in March and April
   throughout Syria. The agriculturist was always anxious about these
   rains; they were of critical importance for his welfare. But the
   aptness of the figure here depends on the fact that, according to the
   O.T. interpretation (Deuteronomy xi. 8 f.), this special feature of the
   Palestinian climate suggested to the pious the providential
   intervention of God in man's affairs. The farmer had to wait for this
   rainfall twice in the year; but although he could do nothing to bring
   it, he did not lose heart, 8provided that he was obeying the will of
   his God. 9So, James implies, with your patient hope: something is
   coming of it in this order of God. It is a failure of this patient
   self-control when the strain is allowed to make people irritable and
   censorious. In what has just been said about the need of patient
   en-durance, James has embraced the role of endurance under the general
   trials of life which he had already touched in i. 2 f. So in warning,
   Christians not to murmur or complain against one another, he is
   repeating the admonition of iv. 11-12, 14 f. against quarrelsomeness
   and carping judgments on one's fellow-members; this sharp, unbrotherly
   temper will be punished by the Lord. For, like Peter (1 Peter iv. 17
   f.), James is alive to the ethical fact that God's judgment will take
   strict account of Christians' behaviour as well as of their
   persecutors. What? Falling out with one another, when the Judge is
   standing at the very door! Fretful, blaming one another, with God on
   the point of judging men for such breaches of His Law!

   10

   Then, from warning, James swings back to encouragement (10, 11),
   appealing to his readers' recollections of the Bible. Jesus had held up
   the prophets also as an example to his hard-pressed disciples (Matthew
   v. 12), but it is strange that James does not appeal to the great
   example of Jesus himself, as other N.T. writers like Peter (1 Peter ii.
   21) did. Why too does he describe the prophets as men who have spoken
   in the name of the Lord (i.e. by the authority of the Lord)? Not to
   indicate that even distinguished servants of God have to suffer, but to
   show that genuine, true prophets had to encounter hardship. Job was 11
   traditionally reckoned as a prophet (Ezekiel xiv. 14, 20; Sirach xlix.
   9), and his heroic endurance is specially recalled. No other N.T.
   writer mentions Job, but to James his story shows how the end of the
   Lord with patient sufferers justifies the ordeal; those who hold on
   stedfastly under hardship find, as Job did, that--


   All is best, though we oft doubt

   What the unsearchable dispose

   Of Highest Wisdom brings about,

   And ever best found in the close.

   This is the most permanent and profound thought of the whole passage;
   patient endurance can sustain itself on the conviction that hardships
   are not meaningless, but that God has some end or purpose in them which
   He will accomplish, if sufferers only are brave enough to hold fast to
   Him (so i. 4). Job was sometimes impatient and fretful, but he never
   renounced God, and that was his stedfastness. We call the stedfast
   (those who endure) happy (or blessed). This is an echo of what he had
   said in i. 12, and stedfastness is the same term as that rendered
   endurance in i. 3, 4. The blissful conclusion of the story of Job is
   claimed as an illustration of Psalm ciii. 8, which is freely quoted
   from the Greek version as, the Lord is very compassionate and pitiful,
   the word for pitiful only occurring elsewhere in the N.T. in Luke vi.
   36, where God is called merciful. The counsel on stedfast endurance
   thus closes on the note of history and experience as justifying
   patience.


   Endurance is the crowning quality,

   And patience all the passion of great souls.

   James had offered an illustration of this from the farmer's attitude to
   the slow processes of nature, but he reaches deeper in appealing to
   what his friends had heard read aloud in the lessons from the O.T.
   during worship, proving that trial was no new thing in the religious
   life, and that no one who trusted in God had ever been confounded.

   Against oaths (12).

   12    Above all, my brothers, never swear an oath, either by heaven or
   by earth or by anything else; let your yes' be a plain yes,' your no' a
   plain no,' lest you incur judgment.

   12

   A puzzling fragment, on one sin of the tongue, which James seems to
   regard as specially serious. Above all was a formula which generally
   came in as a letter was drawing to its end (see 1 Peter iv. 8), calling
   attention to something particularly important; but it is an anti-climax
   to put forward a prohibition of cursing (see on iii. 10-12) and
   swearing as more momentous than anything which has been said in this
   epistle. Probably James jotted it down as an after-thought, to
   emphasize the warning of ver. g; in excitement or irritation there was
   a temptation to curse and swear violently and profanely. Christians,
   James means, should have more self-restraint; they should also be so
   truthful and straightforward that their bare word would suffice. Let
   your sincerity come out in your speech, when you make a statement or a
   promise, and in intercourse with one another do not give way to
   frivolous oaths.

   Jews had various forms of swearing; for superstitious reasons they
   avoided the name of God, but swore freely by heaven or by earth or
   otherwise, though moralists had already protested against the abuse of
   such oaths. Thus Sirach (xxiii. 9 f.) includes loose swearing among the
   sins of the tongue. Accustom not your mouth to an oath, nor make a
   practice of naming the Holy One. . . . If a man swear idly, he shall
   not be justified'--as James put it, he would incur judgment at the
   divine tribunal (ver. 9, iv. 11, 12). The disapproval of swearing was
   not confined to Judaism. Thus Epictetus (Enchiridion, xxxiii.) writes,
   Refuse absolutely to swear an oath, if possible; if it be not possible,
   refuse as far as you can.' But James's word, couched in Jewish
   terminology, is unqualified, probably because common oaths were to him
   irreverent, or because they implied and encouraged untruthfulness, or
   because he was protesting against the casuistry which viewed only
   oaths, and only some oaths, as binding; an ungarnished yes or no was
   better than any profuse asseveration backed by an oath. If he was
   thinking of the courts before which Christians were sometimes dragged
   (ii. 6, v. 6), the prohibition might refer also or entirely to judicial
   oaths, but this is less likely, either here or in the curiously similar
   saying which is attributed to Jesus in Matthew v. 34-37. It is possible
   that James had this saying in mind, though not necessarily in its
   present form.

   Still dealing with the use of the tongue in the religious life, he
   passes on to give some advice about prayer (13-18), supplementing what
   he had already said in i. 5-7 and iv. 2-3.

   13    Is anyone of you in trouble? let him pray. Is anyone thriving?
   let him sing praise. ^14 Is anyone ill? let him summon the presbyters
   of the church, and let them pray over him, anointing him with oil in
   the name of the Lord; ^15 the prayer of faith will restore the sick
   man, and the Lord will raise him up; even the sins he has committed
   will be forgiven him. ^16 So confess your sins to one another and pray
   for one another, that you may be healed: the prayers of the righteous.
   have a powerful effect. ^17 Elijah was a man with a nature just like
   our own; but he offered prayer that it might not rain, and for three
   years and six months it did not rain; ^18 then he prayed again, and the
   sky yielded rain, the earth brought- forth its fruit.

   13

   To be in trouble is the verb corresponding to the noun underlying
   fortitude in ver. 10; prayer is what sustains the spirit when any
   suffering or hardship has to be bravely borne. Instead of murmuring
   against one another (ver. 9), or complaining peevishly, or breaking out
   into curses, pray to God. Trust in God with all your might,' Haydon
   wrote to Keats. From my soul I declare to you that I never applied for
   help, or for consolation, or for strength, but I found it. I always
   rose from my knees with a refreshed fury, an iron-clenched firmness, a
   crystal piety of feeling that sent me streaming on with a repulsive
   [repelling, he means] power against the troubles of life.'

   James adds, in passing, to complete the picture: And let anyone who is
   thriving, in good spirits, sing praise to God. Prayer and song are our
   means of communicating with God. Praise is the sound which ought to
   rise from a cheerful, prosperous life. Elsewhere in the N.T. the word
   to sing praise refers to public worship, and always, if the usage in
   classical Greek and in the Greek O.T. be decisive, to songs with a
   musical accompaniment. But the use of a musical instrument is not bound
   up with the verb, and in the case of an individual is less likely.

   14

   One form of trouble is illness, and we now have a word on the functions
   of prayer at the sick-bed. Social oppression is to be endured, but
   James believed that some trials could be removed, and among them
   illness. The sickness of a believer is not a merely physical trouble;
   neither is it a purely individual concern; these are the two
   assumptions of his argument. Illness is somehow connected with sin, and
   the sick man has the right--perhaps we should rather say, he
   requires--to call in help from the church. The church or churches
   addressed by James had teachers, but, like the churches addressed by
   Peter (1 Peter v. 1 f.), they were ruled by presbyters, who would pray
   over the sick man as he lay in bed. Let the presbyters care for the
   sick,' Polykarp writes to the church of Philippi (Ad Philipp. vi.).
   Such intercessions were part of their pastoral care and duty. 15 James
   had spoken about a man praying in faith for himself (i. 5); he now
   mentions the presbyters offering a prayer of faith for others, which
   has the effect of restoring the sick man to physical health. The Lord
   who hears the prayer of faith answers it by raising him from his
   sick-bed (see Mark ii. 5). And more: even the sins he has committed, by
   which his illness was brought on, will be forgiven him. It is natural
   to assume that the presbyters had the right and power of giving him
   this assurance, or, as the later church would have said, of pronouncing
   absolution over him in the name of the Lord. This is not mentioned
   directly, but neither is the man's personal confession of sins, which
   is plainly implied (ver. 16). Or is the regaining of health the
   assurance of spiritual pardon? It is so, among some Chinese Christians
   to-day, according to Mr. C. N. Moody (The Mind of the Early Converts,
   p. 19). It is an everyday occurrence to hear the remark, "My sins are
   very heavy." This almost invariably means, "My troubles are great"; for
   converts believe that special affliction is a proof of special
   transgression, known or unknown,' and one of the main proofs of
   forgiveness' is deliverance, especially a signal deliverance from
   distress' or a remarkable cure in answer to prayer.' For James's age
   the prevalent belief that sickness was connected with sin is expressed
   in the Testament of Simeon (v. 9): God brought upon me a disease of the
   liver [the seat of envious passion], and had not the prayers of my
   father Jacob succoured me, my spirit could hardly have failed to
   depart.' Here the penitence of the sick man is also assumed, and the
   cure is due to intercessory prayer. In Sirach (xxxviii. 9 f.) the
   doctor is mentioned. After highly commending the skill of physicians
   and the science of medicine, the author tells a sick man to do three
   things. First there is prayer and penitence. Pray to God, for he can
   heal you . . . cleanse your heart from all sin.' Then, offer the
   sacrifice prescribed in Leviticus ii. 1-3. Finally, call in the doctor,
   for God has created him'; the doctor also prays for a blessing on his
   diagnosis and treatment of the patient.

   James describes a curious custom in the churches which he knew, of
   employing oil, not by the hands of a doctor but as a religious rite of
   therapeutic power. While prayer is the decisive factor in the cure, the
   presbyters are not only to pray over the patient but to smear his body
   with oil, pronouncing the sacred name of the Lord, i.e. Jesus,' which
   was supposed to have potent efficacy in working cures. Oil was a
   well-known medical remedy in the East, but this is a religious rite of
   unction, neither mere faith-healing nor purely medical therapeutic. The
   only other reference to the custom is, in one tradition about a mission
   of the disciples during the lifetime of Jesus (Mark vi. 13), when they
   cast out a number of daemons and cured a number of sick people by
   anointing them with oil.' If this occasional practice was anything more
   than a recourse to popular medicine on the part of the missioners, it
   may throw light on the isolated habit in vogue among these Christians
   to whom James writes. What interests him, however, is not the oil but
   the prayer of faith, and that as bearing on the forgiveness of sins. So
   he goes over the important items again, filling in the outline at one
   point. What follows is not a general statement about mutual confidence
   and intercessory prayer, but a reiteration: 16 so (as physical health
   and forgiveness are together won through prayer) confess your sins to
   one another (patients, e.g., to presbyters) and pray for one another
   (as presbyters could not do intelligently and truly, unless they were
   sure of the patient's penitence), that you who are sick may be healed.
   That is, the most vital matter is the personal confession of sins.

   Now, in the primitive church this was openly done as a rule, before the
   congregation. The earliest manual of church practice prescribes: you
   must confess your sins in church, and not betake yourself to prayer
   with a bad conscience' (Didaché iv.), and again that confession of sins
   must precede the communion service (xiv.). Clement of Rome (lvii.)
   tells the insubordinate members at Corinth that they must submit to the
   presbyters and be schooled to repentance.' The context of this
   admonition of James points to the same practice. To a sick person,
   unable to attend worship, the visiting presbyters represent the church;
   they listen to the patient's confession, and after prayer for his
   recovery pronounce over him the assurance of God's pardon. James is
   speaking to presbyters and other members about their respective duties,
   when he says Confess . . . pray. It is in line with the functions
   assigned here to presbyters that in the English Prayer Book, before the
   communion service, the minister exhorts anyone disturbed in conscience
   to come to me or to some other discreet and learned minister of God's
   Word, and open his grief; that by the ministry of God's holy Word he
   may receive the benefit of absolution.'

   In this second word (ver. 16) on the subject James seems purposely to
   reverse the order of the first word in 14, 15, where in introducing the
   topic he had had to speak of the physical side specially. To remove any
   misconception, he adds his second word. The prayer of faith is
   everything in healing. A marvellous power, this, to ascribe to prayer?
   Yes, but the prayers of the righteous (a generic singular as usual),
   i.e. of any true Christian like a presbyter who prays in unquestioning
   faith, are of extraordinary effect.17 He cites an O.T. illustration of
   this. Abraham, Rahab, Job--and now Elijah as an example of efficacious
   prayer. In the tale of 1 Kings xvii.-xviii. Elijah does not pray either
   to bring on or to remove the drought, but Jewish tradition in reverence
   for his prestige as a prophet had ascribed these wonders to his
   petitions. Thus in the contemporary apocalypse of 4 Esdras (vii. 109),
   we find (i.e. in Scripture) that Elijah prayed for those who received
   the rain.' One might have expected that James would have found a more
   telling example in the prayer of the prophet which restored the dead
   son of the widow to life, but this would have been out of touch with
   his argument in 14-16; he is not thinking there of a patient dead or on
   the point of death. The O.T. said that Elijah announced or predicted
   the drought; then Jewish tradition said that he procured it (this is
   asserted in Sirach xlviii. 3), and finally, by a not unnatural
   inference, that he had prayed for it.

   Another trace of the Jewish tradition which James follows 18in this
   account of Elijah is the change of the O.T. three years into three
   years and six months. Three and a half, being the half of the perfect
   number seven, had become the period in years for disaster and distress,
   in apocalyptic calculations (see Daniel xii. 7, followed in Revelation
   xi. 2, where Elijah is one of the two prophets). This interpretation
   rose before Christianity; it is reflected in Luke iv. 25, 26. On the
   other hand there is an implicit protest against the exaggerated Jewish
   reverence for Elijah as almost superhuman. James calls him a man with a
   nature just like our own. An example for us, some might say? But he was
   a saint far above our mortal level; no wonder his prayers were heard.
   The reply to this objection is that he was a human being like
   ourselves, no more righteous than we are or than we ought to be.

   A last word of encouragement in the task of restoring lapsed Christians
   (19, 20).

   19    My brothers, if any one of you goes astray from the truth and
   someone brings him back, ^20 understand that he who brings a sinner
   back from the error of his way saves his soul from death and hides a
   host of sins.

   19

   According to Polykarp (see above, on ver. 14), this was the duty of the
   presbyters: let the presbyters be merciful to all, bringing back those
   who have gone astray.' James certainly regards it as one expression of
   the mercy which God would reward at the end (ii. 13), but the appeal
   may be general in its scope; like Judas (22, 23) he probably thought it
   the duty of every Christian to reclaim a brother who had lapsed from
   the truth (i. 18), i.e. from the faith and obedience of the gospel.
   Dealing with a sick, penitent Christian was only one method, for not
   all sins led to physical suffering. Instead of being sharp and harsh
   with an erring brother, instead of giving him up as hopeless, a true
   Christian must endeavour to reclaim him, and 20 a twofold motive for
   this difficult and gracious effort is suggested. It is twice blest,'
   like Shakespeare's quality of mercy, for a Christian who succeeds saves
   his (the sinner's) soul from death, which is the outcome of sin (i. 15)
   and also atones for a number of his own personal misdeeds. James quotes
   the same O.T. passage as Peter in 1 Peter iv. 8, and in the same sense.
   The unselfish Christian love which makes one feel responsible for an
   erring brother and moves one to bring him back to the church, hides a
   host of the good Christian's sins (for we all make many a slip in
   life); such forgiving, redeeming love to a brother will atone for a
   great deal. It is a good work which the loving God will allow to count
   in favour of the true Christian--exactly the truth put otherwise in ii.
   13, or in another homily (2 Clement xv.), where the writer observes
   that if a man follows my advice, he will save both himself and me his
   counsellor; for it is no small reward to bring to salvation an erring,
   perishing soul.'

   So the homily ends--abruptly, even more abruptly than the First Epistle
   of John, without any closing word of farewell to the readers, abruptly,
   but not ineffectively. The Wisdom writings on which it is modelled end
   as suddenly. Indeed Sirach (li. 30) closes on a note which is not
   altogether unlike the encouraging note of James : do your work [i.e.
   of. seeking the divine wisdom] before the time [i.e. of the final
   reckoning], and He will give you your reward at its time.' But James
   promises God's reward to those who do more than seek divine truth for
   themselves.
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST. PETER
     __________________________________________________________________

  INTRODUCTION

   This beautiful epistle is addressed to Christians in Asia Minor who
   needed heartening and encouragement under the strain of a
   persecution-period. It was a time of tension, due to interference by
   the State authorities, who had obviously become suspicious of the
   Christian movement as immoral and treasonable. This set up, in some
   circles of the church, a feeling of perplexity and hesitation.
   Christians were suffering from the unwelcome attentions of Government
   officials, as well as from social annoyances, and they required to be
   rallied. The purpose of Peter is to recall them to the resources of
   their faith. Hence the emphasis upon hope, in its special aspect of
   hope in the near, messianic advent of Jesus Christ. But the
   responsibilities of hope are also urged; there is a constant stress
   upon reverent submission to the will of God as well as upon the duty of
   living innocent and peaceable lives which will commend the faith to
   outsiders.

   The epistle follows the method of most of the Pauline letters in
   concluding (iv. 7 f.) with some special admonitions to various classes
   in the church. Peter may have known some of the Pauline letters, such
   as Romans. But his type of thought is independent. St. Paul's influence
   scarcely carried him appreciably forward. . . . To compare First Peter
   with the Pauline epistles is like comparing Schubert with Beethoven.'
   [2] Here we miss the Pauline themes of faith-mysticism, eschatology,
   and justification. What we rather find is an original meditation by a
   primitive Christian upon the issues of the Christian life as these were
   visible in the light of the better messianism fostered by Jewish
   apocalyptic piety.

   So familiar and congenial is the vocabulary of this apocalyptic
   religion to Peter, that he even speaks of Rome as Babylon' (v. 13). He
   sends greetings to these provincial churches from the church of the
   capital. They were pre-dominantly Christians who had been born pagans
   (i. 1, 14, ii. 9, etc.), in Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia, and
   Bithynia, i.e. in Asia Minor north of the Taurus range. It does not
   follow that Peter had evangelized these districts. Indeed, Lightfoot
   infers, from the way in which Galatia is used in the provincial sense,
   that he had not; this is not un-natural in one who was writing from a
   distance and perhaps had never visited the district.' [3] A glance at
   the map will show that the districts are enumerated, for some unknown
   reason, from N.E. to S. and W. Possibly the bearer of the epistle was
   to follow this route. In any case, facilities of travel were abundant,
   and copies of the missive could be multiplied readily.

   The bearer was Silvanus (v. 12), to whom Peter probably dictated the
   epistle. How far Silvanus was responsible for the Greek style of the
   message, it is impossible to say. He was not a mere transcriber of what
   he heard, but neither is it likely that the bulk of the homily was the
   deposit of baptismal discourses by himself, mainly on the 34th Psalm,
   as has been recently suggested. It is possible that Peter left to him
   the task of putting his counsels into literary shape. Yet there is
   nothing in the homily which fairly tells against the Petrine
   authorship, once the error of regarding it as a product of secondary
   Paulinism is abandoned. The allusions to persecution harmonize with
   those reflected in the contemporary Gospel of Mark, behind which lie
   Peter's spirit and experience; in these references there is no item
   which does not suit the seventh decade of the first century. The tone
   of the religious arguments accords at several points. with that of
   Peter's speeches in the early chapters of Acts, which go back to a good
   tradition. There are numerous indications of an acquaintance with the
   primitive tradition of the sayings and sufferings of Jesus, and, once
   it is recognized that Peter did not set himself to compose a full
   statement of the Christian faith, there seems no crucial objection, so
   far as internal evidence goes, to the acceptance of the homily as it
   stands, viz. as a pastoral letter sent by Peter from Rome during the
   seventh decade of the first century.

   Traces of it appear soon in early Christian literature, probably in
   Clement of Rome (towards the close of the first century), certainly in
   Polykarp of Asia Minor, and in Gaul (in the letter from the churches at
   Lyons and Vienne). It was also known to Papias at the beginning of the
   second century. It is possible to argue that traces of First Peter are
   to be found in Ephesians and James; certainly there are some noticeable
   affinities with Hebrews, which was the work of a later teacher in the
   church. But First Peter differs from Hebrews, even while they breathe a
   common atmosphere. Such conceptions as faith (with a different shade of
   meaning from that in Paul), cleansing through the blood of Christ,
   inheriting the promised blessing, antitypes of the Christian order as
   found in the Old Testament, the finality of Christ's sacrifice, must
   all have been current in the apostolic church. Their appearance in
   common in two epistles, whose authors are men of such different moulds,
   reminds us of the rich heritage of religious thought which belonged to
   the early Christian community, independently of Paul's epoch-making
   constructions.' [4]
     __________________________________________________________________

   [2] A. H. McNeile, New Testament Teaching in the Light of St. Paul's,
   p. 138.

   [3] The Epistle to the Galatians, p. 19.

   [4] H. A. A. Kennedy, The Theology of the Epistles, pp. 173-174.
     __________________________________________________________________

  THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST. PETER

   i.

   1     PETER, an apostle of Jesus Christ, to the exiles of the
   Dispersion in Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia, and Bithynia, ^2 whom
   God the Father has predestined and chosen, by the consecration of the
   Spirit, to obey Jesus Christ and be sprinkled with his blood: ^3 may
   grace and peace be multiplied to you.

   1

   Apostle means a delegate with powers, one who represents the person who
   has commissioned him. Whether Peter had founded (ver. 12), or even
   visited, any of these churches, we do not know; he simply addresses
   them as an apostle of Jesus Christ (never using the term Jesus without
   adding Christ), perhaps to distinguish his position from that of the
   Jewish apostles' who visited Jewish communities in the Dispersion.
   Similarly he takes over into the Christian vocabulary the technical
   Jewish phrase exiles of the Dispersion (see ii. 11, v. 9). But on his
   lips it has a fresh sense and scope. (a) The reassembling of the exiles
   is to be in heaven, not on earth in Palestine; the thought is
   eschatological, as in Mark xiii. 27 and in the primitive eucharistic
   prayers of the Didaché (ix. 4: As this broken bread was scattered upon
   the hills and collected to become one, so may thy church be collected
   from the ends of the earth into thy kingdom'; x. 5: Remember thy
   church, Lord, to deliver her from all evil and perfect her in thy love,
   and collect her, made pure, from the four winds into thy kingdom which
   thou hast prepared for her'). Then (b) there is no touch of pathos
   (poor exiles'), but an exulting stress upon the privilege of membership
   in this community which is soon to be admitted to its proper glory and
   privileges in heaven. These Christians of pagan birth are heirs to all
   that Jews proudly claimed for themselves from God. (c) Hence the
   ethical obligation, which is worked out in ii. 11 f., of pure
   detachment from the vices of the pagan world; those who have such a
   prospect must not disqualify themselves by careless lives.

   This Christian position is further described, after the geographical
   address (on which see the Introduction), 2 as whom God the Father has
   predestined and chosen (literally, chosen according to the
   predestination of God the Father). Christians as the true People of God
   their Father enjoy the prerogative hitherto monopolized by Jews of
   being chosen by God (so ii. 9), whose will of love lies behind
   everything in life, behind their experience as well as behind the
   vocation of Jesus Christ (ver. 20). In one sense, the consciousness of
   being thus chosen by the Divine call and choice is what makes them feel
   exiles. Chosen refers to the Land where they are really at home but
   from which they are at present distant; exiles refers to the land where
   they reside at present but. in which they are not at home. The hope of
   ultimate salvation rests on the consciousness of being predestined and
   chosen by God the Father, who has taken up their lives into His eternal
   will and purpose for all time. Such is the basis and hope of
   Christianity for Peter as for Paul (Romans viii. 28 f.). The means and
   process of this Christian life is described as by the consecration of
   the Spirit. Jewish Christians had coined the term hagiasmos to express
   an idea for which the nearest pagan equivalent was hagismos, i.e. the
   hallowing of the People. Consecration means the stamping and setting
   apart for God of those who belong to Him. At baptism they were
   consecrated (1 Corinthians vi. 11) thus by the Spirit. For what
   differentiates Christians from the world is not any birth-tie with a
   nation but their possession and control by the Spirit, which marks them
   off from paganism (iv. 17-18). To belong to God is to obey Jesus Christ
   (see Matthew xxviii. 19-20), i.e. primarily to believe in Him (so i.
   22) and to accept Him as the means of union between the soul and God
   (i. 21, ii. 25, iii. 18). Hence Peter proceeds to describe the object
   of Christianity as to obey Jesus Christ. Obey' is one of the deep words
   of this epistle; here, as is plain from a passage like ii. 8 or iv. 17,
   it is practically equivalent to believe.' To obey Jesus Christ involves
   moral conduct, but primarily faith. Indeed Peter instantly proceeds to
   explain the religious and redemptive setting of the term by adding and
   to be sprinkled with his blood. This is not the thought of 1 John i. 7,
   the continuous forgiveness needed by those who are trying to obey Jesus
   Christ. It is an O.T. allusion, familiar to his readers. In Exodus
   xxiv. 7 f., the story of the ratification of the covenant at Sinai,
   Moses took the book of the covenant and read it in the audience of the
   people, and they said, All that the Lord hath spoken will we do, and be
   obedient.' He then sprinkled the blood on the people, and said, Behold
   the blood of the covenant which the Lord hath made with you on the
   basis of these words,' i.e. their promise of obedience to the laws
   enacted. Half of the blood of the oxen had been previously sprinkled on
   the altar, as representing the Lord; the rest is sprinkled then on the
   people, who are thereby bound to God. The blood ratifies the compact or
   bond between God and the people. Peter's point is that the new and true
   People of God owe obedience to Jesus Christ, not to any Jewish Law, as
   the authority to be followed; or, more precisely, that their entire
   relation to God depends upon the sacrificial death of Jesus Christ. But
   this belief in the significance of the death is merely mentioned, not
   elaborated.

   The final greeting is couched in archaic terms, borrowed from Enoch (v.
   7: to the elect there shall be light and grace and peace') and Daniel
   (iv. 1: peace be multiplied to you'). Grace suggests here as often in
   Paul the admission of pagan converts to the prerogatives and privileges
   of God's People; peace carries its full Semitic sense of bliss and
   well-being, due to the goodwill and free favour of God.

   The subject of the homily is faith under suffering; it is addressed to
   Christians who are undergoing a hard time. But Peter begins upon the
   note of praise (i. 3-12). Remember first of all how much you have to
   thank God for. The right perspective for facing trouble. lies in the
   attitude of grateful thanks to God for His gift of an eternal hope, His
   sure promises, His purpose for you, and His preservation of you,
   leading up to the final joy so soon to come; it is a position which the
   very prophets of old could only anticipate, and which the very angels
   envy.' This blessing, which in the original is one long sentence
   (3-12), has three phases, connected with God the Father (3-5), Jesus
   Christ (6-9), and the Spirit (10-12)--a trinitarian arrangement already
   suggested in ver. 2.

   3     Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ! By his
   great mercy we have been born anew to a life of hope through the
   resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead, ^4 born to an unscathed,
   inviolate, unfading inheritance; it is kept in heaven for you, ^5 and
   the power of God protects you by faith till you do inherit the
   salvation which is all ready to be revealed at the last hour.

   3

   Blessed be (the) God was a devout phrase of Jewish religion. Peter,
   like Paul (2 Corinthians i. 3), expands it as a Christian by adding and
   Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. What God has done through Jesus Christ
   is the assurance of what He will do for Christians. No need to fear any
   break or blank in a life which springs from God's great mercy, i.e. 4
   His free, loving choice (ii. 10). By this we have been born anew. Our
   first birth ends in physical death; this regeneration issues in life
   eternal, in a life of hope, thanks to the resurrection of Jesus Christ.

   For Peter, God is the Father of Christians (i. 2, 17) as well as of
   Jesus, but he does not work out the sonship of Christians as Paul had
   done, though he recognizes that sonship carries with it an inheritance
   or patrimony (Galatians iv. 7). Christians owe everything to God; the
   initiative is with Him. Peter shares this fundamental conviction, that
   the undeserved, spontaneous favour of God is the beginning of
   everything in the Christian experience. But he expresses this in new
   terms; for the first time regeneration' enters the Christian
   vocabulary. It was not an O.T. metaphor, but it would be intelligible
   to Asiatic Christians who knew the mystery-cults, where the hope of the
   initiates was often for a re-birth to immortality through communion
   with the deity who had passed through death. One devout initiate thus
   describes himself: A man, son of A. and born of the mortal womb of B.
   and of human sperm, to-day born again by Thee, one of so many myriads
   rendered immortal at this hour according to the good pleasure of God in
   His exceeding goodness.' This conviction, that there could be no
   salvation or immortality apart from regeneration, was widely spread.
   The cults endeavoured to meet this yearning for a new life through
   fellowship with some divine Saviour, generally some mythical hero-god
   or personification of a nature-force. What they offered through
   sacramental rites and ecstatic experiences on the part of the devotees,
   generally of a more or less crude nature, Christianity offered in its
   gospel of the risen Christ. Regeneration issues in a life of hope, i.e.
   (see on ver. 21) hope of life, eternal secured and assured by Jesus
   Christ the risen Lord, which is further described as an unscathed (a
   synonym in contemporary Greek for immortal' or imperishable'),
   inviolate (unprofaned--see Isaiah xlvii. 6), unfading (see ver. 4)
   inheritance (such as children receive from their father). In Enoch
   (xxxix. 9, 10) the prophet exclaims, In these days I praised and
   extolled the name of the Lord of Spirits with blessings and praises,
   because He hath destined me for blessing and glory according to the
   good pleasure of the Lord of Spirits. For long time my eyes regarded
   that place [the predestined dwelling in heaven] and I blessed Him and
   praised Him, saying, "Blessed is He, and may He be blessed from the
   beginning and for evermore."' This is the outline filled up in these
   verses by the Christian prophet, who now adds that this inheritance is
   all ready in heaven, kept for you from all eternity (such is the force
   of the perfect participle). The change from us to you is simply the
   preacher addressing his people; in ver. 8 there is an obvious
   distinction between Peter and those Christians who had never known
   Jesus on earth, but here he is not dissociating himself from their
   expectation. 5 Yes, he adds, and (lest you think you may never reach it
   through all this hardship) the power of God protects you by faith (as
   you are loyal, v. 6, 10) till you do inherit the salvation (literally,
   unto the salvation--see Romans i. 16); God stands between you and all
   that menaces your hopes or threatens your eternal welfare, as you rely
   on Him; His power works in and for human faith. What is implied in
   faith is explained later (see vers. 7 and 9, 14, iii. 9, iv. 19, v. 7,
   10). Peter meanwhile adds that the salvation (see ver. 9, iv. 18) is
   the final deliverance which issues in life eternal. So the messiah in
   Enoch (xlviii. 7) hath preserved the lot of the righteous, because they
   have hated and despised this world of unrighteousness,' their lot being
   called the heritage of faith' (lviii. 5). On the other hand, the
   protection of the faithful here is entirely and directly the work of
   God; Christianity drops the belief of Enoch (c. 5) in guardian angels
   appointed by God to protect them. The salvation is not merely secure,
   but soon to come, ready (see on iv. 5) to be revealed at the last hour
   after the imminent crisis of the judgment and the second Advent (iv.
   5-7, 17-18). Revealed always implies something or someone already in
   existence. At the last hour is a Greek phrase which literally (en kairô
   eschatô) might mean, when things are at their worst'; classical writers
   used it thus, but the context of this epistle is too eschatological to
   permit any sense except a reference to the imminent end (iv. 7).

   Such bliss endangered by your present hardships? No, it is reached
   through them (6-9).

   6     You will rejoice then, though for the passing moment you may need
   to suffer various trials; ^7 that is only to prove your faith is
   sterling (far more precious than gold which is perishable and yet is
   tested by fire), and it redounds to your praise and glory and honour at
   the revelation of Jesus Christ.

   6

   The contrast is between then (i.e. at the last hour) and now, the
   passing moment of persecution. Peter speaks elsewhere of a present
   heroic joy for Christians who bear rough experiences in the right
   spirit (iv. 13), but here he is thinking of the last day. I promise
   you, that will be a day of joy, a thrilling moment (ver. 8), when you
   find your faith ratified and rewarded!' In Greek the verb rendered You
   will rejoice is a present with a quasi-future meaning, and most of the
   early versions understood the word as a future. The apostle's simple
   philosophy of suffering is that (a) troubles are merely a temporary
   episode, (b) they do not last long, for the end (iv. 17, v. 10) is
   near, (c) some may be spared (may need) the ordeal, and, best of all
   (d), they are not accidental, but designed to test and attest faith.
   You may need to suffer various trials. Some of the acutest pangs are
   caused by uncertainty whether God means anything by allowing trials to
   befall us; this mental suffering need never trouble you, the apostle
   pleads. In Samson Agonistes (667-670) the Chorus cry:


   God of our fathers I what is man,

   That thou toward him with hand so various--

   Or might I say contrarious?

   Temper'st thy providence through his short course?'

   No, Peter would reply, You must not say "contrarious."' 7 The variety
   of trials which beset Christians is permitted only to prove something;
   persecution shows, as nothing else can, whether Christians are loyal to
   their convictions. Trouble is part of your discipline, to show that
   your faith is sterling, not mere emotion or words. The comparison of
   discipline to the furnace in which gold metal was tried, to bring out
   the sound ore, was common in antiquity; Peter's pagan contemporary
   Seneca wrote in his treatise De Providentia (5), ignis aurum probat,
   miseria fortes viros. And it redounds to your own credit, when account
   is taken of life at the end. Peter speaks later of how the loyalty of
   Christians redounds to the honour of God (ii. 12, and iv. 11, 16);
   here, of the praise or moral approbation conveyed in the Well done,
   good and faithful servant.' Glory and honour are eschatological, as in
   Romans ii. 7, 10. The signal honour paid by God to the loyal comes at
   the close of their ordeal, when the world-order with its malign attacks
   upon the faithful is brought to an end at the revelation of Jesus
   Christ. This revelation of Jesus Christ in glorious authority is never
   far from the mind of the apostle (see ver. 13, iv. 13, and v. 4); he
   thinks of it not as the issue and reward of Christ's own sufferings but
   rather as the supreme encouragement to his loyalists during the sharp
   interval, when they have to hold on and hold out till they are relieved
   (v. 10).

   Faith and love for Christ will bring you successfully through the
   brief, hard interval before the end (8, 9) faith has an outcome.

   8     You never knew him, but you love him; for the moment you do not
   see him, but you believe in him, and you will thrill with an
   unspeakable and glorious joy ^9 to obtain the outcome of your faith jn
   the salvation of your souls.

   8

   The original reading, eidotes, was at an early period confused with
   idotes; hence the rendering, whom having not seen.' But Peter means,
   you never knew him in the past, as I did, and yet you love him . . .
   you believe in him in the present, though for the moment (ver. 6) you
   do not see him, as one day you will, when he is revealed in the
   immediate future. In Enoch (xlviii. 6 f., lxii. 7) the messiah is only
   revealed to the elect through O.T. prophecy. The Christian tie with
   Christ is infinitely. richer; your heart, if not your eyes, can possess
   him, Peter claims; the close fellowship of Christians with Christ
   underlies the thought of passages like ii. 4, 25 and iii. 15. Faith is
   not a stoical endurance of evil, but a personal affection and devotion
   to the Lord, and love proves its sterling quality by standing the
   strain of life in his service. Out of sight but not out of reach: such
   is Peter's description of Christ. It is one of the most inward and
   moving sentences in the epistle. Here, as in ii. 6, Christ is the
   object of faith, and he never disappoints the personal confidence of
   Christians. Soon you will thrill (the verb is future in sense, as in
   ver. 6) with an unspeakable (too deep for words) and glorious joy. In
   the Greek version of Psalm lxxxvi. 3, glorious things are spoken of
   thee, O City of God,' Peter declares that the joy of Christians in
   heaven will be glorious, but that it cannot be put into words. The
   promise of joy had been made in Enoch (civ. 4): Be hopeful and cast not
   away your hope, for you shall have great joy as the angels in heaven.'
   9Peter defines the joy differently; you obtain the outcome (same word
   as receive in v. 4) of your faith in the salvation of your souls; God
   will see to it that your faith (ver. 7) does not go for nothing.

   In the next sentence (10-12), the certainty and magnificence of this
   salvation are extolled, on quite original lines.

   10  Even prophets have searched and inquired about that salvation, the
   prophets who prophesied of the grace that was meant for you; ^11 the
   Spirit of messiah within them foretold all the suffering of messiah and
   his after-glory, and they pondered when or how this was to come; ^12 to
   them it was revealed that they got this intelligence not for themselves
   but for you, regarding all that has now been disclosed to you by those
   who preached the gospel to you through the holy Spirit sent from
   heaven, The very angels long to get a glimpse of this!

   10

   How favoured Christians are, when the very prophets of to old
   anticipated but only anticipated this destiny! Even prophets of old,
   inspired men who were deeply interested in your religious privileges,
   could not do more than predict the grace or salvation that was meant
   for you; they could neither experience it nor understand the hour or
   method of its realization. This grace includes the thought of God's
   goodness in admitting pagan converts to membership in the People (i. 2,
   ii. 9 f.), so that prophets would mean seers like Isaiah and Hosea whom
   Paul had interpreted (see Romans ix. 25 f., etc.) as foretelling the
   admission of pagans to the People by God's merciful favour. But, as the
   next words indicate, the apostle's thought is still wider; he is
   thinking of Christians in general, not simply telling these pagan
   converts that their religious position is no after-thought of God, a
   sudden, new thing, but recalling that the Christian hope of salvation,
   which depended upon Christ's suffering and glory (i.e. upon his
   resurrection, vers. 3, 21), as predestined (i. 2, 20) in the mind of
   God, had been already the subject of prophecy. Suffering and
   after-glory were essential to the messiah, but under the order of God's
   grace Christians also pass through suffering to glory (see, e.g., iv.
   13); they share this experience on the way to their salvation. Even
   Moses, according to one early Christian writer (Hebrews xi. 26), shared
   the obloquy of the messiah. Much more those who lived after messiah or
   Christ had come; with him and for him they suffer.

   All this the early Christians found freely predicted in the O.T.; such
   a messianic interpretation of the O.T. was common (see Luke xxiv. 26,
   27), especially in interpreting passages like Isaiah liii. and Psalms
   xvi. 10, 11 (see Acts ii. 25 f. for Peter's view of this prophecy) and
   xxii. Jesus had once told his disciples that many prophets had longed
   to see what they saw and experienced (Matthew xiii. 16, 17 = Luke x.
   23, 24); this was to enhance their appreciation of the gospel. In the
   Fourth Gospel (viii. 56, xii. 41) prophets like Abraham and Isaiah do
   not long in vain, they actually have visions of the Christ; Isaiah saw
   his glory, i.e. the glory of the messiah or pre-existent Christ. So
   Peter here assumes not only that what occupied the minds of these
   prophets was the salvation to be realized by Christ, 11 but that they
   were inspired by the Spirit of messiah within them (the Greek term for
   messiah being christos, the anointed of God, a title which became for
   Christians the proper name Christ'). This was the current opinion in
   the early church; the prophets, receiving grace from him, prophesied of
   him' (Barnabas v. 6). Peter is in line with others when he declares
   that the Spirit of messiah foretold (edêlou, as in Hebrews xii. 27;
   promarturomenon, a word coined by the apostle) the suffering of
   (literally, meant for) messiah and his after-glory, i.e. not merely
   what Christ as messiah actually and afterwards experienced (1
   Corinthians xv. 3, 4, according to the scriptures'), but the messianic
   woes (Mark xiii. 8 f.) which accompanied the end or last hour (ver. 5),
   and in which these Christians were now involved as the sharp prelude to
   their final enjoyment of glory at the revelation of Jesus Christ (ver.
   7).

   Such engrossing interest in the storms that were to herald the final
   bliss was characteristic of the apocalyptic prophets particularly (see
   Daniel ix. 24 f.), and Peter has them specially in mind as he says that
   they pondered reflectively when or how this consummation was to come
   (literally, what was to be the time and the character of the time).
   Would it be soon? What would be the signs of the time? This was not
   revealed to them--a significant hint, for Peter himself never enters
   into details about the future in this epistle; he had learned his
   lesson (Acts i. 7) and is content to be sure that the end is near for
   Christians, 12 without offering prophetic calculations (iv. 7, v. 6,
   etc.). All that was revealed to these prophets (to Daniel, for example,
   in Daniel xii. 6, 7) was that their message was for the far future, not
   for themselves (though they would fain have shared in the promised
   consummation of grace), but for you (Peter is speaking from the
   standpoint of Christians). What the apostle has in view is the
   apocalyptic confession of Enoch (i. 2), as he predicts the experiences
   of the righteous on the day of tribulation which inaugurates the final
   intervention of God; I Enoch saw the vision of the Holy One in the
   heavens . . . which the angels showed me . . . and I understood it not
   for this generation but for one afar off.' The Greek term for
   understood' is dienoounto, and Dr. Rendel Harris shows how this could
   have been changed into the common reading diekonoun by an ordinary
   palaeographical error on the part of a scribe. Originally Peter wrote
   that the prophets got this intelligence or understood this (i.e. their
   vision of the coming grace), just as in ver. 13 he tells Christians to
   make their understanding (mind is the noun from this verb) a power in
   life, they who understood God's grace so much better than these
   prophets of the past.

   All this is designed to encourage the readers. The salvation in store
   for them has been the absorbing theme of inspired prophets in the past;
   also, they, are better off than the prophets, for (a) experience is
   higher than anticipation, and (b) even the prophets were limited in
   their visions; to Christians alone the full truth of God's grace in
   Christ has now been disclosed. The preaching of the gospel is through
   the holy Spirit (as in Heb. ii. 4), who was sent from heaven (an
   allusion to Acts ii. 1 f., 32-33) to inspire conviction. The Spirit
   inspired prophets to predict the gospel, and the same Spirit now in the
   Christian order (sent from heaven) is the dynamic of the gospel
   mission.

   The very angels are interested in this salvation, they long to get a
   glimpse of it! The verb is used of the four arch-angels in Enoch (ix.
   1) looking down upon the wickedness of the earth before the Flood, but
   the sense here is the same as in John xx. 5 (glance). Peter thus closes
   the paragraph with a rapid, picturesque touch, alluding to the
   widespread belief in the early church that the saving purpose of God
   was a fascinating spectacle for the inhabitants of the celestial world.
   The background of the allusion is the same as in Ephesians iii. 9, 10.

   Two paragraphs follow (i. 13-21, i. 22-ii. 10) on the moral
   responsibilities of this Christian position, but each ends by stressing
   the spiritual resources that lie behind and below the duties. The first
   paragraph handles the ethical obligations generally.

   13    Brace up your minds, then, keep cool, and put your hope for good
   and all in the grace that is coming to you at the revelation of Jesus
   Christ. ^14 Be obedient children, instead of moulding yourselves to the
   passions that once ruled the days of your ignorance; ^15 as He who
   called you is holy, so you must be holy too in all your conduct--^16
   for it is written, You shall be holy because I am holy. ^17 And as you
   call upon a Father who judges everyone impartially by what he has done,
   be reverent in your conduct while you sojourn here below; ^18 you know
   it was not by perishable silver or gold that you were ransomed from the
   futile traditions of your, past, ^19 but by the precious blood of
   Christ, a lamb unblemished and unstained. ^20 He was predestined before
   the foundation of the world, and has appeared at the end of the ages
   for your sake; ^21 it is by him that you believe in God who raised him
   from the dead and gave him glory; and thus your faith means hope in
   God.

   13

   Such a prospect should rally you. Brace up your minds, instead of
   allowing yourselves to become depressed or panic-stricken by the hard
   times through which you are passing (ver. 6). Brace, literally, is gird
   up the loins'--a metaphor common in the ancient world, where loose and
   flowing garments were tucked up and belted, to facilitate action and
   movement (Luke xii. 35; Ephesians vi. 14). No vague, dreamy thoughts
   will do, no habit of letting the mind be dominated by appearances,
   which often contradict the Christian hope. Realize the great, sure
   future before you; your religious position requires mental energy and
   resolution, in place of any slackness. Otherwise you may become excited
   and feverish, under the strain. Keep cool (iv. 7, v. 8), your faculties
   all under control, and thus, with calm conviction, put your hope (for
   yours is a life of hope, ver. 3) for good and all (as your one
   resource) in the grace (ver. 10) that is coming to you at the
   approaching revelation of Jesus Christ (ver. 7). Revelation is always
   eschatological in this letter (i. 5, v. 1). In some circles (Didaché x.
   6) the cry was, Let grace come, and let this world pass away.'
   Everything was to be staked upon this future, Peter argued. A man might
   be a member of several cults and try one mystery-religion after
   another, to insure his eternal welfare, but Christians must put their
   hope for good and all (absolutely) in the promise of bliss;
   Christianity was too great to require to be eked out with other aids.

   These words are a bridge between i. 3-12 and the following counsel upon
   the moral obligations and conditions of the Christian hope. Three
   serious demands are laid upon the conscience: Christians must resemble
   God in His nature (14-16), they must fear the last judgment (17), and
   they 14 must remember the cost of their redemption (18-21). Be obedient
   (i. 2) children of the God to whom you owe your life (i. 3), instead of
   moulding yourselves (the word used by Paul in Romans xii. 2) to the
   passions (ii. 11, iv. 2) that once ruled the days of your ignorance--a
   term specially applicable to Christians who had been born and bred in
   the religious ignorance of the true God which was a characteristic of
   paganism (so Acts xvii. 30; Ephesians iv. 17, 18). The primitive
   Christians used this language about pagans, as Muhammad called the ages
   before Islam, The Times of Ignorance.

   15

   (a) The first motive is put in O.T. language (e.g. Leviticus xix. 2);
   Christians as God's people (ii. 10) must be holy like God Himself, as
   their ancestors (see iii. 5, 6) had been enjoined in the sacred book.
   Holiness, deepest of all words that defy definition' (Lord Morley),
   implies here as elsewhere a renunciation of what is worldly and
   corrupting, in the strength of some higher conception of God. You shall
   be holy because I am holy now means for Christians the call to
   reproduce what is the real nature of God, His goodness, justice, and
   moral purity. Moral purity of this kind was sought in some of the
   contemporary cults like Orphism, with which Peter's readers were
   familiar; there were contemporary efforts in pagan religion to secure
   communion with the gods and immortality by means of a holy life. But
   Peter simply recalls and broadens the O.T. saying, which for his
   readers had no associations of merely negative and ritual purity. One
   specific form of this imitation is mentioned later (ii. 21). Here the
   injunction is general; as He who called you (ii. 9)16 is holy, so you
   must be holy too.

   (b) Further, stand in awe of the judgment of God; Christianity is no
   sentimental religion of the Father, which encourages presumption and
   moral carelessness. Il est bien nostre seul et unique protecteur,' says
   Montaigne in his essay on prayer (Essais, i. 56), et peult toutes
   choses á nous ayder: mais encores qu'il daigne nous honnorer de cette
   doulce alliance paternelle, it est pourtante autant juste, comme il est
   bon et comme it est puissante.'17 You call upon (invoke) a Father
   (perhaps a reminiscence of O.T. words like Jeremiah iii. 19 or Psalm
   lxxxix. 26, but certainly an allusion to the Lord's Prayer) who judges
   (at the end, iv. 5, 17) everyone impartially (only here in N.T.) by
   what he has done (not by his pious language or warm emotions). God your
   Father will take strict, impartial account of your behaviour in His
   household, while you sojourn (ii. 11) here below. So be reverent (ii.
   17), stand in awe of Him; God's judgment will soon begin with us (iv.
   17), and it will be searching, unbiassed, severe.

   18

   Finally, (c), remember the cost of your redemption from the futile
   traditions of your past. Futility' and ignorance' were two standing
   epithets for paganism (see Ephesians iv. 17 and above on ver. 14),
   futile' especially for idolatry (Acts xiv. 15, etc.). Their ancestral
   customs and national traditions were futile, because they led to
   nothing; such religious and patriotic rites did not avail to bring them
   near to God (iii. 18), as Christ alone could do and had done. In
   another sense, of course, they were far from weak; age-long customs
   acquire a sanctity and binding force, which in the mission-field have
   always been found an obstacle. Why should we give up our fathers'
   religion? The pull of these old habits is referred to in iv. 3, 4. But
   they were futile because they yielded no sure hope in God, and from
   them these Asiatic Christians had to be emancipated.

   19

   As usual, Peter does not explain how Christ's sacrifice availed to free
   men; with some words of Isaiah lii. 3 in his mind, he appeals to the
   heart of his friends--you know it was not by perishable silver or gold
   that you were ransomed, but by the precious blood of Christ as a
   sacrifice, a lamb unblemished and unstained. This may be an allusion to
   the passover lamb of Exodus xii. 13, sacrificed when the People were
   emancipated from the slave-pen of Egypt; it implies at anyrate that the
   efficacy of Christ's sacrifice lay in his sinlessness, and that it
   results in a moral emancipation. To be ransomed was to be set free, and
   in the world of that day certain forms of manumission were carried out
   in temples, the formal ceremony concluding with a sacrifice; thus the
   connexion of slaves' emancipation with a sacrificial act would be
   intelligible to these Asiatics.

   The fundamental idea in all such references to emancipation as ransom
   in the N.T. is not from what but for what one is ransomed, not to whom
   the price was paid (for ransomed is equivalent to bought) but to whom
   one now belongs. The Ransomer owns those whom he has emancipated at the
   cost of his own life; remember that, Peter urges--you belong to
   Another, after what he has done for you (the argument of ii. 24), by a
   sacrifice which has an eternal value; it is the sacrifice of One who is
   not merely sinless but outside the perishable, transient order of
   things. This conception emerges in Hebrews ix. 14, where Christ's
   sacrifice is made in the spirit of the eternal. Peter does not develop
   the idea, 20 but proceeds to describe Christ in his own way as above
   the order of time and the universe, predestined (he had said this
   before, in Acts ii. 23) to his vocation as Redeemer before the
   foundation of the world. In i. 2 (as in Ephesians i. 4) Christians are
   predestined, but here the conception of a personal pre-existence is
   extended to the personality of Christ. The history of the world is
   determined by a redeeming purpose of God from all eternity, a purpose
   which was inaugurated when Christ appeared (so 1 Timothy iii. 16) at
   the end of the ages (so 1 Corinthians x. 11, Hebrews i. 2, etc.) for
   your sake, and which is soon to be completed (ver. 13). This thought of
   Christ's pre-existence expresses the religious 'sense of his absolute
   value. It was natural for readers familiar with the book of Enoch and
   its messianic theology; in Enoch (xlviii.) the messianic Son of man'
   was chosen and hidden before God, before the creation of the world, and
   the wisdom of the Lord of spirits hath revealed him to the holy and
   righteous; for he hath preserved the lot of the righteous' (so lxii.
   7), i.e. he has been revealed through prophecy and has upheld the
   faithful, till he becomes visible at the final judgment--a rough
   outline of what Peter has been saying about Christ.

   21

   The appearance of Christ on earth evokes faith, a faith that expects
   the final intervention before long; it is by him that you believe (by
   the faith he inspires,' as Peter had already said, Acts iii. 16) in
   God, the God who raised him from the dead and gave him glory (ver. 11);
   and thus your faith means hope in God (ver. 3). Faith is determined by
   revelation, by the character of the God who appeals for it, here by God
   who raised Jesus from the dead. As the resurrection of Christ is the
   basis of hope for Christians, their faith becomes confident and hopeful
   of a similar triumph over death for themselves (the thought of Paul in
   Romans viii. 11, 13 f.). Thus the paragraph closes as it started, with
   hope (ver. 13). To Christians of pagan birth their new faith meant hope
   pre-eminently (see 1 Thessalonians iv. 13, Ephesians ii. 12); in their
   old religions the outlook upon the state after death had been hopeless;
   a yearning for the assurance of immortality throbbed in some of the
   mystery-cults of the age, but, if Peter was conscious of them, he
   evidently felt that their creeds were not worth mentioning beside the
   full and clear revelation of hope in Christian faith.

   Only, this hope is not a selfish possession; it involves brotherly love
   and mutual affection in the members of the community. The general moral
   obligations of the faith have been already outlined; now, after the
   slight digression in 19-21, the apostle goes forward to the special
   obligations of community-life among Christians (i. 22 f.). The first
   movement of this long paragraph (i. 22-ii. 10) is in i. 22-li. 1.

   22    Now that your obedience to the Truth has purified your souls for
   a brotherly love that is sincere, love one another heartily and
   steadily. ^23 You are born anew of immortal, not of mortal seed, by the
   living, lasting word of God; ^24 for

   All flesh is like the grass,

   and all its glory like the flower of grass:

   the grass withers

   and the flower fades,

   ^25 but the word of the Lord lasts for ever--

   ii.1

   and that is the word of the gospel for you. So off with all malice, all
   guile and insincerity and envy and slander of every kind!

   22

   Peter had once spoken about God cleansing the hearts 22 of pagans by
   faith (Acts xv. 9). Here he uses another ritual term (like James iv. 8)
   in a metaphorical sense; now that (since your baptism--see iii. 21)
   your obedience (i. 2) to the Truth (instead of futile traditions) has
   purified your souls (the other side of the holiness mentioned in ver.
   15) for a brotherly love (ii. 17)that is sincere, love one another
   heartily and steadily (not in any formal or perfunctory or casual way
   not simply when it is easy or when you feel in the mood, but
   persistently and patiently). Sincere is emphatic; the object of the
   Truth (i.e. the revealed will of the true God, the true Religion--a
   phrase which came naturally to an apocalypist, as in Daniel viii. 13)
   is a true affection, devoid of pretence. Paul has twice to give the
   same warning about Christian love (Romans xii. 9; 2 Corinthians vi. 6),
   where he uses the same term as here, literally devoid of hypocrisy,
   hypocrisy meaning playing a part,' the word rendered insincerity in ii.
   1.

   There is an apt illustration of the thought and term in Marcus Aurelius
   (xi. i8), who observes, A friendly disposition is invincible, if it be
   genuine and not an affected smile or playing a part (hypocrisis).'
   Brotherly love or philadelphia was no longer mere affection for one's
   blood brothers or even for fellow-members of one's nation, as Greeks
   and Jews interpreted it, but the tie which bound Christians to
   Christians as members of the brotherhood for which Christ had died,
   though by birth they might belong to different families and nations,
   the tie that drew them together and made them join hands in a warm,
   religious fellowship. Such an affection, Peter implies, does not spring
   up naturally in human nature; it is not a sensuous affection, but flows
   from the heart (heartily), from souls purified by a spiritual process,
   otherwise it may become a short-lived impulse or dry up into a formal
   expression. Even in Christians it requires to be disciplined and
   trained. This conception recurs elsewhere in the N.T., e.g. in James i.
   20 f. (where the royal law of love has to be implanted in the soul), in
   1 Timothy i. 5 (the aim of the Christian discipline is the love that
   springs from a pure heart, from a good conscience, and, from a sincere
   faith'), and in 1 John iv. 7 and v. 1 (where brotherly love is the
   outcome of love to God), above all in John xvii. 17 f. (where the
   consecration of life by the Truth leads to brotherly unity).

   Love must be taken as seriously as hope, Peter means. In Christian
   circles it is constantly spoiled by spitefulness, self-seeking,
   censoriousness, fickleness, and formality; vital love of this new and
   exacting kind grows in a regenerated life, and the practice of it
   requires a realization of the re-generating power of God. Brotherly
   love is a moral task, but it is also an endowment. This is the point of
   the connexion between ver. 22 and what follows. Christian brotherly
   love, which may be defined as devotion to the ends of God in human
   personality, comes from the new relation to God in which He has placed
   us. Peter again, as in 19-21, recalls the roots as he appeals for the
   fruits of Christian living. 23 Love one another as you are born anew
   (so i. 3). Born by the Word of the truth, another writer put it (James
   i. 18); but Peter as usual prefers to use some O.T. lines, quoting
   Isaiah xl. 6, 7, to prove that God's word was their vital force in
   living the Christian life, the seed to which they owed their being.
   Seed was appropriate, as it meant not only human seed but the seed of
   plant life. The seed is the word of God,' said Jesus in his parable
   (Luke viii. 11) of plant-life; the further idea of a divine word as
   reproductive in human life was already familiar in the Stoic notion of
   the Logos spermatikos or seminal reason which pervaded existence, but
   this Christian application is different. A closer parallel is the use
   of sown' as founded ' in a passage like Enoch lxii. 8 (the congregation
   of the elect and holy shall be sown'), where the founding of the
   community is due to the revelation of messiah. Here the gospel word of
   God is the saving revelation of Christ who has appeared (ver. 20), 24
   and the citation is made in order to contrast the living, lasting word
   of God with mortal seed which can only 25 produce transient life. You
   are born of immortal seed, i.e. you owe your being as Christians to the
   revelation of the living God in Christ incarnate and risen. Such is
   your regenerate nature, a nature not only of faith and hope but of
   love, it is implied. Let its instincts have full play. ii. Off with
   (see Colossians iii. 8) 1 all habits and tempers that thwart brotherly
   love in your fellowship! The regenerate nature has instincts of love,
   but it demands a moral effort; old inconsistent ways of life have to be
   thrown aside (Ephesians iv. 22), all manner of malice (ill-feeling,
   shown in word or deed), guile (pretence or underhand dealing, but
   specially deceitful speech--see on ii. 22, iii. 10), insincerity
   (saying what one does not really mean--a common vice of the religious
   world, where pious language may be used by those who hide their true
   feelings; see i. 22), envy (almost the only vice which is practicable
   at all times and in every place,' Johnson) and slander of every kind;
   Christians might be guilty of slander as well as exposed to it (ii. 12,
   iii. 16).

   It is not enough to avoid or discard what is inconsistent; a taste for
   the new life must be developed (2-3, 4-5). Peter then describes again
   the strong position of Christians in the purpose of God, the honour. of
   this new life and its responsibilities (6-10).

   2    Like newly-born children, thirst for the pure, spiritual milk to
   make you grow up to salvation. ^3 You have had a taste of the kindness
   of the Lord: ^4 come to him then--come to that living Stone which men
   have rejected and God holds choice and precious, come and, ^5 like
   living stones yourselves, be built into a spiritual house, to form a
   consecrated priesthood for the offering of those spiritual sacrifices
   that are acceptable to God through Jesus Christ.

   2

   Like newly-born children (babes at the breast)--either an indication
   that this part of the homily had been originally addressed to the
   newly-baptized, or a reminder that, however experienced, they were not
   beyond the need of simple spiritual nourishment for the regenerate
   life, that they might grow up to salvation (the other side of i. 5).
   This is a striking and original expression; the present attitude of
   Christians is more than mere waiting for the imminent salvation (i. 9),
   it is an active faith and love for the Lord which here and now brings
   them into vital contact with him. Thirst for (as the one food you
   appreciate) the pure (unadulterated) spiritual milk, i.e. for what
   faith receives from the living Lord. Peter does not contrast milk with
   solid food, as Paul had done in 1 Corinthians iii. 2 (see Hebrews v. 12
   f.); he describes it as spiritual, using, like Paul (in Romans xii. 1),
   a Greek term, logikon, which in contemporary religious language had
   acquired this sense. The mistaken idea that there was a play on the
   resemblance between it and logos (Word) led to the rendering milk of
   the Word,' as though Christ were the content of Scripture or the Word.
   By a quaint custom in the later church the newly-baptized were
   sometimes given milk and honey as a symbol of their birth into God's
   household--a practice for which there was apparently a precedent in the
   cults; the initiated in some Phrygian rites received milk, to symbolize
   their new birth to life eternal. The prevalence of such rites would
   lend point to Peter's figure. But what is in his mind is 3 a
   reminiscence of Psalm xxxiv. 8: You have had a taste of the kindness of
   the Lord. Here kindness is the same as goodness in Titus iii. 4. Any
   mention of the Lord in the O.T. naturally suggested the divine Christ
   to an early Christian, and this sent Peter off again (as at i. 19) to
   expatiate upon the vital value of Christ to Christians. The metaphor is
   abruptly changed, from child-life to architecture, but there is no
   change in the thought: all depends upon Christians availing themselves
   of what God has provided in Christ. In the Greek Bible known to Peter
   and his friends, the fifth verse of the 34th Psalm (they looked to
   him') was mistranslated Come to him.' Peter quotes this, and turns to
   the figure of the Stone and the Building, which he had heard Jesus use
   (Mark xii. 10, 11) 4and which he had himself already applied to the
   Lord (Acts iv. 11). Come to him, to that living Stone, which had been
   flung aside as useless by men like the Jewish authorities; they had, by
   a tragic miscalculation, rejected the messianic Stone as of no value
   for the fabric of God's House, but in the resurrection God had shown
   his true value for the People, proving him choice and precious.

   These words echo another passage, from Isaiah, which he is about to
   quote. 5 But, before developing this thought, he appeals for a vitally
   close fellowship with the Lord; come and, like living stones
   yourselves, be built into a spiritual house (iv. 17). Spiritual is
   equivalent to not made with hands,' and there may be an allusion to the
   Latin vivus in the adjective living, for vivus, when applied to a
   stone, meant a stone that had not been worked by hand. Hebrew thought
   also associated the building of a house with a family, as in 1 Samuel
   ii. 35, where to build up a sure house for David' was to ensure a
   succession of children; indeed the Targum on Psalm cxviii. 22 reads,
   the youth which the builders rejected.' But Peter does not elaborate
   the figure of the church as a building, as Paul had done; he continues:
   to form a consecrated priesthood (ver. 9) for the offering of those
   spiritual sacrifices (thank-offerings, of course, not atoning for sins)
   that are acceptable (because spiritual) to God through Jesus Christ. A
   priesthood and sacrifices were the normal features of any ancient
   religious house; the former is spiritualized as usual to mean the
   Christian body of members, but Peter does not explain what the
   sacrifices are; this is done in Romans xii. 1, Philippians ii. 17, iv.
   18, and Hebrews xiii. 15, 16: What made sacrifices like praise and
   beneficence and brotherly love acceptable was that they were inspired
   and prompted by Jesus Christ. Nothing is said about sacrifice in
   connexion with the eucharist nor of the martyr's death as a sacrifice
   (Martyrdom of Polykarp, xiv.); these lay beyond the horizon of the
   apostle.

   He now comes back to Christ (6-10) as the Stone, before finishing his
   glowing outline of God's goodness to Christians.

   6     For thus it stands in the scripture:

   Here I lay a Stone in Sion,

   a choice, a precious cornerstone:

   he who believes in him will never be disappointed.

   ^7 Now you believe, you hold him precious,' but as for the
   unbelieving--

   the very stone the builders rejected

   is now the cornerstone,

   ^8 a stone over which men stumble and a rock of offence; they stumble
   over it in their disobedience to God's word. Such is their appointed
   doom. ^9 But you are the elect race, the royal priesthood, the
   consecrated nation, the People who belong to Him, that you may proclaim
   the wondrous deeds of Him who has called you from darkness to his
   wonderful light--^10 you who once were no people and now are God's
   people, you who once were unpitied and now are pitied.

   6

   The scripture is (a) Isaiah xxviii. 16; but two other Stone-passages
   are in his mind, (b) the 118th Psalm, in ver. 7, and (c) Isaiah viii.
   14, in ver. 8. In Luke xx. 17 f. (b) and (c) are fused, in Romans ix.
   33 (a) and (c). Probably the references are to some book of proof-texts
   from the O.T., arranged topically for the sake of convenience. The
   first passage combines the ideas of Christ's value and of human faith
   in him; he never breaks down nor gives way; there is no disappointment
   in store for the faith of the church that rests upon his divine
   authority. This is quoted freely from the LXX and without any reference
   to its original historical 7 meaning; what matters is the conclusion,
   now you believe, you hold him precious' (taking God's view, ver. 4),
   i.e. you accept Christ as messiah, as the foundation of all your hopes,
   as the divine revelation upon whom everything depends. But not so all.
   There are unbelieving people in the world. Men come across Christ; some
   find and make him the stay and support of life, while others trip over
   him and collapse. To some he is, as the psalm sings, the cornerstone of
   their Sion or sanctuary, the foundation-stone at the angle of the
   building which determines the whole structure; to others he is in their
   way. 8And this is the sense of the second Isaiah clause, a stone over
   which men stumble and a rock of offence. If men to-day, like Ephraim
   and Judah of old, continue to ignore God's goodness and strength, He
   will prove disastrous to them. The figure is not quite clear; the Stone
   may be thought of as one and the same, the passer-by tripping over the
   corner-stone of the building which juts out on the road, or two
   different stones may be in the apostle's view. But the idea is plain:
   the presence of Christ in the world elicits faith and unbelief. The
   belief of Christians is thrown into relief against a background of
   repudiation on the part of others. These others include Jews, but they
   are not confined to Jews. Peter does not enter into any explanation of
   the offence of the cross, as Paul does; we are not told why some do not
   believe in Christ, but merely that they stumble over the Stone in their
   fatal (see iv. 17, iii. 1) disobedience to God's word (i.e. to the
   gospel message and revelation of Christ). Such (i.e. such a collapse)
   is their appointed doom, as fixed as the blessed outcome of faith
   (never disappointed) for Christians. A similar problem is discussed by
   Paul in Romans ix.-xi., in connexion with the destiny of unbelieving
   Israel, who have rejected Christ. But Peter is not thinking of Israel
   specially. He does not mean that a special number of men were
   predestined to unbelief and doom, for the unbelieving (ver. 7) merely
   means any who disbelieve.' On the other hand, he regards unbelief no
   less than belief as falling under the will of God.

   From this stern reminder that the attitude of men towards Christ is
   critical and decisive, and that the world-order is a grave matter for
   the disobedient 9(ii. 23), he turns to describe Christians in a mosaic
   of O.T. phrases drawn from Isaiah, Exodus, and Hosea, transferring tlA
   most honourable predicates of Israel to the Christian church as the
   true heir of all the divine promises. Some of these predicates had been
   already combined in Judaism, e.g. in the book of Jubilees (xvi. 18),
   where it is foretold that Israel should be for the Lord a people who
   belong to him above all nations, a royal priesthood, and a consecrated
   nation. The elect race is from Isaiah xliii. 20, the royal or kingly
   priesthood and the consecrated (i. 2) nation are from Exodus xix. 6;
   the former phrase is the only allusion to the King or the Kingdom in
   the epistle, terms which Peter perhaps avoided on account of their
   liability to be misconstrued (see on iv. 15). The People who belong to
   Him is a fusion of Exodus xix. 5 and Malachi iii. 17; it refers to the
   present possession of the church by God as His very own. The object of
   all this honour and privilege is that you may proclaim (from Isaiah
   xlii. 12) the wondrous deeds (from Isaiah xliii. 21) of Him who has
   called you (i. 15) from darkness to his wonderful light. The term
   rendered wondrous deeds is almost the same in meaning as the triumphs
   of God in Acts ii. 11; in current Greek it denoted the miraculous or
   wonderful deeds of a god, for which. he was to be praised, his
   manifestations of power. Darkness is often the term for the paganism
   from which converts have been emancipated (see Colossians i. 13,
   Ephesians v. 8). Christians are the People of God, not that they may
   exult over the Jews who have been superseded, but that they may exhibit
   the marvellous goodness of God and by their dutiful life (see, e.g.,
   ii. 12) answer His purposes in the world. This is really the climax of
   the passage: Such is your destiny. 10But Peter, like Paul (Romans ix.
   25), remembers some apt words from Hosea (ii. 3, 25), which he too
   transfers boldly to pagan converts. Pitied echoes God's great mercy in
   i. 3.

   The transference of the religious consciousness from the city or state
   to a religious society had been already initiated in cults like those
   of Isis and Mithras, which were international or rather non-national in
   scope. For this and other reasons they were suspected by the Romans,
   either as immoral (which was sometimes true, of Isis at anyrate) or as
   harbouring anti-social and unpatriotic tendencies. Both criticisms were
   levelled against Christianity as one of these new Oriental fellowships,
   and both now engage the attention of the apostle, who issues a series
   of counsels (ii. 11-iii. 12) on the practical duty of proclaiming the
   wondrous deeds of their God, counsels which close with a renewed
   emphasis upon (iv. 8 f.) the brotherly love which had been already
   urged in i. 22-ii. 2. The first is an admonition (11-12) on how the
   consecrated nation (ver. 9) was to behave in the midst of a pagan
   society saturated with vice and hostile to the Christian faith.

   11    Beloved, as sojourners and exiles I appeal to you to abstain from
   the passions of the flesh that wage war upon the soul. ^12 Conduct
   yourselves properly before pagans; so that for all their slander of you
   as bad characters, they may come to glorify God when you are put upon
   your trial, by what they see of your good deeds.

   11

   The first time Peter speaks in his own person, he affectionately calls
   his readers beloved (see iv. 12). What was once said of the Jewish
   nation is now said of the Christian church; they are appealed to as
   sojourners and exiles on earth (the thought of i. 1 and 17) whose real
   interests are elsewhere. The classical expression of this other-worldly
   consciousness occurs in the Epistle to Diognetus (v.): they live in
   their own countries, but as sojourners . . . every foreign country is a
   fatherland to them, and every fatherland is foreign.' Christians are
   citizens of Heaven, and here only for a time. All the more reason,
   therefore, to hold aloof from their surroundings. Abstain from the
   passions (iv. 2-4) of the flesh that wage war upon (James iv. 1) the
   soul(the self, the true personality). Both metaphors are combined in
   Marcus Aurelius, ii. 17: Life is a warfare and a foreign sojourn.' And
   the call to abjure such passions was common in Greek ethics, e.g.
   Plato, Phaedo, 83: the soul of the true philosopher abstains as far as
   possible from pleasures and passions.'

   One good of this moral discipline is that it forms an effective 12
   reply to the pagan slander of Christians as bad characters (so iv. 15).
   Among the nuisances and abuses punished during Nero's reign, at Rome,
   was the religion of Christians,' says Suetonius (Life of Nero, xvi.), a
   class of men belonging to a new and mischievous superstition' (where
   the Latin term maleficus rendered mischievous' answers to the Greek
   term kakopoios used here by Peter). It is a vague term to express the
   ordinary pagan antipathy to Christians as a pest to society. Live down
   these hateful slanders and insinuations; says Peter (so in iii. 16), by
   behaving yourselves properly, i.e. leading an honest, upright life
   (Hebrews xiii. 18--similar phrase), so that your accusers may come to
   glorify God, i.e. to own your God, who inspires such innocent, moral
   lives, by what they see (iii. 2) of your good works. This refers to the
   scrutiny at a Roman cognitio or preliminary cross-examination of
   accused persons, which the magistrate held, when the charges were
   considered and evidence sought for the case. The apostle confidently
   hopes that the charges will break down, perhaps even that the accusers
   will be converted (if this be the meaning of glorify God, as in Matthew
   v. 16). When you are put upon your trial is literally on the [a] day of
   visitation,' a phrase used in Isaiah x. 3 of God visiting men in
   judgment. But Peter uses it for his own purpose, to mean not God's
   trial of them (i.e. some crisis which will open their eyes to your
   innocence), but their trial of you as supposed wrongdoers, when they
   inspect your record or investigate your conduct.

   No provocation must lead to rebellion against the authorities (iv. 15);
   a law-abiding, honest life is your duty (13-17). Such is the general
   principle laid down in these verses.

   13    Submit for the Lord's sake to any human authority; submit to the
   emperor as supreme, ^14 and to governors as deputed by him for the
   punishment of wrongdoers and the encouragement of honest people--^15
   for it is the will of God that by your honest lives you should silence
   the ignorant charges of foolish persons. ^16 Live like free men, only
   do not make your freedom a pretext for misconduct; live like servants
   of God. ^17 Do honour to all, love the brotherhood, reverence God,
   honour the emperor.

   13

   In vindicating Christian freedom against the Law, Paul had to issue a
   similar warning against antinomian excesses (Galatians v. 13); the
   freedom of Christians was not self-indulgence or any escape from moral
   restraints. But Peter never mentions the Law. His readers had no such
   problem. The experience of Christian freedom was a temptation to them,
   but in a different direction. Their danger was to become restive and
   insubordinate, as though the civil and social order of things had no
   claim upon them, particularly as it often interfered wantonly with
   their religion. They belonged to God's People; they owned allegiance to
   Him alone; they were soon to be released from the present, distressful
   order of things on earth. Why should they pay respect to pagan
   institutions? Evidently anarchical and radical tendencies were abroad,
   fostered by the very consciousness of Christian liberty and hope. In a
   province like Asia, specially sensitive to loyalty, and with a
   government intensely suspicious of any secret movements which might
   cloak political sedition under religious pretexts, such high-flying
   notions would be compromising and dangerous, Peter felt. Hence, like
   Paul (Romans xiii. 1), he bids his readers submit for the Lord's sake
   (either because Jesus told you so, when he said, Render to Caesar the
   things that are Caesar's,' or out of loyalty to him, not to bring
   discredit upon him) to any human authority (ktisis in the modern sense
   of foundation' or institution), i.e. not simply because you have to,
   but for a religious reason; no spiritual independence absolves you from
   obedience to the authorities of the State, whose 14 functions are to
   maintain the moral order of society. Submit to the emperor (basileus,
   the Caesar's title among Greeks and Orientals) as supreme, and to your
   provincial (Mark xiii. 9) governors, subordinate officials deputed by
   him for the punishment of real wrongdoers (same word as bad characters'
   above) and the encouragement of honest people, i.e. of law-abiding,
   good citizens, who were frequently rewarded with crowns, statues, and
   inscriptions in their honour, by a grateful community. Submit, instead
   of being resentful and rebellious when you are charged with being
   wrongdoers. Never give 15your pagan neighbours a handle for their
   calumnies. For it is the will of God (iii. 17) that by your honest
   lives (politically and morally blameless) you should silence the
   ignorant charges (made in disgraceful ignorance) of foolish persons.
   The pagan ignorance of Christianity was vocal; it expressed itself in
   calumnies and prejudiced criticism, as, for example, in the insinuation
   that the Christian kingdom (Acts xvi. 21 f., xvii. 7) was a
   revolutionary movement. There is a touch of righteous indignation in
   Peter's description of these senseless critics. Also a very optimistic
   hope in the idea that such popular outcries will be silenced by the
   mere example of Christian good behaviour. The next two centuries
   dissipated this expectation; the friction between State and Church
   proved to be much more serious than the apostle at this period
   imagined. But his wise concern is to check any compromising outburst of
   insubordination on the part of the Asiatic Christians. 16 Live like
   free men . . . like servants (literally, slaves) of God (a fine
   oxymoron, see 1 Corinthians vii. 22), who requires you to obey the
   authorities (ver. 13). Do not make your freedom a pretext (literally, a
   cloak) for misconduct--the warning of a wise leader who knows how
   fanatical tendencies need to be disciplined. Religious freedom (i. 18)
   must never be made an excuse for moral or social anarchy.

   17

   What Christians are really free and bound to do is now put in four
   terse clauses. Do honour to all, not only to the authorities by loyalty
   and paying taxes, etc., but to all men; human nature is dishonoured by
   being treated as material for one's own advantage (the temptation of
   the strong), or by being flattered (the temptation of the weaker), or
   by any cynical temper. Peter takes it for granted that those to be
   honoured deserve honour, owing to their position or their character and
   capacities. He had himself once learned a lesson on this subject (Acts
   xi. 9). Love the brotherhood (v. 9, only here in N.T., a Jewish-Greek
   term taken over to describe the brotherly union of Christians), is
   already in i. 22. The words of the next two clauses are partly taken
   from the Greek version of Proverbs xxiv. 22, reverence God and the
   king,' but Peter inserts honour before the emperor, thus closing the
   paragraph on the note on which he opened it (ver. 13). Awe or reverence
   is for God alone. The honour is done by obedience. To reverence God is
   the duty of His servants, and it is not incompatible with loyalty to
   the head of the State. Where Christians afterwards felt the strain
   between the two was over the claim of the State to enforce the worship
   of the emperor as an official proof of loyalty, which led to the
   situation reflected in the book of Revelation. But as yet things had
   not gone so far in Asia.

   All Christians were servants or slaves of God. But some were literally
   slaves, who were specially tempted to be restive. Peter now turns to
   them (vers. 18-25), calling them to be patient under bad treatment and
   to give no offence, after the example of Christ.

   18    Servants, be submissive to your masters with perfect respect, not
   simply to those who are kind and reasonable but to the surly as
   well--^19 for it is a merit when from a sense of God one bears the pain
   of unjust suffering. ^20 Where is the credit in standing punishment for
   having done wrong? No, if you stand suffering for having done right,
   that is what God counts a merit. ^21 It is your vocation; for when
   Christ suffered for you, he left you an example, and you must follow
   his footsteps.

   ^22 He committed no sin,

   no guile was ever found upon his lips;

   ^23 he was reviled and made no retort,

   he suffered and never threatened,

   but left everything to Him who judges justly; ^24 he bore our sins in
   his own body on the gibbet, that we might break with sin and live for
   righteousness; and by his wounds you have been healed. ^25 You were
   astray like sheep, but you have come back now to the Shepherd and
   Guardian of your souls.

   18

   Peter thinks it possible that pagan husbands may be won over by
   Christian wives (iii. 1), but he does not contemplate the possibility
   of Christian servants converting their masters. All he asks is that
   they be submissive, even under intolerable treatment, with perfect
   respect (no disrespectful behaviour in any circumstances), even to
   masters who were not reasonable (i.e. considerate, unwilling to be
   tyrannical). The term surly means difficult to deal with, harsh.
   Domestic slaves, such as Peter is specially addressing, were at the
   mercy of their masters; they had no protection against bad temper or
   injustice, for they had no rights. As the law did not recognize them as
   persons, they had no means of redress under the existing conditions of
   social life. The master could whip his slave, or brand him, if he
   stole, if he tried to escape; in the last resort, he could crucify him.
   Such severity sometimes led pagan slaves to rebel, and, short of that,
   to be impertinent or to retaliate by pilfering (Titus ii. 10). No
   wonder if Christian slaves were also tempted to resent the degrading
   duties thrust upon them by some masters, or to be refractory under
   unfair treatment, as they reflected that they were equal to their
   masters in the sight of God. Sometimes they were better educated than
   their masters. For house-stewards (see iv. 10), librarians, and
   physicians in a large private establishment could be slaves as well as
   the cooks and porters and personal attendants. When they became
   Christians, their new sense of personality might intoxicate them, till
   they forgot to be respectful, when the master proved violent and
   overbearing.

   But if you cannot please these unreasonable masters, you can please
   your God by bearing the pain of unjust suffering; 19 that is a merit,
   it counts with God, wins His approval. The phrase from a sense of God
   is unexampled in the N.T.; it means that one is supported by a steady
   consciousness of God (as for the Lord's sake, ver. 13), perhaps by the
   feeling that God calls the servant to this trial (ver. 21). The term
   for standing punishment includes the narrower sense of being buffeted
   (A.V.), for a sharp blow was the common punishment of a slave who fell
   under his master's displeasure; but the range of penalties was wider
   than whipping or flogging. 20 Where is the credit (only here in N.T.)
   in bending to punishment when you deserve it? Peter means, the credit
   with God. What God counts a merit (Luke vi. 32) is the patient
   endurance of suffering that you do not deserve. This 21 indeed is your
   vocation (iii. 9), for Christ calls you to follow his footsteps, i.e.
   (me aemulari, mein instare vestigiis, Pliny's Epp., vi. 11) the example
   he left you of enduring unmerited pain without resenting it or
   retaliating. When Christ suffered for you, his sufferings were
   redemptive and more (i. 18, 19); they set you an example. This is a
   proof of the honour done by Christianity to the slave-class; Christ was
   actually held up to them as a pattern! Never had such conduct been
   expected from slaves in the ancient world. 22 His innocence is
   described in words freely quoted from Isaiah liii. 9 (the famous
   passage which was taken in the early church as a prediction of Christ);
   guile was particularly applicable to slaves in the empire, where glib,
   deceitful speech was one of their notorious characteristics, adroit
   evasions and excuses being often their sole means of self-protection.
   But no quotation was needed to describe the bearing of Jesus during his
   trial; Peter remembered well what he had seen; he could not forget (see
   v. 1) that the execution of 23 Jesus was a piece of human injustice,
   that it had been preceded by insults, and that the Lord had neither
   resisted nor resented the outrageous, cruel treatment he had received
   from the lips and hands of those who had him in their power. He
   suffered and never threatened vengeance upon his tormentors, but left
   everything to Him who judges justly (whatever the Jewish priests and
   the Roman judge might do in their unjust procedure). So must you, Peter
   implies, hinting (as in Ephesians vi. 9) that unjust masters will yet
   be called to account by God.

   But the parallelism does not hold his mind. He does not suggest that
   Christian slaves by their patience under suffering vicariously atone
   for the sins of those who oppress them. Instinctively he returns to the
   thought, Christ suffered for you (iii. 21), recalling again the
   Isaiah-prophecy; he himself 24 (the word is emphatic) bore our sins in
   his own body on the gibbet (the slave's punishment--a favourite word of
   Peter for the cross, to mark the shame of it, e.g. Acts v. 30, x. 39).
   He bore the consequences of our sins. How, Peter does not explain. It
   is the inimitable element in the sufferings of Christ, interpreted
   again from the O.T.: he went up to the cross to suffer there the
   penalty for our sins, not for his own. This, illustrated in various
   ways from the O.T. (e.g. i. 2 and 19), was the central truth in
   Christianity. Indeed for the moment Peter includes all Christians in
   what he says--he bore our sins that we might break with [die to] sin
   and live for righteousness (a collective term for the life that answers
   to the will of God). It is not the method but the object of the atoning
   death which interests him here as in i. 19. The language echoes that of
   Romans vi. 2, 11, 18, but there is nothing corresponding to Paul's deep
   thought of dying and rising again with Christ; this was as far from the
   mind of Peter as was Paul's conception of the church as the Body of
   Christ.

   The apostle then turns back to the slaves; and by his wounds
   (literally, the weals or scars left by the lash) you have been healed
   (from Isaiah liii. 12), put into a position in which you can live, now
   that sin has been dealt with. The same thought is then put in another
   form; you have Christ to care for you, in this trying life of
   obedience, for while 25 you were astray like sheep (the last three
   words are a reminiscence of Isaiah lii. 6) once, you have come back now
   (like other pagan converts, 1 Thessalonians i. 9, Acts xi. 21) to the
   Shepherd (v. 4) and Guardian of your souls. Guardian or overseer, one
   who exercises oversight and protection, is literally "bishop"; Christ
   is the only bishop known to Peter and his churches. Christ had died for
   them; Christ had left them an example; and, best of all, Christ was
   living to make himself responsible for them as they tried to follow him
   in their own way and trusted themselves to his charge and care.

   From slaves Peter turns to wives and their duties (1-6) in the home.
   Women in the churches he addressed had evidently no need of being
   counselled about behaviour in church, as some of the Corinthian matrons
   had (1 Corinthians xiv. 33-35.

   iii.

   1     In the same way, you wives must be submissive to your I husbands,
   so that even those who will not believe the Word may be won over
   without a word by the behaviour of their wives, ^2 when they see how
   chaste and reverent you are. ^3 You are not to adorn yourselves on the
   outside with braids of hair and ornaments of gold and changes of dress,
   ^4 but inside, in the heart, with the immortal beauty of a gentle and
   modest spirit, which in the sight of God is of rare value. ^5 It was in
   this way long ago that the holy women who hoped in God adorned
   themselves. They were submissive to their husbands. ^6 Thus Sara obeyed
   Abraham by calling him lord.' And you are daughters of Sara if you do
   what is right and yield to no panic.

   The new Christian freedom was apt to make some married women restive as
   well as slaves, especially when their husbands were pagans. Mixed
   marriages started an acute problem in the early church. A Christian
   wife found herself in serious difficulties, domestic and social, when
   her religion ran across the pagan customs of her position as a married
   woman. Tertullian, a century and a half later, wrote vividly on these
   problems, but already they were being felt in Asia Minor, as they had
   been in Corinth (1 Corinthians vii. 10-16). And even when a husband was
   Christian, the wife was tempted to be self-assertive as she felt for
   the first time how her religion invested her with fresh rights as a
   personality.

   1

   Peter's first word is that a similar (in the same way, as ii. 13, 18)
   duty of submissiveness lies upon Christian wives, though he does not
   give the reason of Ephesians v. 22 f. He thinks mainly of Christian
   women married to pagan husbands (Acts xvi. 1, xvii. 4) who will not
   believe the Word (ii. 8), i.e. the Gospel message. Be submissive; not
   simply to keep their affections, but that they may be won over (the
   thought of 1 Corinthians vii. 16, and the very word used in 1
   Corinthians ix. 19 and Matthew xviii. 15) without a word. Your
   uppermost thought should be their conversion, and this will not be
   managed by talking. at them or even to them; quiet submissiveness to
   marital authority will do 2 more than nagging or indeed than any
   argument, when they see (ii. 12) how chaste and reverent you are.
   Chaste because reverent; en phobô here means reverence towards God (i.
   17, ii. 17), not (as in ii. 18) respectfulness and deference.

   The spectacle of chastity must also include gentle modesty (3-4),
   evinced in dress. This is the first sumptuary counsel in Christianity.
   Tertullian afterwards elaborated it into a puritanic protest, in his
   tract on The Dress of Women, against wives taking any care of their
   persons, which, he argued, simply pandered to lust; such attention to
   one's person drew the eyes and sighs of young fellows in the street,
   whereas husbands wanted chastity alone in their wives! Tertullian was
   denouncing fashionable ladies in the Carthaginian church. Peter is also
   addressing ladies of wealth and position in this fine word upon the
   real attractiveness of womanhood, with its emphasis upon character, and
   its protest against showy luxury. He and his readers knew the tradition
   about the origin of such luxuries, the religious tale voiced in the
   Jewish piety of the book of Enoch (viii.) and elsewhere, that the
   fallen angels of Genesis vi. were responsible for introducing them on
   earth; these corrupt spirits (of whom he is to speak later, in iii. 19,
   20) seduced women by revealing the knack of manufacturing bracelets and
   ornaments,' jewels and cosmetics. Even apart from such sinister
   associations of luxury in religious tradition, Greek and Roman ethic
   often frowned upon these meretricious ornaments as pandering to
   immorality. Probably the provinces followed the capital in fashions. 3
   The Roman ladies wore no hats, but there was an elaborate cult of
   hairdressing with jewelled combs and golden fillets (braids of hair and
   ornaments of gold), and lavish expenditure on dress, among women of
   means.

   Peter's word anticipates some warnings by pagan moralists in the next
   century. Thus Plutarch (Conjug. Praecept. 26, 48) explains that for a
   woman to adorn (ho kosmos, the very word used here) herself with gold
   or pearls does not really beautify her; the real beauty of the sex lies
   in whatever invests them with seriousness and decorum and modesty. He
   also makes a point, by the way, which Peter misses, viz. that a husband
   must not expect his wife to avoid pretentious extravagance if she sees
   that he is addicted to it himself; you cannot banish extravagance from
   the women's quarter, when it is unchecked among the men' (e.g. in
   decorating the harness of their horses). Lucian stresses beauty of
   character in women instead of outward adornment (Imagines, 11) with
   similar arguments, and there are other proofs that ethnic critics of
   social morality were alive to what Peter here urges on religious
   grounds. The apostle's thought is that such moral beauty never wears
   out, being immortal (a characteristic touch, absent from 1 Timothy ii.
   9), that simplicity is part and parcel of chastity, so far as husbands
   are concerned, and that 4 Christian wives owe it to God (in the sight
   of God) to think more of their personalities than of external
   adornments to their persons. By a gentle and modest spirit he means a
   spirit that is not self-assertive and aggressive, that will not flaunt
   even its religious opinions; to be modest in this sense is to be free
   not only from indelicacy but from fussiness and complacency.

   Augustine's mother Monica is an apt example of what is intended here.
   We are told in her son's Confessions (ix.) how she endeavoured, and not
   without success, to win over a pagan husband to God, preaching Thee to
   him by her character, whereby Thou didst make her beautiful to her
   husband, reverently loveable and wonderful.'

   5

   Peter now (5, 6) urges the example of O.T. women like Sara, holy women,
   i.e. women who belonged to the Chosen People of God. All Christian
   women are now by their faith daughters of Sara, though they had been
   born in paganism. The O.T. tells us nothing of the dress of such women,
   who probably wore the usual Oriental jewels and robes. But the apostle
   is thinking of the beautiful submissiveness shown by these women who
   hoped in God (i. 21), as an expression of their religion, particularly
   of Sara's. In the tale of 6 Genesis xviii. 12 she was reported to have
   obeyed Abraham by calling him lord.' The instance sounds to us casual,
   but Jewish tradition attached high importance to it as a proof of
   piety; as such it is cited here, the more aptly as in Greek law the
   husband was the lord (kurios) of the wife. The Roman Pliny (Epp., viii.
   5) has no finer praise for a friend's dead wife than to declare that
   for thirty-nine years he lived with her, without any quarrel or
   disagreement. What respectful deference she showed to her husband,
   though she herself deserved the greatest deference!'

   And you are true (Isaiah li. 2) daughters of Sara if you do what is
   right (iv. 19, a general term here for a chaste, submissive, married
   life) and (even when your religious principles expose you to risk)
   yield to no panic or alarm. The last phrase is a reminiscence of
   Proverbs iii. 15, but the idea is entirely different; keep calm and
   courageous, even when a pagan husband threatens you with violence if
   you disobey his orders, e.g. perhaps to throw out a female infant (as
   by law he had the right to do), or to gratify his passions immodestly,
   or to give up some religious conviction. A hint of the limits to
   passive obedience on the part of a Christian wife, but only a hint!
   Peter is laying down general principles for wives as for slaves. He
   does not enter into the question of what a wife's duty should be in
   cases where a pagan husband went too far. Plutarch, in the tract
   already cited (xix.), declared that a married woman ought to have no
   friends except her husband's friends, and that as the chief friends
   were the gods, a wife should reverence and acknowledge the gods owned
   by her husband. Her street-door should be kept shut against novel forms
   of worship and foreign superstitions.' This Peter would not have
   admitted. One lady (the story is told in the Second Apology of Justin
   Martyr) was obliged eventually to divorce her pagan husband for gross
   and repeated licentiousness; whereupon he gave information to the
   authorities and had her arrested as a Christian. This is the kind of
   threat which we can read between the lines of Peter's final word to
   Christian wives who had pagan husbands.

   Now for a brief word to husbands (7). It is assumed that their wives
   were Christians, and it is argued that they have their dues.

   7     In the same way you husbands must be considerate in living with
   your wives, since they are the weaker sex; you must honour them as
   heirs equally with yourselves of the grace of Life, so that your
   prayers may not be hindered.

   7

   Considerate, in the light of 1 Thessalonians iv. 3-5 and 1 Corinthians
   vii. 3-5, includes a reference to sexual rights. Peter brings three
   motives to bear upon Christian husbands. (a) Women are the weaker sex,
   deserving courtesy and chivalrous consideration. The term skeuos, here
   rendered sex,' literally means vessel or instrument (a wife in 1
   Thessalonians iv. 4). (b) The tie is deeper than mere marital
   intercourse; husband and wife in marriage have equal religious
   privileges. You must honour them (a special case of ii. 17) as heirs
   equally with yourselves of the grace of Life, God's grace consisting of
   the Christian life, the only life worthy of the name. Finally (c), so
   that your prayers may not be hindered (literally blocked'--a military
   metaphor). Paul mentions how marital intercourse might be interrupted
   on occasion for the sake of prayer (1 Corinthians vii. 5). Peter twice
   mentions prayer, and in both passages notes the need of its conditions;
   in iv. 7 the need of a collected mind, here perhaps specially the need
   of courtesy and kindness on the part of husbands. God will not hear
   prayers from a home where the man bullies and overbears the woman. The
   reference is not to prayers in church (1 Timothy ii. 8), but to home
   prayers; it is assumed that both man and woman pray, and pray together.
   The previous words tell against the idea that the prayers are those of
   a Christian husband for the conversion of his pagan wife, prayers that
   naturally would be frustrated if they rose from a home where he did not
   treat her kindly.

   Platon en ses loix,' says Montaigne (Essais, i. 56), faict trois sortes
   d'iniurieuse creance des dieux: Qu'il n'y en aye point; Qu'ils ne se
   meslent point de nos affaires [the point met by Peter in v. 7]; Qu'ils
   ne refusent rien à nos voeux, offrandes et sacrifices.' On the third
   error he adds, il fault avoir l'ame nette, au moins en ce moment auquel
   nous le prions, et deschargee de passions vicieuses.' Peter would not
   have limited the demand, however, to, ce moment auquel nous le prions.'
   In view of the later tendency in some circles of the church to regard
   the married life as incompatible with true Christianity, it is
   important to note that Peter's ethic is free from such ascetic
   aberration; he teaches that the ordinary relations of husband and wife
   may be and ought to be regulated for the highest ends of the Christian
   religion.

   Peter has nothing to say about children and their parents, any more
   than about the duties of masters to their slaves. He passes forward to
   offer counsel to the whole body of Christians (iii. 8-iv. 6), beginning
   with a general word (8-i2) which opens out into advice about their
   bearing under trouble.

   8     Lastly, you must all be united, you must have sympathy, 8
   brotherly love, compassion, and humility, ^9 never paying back evil for
   evil, never reviling when you are reviled, but on the contrary
   blessing. For this is your vocation, to bless and to inherit blessing;

   ^10 he who would love Life

   and enjoy good days,

   let him keep his tongue from evil

   and his lips from speaking guile

   ^11 let him shun wrong and do right,

   let him seek peace and make peace his aim.

   ^12 For the eyes of the Lord are on the upright,

   and his ears are open to their cry;

   but the face of the Lord is set against wrongdoers.

   8

   Lastly (the phrase only here in N.T.), you must all be united. The
   Greek word for united (only here in the N.T.) is explained by the use
   in Homer's Iliad (xxii. 260 f.): wolves and sheep cannot have a united
   mind, but are constantly thinking evil against one another'; to be
   united is to be harmonious--no falling out among yourselves--you must
   have sympathy (only here in N.T.), fellow-feeling, brotherly love (i.
   22), compassion (same word as tenderhearted' in Ephesians iv. 32), and
   humility (adjective only here in N.T.; see on v. 5). How needful was
   this appeal, for communities with such differences of social position
   among their members! Domestic slaves and noble ladies, for example,
   summoned to mutual consideration !

   Then comes, as in Romans xii. 17, after the call for humility, a
   prohibition of retaliation which is an echo of Matthew v. 44; 9 never
   paying back evil for evil, never reviling when you are reviled, but on
   the contrary blessing (Bless those who curse you,' Luke vi. 28; being
   reviled, we bless,' 1 Corinthians iv. 12). The thought already is
   including the relation of Christians to the outside world and its
   hostile atmosphere. For this is your vocation (so ii. 21), thus to
   bless and so to inherit blessing from your God, who only hears the
   prayers and undertakes the protection of those who live His life (see
   above, on ver. 7).

   Then follows (10-12) a free quotation from Psalm xxxiv. 12-16, a psalm
   which he has already quoted (in ii. 3); he takes Life, not as earthly
   life (in the psalmist's sense), but in the deeper sense of ver. 7, and
   purposely omits the closing line (to cut off the remembrance of them
   from the earth'). The last line of his citation echoes the thought of
   ii. 23, and it starts the next counsel on the attitude of Christians
   towards their enemies in the outside world (vers. 13 f.).

   13   Yet who will wrong you if you have a passion for goodness? ^14
   Even supposing you have to suffer for the sake of what is right, still
   you are blessed. Have no fear of their threats, do not let that trouble
   you, ^15 but reverence Christ as Lord in your own hearts.

   13

   Wrongdoers? Yet who will (who is likely to) wrong you if you have a
   passion (a strong term, rendered a zest' in Titus ii. 14) for goodness?
   An optimistic comfort! He at once qualifies this naïve idea by adding,
   14 Even supposing you do have to suffer for the sake of what is right
   (as Jesus foretold, Matthew v. 10), still you are blessed by God (ver.
   12). He thus comes nearer to the realities of life. You are certain of
   God's blessing as you maintain your inward reverence and homage for
   Christ as your Lord, instead of allowing yourselves to be intimidated
   into apostasy.' He clinches the argument by using O.T. words (from the
   Greek version of Isaiah viii. 12, 13) which originally meant that
   Isaiah's pious followers were to have no fear such as the other
   panic-stricken Jews felt in the crisis of the Syrian invasion. Peter
   had already quoted (ii. 8) from this chapter. Here he takes the words
   as do not be afraid of your persecutors' threats'; do not let that
   trouble you. Your one concern 15 is to be loyal to your Lord, as the
   pious Jews once had to be loyal to their God.

   This is the negative side of their attitude towards pagan oppressors.
   But occasionally a more positive attitude is demanded (15-16).

   15    Always be ready with a reply for anyone who calls you to account
   for the hope you cherish, but answer gently and with a sense of
   reverence; ^16 see that you have a clean conscience, so that, for all
   their slander of you, these libellers of your good Christian behaviour
   may be ashamed.

   15

   Fearlessness does not mean contemptuous indifference to pagans,
   however; when you are questioned informally or interrogated by a
   magistrate, after arrest, always be ready with a reply. Be ready to
   explain and discuss your religion, not merely to reverence Christ as
   Lord in your own hearts, but to tell others what he means to you. The
   new outlook upon death and immortality often excited curiosity and keen
   interest in those who first heard of the Christian religion, but the
   hope you cherish is probably no more than a synonym for Christianity
   (see ver. 5). Particularly when they were ridiculed about the
   resurrection or called to account in court (ii. 12), there was a risk
   of replying arrogantly and scornfully. Hence Peter bids them not only
   take every chance of clearing away misconceptions of the faith, but
   also to do this gently (no indignation, no supercilious temper) and
   with a sense of reverence (towards God--as i. 17, iii. 2); to bear
   testimony before men tactfully and wisely requires a sense of serious
   responsibility to God.

   To these two conditions of an effective reply, freedom from any
   lecturing tone and a deep consciousness of God's presence, the apostle
   now, adds a third, 16 viz. that Christians must be conscious of their
   own innocence (the thought of ii. 12, and the phrase of iii. 21); any
   misconduct or inconsistent behaviour (i. 15, 16) would spoil their
   reply. The charges which they had to meet were obviously against
   alleged immoral conduct on the part of Christians. Christian is
   literally in Christ,' a phrase coined by Paul and used by him in a
   special and mystical sense. Peter hopes for some good result of such
   testimony; it may make an impression upon the pagan authorities; if
   they are not actually converted (ii. 12), they may at least be ashamed
   of their base and baseless misrepresentations.

   Now, resuming the thought of ver. 14, he shows how the sufferings of
   Christians resemble those of Christ himself, as in ii. 21 f., where
   also the thought of Christ's example passes at once over into the
   larger thought of the redemptive efficacy of his sufferings.

   17    For it is better to suffer for doing right (if that should be the
   will of God) than for doing wrong. ^18 Christ himself died for sins,
   once for all, a just man for unjust men, that he might bring us near to
   God; in the flesh he was put to death but he came to life in the
   Spirit.

   17

   God's will is personified here, like His patience in ver. 20. Suppose
   you are punished or ill-treated unfairly? At anyrate it is not
   arbitrary or accidental, but the will of God for you as once it was for
   Christ himself. 18 He had to suffer death itself to overcome the
   obstacle of the sins that separated us from the presence of God (the
   other side of ii. 25). Peter had already spoken of Christ as The Just
   One' (Acts iii. 14), a messianic title first current in Enoch (see
   xxxviii. 2), and this lies behind the phrase a just man for unjust men.
   But how could he secure this free access to God, if he died? The answer
   is (as in 2 Corinthians xiii. 4) that he came to life in the Spirit as
   a Christ of power.'

   From the turn of thought here, as at ii. 21 f., we might again expect
   that Peter would proceed to show how Christians can vicariously suffer
   for others, as Christ did, by patient endurance of an unjust death. But
   he never does. He goes on to indicate that their suffering has a
   beneficial result upon themselves (iv. 1 f.). Before passing to this,
   however, the mention of the Spirit and the resurrection leads him into
   an aside upon baptism as the manifestation of Christ's risen power in
   the Spirit (19-22). Only as baptized persons can Christians be nerved
   to lead a clean life in the flesh, with the suffering which it may
   entail. What takes place in the flesh, in the present bodily sphere, is
   explained by what takes place in the sphere of the Spirit.

   19    It was in the Spirit that Enoch also went and preached to the
   imprisoned spirits ^20 who had disobeyed at the time when God's
   patience held out during the construction of the ark in the days of
   Noah the ark by which only a few souls, eight in all, were brought
   safely through the water. ^21 Baptism, the counterpart of that, saves
   you to-day (not the mere washing of dirt from the flesh but the prayer
   for a clean conscience before God) by the resurrection of Jesus Christ
   who is at God's right hand--^22 for he went to heaven after angels,
   authorities, and powers celestial had been made subject to him.

   19

   You remember, says, Peter, how it was in the Spirit (i.e. after his
   translation to heaven) that Enoch went down on his famous mission to
   the imprisoned spirits. One tradition placed this commission during
   Enoch's lifetime; Enoch, though a man, acted as God's envoy to the
   angels, and was translated,' says Irenaeus (iv. 16, 2). Peter seems to
   follow the other tradition (so Enoch xii. 1), which gave Enoch the
   honour of being commissioned by God to go down from heaven to announce
   a sentence of final doom to the rebellious angels who had (Genesis vi.
   1-7) demoralized mankind so deeply that the Flood had to be sent. They
   were spirits who had defiled themselves with the flesh (Enoch xv. 4),
   and were punished by being imprisoned at the Flood (Enoch liv. 7 f.) in
   chains eternal (Judas 6). In vain they pled to God for mercy. At His
   bidding Enoch went and preached doom to them (Enoch xii. 3), telling
   them from God that they were to have no peace nor forgiveness of
   sin'--a grim preaching! (Peter never uses this word in the epistle for
   preaching the gospel.) Enoch's activity in the Spirit was very
   different from Christ's: the one went down, on a mission of doom; the
   other went up (ver. 22), triumphing over all that kept men from
   receiving the mercy of God.

   But what interests Peter is baptism, not Enoch. The contrast of flesh
   and Spirit, on which he is dwelling (iii. 18, iv. 1-6), suggests to him
   the supreme case of sin in the flesh being punished, and also the
   contrast between the two missions of Enoch and Christ in the Spirit.
   But his aim is to remind his readers that this activity of Christ in
   the Spirit has inaugurated the sacrament of baptism, which saves the
   spirit from the defilement of the flesh. We moderns have to spend words
   on explaining the mission of Enoch, because the allusion is to a world
   of belief which is remote and misty for us; but the first readers of
   the epistle required no explanation. They were familiar with the story
   of Enoch. The legend was so intelligible that their minds easily passed
   on to the subject of baptism, the reference to the Flood being the
   bridge between it and the mission of Enoch. The Flood! What a terrible
   warning (see Matthew xxiv. 37 f.) of the end of the world! Only eight
   souls saved then! Only a few--and will salvation be easy now (iv. 18)?
   There was an interpretation of Genesis vi. 3 (yet shall man's days be a
   hundred and twenty years') which took it as the declaration of a
   respite before the Flood, and to this 20 Peter refers when he speaks of
   the time when God's patience held out during Noah's construction of the
   ark (Hebrews xi. 7). Then no more than eight souls were brought safely
   through the water. The Greek preposition dia has the same convenient
   vagueness as our through'; the water was at once the means of
   destruction and the agent of salvation. (Hence One rabbinic legend made
   Noah and the others find their way to the ark by wading up to the knees
   through the water which had already begun to rise.) Now 21 there is
   water in our sacrament too, the counterpart to this rescue of Noah and
   his family through water. Paul found a counterpart in the waters of the
   Red Sea (1 Corinthians x. 1-2); Peter chooses what some of these
   Asiatic Christians would appreciate as a local allusion, for early
   traditions connected both Enoch and the ark with Phrygia; indeed the
   city of Apamea on the river Marsyas was identified as the spot at which
   the ark rested, partly owing to its byname of Kibotos (Ark). But Peter
   appeals to far more than local interest. Baptism saves you to-day by
   the resurrection of Jesus Christ; the faith (i. 21) of Christians made
   them participate at baptism in the new life opened by Christ's
   supremacy in the spiritual world. Again, the language would appeal to
   those who knew the contemporary representations of resurrection in
   cults like those of Cybele and Attis, or the aim of the Eleusinian
   mysteries to effect regeneration and salvation from evil through
   baptism (see above, on i. 3). But the thought of Peter is quite
   intelligible in the light of common Christian experience: had Christ
   not risen, there would have been no baptism at all; baptism in the name
   of Jesus Christ meant from the first (Acts ii. 31-41) a recognition of
   his living power to pardon sin and to confer new life.

   In an important parenthesis Peter explains the human side of the
   sacrament. The Greek term (baptisma) still carried its original sense
   of washing (see Ephesians v. 26), but the effect of the sacrament was
   not skin-deep, as we say, not the mere washing or removal of dirt from
   the flesh. Instead of saying that it meant the cleansing of the spirit
   or heart (Hebrews x. 22), Peter defines the inward, essential factor in
   baptism as the prayer (only here in N.T.) for a clean conscience (ver.
   16) before (in presence of, a reverential use of eis in connexion with
   petitions to authority) God. The reference is to the strict ethical
   obligations laid upon catechumens at baptism, perhaps to their solemn
   renunciation of the world. When Pliny cross-examined some Christians in
   Bithynia, about A.D. 112, he found that they bound themselves by an
   oath (sacramento) not to commit theft or robbery or adultery, not to
   break their word, and not to deny having received a deposit when
   demanded'--a practical expression of the clean conscience for which
   Christians at baptism prayed, and to which Peter summoned them for the
   sake of impressing the outside public as well as for their own sake.

   As for the closing words of the paragraph, they allude to the accepted
   belief of the church that the resurrection was 22 followed by the
   ascension (went to heaven), the session at God's right hand (as Peter
   had said long ago, Acts ii. 32-35) and (as he had already mentioned, i.
   12) the despatch of the holy Spirit. It is a picturesque way of
   delineating the supreme honour and authority of Christ. In the book of
   Enoch, Enoch is on a footing with the angels and celestial powers, but
   no more. Christ is superior to angels, authorities, and powers
   celestial (the same enumeration of celestial forces occurs in the
   contemporary Jewish apocalypse of The Ascension of Isaiah, i. 3); this
   supremacy in heaven belongs to the glory (i. 11, 21) he has won through
   death. Paul makes more of this triumph in the spirit-world, but Peter's
   practical interest only touches the belief in order to remind
   Christians how secure they might feel with so exalted and powerful a
   Guardian (ii. 25) over them and theirs. In the flesh Christ had to die,
   his body laden with sins that were ours, not his. But now in the Spirit
   he has a saving ministry for us, who are still in the flesh.

   Note on iii. 19, 20.--The text of ver. 19 as rendered above is ENOKAI
   ENOCh. The common text is ENOKAI, i.e. by or in which (the Spirit), but
   an early copyist dropped ENOCh, owing to their similarity to the
   preceding ENOK, a blunder not uncommon in MSS. This conjecture was
   originally suggested by some English scholars in the eighteenth
   century, made independently by the Dutch scholar Cramer in 1891, and
   put in improved form by Dr. Rendel Harris recently. The ordinary
   reading makes the preaching to the imprisoned spirits the work of
   Christ. Some scholars, it is true, recognize the mission of Enoch in
   iii. 19 even under the traditional text, but 'suppose that Christ acted
   through Enoch. The majority, however, take the words to mean a personal
   mission of Christ. This is sometimes referred to (a) the pre-existent
   Christ who is supposed to have preached in vain to the disobedient
   contemporaries of Noah (now in durance vile as imprisoned spirits for
   their rejection of his warning). More often, though no more
   convincingly, it is assigned to (b) Christ between the crucifixion and
   the resurrection, when, his body lying in the grave, he went in the
   Spirit to preach in Hades, the world of the dead. But to whom? To these
   impenitent contemporaries of Noah, offering them salvation; they were
   examples, good examples, just because they were so bad, of the gospel
   being presented after death to sinful men (an idea which is frequently
   read into iv. 6). This would be an unparalleled application of the
   common early Christian belief that Christ did descend to the lower
   world; the more usual view was that he preached there to the O.T.
   saints or that he released all in Hades, pagans as well as good Jews.
   The idea of disembodied spirits being released from Hades and the devil
   may underlie the allusion to the celestial powers having been made
   subject to Christ (ver. 22); such a result of the conquest of Hades by
   the descent of a divine victor was familiar in ethnic circles already,
   and soon entered into primitive Christianity as well as into
   apocalyptic Judaism. The later Petrine' literature throws no light upon
   the passage. In Second Peter the entire conception is ignored; Noah is
   the herald of righteousness (ii. 5) to his incredulous generation. In
   the Gospel of Peter (x. 39-42), when Christ, supported by two angels
   and followed by the cross, emerges from the grave, a Voice from heaven
   asks, Hast thou preached to them that sleep?' The cross replies, Yes.'
   Those who sleep are the dead, but the reference is deliberately vague.

   Peter now resumes the thought of iii. 17, 18, applying the antithesis
   of flesh and the Spirit to the Christian life. In iii. 19-22 the Spirit
   of Christ has been uppermost; now it is the flesh of the Christian.

   iv.

   1     Well, as Christ has suffered for us in the flesh, let this very
   conviction that he who has suffered in the flesh gets quit of sin, ^2
   nerve you to spend the rest of your time in the flesh for the will of
   God and no longer for human passions.

   1

   We are living in a new era and order of experience, since Christ has
   suffered for us in the flesh. Therefore, he had already said, We must
   break with sin and live for righteousness' (ii. 24); the same thought
   is now put differently, in the form of a general axiom, he who has
   suffered in the flesh gets quit of sin. Some in the later church held
   that martyrdom was an atonement for sin, a second baptism which washed
   the soul clean. But this is not the meaning here; the words about the
   rest of your time in the flesh suggest that capital punishment was not
   expected as the normal outcome of faithfulness.' The idea rather is
   that suffering in the flesh, i.e. in our sensuous nature, has a
   purifying and liberating effect. When Christians undergo suffering for
   conscience' sake, there is a real virtue in it, a blessing (iii. 14)
   from God; it enables them to participate more fully in the Spirit (iv.
   14). This is the deep thought expressed by Paul in his aspiration to
   know Christ in the power of his resurrection and the fellowship of his
   sufferings, with my nature transformed to die as he died (Philippians
   iii. 10), i.e. to sin. Peter puts it thus: people who for the sake of
   maintaining a clean conscience before God endure pain or face trials in
   order to advance his cause, are thereby detached from the grip of sin.
   Self-denial and hardship of this kind contribute a moral and spiritual
   factor of development to our nature (see ii. 20). It proves that they
   are done with sin, sitting loose to the passions and instincts of the
   flesh.

   Experience is the best exegesis of such tense words, particularly the
   experience of those who have lived through similar phases of endurance
   in the Christian cause. Thus when Hus went to the Council of Constance
   in 1414, he wrote a letter to his friends in Bohemia about his
   persecutors in the Roman Church which contains a passage bearing on our
   text. I shall not be led astray by them to the side of evil, though I
   suffer at His will temptations, revilings, imprisonments, and deaths as
   indeed He too suffered, and hath subjected His loved servants to the
   same trials, leaving us an example that we may suffer for His sake and
   our' salvation. If He suffered, being what He was, why should not we?
   In truth, our suffering by His grace is our drawing from sins and our
   deliverance from eternal torments' (The Letters of John Hus, ed.
   Workman and Pope, p. 148). The same profound thought reappears in lines
   which he wrote during his imprisonment (ibid., p. 198):


   The hours pass lightly; for this road

   The Master went, who bore our load.

   This is my passion, naught indeed

   Or slight, if I from sin be freed.

   May Christ the Lord stand by His own,

   Lest Antichrist do gulp us down!

   2

   This is the conviction needed to nerve you for such moral loyalty; it
   is an heroic and trying enterprise. Literally the phrase is, arm
   yourselves with' this conviction. It is a common phrase, which has even
   passed into English. Thus the Roman general Cominius, in Shakespeare's
   play, exhorts the high-spirited Coriolanus to summon up his powers of
   sell-control in order to meet the critical tribunes:

   Arm yourself

   To answer mildly; for they are prepared

   With accusations.

   What matters is not so much the actual trials incurred in a consistent
   obedience to the will of God (ii. 15, iii. 17) as what we think about
   them when we encounter them in the flesh, where human passions still
   make their appeal. These human passions were primarily impurity and
   self-seeking. What impressed the world in the early Christians was
   their charity and their chastity. The former has been already
   mentioned. The latter, for which they were liable to be affronted and
   abused as well as admired, is now discussed.

   With a touch of grave irony, Peter tells them that they have lived long
   enough in pagan vices, and consoles them by predicting the imminent
   judgment of God which will vindicate their staunchness (3-6).

   3     It is quite enough to have done as pagans choose to do, during
   the time gone by! You used to lead lives of sensuality, lust,
   carousing, revelry, dissipation and illicit idolatry, ^4 and it
   astonishes them that you will not plunge with them still into the same
   flood of profligacy. They abuse you, ^5 but they will have to answer
   for that to Him who is prepared to judge the living and the dead (^6
   for this was why the gospel was preached to the dead as well, that
   while they are judged in the flesh as men, they may live as God lives
   in the spirit).

   3

   A sixfold description of the human passions of pagan society.
   Sensuality is indecent, lascivious conduct, wanton and unashamed. Lust
   is sexual passion in immoral forms (same word as that rendered
   passions' in ver. 2). Carousing (only here in N.T.) is immoderate
   indulgence in wine. Revelry means protracted drinking-bouts, often in
   connexion with celebrations of pagan religion, and dissipation refers
   to social drinking-parties (only here in N.T.). All idolatry was
   illicit, from the Christian point of view (i.e. contrary to the law and
   worship of God), but some forms of pagan worship in the Oriental cults
   were mixed up with practices which, from the point of Roman law, were
   abominable and illegal. What you were makes them astonished at what you
   are': this is the thought of ver. 4, 4 where profligacy means a
   reckless waste of time and strength and means. The reverberating effect
   of the participle blasphemountes at the end of the sentence is best
   preserved by taking it as the beginning of the next; from amazement at
   your new strictness they pass to abuse, taunting you as kill-joys and
   morose creatures. But they will have to answer for that abuse (which
   did not stop with words) to Him who is prepared ere long, at the second
   Advent, to judge the living and the dead, i.e. God the Father (i. 17,
   ii. 23), though, in speaking to Cornelius (Acts x. 42), Peter had
   followed the theology of Enoch (lxix. 27) that all judgment was
   entrusted to Christ. He is prepared to judge the dead as well as the
   living, in the immediate future, for the dead have had their chance of
   hearing the gospel already. The living include the present abusive
   enemies of Christians, for it is assumed that they will be alive at the
   judgment, so near it is. The Christians will also be alive and be
   judged strictly by their God (i. 17, iv. 17, 18), passing into life
   eternal in the spirit.

   Peter mentions the dead for a special reason and with an explanation by
   way of parenthesis. Christians who have died before the second Advent
   are not excluded from this blissful vindication; though they have had
   to suffer the penalty of death in their mortal sinful natures 6 (judged
   in the flesh as men), their acceptance of the gospel when they were
   alive insures their immortal life as God lives (see i. 15) in the
   spirit. Peter thus meets in his own way the anxiety felt by some
   Macedonian Christians (1 Thessalonians iv. 13). In Asia, too, the vivid
   hope of the second Advent made believers feel disappointed and
   discouraged when some of their fellows died before this crowning
   triumph; they asked in perplexity, What was the use of preaching the
   gospel to them at all, if they miss the outcome of it?' Peter's reply
   is that the reason why the gospel was preached once (i. 12) to those
   who are now dead as well as to those still living was to secure that in
   adhering to it they, like Christ (iii. 18), should reach the divine
   life in the spirit, though first they had to be judged in the flesh.

   Another view is possible. While it is naturally out of the question to
   take the dead here as dead in trespasses and sins' (the dead in ver. 5
   are dead people, and the dead here are the same: they are not
   spiritually dead, but dead in the sense that they have experienced
   death on earth), yet the dead here might refer to those who had not
   heard the gospel during their lifetime, and therefore had an
   opportunity granted them somehow. In the early church there was a
   belief that Christ preached in Hades, the underworld of the dead,
   between the crucifixion and the resurrection, either to all the dead or
   to the O.T. saints, and Peter may be alluding to this idea (see above).
   There would be an implicit contrast between Enoch's mission (iii. 19)
   and Christ's; Enoch had only a message of doom, whilst Christ had one
   of hope; Enoch addressed fallen angels, whilst Christ dealt with
   disembodied human spirits, in the spirit-world.

   In any case the words are an allusion in passing to some belief which
   was familiar to the writer and his readers, too familiar to require
   explanation. But it is hard for us to reconstruct the context of the
   belief from the scanty materials at our disposal. Peter was not writing
   a theology; he was simply addressing himself to a special situation, to
   harassed Christians who were in need of encouragement, and he reminds
   them that the relief is sure and near, vindication. for themselves,
   retribution for their foes--and also that their dead fellows were quite
   safe with God. Modern Christians ask larger questions. What becomes of
   the pre-Christian dead? How are men treated, who at the end have never
   heard the gospel? But these questions were not present to the apostle's
   mind here.

   The next paragraph (7-11) is an epilogue, recalling the tone of iii.
   8-12.

   7     Now, the end of all is near. Steady then, keep cool and pray! ^8
   Above all, be keen to love one another, for love hides a host of sins.
   ^9 Be hospitable to each other, and to do not grudge it. ^10 You must
   serve one another, each with the talent he has received, as efficient
   stewards of God's varied grace. ^11 If anyone preaches, he must preach
   as one who utters the words of God; if anyone renders some service, it
   must be as one who is supplied by God with power, so that in everything
   God may be glorified through Jesus Christ. The glory and the dominion
   are his for ever and ever; Amen.

   7

   No panic or excitement, however, though the end of all is near (ver.
   5)! Steady (the word translated sane' in 2 Corinthians v. 13) then,
   instead of losing your heads, as some early Christians were apt to do
   (see 2 Thessalonians ii. 2, iii. 11, 12), dropping their work and
   duties in hectic anticipation. Keep cool (i. 13) and pray (literally,
   keep cool for prayer'); your prayers must not be wild screams or
   reason-less cries. The judgment was to be a trying time (iv. 17, 18) as
   well as a relief, and serious prayer was the best preparation for it.

   8

   Another vital preparation was the habit of mutual love (i. 22, ii. 1,
   iii. 8), answering to the demands of God. Keen is the adjective whose
   adverb is rendered steadily' in i. 22. The community must hold
   together, instead of allowing their love to grow cold' (Matthew xxiv.
   12) in the latter days of strain; it is a warning against loving others
   by fits and starts, a plea for steady affection, persisting through the
   irritations and antagonisms of common life in a society recruited from
   various classes of people. For much will be forgiven to a loving heart;
   God counts that too (ii. 20) a merit. Love hides a host of sins, says
   Peter, quoting a Greek version of Proverbs x. 12, to remind his friends
   that brotherly love will atone for a good deal in the sight of God. The
   original meaning of the proverb was that the loving temper does not
   rake up faults but seeks to pass them over with forbearance (the idea
   of 1 Corinthians xiii. 7). But here the sins are a man's own, not his
   neighbours', As he forgives, he is forgiven (Matthew vi. 14, 15); hides
   or covers' implies forgiveness (Psalm xxxii. 1). The imminent judgment
   was to be a serious scrutiny of Christians (ver. 17), who would be
   tested by their measure of brotherly love.

   9

   As in Hebrews xiii. 2, one special form of love is urged. Be hospitable
   to one another. This duty of entertaining travelling Christians was
   still the duty of the members, though later it fell specially to the
   clergy (1 Timothy iii. 2). It was needful, for inns in the East were
   often not only expensive but morally deteriorating; an itinerant
   Christian, whether he was a preacher or not (see 3 John 5-8), was safer
   in the house of some local member of the church. And do not grudge it,
   despite the trouble and expense; naturally the burden would fall on one
   or two as a rule in each community, and fall repeatedly. In the
   pre-Christian Psalter of Solomon (v. 15), drawing a contrast between
   God's kindness and man's, the author writes: If a man repeats his
   kindness and does not grudge it the very phrase used here], you would
   be surprised.'

   The point of 10-11 is that the exercise of the various talents or
   endowments of Christians must be carried on in a deep sense of
   responsibility to God, as designed for the service of the community,
   not for self-display nor in any sell-reliance. We do not make them; 10
   each has received his talent (Romans xii. 6, 1 Corinthians xii. 4) to
   serve others, and we are called to be efficient stewards in the
   household of God, administering His varied grace. The house-steward
   distributed the rations and pay regularly to his fellow-slaves. Jesus
   had used the figure (Luke xii. 42), and so had Paul. (1 Corinthians iv.
   1), for the responsible duty of exercising one's gifts in the service
   of the church.

   Hospitality (Romans xii. 13) was one of these talents, but Peter passes
   on to mention preaching specifically, as Paul does in Romans xii. 7, 8;
   this, and not the administration of the sacraments, was the prominent
   function (so Hebrews xiii. 7). Preaches is a word that covers teaching
   and prophetic utterances, any official or unofficial exhortation to
   which a member was moved by his talent. The temptation of the talent of
   hospitality was to be grudging, i.e. to regard one's possessions as
   more for oneself than for others. The temptation of preaching was to
   forget that one was no more than a steward, giving out what God had in
   store for the good of others. Hospitality was stewardship of money and
   a home; preaching was stewardship in which a man depended on God 11 for
   what he said. He must preach as one who utters the words of God, not
   his own opinions, not rhetoric of his own which he parades; he must
   depend upon the inspiration' of Another for what he says.

   So with any other form of practical service (Romans xii. 7, 1
   Corinthians xvi. 15); the person must render it with due recognition
   that he is supplied by God with power (the term rendered supplied' is
   that rendered furnish' in 2 Corinthians ix. 10), therefore humbly,
   without self-display. Ignatius (Ad Polyk. vi.) bids the members of the
   church at Smyrna live together as God's stewards and assessors and
   servants.' The range of stewardship here is equally wide; it is not
   confined to apostles or presbyters or any special ministers. Such a
   spirit of service in the community will bring out the full power of
   God, as it was intended to do--so that in everything God may be
   glorified through Jesus Christ (the thought of Matthew v. 16 and John
   xv. 8). The brotherly love which is the life of the church is devoid of
   any self-glorification. The more efficient a community is, the more it
   suggests how great and good is the God to whom it owes everything. The
   glory and the dominion (over the celestial world, the earth, and the
   church, iii. 22, iv. 5, 11, see v. 6 and 11) are his (God, or, as in
   Revelation i. 6, Jesus Christ) for ever and ever: Amen (i.e. so be it,
   so it is--liturgical affirmation).

   Here the homily might have ended. Here indeed it may have ended. But
   letters then, as now, were not always written at a sitting, and we may
   assume some interruption at this point; the epistle had to be laid
   aside for a time, and then resumed. In what follows Peter reiterates
   afresh the main thoughts of the earlier sections: iv. 12-19 corresponds
   to iii. 8-iv. 11 and v. 1-11 to iv. 7-11. On both topics he found he
   had more to say.

   And now for a last word upon your sufferings.' The apostle has two
   things to say, the first in 12-16, the second in 17-19.

   12    Beloved, do not be surprised at the ordeal that has come to test
   you; as though some foreign experience befell you. ^13 You are sharing
   what Christ suffered; so rejoice in it, that you may also rejoice and
   exult when his glory is revealed. ^14 If you are denounced for the sake
   of Christ, you are blessed; for then the Spirit of glory and power, the
   Spirit of God himself, is resting on you. ^15 None of you must suffer
   as a murderer or a thief or a bad character or a revolutionary; ^16 but
   if a man suffers for being a Christian, he must not be ashamed, he must
   rather glorify God for that.

   12

   Beloved, as in ii. 11, is a touch of affectionate sympathy, as he
   handles the sensitive question of their trials. It is as though he
   overheard some saying, Why have we been plunged into this trouble? What
   relevance has all this to our character and record?' His first point is
   (a) that it is a test (as in i. 7). The term rendered ordeal occurs in
   the LXX of Proverbs xxvii. 21 (the fining pot for silver and the
   furnace for gold'). Only valuable metal is smelted in a furnace, and
   smelted to bring out its brilliance and lasting value. Then (b) the
   ordeal is not a foreign experience, not something irrelevant and
   abnormal, but in the direct line of Christ. Peter does not bring
   forward the example of the prophets, like Jesus (Matthew v. 11-12) and
   James (v. 10); he again (ii. 21) recalls how Jesus was badly treated by
   the world of his day, and summons his friends 13 to rejoice in sharing
   what Christ suffered. To be maligned and molested for his sake brings
   his followers into touch with him. Theirs is the inward joy of which he
   spoke (Matthew v. 10), and there is a thrilling joy (so i. 6, 8) to
   follow at the end of the rough experience. What promotes this heroic
   enthusiasm cannot be thought foreign to the Christian discipline.
   Peter, like Paul, only speaks about the sufferings' of Christ in
   connexion with Christians sharing them (see 2 Corinthians i. 5 and
   Philippians iii. 10). And in elaborating his argument (ver. 14) he is
   speaking of what he himself knew by sharp experience (see Acts v. 41),
   as well as of what he had once heard Jesus say (Matthew v. 11).

   Rejoice. Why? 14 Because (see iii. 14) you are already being blessed,
   as Jesus promised; there is a divine compensation to be enjoyed under
   the outward contempt and scoffing, as you are denounced for being
   Christians. Sometimes this denunciation led to arrest and punishment at
   the hands of an excited mob or of the authorities (see ver. 16), but
   Peter is here thinking primarily of the sneers and taunts and slanders
   from pagans which were apt to make Christians feel depressed and
   uneasy. He would have them deserve the praise awarded to Milton's
   Abdiel (Paradise Lost, vi. 32 f.), who, for the testimony of truth,'
   had borne--


   Universal reproach, far worse to bear

   Than violence; for this was all thy care--

   To stand approved in sight of God, though worlds

   Judged thee perverse.

   Injuries and outrages reveal the spirit of your pagan neighbours, who
   try to crush your strength, but there is for your loyalty another
   revelation of God's glory and power (the presence of God in glorious
   power) which inwardly rewards and rallies you. The phrase you are
   denounced . . . Christ may be an echo of Psalm lxxxix. 51, 52 (the
   LXX); certainly there is an echo of Isaiah xi. 2 in the Spirit of God
   is resting on you, i.e. inspiring and endowing you permanently. Only,
   this inner glow is reserved for those who are suffering innocently for
   the sake of Christ; it is not for any Christian who is punished as a
   criminal, e.g. as a really (contrast ii. 12) 15 bad character (see on
   ii. 12). This Greek term has been taken in the narrower sense of the
   Latin maleficus, i.e. poisoner or magician, but we should expect then a
   word like goês (2 Timothy iii. 13) or magos (Acts viii. 9 f.).
   Revolutionary again suggests the danger of Christians laying themselves
   open to the Roman suspicion of the church as a seditious, secret
   organization, aiming at the overthrow of the State. A Christian,
   especially under the influence of apocalyptic hopes, might incur the
   suspicion of treason by encouraging disobedience among slaves, for
   example, or by sympathizing with revolutionary movements, in
   exasperation against the persecuting authorities. The risk of an
   extreme left wing among Christians was not unfounded at this period.
   The anti-Roman tone of an apocalypse like the book of Revelation shows
   how the apocalyptic hope might be used to foster social discontent and
   political disorder. The Greek term, however, has been also taken to
   mean "busy-body," i.e. a tactless interference with social customs, as
   when a Christian gave needless offence by tampering with social
   relationships or by ill-timed protests which roused dissension and
   discord. It might further refer to imprudent, though generous,
   representations to the authorities on behalf of some ill-used
   fellow-citizen, which laid the objectors open to the law against
   treason. Peter seems to have coined the word, and revolutionary answers
   to the sense of the context better than any allusion to indiscreet
   interference or meddling tactics.

   16

   But if a man suffers for being a Christian, he must not be ashamed, and
   so apostatize (see Mark viii. 38, 2 Timothy i. 8, 12), he must rather
   glorify God for that, i.e. in words, by thanking God for this
   opportunity of proving his loyalty and honouring the Christian cause,
   and also in deeds, proving by his stedfastness and patience what a good
   God he has and thus reflecting credit on his God--perhaps even by a
   martyr death (as in John xxi. 19). The name of Christian (see on Acts
   xi. 26) had already become a nickname on the lips of the Roman mob, as
   Tacitus implies. But it is noticeable that Peter never alludes to the
   three charges of atheism, cannibalism, and immorality, which were
   afterwards brought against Christianity by the suspicious Romans. Here,
   as elsewhere in the homily, the situation reflected seems to be merely
   one of popular suspicion directed against what was considered to be an
   illicit, foreign cult or secret religious society, largely recruited
   from the slave class and ominously antagonistic to social harmony.

   Peter's second word of consolation is eschatological. Deliverance is at
   hand: you have not long now to wait.'

   17    It is time for the Judgment to begin with the household of God;

   and if it begins with us,

   what will be the fate of those who refuse obedience to God's gospel

   18

   If the just man is scarcely saved, what will become of the impious and
   sinful?

   19    So let those who are suffering by the will of God trust heir
   souls to him, their faithful Creator, as they continue to do right.

   17

   It was an O.T. axiom that God's judgment should begin with the
   household of God (see Isaiah x. 12, Jeremiah xxv. 29, and Ezekiel ix.
   6, which is in the apostle's mind here). That is, it begins with us,
   God's People (ii. 9, 24) who live His life. Peter, like Jesus in the
   parable (Luke xix. 15), is sterner and stricter than the book of Enoch,
   which (see civ. 5, etc.) occasionally exempts the righteous from
   judgment. He views the sufferings of Christians as the prelude to the
   final judgment, or rather as the initial scene in the last act of
   judgment, and trying (the apocalyptic thought of Mark xiii. 20) because
   they involve the possibility of failing under the 18 severe test. The
   just man is scarcely saved, so hard is the trial, so weak is human
   nature. The consolation is (a) that it will be over soon, and (b) that
   failure will be unspeakably awful. Trust yourselves to God, continue to
   do right(see on ver. 8), and all will be well; however severe this
   ordeal may be, it is nothing compared to the fate of outsiders. In
   Proverbs xi. 31 the Hebrew couplet ran:


   The just will be punished on earth--

   How much more the impious and sinful!

   That is, retribution will overtake sin in the present world. The LXX
   omitted on earth, which suited Peter's purpose better. He is content to
   leave his question unanswered, What will be the fate of the impenitent?
   Which is more impressive than the explicit threats of Enoch (xxxviii. 1
   f.: sinners shall be driven from the earth,' xlv. 6, etc.).

   19

   So, in view of what has been urged in 12-16 as well as in 17-18, let
   those who are suffering by the will of God (iii. 17) trust their souls
   to him for safe keeping--the thought of Psalm xxxi. 5, which Jesus
   quoted on the cross (Luke xxiii. 46). Do as Jesus did (ii. 23), leave
   yourselves in the hands of a faithful Creator, faithful in upholding
   the moral order, punishing the evil and preserving the faithful. The
   appeal to God as Creator is as early as Acts iv. 24, but this is the
   only place in the N.T. where the title is used. The implication here,
   as in Hebrews ii. 10, is that the redemptive purpose is part of
   creation. The Creator has the forces of the universe at His disposal to
   punish the disobedient (Enoch xciv. l0: He who hath created you will
   overthrow you'--the woe upon rich oppressors) and to safeguard the
   loyal lives which He has Himself created, as they continue to do right.
   Their trust in Him implies moral activity (the thought of 15-16). There
   must be no presuming upon faith in God; only a clean, obedient life can
   be securely committed to God's care.

   A word to the presbyters (v. 1-4) broadens into a general plea for
   humility (5-7), which brings the apostle round again for the last time
   to the critical situation of his readers (6-11).

   v.

   1     Now I make this appeal to your presbyters (for I am a presbyter
   myself, I was a witness of what Christ suffered and I am to share the
   glory that will be revealed), ^2 be shepherds to your flock of God;
   take charge of them willingly instead of being pressed to it, not to
   make a base profit from it but freely, ^3 not by way of lording it over
   your charges but proving a pattern to the flock. ^4 Then you will
   receive the unfailing crown of glory, when the chief Shepherd makes his
   appearance.

   1

   Presbyter, the official title for the ministers of the primitive
   communities, meant literally senior.' Not all the seniors in a
   community would be presbyters, but the presbyters would be as a rule
   chosen on account of their experience and age. Peter plays on the
   double sense of the term; I am a presbyter myself, i.e. old enough to
   have seen Christ suffer. Presbyter myself (literally, fellow-presbyter)
   is a touch of modesty from an apostle (i. 1)--there is nothing
   overbearing about Peter (ver. 3). Witness means not only an
   eye-witness, but one who witnesses to what Christ suffered, i.e. to
   their significance and reality. But he cannot speak of these sufferings
   without adding their climax of the glory that will be revealed (see iv.
   13), in which he is to share with Christ (the thought of John xiii.
   36). Behind the suffering of the present world for Christians as well
   as for Christ, Peter always sees the gleam of the final glory. Even in
   an aside like this, the thought rises instinctively to hearten his
   readers.

   2

   Now . . . be shepherds. The adverb and the aoristic imperative of the
   verb (here, as in i. 13, 17, 22, referring to a specific period, the
   interval before the end ver. 4) imply that one means of upholding the
   faith of Christians under a strain (iv. 19) is the proper discharge of
   ministerial duty. The faithful must not be left to themselves;
   ministers ought to fulfil their pastoral responsibilities, supplying
   Christian discipline and direction, and giving a lead to the people.
   The pastoral metaphor has lost its appeal and significance for modern
   readers. Nowadays a mature layman will resent a clergyman calling me
   one of his sheep. I am not a sheep relatively to him. I am at least his
   equal in knowledge, and greatly his superior in experience. Nobody but
   a parson would venture to compare me to an animal (such a stupid animal
   too!) and himself to that animal's master' (P. G. Hamerton, Human
   Intercourse, p. 191). But in the ancient world the metaphor denoted a
   vigorous and responsible authority. It was applied to kings and rulers,
   who had to provide for their people, protecting and ruling them with
   close personal supervision. The Oriental shepherd had to protect his
   flock as well as guide them to good pasture. He was never away from
   them. He had to stand between them and danger, to think for them, and
   to be responsible for them with his own life, if occasion required. No
   relation so expressed the twofold functions of control and devotion.
   Hence the term came into use for ministers of the church. Be shepherds
   to your flock of God. The flock belongs to God; Christ is the chief
   Shepherd (ver. 4); Christian ministers are subordinate shepherds. The
   word your (literally, among you) means that part of the great church
   which falls to your charge; the flock is wider than those within the
   Asiatic communities; it is invariably the flock of God, the divine
   flock (My sheep,' John xxi. 15, 16); and Peter has three directions for
   the presbyters.

   (a) They must show no reluctance in undertaking or in carrying out
   their duties. Take charge of them (episcopountes, i.e. discharge your
   episcopal functions) willingly, instead of being pressed to it.
   Sometimes the presbyters were selected by the apostles who founded the
   community (Acts xiv. 23). But, however chosen, they had a divine
   commission; Paul reminds the presbyters of the Ephesian church of their
   duties to all the flock of which the holy Spirit has appointed you
   guardians (episcopous, bishops): shepherd the church of the Lord' (Acts
   xx. 28). They must not grudge time and pains in the service, nor resent
   the onerous responsibilities of the position. In periods of persecution
   there was a real danger in accepting office, for officials enjoyed an
   unpleasant prominence, which led to them often being singled out by the
   State authorities. Hence some were indisposed to take office at all.

   Others, again, were quite willing to serve, and threw themselves into
   the work, but evidently for the sake of what it brought them. Such
   presbyters (b) are warned not to make a base profit from it but to
   serve the church freely, i.e. without making the stipend the main end.
   Peter protests against mercenary aims, against the temper which makes
   men do no more than they are paid for. The presbyters had some control
   of church finance; they had to do with the funds, and this started
   temptations to make a lucrative thing of their position. Polykarp, in
   his epistle to the church of Philippi (ch. xi. 1), mentions the sad
   case of a local presbyter called Valens, who had evidently succumbed to
   this temptation.

   But the desire for position is stronger in some than the love of money,
   and the apostle proceeds to warn (c) other 3 presbyters against lording
   it over their charges, the overbearing temper against which Jesus had
   already put his disciples on their guard (Mark x. 42 f., Luke xii. 45).
   A pre-Christian Jewish warning is quoted in the Chagiga (5b, i. 32)
   against any president of a rabbinic school who deals arrogantly with
   the congregation.' How this autocratic or self-important temper worked
   in the primitive Christian communities we are not told, but this is not
   the only hint of it (see 1 Timothy iii. 3). Such a domineering spirit
   defeats the ends of Christian discipline, produces bad feeling, and
   lowers the atmosphere of brotherly love.

   Charges translates the plural of the term klêros, which here has its
   untechnical sense of an allotted portion'; the charges are the
   different churches entrusted to the care of the presbyters. The Vulgate
   rendered the Greek literally, dominantes in cleris,' but the
   distinction between clergy and laity is much later than this, and the
   words cannot mean domineering over the lower clergy.' Instead of
   driving and bullying the faithful, the presbyters are to prove a
   pattern to the flock; their best influence will be through personal 4
   example. Then, at the second Advent, you will receive (the same verb as
   obtain ' in i. 9) the unfading (i. 4) crown (consisting) of glory, when
   the chief Shepherd makes his appearance (same verb used of the first
   Advent in i. 20). In the Hellenistic world distinguished statesmen or
   public benefactors received crowns of gold from the community as a
   recognition of their services.

   A brief sentence to the younger men (5) passes on to a general counsel
   upon deference and humility (6-7).

   5     You younger men must also submit to the presbyters. Indeed you
   must all put on the apron of humility to serve one another, for

   the haughty God opposes,
   but to the humble he gives grace.

   6

   Humble yourselves under the strong hand of God, then, so that when it
   is time, he may raise you; ^7 let all your anxieties fall upon him, for
   his interest is in you.

   5

   The younger men are junior subordinates in the ministry (see Acts v. 6,
   10). They also (same word as in the same way,' iii. 1) have their
   temptation, to be restive under authority, and are bidden submit to the
   presbyters. Later in the century serious trouble arose in the church at
   Corinth over insubordination on the part of the younger men; the
   epistle of Clemens Romanus is elicited by this. Peter probably had this
   risk of forwardness and insubordination in mind when he warned the
   senior presbyters against rough ways (ver. 3). A tyrannical spirit
   among authorities does not make submissiveness easy among subordinates.
   Indeed you must all (seniors and juniors alike, officials and members)
   put on the apron of humility, as Jesus did at the last Supper (John
   xiii. 4 f.). Peter had not forgotten his lesson. The apron was worn by
   slaves, to protect their tunic when at work. Ministers are to help or
   serve one another; they require mutual aid and support, and this is
   impossible when they put on airs. Age and youth in the ministry are
   equally liable to a proud independence. But the common spirit of
   humility demanded by Peter from the rank and file as well implies a
   readiness to learn from others, a willingness to work with them; each
   must humbly recognize what the other may have to contribute, instead of
   holding aloof in a proud superiority. The comparative length of the
   admonitions may imply that the senior presbyters required more warning
   than the juniors; but it may simply mean that the senior position was
   more responsible and therefore involved greater perils.

   The quotation from Proverbs iii. 34, with which the counsel is
   clinched, widens and deepens the duty of humility. Friends used to say
   of Bishop Westcott that he was humble to God but not exactly humble to
   man.' 6 Peter insists upon humility in both directions, and now on
   submission to the strong hand of God--an O.T. phrase (Exodus iii. 19,
   Ezekiel xx. 33 f.) for protection and deliverance as well as for the
   downfall of proud persecutors. The pressure of His hand in suffering
   must be submitted to humbly; so that, when it is time (when His time
   comes, as come it will), he may raise you, uplifting the lowly who have
   lain still under His discipline. For--


   Tho' His arm be strong to smite,

   'Tis also strong to save.

   7

   Humble yourselves by letting all your anxieties fall upon him (a
   reminiscence of Psalm lv. 22). No impatience or fretfulness, as if you
   had to carry the burden yourselves. His interest is in you. There are
   gods, and they are interested (melei, the same word as here) in human
   affairs' (Marcus Aurelius, ii. 11). Be sure of His ultimate relief, but
   meanwhile do not think that He is careless or indifferent. His and
   youare emphatic.

   But this does not mean that you can relax your efforts; be alert and
   stedfast till you are finally relieved (8-11).

   8     Keep cool, keep awake. Your enemy the devil prowls like a roaring
   lion, looking out for someone to devour. ^9 Resist him; keep your
   foothold in the faith, and learn to pay the same tax of suffering as
   the rest of your brotherhood throughout the world. ^10 Once you have
   suffered for a little, the God of all grace who has called you to his
   eternal glory in Christ Jesus, will repair and recruit and strengthen
   you. ^11 The dominion is his for ever and ever: Amen.

   Trust is not idle security (so in iv. 19); the confidence in God which
   throws off anxieties only leaves one more able to be morally alert
   against temptations 8 to apostasy. Keep cool (as in i. 13, iv. 7)--no
   need for panic, when God's care is over you--keep awake (Peter
   remembered the incident of Matthew xxvi. 41). For the first time in the
   epistle the origin of persecution is assigned to the ill-will of the
   devil; Satan is the inspirer of the attacks upon Christians. Your enemy
   the devil prowls like a roaring lion round the flock (1-3), roaring in
   hunger and eager ferocity, looking out for someone to devour, i.e. to
   force into apostasy. The devil's aim is to induce weak Christians to
   deny God and thus to incur eternal death (see the phrase of Hus cited
   above on iv. 1). Peter does not explain how this activity of the devil
   was permitted by the will of God (which is the problem of the book of
   Job); he is simply putting his friends on their guard. The best comment
   on the verse is Latimer's in his Sermon of the Plough, where he quotes
   and applies the text to prove that the devil is the most diligent
   prelate and preacher in England'; in Sirach xxi. 2,


   The teeth of sin are the teeth of a lion,

   Slaying the souls of men.

   9

   Resist him by refusing to give up your faith, keep your foothold in the
   faith, firm and unyielding, with a courage on which no hardship makes
   any impression, and learn to pay the same tax of suffering as the rest
   of your brotherhood (ii. 17) throughout the world. Suffering is the
   penalty of your position, and there is nothing exceptional about it; it
   is the common lot of Christians. Peter then repeats his assurance of
   final relief. The prayer of the angels for the pious who are
   persecuted, in Enoch (xlvii. 2), is that judgment may be done them, and
   that they may not have to suffer for ever.' Peter ignores all such
   ideas of angelic intercession, and announces that after suffering for
   10 a little (i. 6) they will be refreshed and settled in God's heaven,
   by the God of all grace. The mark of His grace is that He has called
   you (so i. 2, 10, 15, etc.) to his eternal glory which is bound up in
   Christ Jesus. God's choice, predestinating them to share in His
   purpose, will carry them through all opposition on earth, provided they
   remain loyal. The suffering passes, but the glory is eternal. There and
   then God will repair (refit the church broken by persecutions) and
   recruit (their powers--the same word as be a strength to' in Luke xxii.
   32) and strengthen (verb only here in N.T.) you; some manuscripts add
   themeliôsei (settle), needlessly. The whole promise refers to the
   shattering and disabling effects of persecution, which are to be undone
   in heaven. 11 The liturgical formula of ver. 11 is practically the same
   as in iv. 11, but the stress on the divine dominion is significant;
   during times of persecution it was usual to contrast the transitory
   authority of the Empire with the lasting Reign of God. Thus Polykarp is
   said to have been martyred, in A.D. 155 or 156, at Smyrna, when Statius
   Quadratus was proconsul but when Jesus Christ was reigning for ever'
   (Martyrdom of Polykarp, xvi.).

   A brief postscript follows (12-14).

   12    By the hand of Silvanus, a faithful brother (in my opinion), I
   have written you these few' lines of encouragement, to testify that
   this is what the true grace of God means. Stand in that grace.

   13    Your sister-church in Babylon, elect like yourselves, salutes
   you. So does my son Mark. ^14 Salute one another with a kiss of love.

   Peace be to you all who are in Christ Jesus.

   12

   Silvanus was a Jewish Christian who spoke Greek, and therefore had been
   employed by Peter in the composition of the homily (see Introduction),
   as his amanuensis or secretary. Peter vouches for him as a faithful
   brother (in my opinion), i.e. as a reliable messenger, just as Cicero
   had vouched for Cossinius in one of his letters (Ad Attic., i. 19:
   Cossinius hic, cui dedi litteras, valde mini bonus homo et non levis et
   amans tui vicus est'), perhaps because he was unknown to some or all of
   the recipients, perhaps because he was commissioned to expand orally
   the few lines enclosed. The verb in encouragement is appeal in ii. 11,
   v. 1, but here includes its wider sense of exhorting and inspiriting.
   (The A.V. as I suppose' suggests an uncertainty about Silvanus which is
   not in the original.) The object of the apostle in writing has been to
   testify (only here in N.T.) to what the true (real, see Colossians i.
   5) grace of God is--a sure revelation of the future hope, resting on
   the purpose of God for His People, and not incompatible with hardship
   for the time being. Stand (ver. 9) in that grace (so Romans v. 2). The
   aorist imperative stête is better attested than estêkate (wherein ye
   stand') and more vivid; take your stand upon the Christian position as
   I have outlined it briefly.

   13

   The first of the two greetings is from the local church where Peter is
   writing, your sister-church in Babylon, elect (i. 2) like yourselves.
   This is as figurative as son in the next sentence; it is a phrase of
   the, apocalyptic outlook which has so often marked the homily. As
   Babylon had been the supreme oppressor of the People In the O.T., the
   name had already begun to be applied in Judaism and Christianity to
   Rome, as a telling and cryptic epithet, e.g. in the contemporary
   Apocalypse of Baruch (xi. 1) and the Sibylline Oracles (v. 143) as well
   as in the early sources of the book of Revelation (xiv. and xvi. f.),
   where the term is used as traditional and familiar. No one in the early
   church ever dreamt of any other meaning; the first tradition (which may
   be as early as Papias, the Asiatic bishop, early in the second century)
   explains that Babylon here is a mystical figurative name for Rome
   (Eusebius, Hist. Eccles., ii. 25). It was not till much later, when the
   apocalyptic setting had been forgotten, that Babylon was identified
   with the Egyptian Babylon (a fortress at old Cairo) or Babylon in
   Mesopotamia. No tradition ever connected Peter or Mark with either
   locality.

   14

   The kiss of love, or, as, Paul termed it, the holy kiss, was a naïve
   custom among the primitive communities, who met for worship as real
   families of God. It was a simple, warm expression of the genuine
   fellowship which knit the members. What prayer is complete,' says
   Tertullian, apart from the holy kiss?' But, as Jesus had been betrayed
   by a kiss, it became customary to omit the kiss on Good Friday. As the
   meetings became larger and more formal, the habit of kissing was
   abused; Clement of Alexandria reports indignantly that some churches
   were noisy with the loud smack of kisses, and in the Apostolic
   Constitutions (ii. 57, viii. 11) it was expressly ordered that
   promiscuous kissing was to be stopped, men to kiss only men. The
   epistle was read aloud at public worship.

   Peace as a farewell greeting occurs in 3 John 14; here, as in Hebrews
   xiii. 20, etc., it denotes the full bliss of God's saving presence (see
   above on i. 2). In Christ (iii. 16) is practically equivalent to
   Christians.' Of the just it is said in Enoch cv. 2, I and my Son the
   messiah will be united with them for ever in the paths of uprightness
   in their lives, and ye shall have peace.
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

THE SECOND EPISTLE OF ST. PETER
     __________________________________________________________________

  INTRODUCTION

   THE atmosphere of this tract is described in the introduction to the
   epistle of Judas. Indeed the writer has drawn upon that earlier
   pamphlet, since it seemed to him to characterize the false teachers
   against whom he is warning the churches. Antinomian errors are still
   rampant. But the specific feature of the later development of the
   movement is a repudiation of belief in the second Advent, and the
   author seeks to rehabilitate this doctrine as the source of good,
   Christian faith and morals. He writes a pastoral letter for Christendom
   in general. It is a strongly worded manifesto against unworthy
   antinomian teachers, who were propagating a view of Christianity which,
   under a cloak of liberalism, seemed to him to produce moral
   indifferentism in the lives of its adherents.

   The course of the argument is easily followed; there are no real
   difficulties in the transition from one paragraph to another.
   Everything becomes plain, once it is borne in mind that the writer has
   the tract of Judas before him, and that he is writing under the name of
   Peter, throwing himself back (e.g. at iii. 1) into the position of the
   apostle as a prophet and defender of the authentic faith. The latter
   feature is characteristic and unique. Here we find a second-century
   author who writes under the name of Peter, modestly employing the
   apostle's name in order to discredit views which, he felt certain, were
   unapostolic. The Greek style is totally unlike that of First Peter; so
   is the tone of the manifesto. And the differences of language cannot be
   explained by the supposition that Peter used two different amanuenses
   or dictated the two letters roughly to different secretaries. Second
   Peter stands by itself, in its florid, Hellenistic vein. The
   discrepancies of language and thought are too well-marked to allow of
   both homilies coming from the same author. The author of Second Peter
   has First Peter before him, as well as the tract of Judas; but he
   writes with much less ease and lucidity. His object is to controvert
   the dangerous teachers of his age, and he does so by appealing to the
   prestige of St. Peter as the representative of the primitive, orthodox
   faith. The literary device was recognized in these days. It was a
   development of the method which allowed an historian to compose
   speeches for characters in his narrative, and an author evidently felt
   no scruples about adopting this literary device in order to win a
   hearing for counsels which he felt to be both timely and inspired.

   The real author of any such work had to keep himself altogether out of
   sight, and its entry upon circulation had to be surrounded with a
   certain mystery, in order that the strangeness of its appearance at a
   more or less considerable interval after the putative author's death
   might be concealed.' [5] Hence, the origin of the manifesto is obscure.
   One or two scattered echoes of its phraseology are heard in the
   literature of the second century, as for example in a letter written by
   the churches of Lyons and Vienne in Gaul, during the reign of Marcus
   Aurelius, and in a treatise written about the same time by Theophilus,
   the bishop of Antioch; but the first time it is definitely mentioned is
   by Origen, who admits that there are doubts about it,' i.e. about its
   title to be in the canon. In the next century Eusebius of Caesarea
   declares that of all the writings under the name of Peter he recognizes
   only one epistle as genuine,' i.e. First Peter. As for the current
   Second epistle, it has not come down to us as canonical, though it has
   been studied along with the rest of the scriptures, since it has seemed
   useful to many people' (he means, to Origen and others). One reason why
   so many denied the genuineness of the Second epistle was, as Jerome
   allowed, its disagreement in style with the First. No N.T. writing won
   so limited and hesitating a recognition. So far as its connexions with
   the other Christian literature of the early. church go, they prove no
   more than that it must be later than the tract of Judas, which it
   incorporates freely, and earlier than the reign of Marcus Aurelius.
   Possibly, like the tract of Judas, it emanated from some circle in the
   Egyptian church; but all theories that attempt to link it to a definite
   community are sheer guess-work.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [5] Dr. V. H. Stanton, Journal of Theological Studies, ii. 19.
     __________________________________________________________________

  THE SECOND EPISTLE OF ST. PETER

   As in the case of the epistle of Judas, the greeting or address (1-2)
   is directed to Christians without any specific note of their residence.

   i.

   1     Symeon Peter, a servant and apostle of Jesus Christ, to those who
   have been allotted a faith of equal privilege with ours, by the equity
   of our God and saviour Jesus Christ: ^2 grace and peace be multiplied
   to you by the knowledge of our Lord.

   1

   Symeon, the Semitic form of Simon,' is used by James in Acts xv. 14,
   where he tells the council of Jerusalem that Symeon has explained how
   it was God's original concern to secure a People from among the
   Gentiles to bear his Name.' This may be the meaning of those who have
   been allotted a faith of equal privilege with ours; but probably the
   distinction here is not between the Jewish and pagan origins of
   Christians, but between the apostles (in whose name Peter writes) and
   the ordinary Christians who owed their faith to apostolic preaching
   (iii. 2). Allotted implies the free favour and goodness of God, and the
   equity of our God points to the divine freedom from favouritism;
   supreme as the work of the apostles was, their religious position was
   no higher than that of other Christians. The later generations enjoy a
   faith and fellowship as real, thanks to the impartiality of God; as the
   ages pass, and as the apostolic faith is transmitted, it does not
   become less direct and immediate.

   The description of Jesus Christ as our God and saviour is unique; the
   adoring cry of Thomas, My Lord and my God' (John xx. 28), is the
   nearest parallel to it in the N.T. Elsewhere in the epistle our Lord
   and saviour is the favourite phrase. But the habit of calling Christ
   God was becoming more common; thus Ignatius can write that Mary was
   pregnant with our God, Jesus the Christ' (Ephesians xviii. 2).

   2

   The prayer of First Peter (i. 2) is rounded off by the significant
   addition of by the knowledge of our Lord (which later editors expanded
   into the knowledge of our God and of Jesus our Lord'). Knowledge'
   (gnosis) was a catchword of the age in religious circles; it had
   associations of inwardness in Hellenistic mysticism, which recommended
   it to the writer and others in his age, but it also expressed
   speculative and esoteric theories which are here tacitly set aside in
   favour of a personal acquaintance with Christ as divine. The term
   employed (epignôsis) is a more or less intensive form, but the central
   idea is that the progress and development of the Church's life depend
   on the inward knowledge of Christ, not on fantastic and mystical
   insight into aeons and theosophic mysteries. Here the theme of the
   homily is laid down, and in the next paragraph the writer proceeds to
   expand it. As the meaning of Christ is realized by Christians, they
   enter more and more into what God's grace means, i.e. His free favour
   and forgiving power; also, they experience more and more of His peace,
   i.e. the bliss and security realized by Christ in the lives of
   believers. The knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ is everything. How it
   works and how it calls upon Christians to work with it, the writer now
   explains, in 3-7 and 8-11.

   3     Inasmuch as his power divine has bestowed on us every requisite
   for life and piety by the knowledge of him who called us to his own
   glory and excellence--^4 bestowing on us thereby promises precious and
   supreme, that by means of them you may escape the corruption produced
   within-the world by lust, and participate in the divine nature ^5 for
   this very reason, do you contrive to make it your whole concern to
   furnish your faith with resolution, resolution with intelligence, ^6
   intelligence with self-control, self-control with stedfastness,
   stedfastness with piety, ^7 piety with brotherliness, brotherliness
   with Christian love.

   3

   Us answers to ours in ver. 1; the apostles originally receive the
   revelation, which they transmit to others. The faith was opened up to
   them that it might be passed on; divine promises were bestowed on us so
   that by means of them, handed on by the authoritative apostolic
   tradition (iii. 2), you may enjoy your share in their saving power.
   But, as the writer has spoken of our God and our Lord, it is plain that
   he is already grouping apostles and other Christians together, and that
   he uses you as a preacher addressing his audience; the stress on the
   validity and authority of the apostolic transmission of the gospel is
   not so marked as in Hebrews ii. 3, 4. These words played a large part
   in bringing John Wesley through his spiritual crisis in 1730. About
   five o'clock on the morning of May 24th, he opened his Bible at the
   words, There are given to us exceeding great and precious promises,
   even that ye should be partakers of the divine nature'; that day relief
   came to him, and (on June 4th) he notes in his diary: All these days I
   scarce remember to have opened the New Testament, but upon some great
   and precious promise. And I saw, more than ever, that the gospel is in
   truth but one great promise, from the beginning of it to the end.'

   4

   The ideas and even the language about divine power manifesting itself
   to human beings in order that they might participate in the divine
   nature through some knowledge of the deity, gained by sacramental or
   semi-physical means, often of an ecstatic character, were current in
   the Hellenistic philosophy and religious cults of the age. In terms of
   this contemporary faith the writer expresses his Christian beliefs,
   availing himself of forms and conceptions familiar to his readers. The
   personal fellowship with Christ, first verified by the apostles, is
   adequate for real life and piety, i.e. for the true life which, in a
   world of moral corruption, consists in piety or practical religion (see
   iii. 11 f.). This rules out theosophies which depreciated the
   historical revelation of Christ or reduced him to a position of
   relative importance in the saving order of redemption. The divine
   self-manifestation in Christ is complete; as conveyed in the apostolic
   tradition it does not require to be eked out by any scheme of aeons and
   angels, nor is it to be revised (iii. 4), as though some elements in it
   had been superseded. It is further defined as the intimate knowledge of
   him who called us to his own glory and excellence, i.e. to share his
   pre-eminent divine life, fully and finally manifested in the next world
   (ver. 11). Usually God calls' Christians, but the writer of a
   contemporary homily called 2 Clement (ix. 5) could write that Christ,
   the Lord who saved us, though originally Spirit, became flesh and
   called us,' and this is the meaning here, especially as Christ had
   personally called the apostles during his lifetime on earth.

   The object and end of Christian knowledge is moral and spiritual
   communion with Christ. But this destiny requires active participation
   on the part of believers. The historical revelation endowed men with
   exceptional promises of an undying divine life beyond this transient,
   material order of things; what Christ was and did opened a new outlook
   for men, encouraging them to hope and all its responsibilities, for
   thereby refers loosely to every requisite for life and piety. The
   revelation of the divine nature in Jesus Christ was full of promise. It
   is assumed that these promises will be fulfilled by the Lord, but what
   needs to be argued is the moral demand that they make upon Christians
   (as in iii. 14). Plutarch, in his Life of Aristides (vi.), laments that
   men feel the passion for immortality (a quality of God which they
   cannot share) far more than the passion for God's moral excellence,
   which is within their reach; but our author links both together.
   Immortality is a sure promise of God, and hopes of immortality are a
   moral power and responsibility; to participate in the divine nature,
   i.e. to reach the final glory and excellence, involves an escape from
   the moral decay or corruption produced within the world by lust. This
   is directed against the libertinism of the errorists (see ii. 19, 20).
   The spirit of lust is the spirit which prompts men to demand, Give me
   the portion of goods that falls to me,' the grasping desire for earthly
   things which results in moral deterioration. Ever since Plato, the idea
   of resembling God by shunning material preoccupations had been a
   current thought in religious philosophy; here it is applied to the
   renunciation of the world by those who aim at the Christian hope.

   5

   The positive response to the divine promises is now sketched (5-7) in a
   series of seven Christian graces or acquirements with which faith is to
   be supplied. Faith here, as in ver. 1, is the personal belief which is
   fundamental. But it must be provided with resolution, moral and mental
   energy. Someone has described conventional Christian experience as an
   initial spasm followed by a chronic inertia'; what our writer demands
   is a challenging, vital quality in faith. The Greek term (aretê) here
   carries its specific sense of prowess and power. Faith lives in a world
   of difficulties which have to be met frankly and courageously instead
   of being dodged. But zeal must be according to knowledge, and this
   energy requires to be supplied with intelligence, i.e. with insight and
   understanding, otherwise it may be misdirected. The Greek term (gnôsis)
   is deliberately applied to this quality of practical wisdom, instead of
   to the more speculative flights of contemporary theosophy. A resolute
   faith may be aggressive and enterprising, but it cannot afford to do
   without sagacity or shrewd intelligence. 6 Nor can intelligence work
   effectively apart from self-control--a warning much needed in view of
   the passionate, lax conduct of the errorists (ii. l0 f., iii. 3). The
   appetites to be mastered were not simply those of the flesh, but any
   passions of self-assertion and individual impulse; continence is
   included, but self-control is the opposite of any lack of
   self-restraint.

   Life has to encounter trials, however, as well as incitements to
   self-indulgence, and so stedfastness is further required in maintaining
   the Christian hope when it is contradicted (ii. 3 f.), and in adhering
   to Christian truth when it is denied (i. 16). This tenacity must be
   religious; supply it with piety. It is not a close-lipped stoical
   endurance or a dogged determination to hold on, but inspired by a sense
   of the divine purpose which is running through the trials of life.
   Stedfastness is to be reverent, not defiant. It acquiesces in God's
   will, 7 and it also turns kindly to other members of the brotherhood.
   Supply your piety with brotherliness, i.e. with brotherly kindness (see
   on 1 Peter i. 22); there was then, as there has always been, the danger
   of a piety or godliness which was inhuman, wrapped up in its own hopes
   and fears, and indifferent to the needs of the community. Even this is
   not enough. The affectionate temper must not be confined to members of
   the Christian community; supply brotherliness with Christian love for
   all men.

   Only by this discipline and development of the religious life is it
   possible to attain heaven (8-11).

   8     For as these qualities exist and increase with you, they render
   you active and fruitful in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ; ^9
   whereas he who has not these by him is blind, shortsighted, oblivious
   that he has been cleansed so from his erstwhile sins. ^10 So be the
   more eager, brothers, to ratify your calling and election, for as you
   practise these qualities you will never make a slip; ^11 you will thus
   be richly furnished with the right of entry into the eternal realm of
   our Lord and saviour Jesus Christ.

   8

   The practical development of the Christian life along these lines
   deepens and widens our personal experience and sense of Christ; it
   enables members of the community in their common life to penetrate into
   the meaning of the Lord's life and purpose. 9 We learn him as we live
   with him and for him. Anyone who neglects these graces shows that he
   has forgotten all about the change wrought in his life at baptism, when
   he was cleansed (so ii. 22) from his erstwhile sins; the great
   experience has meant nothing to him, for he has failed to follow it up
   by developing the new nature and under-standing what the divine
   promises involved. 10 So, in view of all this, be the more eager
   yourselves. It is an urgent imperative, as in iii. 14. Ratify or attest
   by a full, consistent life your calling and election (a hendiadys). To
   make a slip, such as a careless, indifferent Christian might make, is
   to collapse on the road to the eternal realm; it is a fall into deadly
   sin (see Judas 24).

   11

   The term furnished echoes ver. 5; furnish your Christian faith with all
   that it requires, and you will be furnished in turn with the entry into
   the future realm of the Lord. The Greek term for right of entry carries
   with it a sense of triumph. The phrase, the eternal realm, is quite
   original, but the thought is the same as in 1 Peter v. 11; it is the
   characteristically Christian expression for what Hellenistic piety
   called participating in the divine nature (ver. 4), though realm is
   nowhere else employed in the epistle.

   My one aim and constant endeavour is to keep you mindful of this vital
   creed (12-15), which is guaranteed by apostolic testimony (16-19a).

   12    Hence I mean to keep on reminding you of this, although you are
   aware of it and are fixed in the Truth as it is; ^13 so long as I am in
   this tent, I deem it proper to stir you up by way of reminder, ^14
   since I know my tent must be folded up very soon as indeed our Lord
   Jesus Christ has shown me. ^15 Yes, and I will see to it that even when
   I am gone, you will keep this constantly in mind.

   12

   In view of the critical importance of the issues, I mean to keep on
   reminding you of them. The Greek is awkward but the sense is plain. So
   is the courtesy (as in Romans xv. 14 and Judas 5). The Truth (see on 1
   Peter i. 22), as it is means the Christian creed of life in the
   complete form in which it has reached them (a similar phrase in
   Colossians i. 5, 6); there is no allusion to any larger experience or
   insight 13 which may be expected. The metaphorical use of tent for the
   body was common, 14 and had been introduced into the Christian
   vocabulary by Paul (2 Corinthians v. 4). Very soon is a poetical term,
   meaning imminent.' When and how Christ revealed this to Peter we do not
   know; the story in John xxi. 18, 19 refers to something quite
   different, to a long life crowned by martyrdom. The line of thought is,
   that while he proposes to recall them to their Christian duty during
   the short time left to him, he will make provision for some lasting
   record of it, to serve after he has gone. 15 But what was this
   permanent record by means of which the readers might keep constantly in
   mind the apostolic testimony? (a) The present epistle as a written
   statement of the faith, to which reference could be made? (b) The
   gospel of Mark, in which Peter's reminiscences were embodied? Or, if
   the words are taken to mean a direct composition, (c) some Petrine
   writing like The Gospel of Peter or The Preaching of Peter? The future
   tense of I will see to it tells against (a), unless he is referring to
   measures taken for the wide circulation of the epistle. It is in favour
   of (b) that the earliest tradition (preserved in Irenaeus) about the
   date of the gospel of Mark ascribes it to Mark after the decease' of
   Peter (the same Greek term as is used here for when I am gone), when
   Mark the disciple and interpreter of Peter transmitted to us what Peter
   had preached.' The data are too few, and faint, however, to enable us
   to do more than guess, at this point. What the writer does make clear,
   in the following passage (16-19a), is that such apostolic testimony is
   worth recalling, since the Christian hope was guaranteed not merely by
   O.T. prophecy, but by apostolic eye-witnesses of Jesus Christ.

   16    For it was no fabricated fables that we followed when we reported
   to you the power and advent of our Lord Jesus Christ; we were admitted
   to the spectacle of his sovereignty, ^17 when he was invested with
   honour and glory by God the Father, and when the following voice was
   borne to him from the sublime Glory, This is my son, the Beloved, in
   whom I delight.' ^18 That voice borne from heaven we heard, we who were
   beside him on the sacred hill, ^19 and thus we have gained fresh
   confirmation of the prophetic word.

   16

   The we now is the apostles once more, as in ver. 1. Our testimony is
   not a handful of illusions; we repudiate the charges and the methods of
   the errorists.' The reference in fabricated fables is either to
   teachers who thus discredited the historical testimony of the gospels,
   or to the fantastic speculations of some gnostic schools; the Greek
   word for fables is rendered myths in passages like 2 Timothy iv. 4 and
   1 Timothy i. 4. Ultra-spiritualists derided particularly the divine
   promise of the second Advent (iii. 4), and this promise is reaffirmed;
   it was no hallucination, our account of the power and advent of our
   Lord Jesus Christ, i.e. the risen power which will be manifested fully
   at his second Advent (so Mark viii. 38, ix. 1).

   The term for advent (parousia) suggested a royal visit or arrival, and
   this regal significance is brought out do what follows; we were
   admitted to the spectacle (literally, initiated into the supreme
   mystery) of his sovereignty or divine majesty at the transfiguration,
   when we first realized his divine honour and authority. The apostolic
   report of his power and advent, was a testimony to what was yet to be
   manifested fully; but there had been a significant anticipation during
   his lifetime, of which Peter and his fellows had been eye-witnesses.
   For some reason the transfiguration is appealed to as a foreshadowing
   of the second Advent rather than the resurrection; 17 there Jesus
   received honour and glory from God the Father (i.e. his Father), shown
   in the dazzling light which we saw shining from his person. There too
   from--the original apo of the Latin Vulgate and the Syriac versions was
   soon altered into the hupo of the traditional text (i.e. by')--the
   sublime Glory (a reverential periphrasis for heaven or the divine
   Presence), the voice came to him, which is quoted freely. The writer
   assumes that his readers knew the synoptic tale, but his citation
   agrees with none of the three versions; he inserts the Greek term for
   I' in the clause in whom I delight, for the sake of emphasis. 18 We
   heard that voice, he declares, we who were beside him on the sacred
   hill, sacred because it was the scene of this divine manifestation. All
   this stress on the transfiguration as heralding the second Advent
   sounds at first sight strange, for in the gospels no such
   interpretation of the scene is suggested. But in all three traditions
   (Matthew xvi., Mark viii.-ix., and Luke ix.) it is introduced
   immediately after a reference to the second coming of the Lord in
   glory' or with power,' and in the Ethiopic text of The Apocalypse of
   Peter (see M. R. James, The Apocryphal N. T., pp. 518 f.) the
   transfiguration is blended with the ascension, whilst Peter speaks of
   the hill on which he showed us the second coming in the kingdom that
   passeth not away.'

   It is not difficult to understand why the writer omitted the words hear
   ye him' from the divine voice, for this concentration of attention upon
   Jesus in contrast to the O.T. law and prophets, who are thereby
   superseded, would not have suited his purpose. So far from viewing the
   transfiguration as superseding the O.T. prophecies, 19 he explains that
   thus (by our experience of the transfiguration) we have gained fresh
   confirmation of the prophetic word, i.e. of the O.T. prophecies about
   Christ, especially in connexion with his glory and second Advent; this
   fulfilment has strengthened our faith in these prophecies. It is an
   argument on the lines of that urged in the apostle's speech in Acts
   iii. 18 f., where he finds O.T. predictions of the second Advent as
   well as of the sufferings of Christ, who is kept in heaven till the
   period of the great Restoration,' of which ages ago God spoke by the
   lips of His holy prophets.' By the time that this epistle was written,
   the engrossing interest of Christian apologetic lay in the proof from
   prophecy. Not long afterwards Origen declared that clear proofs of the
   inspiration of the O.T. could not well be given until Christ came to
   earth. Till then the Law and the prophets were liable to suspicion as
   not being truly divine, but the coming of Christ set them forth clearly
   as records made by the gracious aid of heaven' (De Principiis, iv. 6).
   It was all the more important for the writer to emphasize this value of
   the O.T., as some errorists depreciated it.

   But the connexion between this sentence and the following lies here; if
   we apostles have been led to appreciate the O.T. prophecies, how
   important they must be for you!' Hence he pleads for close attention to
   them (19a-21).

   19 Pray attend to that word; it shines like a lamp within a darksome
   spot, till the Day dawns and the daystar rises within your hearts--^20
   understanding this, at the outset, that no prophetic scripture allows a
   man to interpret it by himself; ^21 for prophecy never came by human
   impulse, it was when carried away by the holy Spirit that the holy men
   of God spoke.

   19

   The O.T. prophecies, especially as they are confirmed by such facts as
   the transfiguration just mentioned, will illuminate your minds
   sufficiently about the second Advent till it actually happens. So
   ponder them' amid--


   The smoke and stir of this dim spot

   Which men call Earth.

   The present world is a darksome spot, where you need this lamp of
   prophecy to guide your steps; all will be clear when the Day of the
   Lord's Advent dawns. The writer twists the metaphor to suit his
   purpose. The daystar rises before the dawn, but here it is the outward
   signs of the Day which clear up the inward uncertainties of Christians;
   the open manifestation of the Advent is the means of enlightening them.

   20

   Attend to the prophetic anticipations of Christ, but under-stand the
   principle of their interpretation. False teachers (ii. 1, 2 f.) were
   disseminating novel views of the O.T., claiming revelations which
   superseded the prophets of old or which undervalued their witness to
   Christ as the Church understood it; hence this protest against such
   unauthorized interpretations as out of keeping with the nature of the
   prophecies themselves. No prophetic scripture allows a man to interpret
   it by himself, out of his own head; it is not susceptible of any
   private interpretation,' the Greek term for private' or out of his own
   head,' being the familiar opposite to authoritative' or inspired.'
   Individual ingenuity cannot solve the problems of prophecy, because 21
   individual ingenuity was not at the origin of prophecy; prophecy never
   came by human impulse, by any conscious cleverness on the part of an
   individual, but it was when carried away by the holy Spirit (under an
   overpowering divine impulse) that the holy men of God spoke, i.e. the
   prophets, holy as possessed by God.

   Here, as in iii. 16, the writer warns his readers against the danger of
   unauthorized interpretations of the O.T. Apart from the Spirit which
   produced the prophecies, how can they be understood? It is implied that
   the Spirit belongs to the Church where the apostolic testimony is
   preserved, but the writer does not enter into further details. He is
   simply putting members on their guard against plausible contemporary
   misapplications of the O.T.; no interpretation is valid if it ignores
   the Spirit, for that is to miss the genius of prophecy. We to-day ask,
   how are such prophecies to be interpreted according to the Spirit? but
   there is no answer to this question any more than to the other, How did
   the Spirit act upon the consciousness of the original prophets?--except
   that the use of carried away as an equivalent for inspired' suggests
   that the writer considered the prophets had been mouthpieces of God in
   the sense popularized by the Hellenistic theology of a man like Philo.
   Those who prophesy,' says Justin Martyr (Apol., i. 33), speaking of the
   O.T. prophets, are divinely inspired (literally, carried away by God)
   by nothing but the divine Word.' This current view went back to Philo,
   who (e.g. in Quis Rerum Div. Haer., 51, 52) explains that the state of
   inspiration is an ecstasy, in which the human faculty of reason is
   replaced by the divine Spirit; the true prophet is rapt into a frenzy
   in which the Spirit uses his unconsciousness to predict and reveal the
   future. Such ecstasy is only possible to pure, godly souls; for the
   prophet utters nothing that belongs to himself; Another is prompting
   him to utter what lies beyond his own range. And as it is wrong for any
   worthless man to be an interpreter of God, so no rascal can be divinely
   inspired, in the strict sense of the term; the wise alone is the
   echoing instrument of God, sounding as he is invisibly struck by Him.'
   This corresponds to the theory behind our writer's words on holy men of
   God alone being swept into prophecy by the divine Spirit.

   Prophecy? Yes, but while there were holy men of God, there were
   pseudo-prophets too, as there are to-day. This leads the writer to the
   special theme of his letter; the next section (ii. 1-22) is a sustained
   indignant exposure of their practices and principles, moulded on the
   epistle of Judas.

   ii.

   1     Still, false prophets did appear among the People, as among you
   also there will be false teachers, men who will insinuate destructive
   heresies, even disowning the Lord who ransomed them; they bring rapid
   destruction on themselves, ^2and many will follow their immorality
   (thanks to them the true Way will be maligned); ^3 in their lust they
   will exploit you with cunning arguments--men whose doom comes apace
   from of old, and destruction is awake upon their trail.

   1

   False teachers, the term for these pseudo-leaders of religion, does not
   occur elsewhere in the N.T.; in Justin Martyr's Dialogue (lxxxii.), as
   there were false prophets in the days of your holy prophets, so among
   us to-day there are many false teachers,' and The Apocalypse of Peter
   begins with this statement of the Lord, many of them will be false
   prophets and teach various destructive dogmas and ways.' The heresies
   which they adroitly and subtly spread affected both faith and morals,
   though the only explicit charge on the former score is that they
   actually disowned the Lord (literally liege, as in Judas 4) who
   ransomed them--probably alluding to some heretical view of the person
   of Christ. But the repudiation of the Saviour might refer to
   inconsistent life; it is to this at anyrate that the writer turns, to
   their immorality (the charge of Judas 4), which brings discredit on
   true Christianity (here called the Way, as the practical aspect is to
   the front).

   In the homily called 2 Clement (xiii.) we read: When pagans hear from
   our lips the oracles of God, they marvel at their beauty and greatness;
   but afterwards, when they discover that our deeds are unworthy of our
   words, they turn to malign the faith, declaring that it is a fable and
   a delusion'--a comment on Isaiah lii. 5 which is quoted here as by Paul
   (in Romans ii. 23, 24). 2 Many will follow their lead, so plausible and
   persuasive are their arguments; in their lust (particularly for
   money--the writer uses deliberately a term which suggested lower
   sensual cravings such as 3 those to which their principles pandered)
   they will exploit you (see on Judas 11, 16) cunningly, turning their
   religious views to personal profit. This is to put the readers on their
   guard. But before describing the deplorable and deadly effects of their
   teaching on their victims (in 18-22), the writer depicts the rapid
   destruction which they bring upon themselves. It is swift and certain.
   God's judgment may seem to be delayed, as these teachers actually
   declared (iii. 3 f.), but the Advent is imminent; they may pooh-pooh
   the idea of a final retribution, but they are doomed men, on the verge
   of punishment. The writer does not find any prophetic prediction of
   their fate, as Judas did (4, 14-15), but it was a commonplace of
   Christian apocalyptic that the appearance of such errorists was a sign
   of the last days (Matthew xxiv. 24 and 1 Timothy iv. 1). The doom that
   from of old overtook such impious offenders is hot upon their trail.

   Then follows in one long, involved sentence (4-10a) a denunciation of
   the errorists, combined with reassurance for the faithful. Three
   historical examples of God punishing sin are given, but the second and
   the third suggest the companion thought of God preserving the loyal
   minority; so, instead of concluding that God will punish these
   errorists, he alters the thought in ver. 9, putting foremost God's
   mercy to the good.

   4     For if God did not spare angels who had sinned, but committing
   them to pits of the nether gloom in Tartarus, reserved them under
   punishment for doom: ^5 if he did not spare the ancient world but kept
   Noah, the herald of righteousness, safe with seven others, when he let
   loose the deluge on the world of impious men: ^6 if he reduced the
   cities of Sodom and Gomorra to ashes when he sentenced them to
   devastation, and thus gave the impious an example of what was in store
   for them, ^7 but rescued righteous Lot who was sore burdened by the
   immoral behaviour of the, lawless (^8 for when that righteous man
   resided among them, by what he saw and heard his righteous soul was
   vexed day after day with their unlawful doings)--^9 then be sure the
   Lord knows how to rescue pious folk from trial, and how to keep the
   unrighteous under punishment till the day of doom, ^10 particularly
   those who fall in with the polluting appetite of the flesh and despise
   the Powers celestial.

   The underlying thought is that God will act as He has always done, to
   punish sinners and to preserve the faithful. This is His character in
   the moral order, and it may be relied upon; history offers examples of
   His procedure which are a salutary warning and a consolation. Instead
   of beginning with the first instance cited by Judas (5, 6), he starts
   more chronologically with the second, the doom upon the rebellious
   angels, adding some touches of his own (ver. 4). The Greek term for
   pits, seirois, is so unusual that it was soon altered to seirais
   (chains'), which had the recommendation of agreeing with the language
   of Judas. Tartarus had been already introduced into Jewish apocalyptic
   by the book of Enoch (xx. 2); it had a certain appositeness, since in
   Greek mythology it was the place of punishment for rebellious celestial
   powers like the Titans.

   5

   In the second example, of the deluge, Noah is called the herald of
   righteousness, herald meaning preacher' as in 1 Timothy ii. 7. Noah
   preached repentance, and those who obeyed were saved' (Clem. Rom.
   vii.). This tradition went back to Jewish sources, where Noah had
   already acquired the halo of a preacher to his evil generation. Many
   angels of God,' says Josephus (Antiquities, i. 3, 1), lay with women
   and begat sons who were violent and who despised all good, on account
   of their reliance on their own strength; for tradition goes that they
   dared to act like the giants of whom the Greeks tell. But Noah,
   displeased and distressed at their behaviour, tried to induce them to
   alter their dispositions and conduct for the better.'

   6

   In the allusion to the destruction of Sodom and Gomorra (the third
   example, as in Judas), the Greek word for reduce to ashes is an
   out-of-the-way term, which commonly meant covering with ashes' (as in
   an eruption of Vesuvius). A punishment by fire follows a punishment by
   water. In the third book of Maccabees, which for a time had a vogue in
   the Eastern Church, this passage occurs (ii. 4, 5): Thou didst destroy
   those who aforetime worked iniquity, among whom were Giants relying on
   their strength and boldness, letting loose on them a boundless flood of
   water. Thou didst burn up with fire and brimstone the men of Sodom,
   workers of arrogance, who had become notorious for their crimes, making
   them an example to all who should come afterwards.' Our passage seems
   like a reminiscence of this as well as of Judas 7, 7 but the writer
   proceeds to dwell on the rescue of righteous Lot. The Wisdom of Solomon
   (x. 6, 7) had already spoken of the rescue of this righteous man, while
   the impious were perishing, who fled from the fire falling on
   Pentapolis, of whose wickedness a waste land still smoking is still
   appointed as a testimony' (see on Judas 7). Sore burdened may be
   another reminiscence of 3 Maccabees (iii. 2), where the prayer is, Give
   ear to us who are sore burdened by an unholy and profane man.'8 Lawless
   (only here and in iii. 17 in the N.T.) means those who defy the divine
   law. In Clem. Rom. xi. 1, For his hospitality and piety Lot was saved
   from Sodom when the entire countryside was condemned by fire and
   brimstone, and the Lord made it clear that he does not forsake those
   who hope in him, but delivers to punishment and torture those who turn
   to others.' 9 This is the thought of 9 and 10, where trial is exposure
   to surroundings that bear hard on faith and goodness. Pious folk
   sometimes, like Noah, can do their best to testify publicly; sometimes
   they can do no more than be shocked and distressed as they maintain
   their character. (Our great security against sin,' said Newman, lies in
   being shocked at it.') But they are never left to themselves. The Lord
   knows how to rescue them, and that soon, by a similar catastrophe (iii.
   9 f.), it is assumed.

   10

   The writer now returns to the errorists, their antinomian practices (as
   in ver. 2), and their irreverent attitude towards angels (as in Judas
   8). This blasphemous depreciation of angels leads him into a bitter
   attack on their general bearing and behaviour (10b-16). The severity of
   tone is not unexampled. Thus Bunyan (see on Judas 19) speaks of the
   cursed principles' of the Ranters, the seventeenth-century English
   analogue to these antinomians; and Richard Baxter, who also loathed and
   lashed them as he encountered them in the Commonwealth army, declared,
   I am an unreconcileable enemy to their doctrines. I had as lieve tell
   them so as hide it. The more I pray God to illuminate me in these
   things, the more I am animated against them. The more I read their own
   books, the more do I see the vanity of their conceits. But above all,
   when I do but open the Bible I can seldom meet with a leaf that is not
   against them.' This is one of the most pugnacious leaves.

   10    Daring, presumptuous creatures! they are not afraid to scoff at
   the angelic Glories; ^11 whereas even angels, superior in might and
   power, lay no scoffing charge against these before the Lord. ^12 But
   those people!--like irrational animals, creatures of mere instinct,
   born for capture and corruption, they scoff at what they are ignorant
   of; ^13 and like animals they will suffer corruption and ruin, done out
   of the profits of their evil-doing. Pleasure for them is revelling in
   open daylight spots and blots, with their dissipated revelling, as they
   carouse in your midst!--^14 their eyes are full of harlotry, insatiable
   for sin; their own hearts trained to lust, they beguile unsteady souls.
   Accursed generation! ^15 they have gone wrong by leaving the straight
   road, by following the road of Balaam son of Bosor, who liked the
   profits of evil-doing--^16 but he got reproved for his malpractice: a
   dumb ass spoke with human voice and checked the prophet's infatuation.

   10

   The first charge is repeated from Judas (8, 9), but in rebuking their
   audacity the writer generalizes the allusion to Michael and omits the
   details about. 11 Satan, so that against these (i.e. the devil and his
   angels) is left vague, whereas in Judas it is pointed. 12 Before the
   Lord is a pictorial detail, added to make up for the omission of the
   retort, The Lord rebuke you.' In ver. 12 the thought of Judas (10) is
   less happily expressed. The fatal result of scoffing at angels was
   often noted in connexion with the story of Sodom, as, e.g., in The
   Testament of Asher (vii.): Be not like Sodom, my children, which sinned
   against the angels of God and perished for ever.' 13 Done out of the
   profits of their evil-doing is a play on words already present in the
   Greek--adikoumenoi . . . adikias; but as this use of adikoumenoi was
   unfamiliar, it was changed into komioumenoi, or receive,' in the
   traditional text.

   The writer had already mentioned (in ver. 3) the self-seeking temper of
   the errorists, and he returns to it in ver. 15, but meantime he dwells
   on their immoral practices. In open daylight seems to be a reminiscence
   of The Assumption of Moses (vii. 4 f.), where the proud religionists
   are cunning in all their affairs, loving banquets at every hour of the
   day . . . filled with lawlessness and iniquity from sunrise to sunset.'
   They were luxurious and self-indulgent, disgracefully dissipated. The
   Greek term apatais literally meant deceivings' (A.V.), but in
   Hellenistic Greek had acquired the sense of pleasure' or delight' (as
   in Mark iv. 19); at an early period it was changed to agapais
   (love-feasts), 14 perhaps owing to the parallel in Judas 12. The
   context shows that lust here (see above, on ver. 3) denotes sensual
   indulgence; the doctrine that spiritual natures could with impunity
   indulge in sexual excesses and that these might even be practised as
   expressions of mystical love, was only too likely to appeal to certain
   natures, unsteady souls, as the writer calls them (in contrast to i.
   12). 15 But he turns back to the errorists themselves (15, 16), who
   like Balaam claimed prophetic visions and set their hearts on gain (see
   Judas 11). He leaves out Cain and Korah, but expands the reference to
   Balaam by mentioning the incident of the ass (Numbers xxii. 21 f.). 16
   Bosor was the name of a town in Gilead, which had no connexion with
   Balaam; it is a mistake for Beor, and the correction was made in some
   early texts.

   A closing paragraph (17-22) on their iniquities describes the
   disastrous effect of their teaching upon their adherents.

   17 These people are waterless fountains and mists driven by a squall,
   for whom the nether gloom of darkness is reserved. ^18 By talking
   arrogant futilities they beguile. with the sensual lure of fleshly
   passion those who are just escaping from the company of misconduct--^19
   promising them freedom, when they are themselves enslaved to corruption
   (for a man is the slave of whatever overpowers him). ^20 After escaping
   the pollutions of the world by the knowledge of our Lord and saviour
   Jesus Christ, if they get entangled and overpowered again, the last
   state is worse for them than the first. ^21 Better had they never known
   the Way of righteousness, than to know it and then turn back from the
   holy command which was committed to them. ^22 They verify the truth of
   the proverb:

   The dog turns back to what he has vomited,
   the sow when washed will wallow in the mire.'

   17

   The writer changes the rainless clouds of Judas (12) into waterless
   (same Greek word as rainless) fountains (yielding nothing to help men,
   for all their appearance) and mists (darkening the light, for all their
   pretences to enlightenment), but this leaves the allusion to nether
   gloom out of place. 18 The seductive appeal of their moral or rather
   immoral principles, backed by rhetoric (which is contemptuously called
   arrogant futilities), has been already denounced (14), but the writer
   is indignant and underlines his warning. Beguile implies the clever use
   of a bait or lure. I, using adroit words,' says Milton's Comas--


   Baited with reasons not unplausible,

   Wind me into the easy-hearted man,

   And hug him into snares.'

   What chance have recent converts from paganism against the specious
   argument of these religionists that Christian freedom means freedom
   from the moral law? The words throb with the righteous passion of a man
   who had seen such men and women suffering a moral collapse under
   libertine spiritual' teaching. 19 Promising them freedom from the law
   of God, when they are themselves the slaves of passion! The
   inconsistency of it!


   Licence they mean when they cry Liberty;

   For who loves that must first be wise and good.

   Paul had had to warn his converts long ago (Galatians v. 13) on this
   very point, but our writer is dealing with leaders who instilled
   religious teaching that led to moral anarchy, and in 20-22 he depicts
   the ruinous consequences of it for the victims. If newly converted
   people (he uses the language of i. 3-4) relapse, i.e. give way to the
   very immorality from which Christianity saves them, then the last state
   for them is worse than the first. 20 This is a reminiscence (see on
   iii. 10) of the saying of Jesus preserved in Matthew xii. 45. The
   responsibility is placed upon the converts themselves. They may be
   unsteady souls, inexperienced and raw, but they are not mere dupes;
   those who mislead them are blamed and doomed, but the converts
   themselves are treated as morally accountable for their actions. 21 The
   Way of righteousness is practically synonymous with the true Way (ver.
   2) or the straight road (ver. 15), and another expression for
   Christianity as a practical authoritative code of life is the holy
   command (see iii. 2) committed to Christians (see Judas 3), i.e. the
   faith viewed as the revelation of God's will as the standard and
   inspiration of life for His People. For individuals just emancipated
   from paganism and still swayed by the associations of the lax morality
   of the age, to make the inner light the supreme criterion of right and
   wrong, or to regard mere morality as beneath the level of an
   emancipated Christian, was to court wild dangers. It was the sense of
   this that helped to recommend the O.T. with its decalogue and ethical
   teaching to the church, when gnostic religious philosophers would have
   rejected it. Our writer does not enter into this, however; he simply
   reiterates that Christianity is a revelation which involved moral
   enterprise and moral obedience.

   22

   As for apostates, who forsake true Christianity for such circles of
   sanctified licentiousness, they merely illustrate the old adage about
   the dog and the sow! It is a double proverb. The first part occurs in
   Proverbs xxvi. 11, the second is from an ancient Oriental story
   preserved in The Book of Ahikar, a pre-Christian collection of parables
   and sayings, where we read, My son, thou hast behaved like the swine
   which went to the bath with people of quality, and when he came out,
   saw a stinking drain and went and rolled himself in it.' The
   combination of the dog and the pig as proverbial illustrations of
   unclean instincts was not uncommon; Horace (Epp. i. 2. 26) says that if
   Ulysses had drunk the cup of Circe he would have sunk to the low level
   of' a dirty dog or a pig that loves the mud.' There is an implicit
   allusion here to the cleansing water of baptism (as in i. 9). The
   stern, severe warning of the whole passage (20-22) is clinched by this
   rough proverb; the writer evidently felt that plain speaking was wisest
   in the circumstances, and his speech is even more plain than the
   equally serious warning in Hebrews vi. 4-6 that any deliberate
   renunciation of Christ is past forgiveness; in ver. 22 there is a note
   of contempt for low natures upon whom baptism has produced no effect
   what-soever. The leaders had been dubbed mere animals (ver. 12),
   actuated by physical instincts, for all their spiritual pretensions.
   Their adherents are now compared to what an Oriental regarded as the
   dirtiest of brutes, not simply worse than any pagan suckled in a creed
   outworn' (21), but on a level no higher than the existence of dogs and
   pigs.

   Now the writer resumes the first person singular, as he returns to the
   theme of i. 5-21, after the outburst of ii. 1-22.

   iii.

   1     This is the second letter I have already written to you, beloved,
   stirring up your pure mind by way of reminder, ^2 to have you recollect
   the words spoken by the holy prophets beforehand and the command given
   by your apostles from the Lord and saviour.

   1

   The first letter, to which this is a sequel, is First Peter, which had
   by this time become well known to the Church at large, and it is to
   this catholic Church that the present epistle is addressed by the
   writer in the name of Peter. It is not sufficiently considered,' says
   Dr. Johnson as a moralist, that men more frequently require to be
   reminded than informed.' Our author had considered this. His allusion
   to the pure mind of Christians is another touch of courtesy, such as in
   i. 12. Philosophers like Plato had spoken of pure intellect or mind,'
   meaning thought detached as far as possible from the bodily senses, and
   the writer uses this phrase for the Christian mind which had been
   uncontaminated by any taint of heresy' (i. 4, ii. 20). It is a loose,
   untechnical application of the phrase.

   2 The language of Judas 17 is then expanded by the addition of an
   allusion to the holy prophets of the O.T., with their predictions of
   the Advent--the idea already urged in i. 19 f. He has already referred
   to Christianity as an authoritative revelation or command (see above on
   ii. 21), embodying the divine will for life. This language of command
   became popular in Johannine circles, particularly in connexion with the
   new command of love. But the writer here does not refer to any specific
   command of Jesus; he is thinking of the Christian creed as the decisive
   rule for regulating faith and morals, for determining not only what was
   to be believed (3-10) but what Christians were to do in the light of
   their beliefs about the Advent. He prefers command to law,' possibly to
   avoid confusion with the Mosaic code of Judaism.

   The words your apostles are not unambiguous. Had the epistle been
   directed to a special church or group of churches, the apostles might
   be those missionaries who had founded them. But in a general pastoral
   like the present, the phrase means the twelve apostles (i.e. men like
   myself, i. 16) regarded as the transmitters of the gospel to the church
   at large. They were in closer touch with the church than the prophets
   of the O.T.; hence he calls them your apostles, as Judas had called
   them the apostles.' One writer calls them the holy apostles' (Ephesians
   iii. 5); our writer, however, confines the term holy to the O.T.
   prophets (i. 21). He reminds Christians that they must attend to the
   apostolic gospel no less than to the prophetic messages (i. 19) which
   anticipated it, and especially to that prediction in the apostolic
   tradition which announced the rise of scoffing objections to the
   doctrine of the immediate Advent.

   In what follows, the writer starts from Judas 17-18, but he develops
   his argument (3-7) along independent lines. No prospect of any change
   in the universe, such as the Advent implies? Yes, there has been a
   violent change already, and there will be another and a final.

   3     To begin with, you know that mockers will come with their
   mockeries in the last days, men who go by their own passions, ^4
   asking, where is His promised advent? Since the day our fathers fell
   asleep, things remain exactly as they were from the beginning of
   creation.' ^5 They wilfully ignore the fact that heavens existed long
   ago, and an earth which the word of God formed of water and by water.
   ^6 By water the then-existing world was deluged and destroyed, ^7 but
   the present heavens and earth are treasured up by the same word for
   fire, reserved for the day when the impious are doomed and destroyed.

   3

   In some quarters the death of Christians before the return of Jesus
   from heaven roused anxious fears, for their friends wondered whether
   they had not thus missed salvation. This perplexity, felt by genuine
   believers, we have already met in 1 Peter iv. 6. In other quarters the
   same fact roused sceptical questionings about the Advent itself,
   especially as the first generation passed away and there was no sign of
   the end at all. 4 Our fathers have died, men said; the Advent of the
   Lord promised in their day has not come; the Advent was to be the end
   of the present world, and the world is as it has always been. This
   objection had apparently passed into writing. Clement of Rome (xxiii.)
   quotes a scripture' in which sceptics are rebuked for doubting the
   Advent by saying, We have heard these things even in the days of our
   fathers, and here have we grown old and none of these things has
   happened to us.' The same word is cited in the homily called 2 Clement
   (xi.) from a prophetic word,' evidently some primitive Christian
   apocalypse which has not come down to us. Our author has it in his mind
   here. The objection he has to meet is not merely that the Advent has
   not occurred during the previous generation when it was promised and
   expected, but that it is contradicted by the stability of the universe.
   His answer is (5-7) that the deluge proves the universe is not stable,
   and that it is to be ended by fire. A convulsion of water ended the
   first world with 5 its heavens and earth which had been formed or
   composed of water and by water. This is an allusion to the cosmogony of
   Genesis i., where God's word fashioned the earth or dry land out of the
   primaeval watery chaos by separating the waters of the sea; it is a
   loose, amplifying phrase such as the writer loved, to bring out the
   fact that water was the medium of the original earth's creation. The
   sentence is awkwardly expressed. Heavens existed long ago stands by
   itself, but the skies were also composed by the word of God, and both
   skies and earth (the Hebrew equivalent for the universe) represent the
   then-existing world which was deluged and destroyed at the flood; water
   constituted the first world and water destroyed it. 6 Another loose
   term is di hôn (the plural), rendered by water; the singular would have
   been correct, but the plural probably was used to suggest the two
   waters referred to above. In the vision of the deluge seen by Enoch
   (Enoch lxxxiii.), the heaven collapsed and fell on the earth . . . and
   the earth was swallowed up in a great abyss,' whereas in Second Peter
   the doom concentrates upon the earth, at the inundation. The argument
   is that while water once destroyed the world--so that things have not
   remained exactly as they were from the beginning of creation--fire is
   to be the doom of the present heavens and earth, which are treasured up
   (a grim destiny!) by the same word (as created the first universe) for
   fire, i.e. for God's doom on the impious (see ii. 5).

   This is the solitary reference in the N.T. to the current idea of the
   universe ending in a conflagration. Josephus (Antiquities, i. 2)
   mentions a prediction of Adam that the world would be twice destroyed
   by water and by fire, and the far-spread idea of a final bonfire of the
   universe had entered Jewish apocalyptic; it is voiced specially in the
   Sibylline oracles, where it differs from the Stoic cosmogony, in which
   there was a periodic renovation of the universe by means of fire. The
   Sibyl and Hystaspes,' says Justin Martyr (Apol., i. 20), "said that
   corruptible things would be dissolved by fire; the philosophers who are
   called Stoics declare that God himself is to be dissolved into fire,
   and that after this change the world will be renewed. . . . In
   asserting that there will be a conflagration we use the language of the
   Stoics, but,' he adds, our doctrine is not theirs in essence. The
   belief was popular in Roman as well as in Greek mythology, and it
   entered Christian apocalyptic at an early period. The writer alludes to
   it here as a familiar conception of the end, in order to meet the first
   objection taken to the doctrine of the Advent. He shows some
   independence in his development of the general theme. Thus he follows
   the, book of Enoch in adding the heavens to the earth as having been
   destroyed at the deluge; the tale of Genesis spoke only of the earth in
   this connexion. But he, adds the heavens to the earth in the
   expectation of the future (ver. 13), whereas the book of Enoch confined
   its outlook to a new heaven; thus in xci. 16:


   The first heaven shall depart and pass away,

   and a new heaven shall appear.

   Our author, like the prophet John (Revelation xxi. 1), expects a new
   earth as well as a new heaven, though, unlike John, he anticipates the
   removal of the first stained universe by fire. This idea caught the
   imagination of the later church, as is plain from the opening lines of
   the great mediaeval hymn:


   Dies irae, dies ilia

   Solvet saeclum in favilla.

   George Herbert echoed it in the last stanza of his poem on Decay:


   I see the world grows old, when as the heat

   Of Thy great Love, once spread, as in an urn

   Doth closet up itself and still retreat,

   Cold sin still forcing it--till it return,

   And calling Justice all things burn.

   His second argument is against misconceptions of the divine delay
   (8-9). It is addressed to believers who were apt to be impatient.

   8 Beloved, you must not ignore this one fact, that with the Lord a
   single day is like a thousand years, and a thousand 9 years are like a
   single day. ^9 The Lord is not slow with what he promises, according to
   certain people's idea of slowness; no, he is longsuffering for your
   sake, he does not wish any to perish but all to betake them to
   repentance.

   8

   The scoffers wilfully ignored one fact; believers were apt to ignore
   another, namely, the truth underlying the words of Psalm xc. 4, with
   the Lord a thousand years are like a single day.' Jewish writers had
   used this text, as Christian writers afterwards did, to explain the use
   of the term day' in the Creation-tales of Genesis, but this is a new
   application of it. The writer ignores any doctrine of a millennium.
   That line of prophecy was popular in his day, but evidently it did not
   appeal to him. He simply quotes the text to show that delay as measured
   by actual time does not apply to the eternal God;


   Long the decrees of Heaven

   Delay, for longest time to him is short.

   What is time to God? If He seems to delay, it is not, as 9 certain
   people imagine, because He is careless or powerless, but because He is
   merciful and patient, longsuffering (see 1 Peter iii. 20) for your
   sake. The early reading dia brings this out better than eis (to
   us-ward'), and your is more apposite than our. He does not wish any to
   perish, but all to betake them (only here in N.T.) to repentance. Do
   you not know, says Paul, speaking of this patient longsuffering, though
   not in connexion with the Advent, that his kindness is meant to make
   you repent?' In 1 Timothy ii. 4, God our Saviour desires all men to be
   saved.' This is the interpretation of the delay offered by the writer;
   God is really putting off the end as long as He can, to give you a
   fuller chance. If He seems slow with what he promises, it is in order
   to make the promise available to as large a number as possible.

   The day of the Lord is sure to come (5-7), and its delay is a proof of
   the divine generosity (8-9). These two truths are now reiterated, the
   former in 10-14, the latter in 15 f.

   10    The day of the Lord will come like a thief, when the heavens will
   vanish with crackling roar, the stars will be' set ablaze and melt, the
   earth and all its works will disappear. ^11 Now as all things are thus
   to be dissolved, what holy and pious men ought you to be in your
   behaviour, ^12 you who expect and hasten the advent of the Day of God,
   which dissolves the heavens in fire and makes the stars blaze and melt!
   ^13 It is new heavens and a new earth that we expect, as He has
   promised, and in them dwells righteousness. ^14 Then, beloved, as you
   are expecting this, be eager to be found by him unspotted and
   unblemished in serene assurance.

   10

   Like a thief is another (see on ii. 20) reminiscence of a saying of
   Jesus about the unexpectedness of the Advent; like a thief (in the
   night)' was one of the most uncommon figures for the sudden return of
   the Lord in primitive Christianity. But the writer lays more stress on
   the cosmic conflagration at the end. Heaven and earth will vanish,'
   Jesus had predicted; our author adds, with crackling roar, using an
   onomatopoetic word in a rare sense. Set ablaze is another unusual term,
   generally employed for feverish heat. The Greek term stoicheia,
   rendered elements' in A.V., means the literal stars here, not the
   Elemental Spirits or angels closely connected with the planets and
   constellations (see on Judas 6) as in Galatians iv. 3.

   The last word of the sentence is obscure. The primitive reading is not
   shall be burned up, as we might expect, but heurethesetai, be found'
   (as in ver. 14). The old Egyptian Sahidic version reads not be found,'
   i.e. disappear, which yields quite a good sense, and is a common phrase
   in similar connexions (e.g. in Revelation xvi. 20). Other conjectures
   have been offered, of verbs meaning destruction or burning, but the
   hypothesis that the negative was omitted by accident by the author or
   some early copyist meets the case adequately. What the earth and all
   its works denotes, is shown by the description in The Sibylline Oracles
   (ii. 251 f., translated by Professor Terry):


   For stars from heaven shall fall into all seas.

   And all the souls of men shall gnash their teeth,

   Burned both by sulphur stream and force of fire

   In ravenous soil, and ashes hide all things.

   And then of all the world the elements

   Shall be bereft, air, earth, sea, light, sky, days,

   Nights; and no longer in the air shall fly

   Birds without number, nor shall living things

   That swim the sea swim any more at all,

   Nor freighted vessel o'er the billows pass,

   Nor kine straight-guiding plow the field.

   11

   The terror and pathos of this are not what the writer stresses; it is
   (11-14) the moral and spiritual effects which such an expectation ought
   to have upon life to-day, 12 on those who expect and hasten the advent
   of this Day of God. Good men hasten the Advent by their repentance (see
   Acts iii. 19 f.), for it is the sins of men that retard the coming of
   the Day (see above, ver. 9). Even by their prayers, like Thy kingdom
   come,' they bring faith to bear upon the fulfilment of the divine
   purpose; for the order of the world is not mechanical but moral, and
   Jesus had taught that his followers might, as it were, 13 thus shorten
   the interval of waiting. The expectation of a new order of things,
   embodying righteousness, calls for a clean, honest life to answer to
   it. One writer put the thought thus: Everyone who rests this hope on
   him purifies himself as he is pure' (1 John iii. 3). 14 Our author
   writes, be eager (so i. 10) to be found by him at his coming (see
   Philippians iii. 9) unspotted and unblemished (not like these
   errorists, ii. 13), in serene assurance, as you are expecting this. A
   pure and consistent life is the one ground for serene assurance, the
   peace of i. 2, and the deep thought is that the Christian hope ought to
   produce a moral and spiritual quickening of conscience. It is a
   privilege, but it is also an obligation. For the writer it was
   impossible to give up the hope of the Advent without ethical
   deterioration. He had already marked the disastrous consequences of
   this in the errorists, and now he drives home the positive counsel to
   his readers.

   The permanent lesson of the passage (as of i. 3-4) is that Christian
   hope must react upon the lives of those who entertain it. As Ruskin
   puts it in his famous application of the passage in The Stones of
   Venice (vol. iii, chap. iv): It is indeed right that we should look
   for, and hasten, so far as in us lies, the coming of the Day of God;
   but not that we should check any human efforts by anticipations of its
   approach. We shall hasten it best by endeavouring to work out the tasks
   that are appointed for us here.'

   The writer now returns to the thought of ver. 9, but this leads him to
   assure his readers that the teaching of the apostle Paul is in
   agreement with his, whatever these errorists might say to the contrary
   (15-16).

   15    And consider that the longsuffering of our Lord means salvation;
   as indeed our beloved brother Paul has written to you out of the wisdom
   vouchsafed to him, ^16 speaking of this as he has done in all his
   letters--letters containing some knotty points, which ignorant and
   unsteady souls twist (as they do the rest of the scriptures) to their
   own destruction.

   15

   The thought of God's longsuffering is more prominent in Romans (see ii.
   4, iii. 25, ix. 22, and xi. 22) than in any other of Paul's extant
   epistles, but the writer is not alluding to this or to any one epistle
   which the readers were supposed to have received for themselves. The
   you means the catholic church. All the Pauline epistles were held to be
   meant for the church at large. In the Muratorian canon it is expressly
   argued that while Paul wrote to separate churches by name yet one
   church is recognized as spread over all the world,' i.e. the Pauline
   epistles are catholic. So here. No one epistle, neither some lost
   epistle nor one of the canonical, is meant. By a natural hyperbole the
   writer declares that Paul treated the doctrine of God's saving patience
   16 in all his letters, but he hurries on to explain that the errorists
   had no right to claim as they did the authority of Paul for their
   antinomian views. If Paul said, You are free from the Law,' he did not
   mean free from moral claims.' The knotty points (only here in N.T.)
   refer to Paul's views on Christian freedom and the like, which even in
   his lifetime had been misrepresented (see Romans vi. 1) and
   exaggerated. By the time this epistle was written, they were being
   warped into a defence of moral laxity as the right of truly spiritual'
   persons, by ignorant and unsteady (see ii. 14) souls. What N.T.
   writings are included along with the O.T. in the rest of the scriptures
   we do not know, but it is clear that the Greek term loipas means not
   the scriptures as well,' but the rest of the scriptures, and that
   graphas means scriptures in the technical sense, not writings or books'
   in general. Fatal (see ii. 1) distortions of Paul's meaning were abroad
   when this epistle was written, and this implies that his epistles were
   being appealed to as authoritative.

   A last word of exhortation (17, 18): be on your guard against error and
   grow in grace.

   17    Now, beloved, you are forewarned; mind you are not carried away
   by the error of the lawless and so lose your proper footing; ^18 but
   grow in the grace and knowledge of our Lord and saviour Jesus Christ.
   To him be the glory now and to the day of eternity: Amen.

   17

   Error is the word rendered misconduct in ii. 18, but it means here the
   pernicious principles and practices of the lawless (see on ii. 7)
   errorists, not pagan morals. To lose your proper footing (only here in
   N.T.) answers to the warning 18 of Judas (24) about slipping. The
   writer then repeats (i. 2-8) his counsel about Christian growth; all
   depends on personal communion with Christ, a personal communion which
   deepens steadily. The knowledge of our Lord and saviour Jesus Christ is
   not a mere means of rescue (ii. 20), but the one means of maturity and
   health, which enables the Christian to throw off pernicious errors. And
   it is a knowledge which depends upon the Lord's grace, not on
   speculative acuteness and individual enlightenment (see on i. 2). In
   the doxology, addressed to Christ (a rare practice in the N.T.), the
   phrase to the day of eternity is unexampled, though it does occur in
   Sirach xviii. 10. There, as a drop from the sea or a grain of sand, so
   are man's few years to the day of eternity'; but here it seems chosen
   as a special variant for the day of the Lord or of God, no period or
   episode but an eternal Day.
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

THE EPISTLE OF JUDAS
     __________________________________________________________________

  INTRODUCTION

   In the rhymed preface to his Pilgrim's Progress, Bunyan explains that
   he was drawn into writing the allegory when he was occupied with
   another book.


   I had undertook

   To make another, which when almost done,

   Before I was aware, I this begun.

   So Judas meant to write upon the general theme of the Christian
   salvation, but, says he, I am forced to write you this special appeal,
   in view of a sudden emergency. Only, Bunyan's alteration of purpose was
   literary. In Bedford gaol he had been thinking and indeed writing
   already about--


   The Way

   And Race of Saints, in this our Gospel-day.

   Fortunately for the world, the allegorical handling of the subject
   suddenly appealed to him with such force that he struck off into
   allegory, instead of composing a theological treatise as he had
   originally intended. Judas had to drop a wider project for a special
   piece of counsel and warning; he had to change his message rather than
   his method. So far as we know, he never wrote the book or epistle which
   he had in mind, when he turned to dictate this urgent call. Pindar
   opens his first Isthmian Ode by apologizing for writing it when he had
   already begun to compose a paean for Delos, which he is obliged to put
   aside meantime. But the poet lived to complete the paean in question;
   it has been preserved. Whereas, if Judas ever finished his original
   plan of composition, it has not survived, unless, as some have thought,
   he had a hand in the composition of the church-manual called the
   Didaché. Probably it is another of the books which early Christians
   meant to write and never wrote. Ignatius, for example, in his letter to
   the Ephesian church, said that if it was the will of Christ, I will
   proceed, in the second treatise which I propose to write to you, to
   explain the divine plan relating to the new man, Jesus Christ, which I
   have begun to discuss.' But he did not live to write this treatise. So,
   for some reason, Judas has only left us this brief manifesto.

   What moved him to write it was an outburst of antinomianism.
   Antinomianism is an ugly word for an uglier thing. In religion it is
   the belief that a truly spiritual man is exempt from the moral law, in
   virtue of his relationship towards God. For certain religions it has
   never been binding on a so-called saint' to be what his fellow-beings
   would call a moral person. But Christianity from the first insisted on
   faith and fellowship being bound up with a good life, and therefore the
   appearance of antinomian tendencies within its communities caused
   instant and indignant protests.

   That such tendencies should manifest themselves, however, was only
   natural. Antinomianism, like Pharisaism, is a perversion of religion at
   its very best. It is the exaggerated extreme of a merely legal view of
   religion. Once people awake to the truth that God's favour is not to be
   earned by an accumulation of merits, nor by merely doing this or that
   in obedience to a prescribed code, they turn to the evangelical or
   mystical line; faith is everything, we are not under law but grace.'
   Pushed to an extreme, this may become, and in the history of the church
   it often has become, for mystics and evangelicals alike, a repudiation
   of any moral restrictions or regulations as inconsistent with inner
   freedom. Mediaeval outbursts of the Free Spirit, the sectaries whom
   Luther had to check, and the English Ranters, are notorious cases in
   point. Paul had already met this spirit, which he denounced as a
   caricature of his teaching about salvation by faith. But towards the
   close of the first century it began to assume formidable proportions,
   as it became connected with a ramified movement of thought in Egypt,
   Asia, and Syria, which exploited the revival of Platonism in the
   interests of an ultra-spiritual conception of the world; a theoretical
   basis for antinomianism was afforded by those who sought to explain the
   origin of evil as part and parcel of the material world. The Christian
   church, says Judas, adores the one and only God, our Saviour, the same
   God in creation and in redemption. But the creation of the world was
   ascribed in some circles to an inferior deity, the O.T. Creator, and
   redemption was the emancipation of the soul from the trammels of the
   senses by means of some higher God, the Father, who in Jesus intervened
   to rescue the pure spirit. Perfection was of the spirit alone. Hence an
   enlightened spirit might either take an ascetic view of evil, or regard
   anything done in the flesh as irrelevant to the well-being of the
   spirit the more so when the O.T. decalogue was regarded, as it was by
   many, as the code of the inferior creator-god, whose sway was cancelled
   for the redeemed.

   It is against a background of this kind that pastoral letters like
   those of Judas and Second Peter are intelligible. The details are
   obscure, for the precise data of the controversy cannot be recovered,
   but the general trend is fairly plain. Judas, for example, is an
   earnest, honest leader of the church, not a keen analyst or cool
   religious critic of heresies. He denounces the errorists, instead of
   describing them. Indeed this would have been superfluous, as his
   readers are assumed to know them at first hand. It is therefore
   difficult to identify them amid the movements that swarmed between the
   last quarter of the first century and the middle of the second within
   the Christian churches of the East. The pastoral is no transcript of
   the errorists' opinions and practices, and the" hints dropped by Judas
   do not fit any one party known to us. But some suggest that he must
   have been attacking an incipient phase of the gnostical tendency which
   characterized, for example, what Irenaeus called the party of Simon and
   Carpocrates,' who were antinomian on principle and held erroneous views
   of the person of Christ, besides disparaging angels. Thus the Simonians
   believed that redemption emancipated the elect from the sway of the
   rebellious angels and celestial powers who ruled or mismanaged
   (according to them) the universe. As Judas put it, they scorn the
   Powers celestial and scoff at the angelic Glories. They also held that
   the distinctions between good and evil were the arbitrary work of these
   angels, and that the free man, saved by grace, could do as he pleased;
   morality, as usually understood, was a matter of opinion, due to the
   angels of the present world. Besides, said some, one ought to try all
   experiences, good or bad. Thus, said the indignant Judas, they pollute
   their flesh, and pervert the grace of our God into immorality. And when
   he charges them with disowning Jesus Christ, it may be a reference to
   their view, resembling that of Cerinthus the traditional opponent of
   St. John, that the Supreme Power descended in Judaea in the form of man
   (yet not a man), who only seemed to suffer (since the flesh and
   suffering were incompatible with the deity). Some did not believe Jesus
   to be the Son of God, and they claimed, says Irenaeus angrily, to be
   not only like Jesus, but sometimes even better.' Obedience to the moral
   law might be good enough for ordinary church believers, who did not
   possess the Spirit, but the emancipated spiritualists held that
   perfection belonged to the spirit, not to the flesh. Hence, they not
   merely took a docetic view of the person of Christ, but regarded the
   passions and impulses of the body as indifferent; in some cases
   adherents of such parties openly held that men ought to obey these
   instincts and were entitled to do so freely--like irrational creatures,
   Judas puts in!

   They made extensive use of dreams and visions, these visionaries! They
   scoffed at the O.T. prophecies as inspired by the inferior angels,
   arrogantly preferring their own revelations. And they practised their
   religious rites and cures for money--for what it brings them, as Judas
   sneered, to benefit themselves. Like the prophet John, who found
   similar lax movements in the Asiatic churches of Ephesus and Smyrna and
   Thyatira towards the close of the first century, Judas took the
   effective line of stamping the errorists with O.T. names of notorious
   offenders--Cain, Balaam, and Korah; but he is controverting a more
   subtle and speculative movement, though it evidently was tinged with
   the same tendency to moral laxity. Clement of Alexandria, in his
   Stromateis (iii. 2), declares that what Judas wrote (8-17) seemed to
   him an actual prediction of what went on at religious gatherings of the
   Carpocratians and other sects in Egypt. He even accuses some of vice
   and sensual perversity, i.e. of sodomy. This was nearly a century later
   than Judas, and probably the movement had degenerated in the interval.
   But if the errorists belonged partly to a rudimentary phase of the
   movement which was organized definitely by Carpocrates the Alexandrian
   early in the second century, it would throw light on some of their
   traits, for the Carpocratians believed that Jesus was born of human
   parents (a disowning of our sole liege and Lord Jesus Christ); they
   also disparaged the world and the angels who were supposed to have
   created it, and from this principle further deduced the practical
   conclusion that all things ought to be common (including wives), and
   that such mundane scruples as moral restrictions on vice and theft were
   not binding on the free soul, which was only concerned with faith (no
   most holy faith, this!) and free love. Love! says Judas angrily these
   fine advocates of spiritual love are simply stains on your love-feasts!

   It is through glimpses like these of various rampant tendencies, all
   speculative and antinomian, that we can form some idea of the teachers
   against whom this emphatic pastoral is directed. It is alive to the
   unholy alliance between speculative theosophy and practical immorality,
   just as the first epistle of John is, though the latter faces the
   Cerinthians with their doctrine of a truly human Jesus who was endowed
   with the divine spirit of Christ only between the baptism and the
   passion. The prophet John in the book of Revelation denounces
   Nicolaitans, who were connected somehow with the followers of
   Carpocrates or at anyrate with the tenets of that party, but he fastens
   on their immoral tendencies like Judas, whereas the first epistle of
   John deals more definitely with the error about the person of Christ,
   an aberration which Judas merely notes in passing.

   It would be interesting to know if, in ver. 11, Judas had in mind the
   extremists who maintained that Cain, the Sodomites, and Korah were
   maligned victims of the creator-god, and therefore heroes! These
   extremists belonged to the party named or nicknamed Serpent-worshippers
   (Ophites), since they viewed man's fall as his real emancipation,
   thanks to the serpent, from the tyranny of the creator-god. In any
   case, all such views about God, which separated creation from
   redemption, were to Judas an infringement of the prerogatives of the
   Christian deity. It is not against pagan polytheism, nor is it a merely
   liturgical flourish, when he lifts his doxology to the only God, our
   saviour. There is but one God in the universe, good and just, and Jesus
   Christ is our sole liege and Lord, by whom He saves us, keeping us
   unblemished. Yet Judas is absorbed, not in the speculative error about
   God's nature, but in the immoral practices which ooze out of it. Mr.
   Gladstone once wrote to the Duchess of Sutherland, There is one
   proposition which the experience of life burns into my soul; it is
   this, that man should beware of letting his religion spoil his
   morality. In a thousand ways, some great, some small, but all subtle,
   we are daily tempted to that great sin.' There is much about this tract
   of Judas which is remote and obscure, but it clearly shows an early
   Christian teacher passionately warning people inside the Christian
   church against religious theories that spoil morality.

   I read my Bible,' says the mother of Felix Holt, in George Eliot's
   romance, and I know in Jude where it's been stained with the dried
   tulip-leaves this many a year, as you're told not to rail at your
   betters if he was the devil himself.' Most people know the epistle of
   Judas from the same passage about the railing accusation against the
   devil, or from the passage at the close about building ourselves up in
   the love of God.' The rest of the writing has little permanent interest
   or value. It is full of denunciations which sound to a modern more
   forcible than profitable. Judas was evidently indignant and alarmed
   about some development in the religious world of his day, but who he
   was and what he was attacking, we neither know nor greatly care to
   inquire. To a modern reader,' as its ablest English editor, Professor
   J. B. Mayor, observes, it is curious rather than edifying, with the
   exception of the beginning and the end.' But it must have impressed the
   church deeply in these early days. The first trace of it is either in
   the Martyrdom of Polykarp (see on 2, 25)--at Smyrna the message would
   be welcome!--or in the second epistle of Peter, whose author thought so
   highly of it that he made copious use of it in his treatise. By the end
   of the second century it was widely known and read at worship, in spite
   of its brevity. Alexandria, Carthage, and Rome esteemed it as
   scripture. This is hardly surprising, when we remember that libertinism
   and gnostic errors were surging through the churches during that
   period. No wonder an early, pungent warning like the tract of Judas,
   coming from the border of the apostolic days, was appreciated and
   circulated!

   The feature that compromised it in some quarters before long was its
   use of the book of Enoch and of legends like that about the dispute
   between the devil and Moses. There were simple Christians like Mrs.
   Holt who read such passages without taking offence at them. But the day
   came--even in the second century it was dawning--when a strict, narrow
   view of inspiration resented any imprimatur being given to the book of
   Enoch as inspired, and the tract of Judas was on that account either
   read with hesitation or excluded from some lists of the N.T. canonical
   writings. For the vogue of apocalypses like the Assumption of Moses and
   the book of Enoch was waning. To the primitive church these had come as
   prophetic contributions from the ancient world.

   In the first epistle of Peter, as we have seen, the collection of
   apocalyptic tractates called the book of Enoch is familiar to Peter and
   his circle, and Judas definitely cites it as inspired. Any modern
   reader who looks into it will marvel at the reputation it once enjoyed
   in these enthusiastic Christian communities. Unless he has been in
   touch with simple, uneducated pietists of a prophetic cast, he may even
   fail to understand why such apocalypses ever held the mind and heart of
   the church. In the apocalyptic and eschatological literature of the
   time, the world was to come to an end. But what really did come to an
   end,' says Professor Vladimir Simkhovitch, in that literature was the
   last shred of thinking capacity and common sense.' This is far too
   severe. Still, by the end of the second century Christians were losing
   interest in the immediate end of the world and in the hectic prophecies
   that predicted it; they began to ask inconvenient questions even about
   the book of Enoch. How did it survive the Flood? Once this decline of
   sympathy with the naïve belief in Enoch set in, the tract came under
   suspicion. Because Judas draws a testimony from the apocryphal book of
   Enoch, his epistle is rejected by very many,' says Jerome in the fourth
   century; but by the end of that century it was nevertheless finally
   canonized. Indeed it is fully owned as scripture in the so-called
   Muratorian Canon of the N.T., a second-century list of N.T. books. The
   Muratorian Canon came from the Egyptian church, and it was there that
   the tract found its earliest admirers, in Origen and Clement; the
   latter wrote comments on it. Its affinities with the Didaché, perhaps
   another Egyptian book, further confirm the hypothesis that the tract
   was of Egyptian origin. It was in Egypt that the first weeds of the
   sinister Carpocratian heresy shot up; we are not far wrong in supposing
   that Judas was some teacher or prophet of the Egyptian church, that is,
   in all likelihood, of the Alexandrian.

   No tradition, however, has come down to us about its origin. Like the
   epistle of James, another Egyptian church encyclical, while it reflects
   some personal experience and local observation, it is a homily or
   pastoral which the writer designs for more than his immediate circle.
   As a teacher of the church, he writes urbi et orbi, in a Christian
   sense. It was the weight of his tract, for all its apparently fugitive
   character, that carried it so far, in the second century. Judas, like
   James, had the immense spiritual prestige of a teacher, and the
   intrinsic merits of his tract, so timely and pungent, were backed by
   the spiritual authority of his vocation. No wonder that Tertullian and
   others were calling him an apostle by the end of the century. But Judas
   was no apostle. So much we know, though little more. Judas was not an
   uncommon name among Hebrew Christians, and Judas the brother of James
   may quite conceivably be some Judas otherwise unknown to fame. There
   was a Judas in the reign of Hadrian who was bishop of the Jerusalem
   church, for example, though this is not likely to be our author. Or, we
   may ask, was the original title merely Judas a servant of Jesus Christ,
   and did some one insert and a brother of James, to guarantee, as it
   were, the credentials of the writer by connecting his person with the
   first head of the Jerusalem church, whose antipathies to pagan
   antinomianism were well known?' Or is the entire title pseudonymous?

   This throws us back upon the fact that among the brothers of Jesus were
   two called James and Judas, who would be born about the beginning of
   the century. The former we know. The latter is unknown to tradition,
   except in connexion with a tale of his grandsons, who were haled before
   the suspicious emperor Domitian, because they belonged to the Davidic
   lineage and were supposed to have hopes of a messianic empire. They
   were horny-handed peasants, who had no difficulty in proving their
   innocence of any revolutionary designs. Now, as this interview took
   place after Judas was dead, he must have written his tract by about
   A.D. 90 at the latest. There is nothing in the references to the
   errorists which quite shuts out this as a possibility. Those who prefer
   to think that in the second century some anonymous writer composed the
   manifesto under the pseudonym of Judas a brother of James have to
   explain how so unimportant a figure was likely to have been chosen to
   voice the warning.

   The difficulty on either of these hypotheses is to understand why he
   called himself or was called a servant of Jesus Christ, instead of a
   brother. This was felt early, and answered by Clement of Alexandria,
   who thought it was due to reverence and humility. This is ingenious,
   but is it necessary? Some Judas who had a brother called James may well
   have written the manifesto. And this is the more likely when the James
   who wrote the canonical epistle is seen to have had no connexion with
   the strict Jewish Christian head of the Jerusalem church. So far from
   claiming to be an apostle, Judas bids his readers recall how the
   apostles of our Lord Jesus Christ had predicted this latter-day
   movement of mischief. He looks back on the apostolic age. But probably
   all the apostles were dead by about 90. On the other hand, his tone of
   surprise at the news or sight of the errorists would indicate that the
   phenomenon was new, or that it had but recently been brought under his
   notice. He starts back from it in horror, shocked by its appearance and
   inroads, even while he insists that it is an innovation which had been
   foreseen beforehand by the apostles. His very allusion to the apostles
   is an indication that he wrote comparatively early in the
   post-apostolic age, for he does not call the loyal Christians to rally
   round the ministry of bishops and presbyters as preserving true
   doctrine. Ignatius does this in the first quarter of the second
   century, and against gnostic perversions of the gospel it became
   increasingly a natural and needful safeguard. For Judas it is enough as
   yet to uphold the apostolic tradition as such. Remember the words of
   the apostles, he urges; he does not say, hold by their true successors
   in authority over the church. All this renders it rather unlikely that
   the pastoral is much later, if later at all, than the close of the
   first century, when already, as we know from the book of Revelation,
   some forms of this heresy were rampant in the churches of Asia Minor.

   Whatever view be held of its authorship, it was either written or meant
   to be taken as having been written at the close of the apostolic period
   as a sort of fiery cross sent through the churches to rally the
   faithful against a new insidious foe. The danger against which it
   sought to forewarn Christendom has altered its form, but it is always
   present, and the burden of the letter retains its significance. For
   antinomianism, like gnosticism in general, is by no manner of means a
   far-off unhappy tendency in the religious world, whose interest for
   ourselves is purely historical or antiquarian.
     __________________________________________________________________

  THE EPISTLE OF JUDAS

   The address or salutation (1-2) is modelled on lines already indicated
   by letter-writers like Paul and Peter.

   1     Judas, a servant of Jesus Christ and a brother of James, to those
   who have been called, who are beloved by God the Father and kept by
   Jesus Christ: ^2 mercy, peace and love be multiplied to you.

   1

   A servant means one who is at the disposal of Jesus Christ for service
   in his cause, here for the special service of warning and counselling
   fellow-Christians. A brother of James (see Introduction) is a unique
   addition; no other N.T. writer mentions his family in this way. He
   writes to those who have been called, and who have accepted the divine
   call. But they are not left to their own resources; they are beloved by
   God the Father (literally in God the Father,' a Greek phrase which
   means dear to Him or loved by Him) and kept safe (same word as in
   Revelation iii. 10) by Jesus Christ. In the original called comes last
   in the clause, so that the three following words answer in reverse
   order to the 2 description of the Christian position; mercy underlies
   God's calling of those who owe everything to His undeserved pity (see
   on 1 Peter i. 3), those who are preserved by Jesus Christ may enjoy
   peace of mind, and God's beloved may count upon fresh experiences of
   His love. Multiplied is explained on 1 Peter i. 2. The phrase reappears
   in the second-century Martyrdom of Polykarp, where the Smyrniote church
   prays: Mercy, peace, and love be multiplied.' Now for the occasion of
   the letter (3-4).

   3     Beloved, my whole concern was to write to you on the subject of
   our common salvation, but I am forced to write you an appeal to defend
   the faith which has once for all been committed to the saints; ^4 for
   certain persons have slipped in by stealth (their doom has been
   predicted long ago), impious creatures who pervert the grace of our God
   into immorality and disown our sole liege and Lord, Jesus Christ.

   3

   Beloved (for I love you too; so in 17, 20), I fully intended to write a
   treatise on our common salvation (shared by all true Christians). The
   present letter is an urgent special appeal to the readers to defend the
   faith by adhering to it (see 17-23). For while the faith has been
   finally and fully entrusted to the saints (i.e. to those called and set
   apart by God for Himself), 4a novel abuse of it has been
   surreptitiously introduced by certain persons (the Greek has the same
   scornful tinge as in Galatians i. 7).

   This is the danger which has roused Judas to put his friends upon their
   guard. The peril is not caused by any persecution stirred by Jews or by
   the Roman Empire. Neither is it an attack upon the principles of
   Christianity by some outside critic. It is an insidious distortion of
   Christianity from within, due to the influence of some who claimed to
   be members of the church. Judas denies their claim. They have slipped
   into the church somehow; instead of being called by God, they are
   doomed. Their ultimate doom has been predicted long ago (the thought of
   1 Peter ii. 8). But meanwhile they are working mischief, these impious
   creatures, by their practices and their principles; they make the
   freedom of a Christian man a pretext for loose living, and they
   compromise the full divinity of Christ. The perversion of our (He is
   not their) God's grace into immorality means that a forgiven, spiritual
   person is above the moral law, free to indulge the impulses and
   instincts of life, since nothing done in the flesh can stain the inner
   spirit. The only difficulty here lies in identifying the particular
   form of this error to which Judas is alluding (see Introduction).

   The other charge is less clear. Jesus had spoken of those who might
   deny him before men, but this meant Christians who disowned their Lord
   under the stress of persecution. It was also possible to speak of
   Christians denying their God by misconduct which contradicted the truth
   of his religion (so Titus i. 16). But in his favourite book of Enoch
   (xxxviii. 2, etc.) the denial of God had the specially ominous sense of
   disavowing Him openly for sinister ends; it was the dark antithesis to
   true belief. So Judas uses it here of crrorists who took some view of
   the person of Christ which he regarded as infringing its fullness, as,
   e.g., when some held that Christ meant a heavenly aeon or spirit which
   only descended upon the human Jesus at the baptism and withdrew from
   him before the crucifixion. This view was the result of a dualism which
   regarded the divine nature as too pure to be directly connected with
   anything so vital to the flesh as birth and the suffering of death. It
   was sincerely designed to pay honour to the divine Christ, but Judas
   sharply characterizes it as a repudiation of him altogether. He never
   alludes to this again; other aspects of the errorists occupy his
   attention in the rest of the letter. Whatever their tenets about Christ
   were, however, he regarded them as implicitly disowning our sole liege
   (generally used elsewhere of God) and Lord, Jesus Christ.

   Remember the terrible warnings against such a sinful course in the past
   history of the People of God (5-7).

   5     Now I want to remind you of what you are perfectly aware, that
   though the Lord once brought the People safe out of Egypt, he
   subsequently destroyed the unbelieving, ^6 while the angels who
   abandoned their own domain, instead of preserving their proper rank,
   are reserved by him within the nether gloom, in chains eternal, for the
   doom of the great Day--^7 just as Sodom and Gomorra and the adjacent
   cities, which similarly glutted themselves with vice and sensual
   perversity, are exhibited as a warning of the everlasting fire they are
   sentenced to suffer.

   5

   A courteous reminder of what they had heard from scriptures like the
   Pentateuch and the book of Enoch, read aloud in church-worship. The
   present situation throws light on these old lessons, so familiar and so
   sombre. First there is the doom that befell the unbelieving Israelites
   who proved sceptical when the promised land was set before them--an
   incident which had powerfully impressed Christian (1 Corinthians x. 5;
   Hebrews iv. 7 f.) and Jewish piety as an outstanding example of
   unbelief and lapsing.

   There may be a warning here for the errorists, some of whom thought
   that their baptized adherents were immune from any risk or danger, in
   virtue of their profession of faith. But the direct warning is for the
   readers; people may once be saved and yet fall away subsequently into
   an unbelief which ruins them, as will be the case with you, if you
   listen to these insidious creatures. Let therefore none presume upon
   past mercies, as if he were now out of danger' (Wesley). This is
   hinted, but no more than hinted. It is not till the close of the tract
   that Judas urges (ver. 20) the truth that any sense of security for
   Christians involves a serious moral and spiritual discipline.

   At present he hastens to recall a second, equally notorious instance of
   punishment for disobedience; 6 it is the fall of the angels who had
   abandoned their own domain in heaven, instead of preserving (literally,
   keeping) their proper rank. This is the famous legend of the later
   Judaism, based upon Genesis vi. 1 f., and popularized for Judas and his
   friends as for Peter (see on 1 Peter iii. 19) by the apocalypse of
   Enoch, which tells how the angels or sons of God' conceived a passion
   for the daughters of men and conspired to break away from their
   heavenly domain. Though spiritual beings, with their domain (Enoch xv.
   7) above, they abandoned (Enoch xii. 4) high heaven. Judas recollects
   the very language of Enoch also in depicting their punishment. They are
   reserved (literally kept--a grim play on the word) by God for the doom
   of the great Day of the last judgment (a phrase used in Revelation xvi.
   10), imprisoned within the nether gloom, in chains eternal. The great
   Day of judgment.' occurs in another connection in Enoch (Greek text of
   xxii. 11), but the tragic tale of the rebellious angels yields the main
   points of the allusion here; thus God orders them to be bound fast in
   the valleys of the earth till the day of their judgment' (x. 12), and
   in liv. 4 f. huge iron chains are forged to fetter them till that great
   Day of final doom when they are to be cast into the burning furnace.'

   A ghastly human parallel to the sin and punishment of the apostate
   angels is now cited, in the O.T. tale of Sodom and Gomorra and the
   adjacent cities (Zoar, Admah, and Zeboim, according to the O.T.). Their
   inhabitants had been guilty not only of vice like the fallen angels who
   had lusted after women, but of sodomy, sensual perversity (Genesis xix.
   5). And look at their punishment! The land is still smoking with the
   subterranean fire in which they burn till they are flung finally into
   the everlasting fire they are sentenced to suffer like the fallen
   angels (see above) at the last day. A solemn warning to all!

   According to Enoch (lxvii. 12), the punishment of the fallen angels is
   a testimony for the kings and the mighty who possess the earth,' but
   Judas does not limit the range of the warning. Under the Gehenna
   ravine, including the site of the cities of the Dead Sea, a
   subterranean fire was supposed to burn, and the volcanic phenomena
   proved to the religious mind the lasting punishment of the district.
   The land still smells of fire,' Tertullian writes (Apolog., xl.), and
   any fruit borne by the local trees can only be looked at; once touched,
   it crumbles into ashes.' Such was the Jewish belief, as Josephus
   witnesses in his Wars (iv. 8, 4): The land was burned by lightning for
   the impiety of its inhabitants. Still there are vestiges of that fire,
   and the traces of five cities are still to be seen.' This Palestinian
   belief underlies the remark about the cities being exhibited as a
   warning of the everlasting fire. It is due to the fact (see on 2 Peter
   ii. 6) that in this awful hollow, this bit of the infernal regions come
   up to the surface, this hell with the sun shining into it, primitive
   man laid the scene of God's most terrible judgment on human sin. The
   glare of Sodom and Gomorrha is flung down the whole length of Scripture
   history. It is the popular and standard judgment of sin' (G. A. Smith,
   Historical Geography of Holy Land, p. 504).

   The gross irreverence of these religious visionaries at the present day
   (8-10).

   8     Despite it all, these visionaries pollute their flesh, scorn the
   Powers celestial, and scoff at the angelic Glories. ^9 Now the very
   archangel Michael, when he disputed the body of Moses with Satan, did
   not dare to condemn him with scoffs; what he said was, The Lord rebuke
   you! ^10 But these people scoff at anything they do not understand; and
   whatever they do understand, like irrational creatures, by mere
   instinct, that proves their ruin.

   These pseudo-prophets claimed to have revelations and visions (of what
   they were allowed or ordered to do or to ask), i.e. to be specially
   inspired, but this merely meant loose living and disrespect for angels,
   the two sins of which Sodom and Gomorra had been guilty. The close
   connexion of sex and religion produced moral aberrations which 8 Judas
   calls a pollution of the flesh; the primitive love-feasts (ver. 12),
   where men and women met in exalted fervour, gave opportunities for
   indulging such passions. So-called spiritual' men might urge and did
   urge that the ordinary restraints of the sexes were abolished by the
   new freedom of the Spirit, and that the impulse to promiscuous sexual
   intercourse was a genuine expression of the love-spirit in the
   community. Religious communism for some enthusiasts meant free love as
   well as no property.

   Disrespect for angels is less intelligible; in the primitive church it
   was usually angel-worship which was the danger. Kuriotes(a generic
   singular) here, as in Ephesians i. 21 and Colossians i. 16 (where it is
   rendered angelic Lords), denotes a class of higher angels, who are also
   termed Glories; but we can only guess how the errorists depreciated the
   angelic hierarchy in their theories or practice. Possibly they were
   precursors of the later sects, who taught that Christians must follow
   Christ in despising and repudiating the angels who had made the created
   world with its passions; the human soul in returning to its spiritual
   orbit scorns these inferior angels and has also the right to regard
   human actions in the present order as morally indifferent (see
   Introduction). At anyrate, it is the open contempt for angels which
   excites the anger of Judas, 9 who proceeds to argue that these
   errorists might well learn a lesson from the archangel Michael. He
   alludes to the legend told in a Jewish apocalypse called the Assumption
   of Moses; when God commissioned Michael with his angels to bury the
   body of Moses, after his soul had been taken to heaven, the devil
   appeared to claim the body as a material object belonging to his sphere
   as the Lord of matter whereupon Michael mildly replied (in the words of
   Zechariah iii. 2, the rebuke of the angel to Satan), The Lord rebuke
   you! 10 No unmannerly scoffing here, even from an archangel to the
   devil! But these people dare to scoff at anything they do not
   understand (i.e. at the celestial hierarchy). It is a side-stroke at
   the pretensions of these votaries to superior insight into the
   mysteries of creation and the moral order, and also a reminder that
   they might well learn respect and reverence from the angels whom they
   affected to contemn. If the glorious archangel would not revile even
   the devil for his insolence, who are these low-minded creatures to
   disparage the holy angels by whom, under God, the law was given and the
   universe ruled as well as made?

   The closing words are stern, but no sterner than the language often
   used by men like Luther or Wesley who had to encounter such antinomian
   perversions among their followers. Even the gentle Ruysbroeck,
   despairing of the fanatical mystics in the thirteenth and fourteenth
   centuries who advocated and practised libertinism, was moved to
   declare, They perish like mad dogs.' These mediaeval votaries of the
   Free Spirit defended their gratification of any appetite on the
   speculative ground that such desires were all part of the one divine
   Matter. Their precursors in the days of Judas started from a less
   pantheistic view, but some of their followers at anyrate were prepared
   to draw the same practical conclusion, and Judas roughly dubs them
   brutes (irrational creatures); they have only the animal instinct for
   physical self-gratification, and that proves their undoing at the end.

   Note on the Assumption of Moses.'--This was an apocalypse written about
   the beginning of the century, in which the dying Moses predicted the
   future of his nation and in which his death was described (though this
   closing part has been mutilated). It specially appealed to Judas for
   two reasons. (i) It contained assertions of the creation of angels and
   of the world by God. Thus a quotation has been preserved giving the
   original finish to Michael's rebuke; he said to the devil, For from His
   holy Spirit we were all created,' and also, From before God went forth
   His Spirit and the world was created.' No lower origin for angels or
   for the universe, as these errorists alleged! (ii) It contained also
   apt words of protest against secular religion and selfishness, as Judas
   recalls in ver. 16.

   A passionate denunciation of their practices (11-13).

   11    Woe to them! they go the road of Cain, rush into Balaam's error
   for what it brings them, and perish in Korah's rebellion. ^12 These
   people are stains on your love-feasts; they have no qualms about
   carousing in your midst, they look after none but themselves--rainless
   clouds, swept along by the wind, trees in autumn without fruit, doubly
   dead and so uprooted, ^13 wild waves foaming out their own shame,
   wandering stars for whom the nether gloom of darkness has been reserved
   eternally.

   11

   Like other N.T. writers, he brands the errorists by comparing them to
   some notorious O.T. characters. Balaam's error is clear; Balaam was the
   prototype of false teachers who inculcated lax principles of morality
   (this is the point of the comparison in Revelation ii. 14) and made a
   good thing out of their pseudo-religion, as did these errorists and
   others (1 Timothy vi. 5--the principle of these unprincipled creatures
   being that religion is a paying concern'). Balaam also had dreams and
   visions, and he had tried to defy angelic authority. The sinister
   reputation he had acquired in the later Judaism lies behind this
   reference of Judas; ambition and haughtiness are his characteristics in
   the Pirke Aboth (v. 29), and this recurs below in ver. 16 (their talk
   is arrogant).

   Korah is not mentioned elsewhere in the N.T., but he was the typical
   rebel against divine authority in the church these highflying teachers
   of the inner Light who claimed that their revelations were above
   criticism, naturally disclaimed the right of anyone to guide or rule
   them, and again resented the opposition of the church-leaders to their
   views (which is one of the points of murmurers in ver. 16). Judas
   predicts their ruin at the hands of God as the result of their
   rebellious, insubordinate attitude.

   The road of Cain sounds less relevant. In Jewish tradition he had
   become the type of self-seeking men as well as of sceptics who refused
   to believe in any moral retribution or in the after-life. The latter
   does not fit these errorists exactly, though some denied that any
   bodily excesses could be punished in' their case after death; the
   former trait of unbrotherly egoism may be what Judas means, 12 in the
   next verse, by quoting from Ezekiel xxxiv. 8, they look after none but
   themselves. Literally this is, they shepherd [indulge] themselves
   alone,' referring to their greedy conduct at the love-feasts (like the
   people whom Paul had denounced at Corinth in 1 Corinthians xi. 20-22);
   such grasping behaviour might be termed the Cain-spirit, especially if
   it carried the deeper suggestion of murdering the souls of men by their
   conduct, and thereby ruining themselves--which would be the result of
   taking the road of Cain, according to Wisdom x. 3, where Cain, falling
   away from God's wisdom in his anger, perished himself by his
   fratricidal passion.'

   The love-feasts were charity suppers in the primitive church, where the
   members gathered for a common meal to express their fellowship as a
   household of the faith. The food seems to have been provided out of the
   church funds or by the wealthier members. But what happened at Corinth
   evidently happened elsewhere; selfishness and bad behaviour spoiled the
   simple meal. Instead of sharing alike, some snatched at the food before
   others arrived (i.e. slaves or humble tradesmen who could not attend
   till the day's work was done). So one goes hungry while another gets
   drunk.' The pushing and grasping members took advantage of others.
   Judas is angry not only at these errorists daring to attend the
   love-feasts, but at their callous, cavalier conduct there. They were
   spots and blots on the proceedings anyhow. For spots is a better
   rendering of the Greek term spilades here than squalls' or sunken
   rocks.' They were out of keeping with true Christians in a church
   meeting. But, worse than that, they have no qualms about carousing in
   your midst, bold creatures that they are, attending to no one but
   themselves--a flagrant violation of what a love-feast meant!

   Sky, land, and sea are then ransacked for illustrations of their
   character. No refreshment of the soul comes from these rainless clouds,
   swept along by the wind of impulse; they are like trees in the late
   autumn (the season when fruit was expected) that are without fruit. 13
   Such men, Judas adds, are doubly dead (i.e. dead in sin before they
   were baptized and dead through their subsequent misdoings) and so
   uprooted finally (see on ver. 10). They make a great splash and noise
   in the church, with their arrogant talk (ver. 16), but it only brings
   out their own shame, exposing their frothy, restless and discreditable
   aims. Finally, there is no light or guidance to be derived from such
   wandering stars, erratic comets or shooting meteors, who are doomed to
   a dark fate (see ver. 6). The notion of stars being punished is a
   reminiscence of the book of Enoch (xviii., xx., etc.), where the nether
   gloom is the punishment of stars (i.e. angels) who have deserted their
   proper orbit and broken away from the regulations of the Lord.

   But Judas does more than recall Enoch; he cites the book triumphantly
   as an inspired prophecy of these loud, licentious mischief-makers,
   whose doom had been predicted long ago (ver. 4) in its message. Here is
   the actual prediction (14-16):

   14    It was of these, too, that Enoch the seventh from Adam
   prophesied, when he said,

   Behold the Lord comes with myriads of his holy ones,
   ^15 to execute judgment upon all,
   and to convict all the impious
   of all the impious deeds they have committed,
   and of all the harsh things said against him by impious sinners.

   16    For these people are murmurers, grumbling at their own lot in
   life--they fall in with their own passions, their talk is arrogant,
   they pay court to men to benefit themselves.

   14

   In the book of Enoch (lx. 8), 15 Enoch is described as the seventh from
   Adam. The quotation is from a prediction (i. 9) of God's intervention
   against impious members of the People; it is free, and the words about
   the harsh things said against God are taken from a later passage
   (xxvii. 2). The holy ones are angels, for the author of Enoch was
   thinking of Deuteronomy xxxiii. 2, where God's coming is with ten
   thousands of his holy ones.' Even in applying the passage to the
   errorists of his day Judas uses language already familiar to his
   readers in the Assumption of Moses, where (v. 5, vii, 7, 9) 16 the
   vicious religionists are called grumblers, whose talk is arrogant, and
   who pay court to well-to-do or influential people. No other N.T. writer
   uses the word for murmurers. It refers to the discontented spirit
   which, according to Judas, led them to object to angels (ver. 8), and
   also, like Korah (ver. 11), to chafe under the refusal of the church
   authorities to recognize their pretensions. Probably this was one
   expression of their grumbling at their own lot in life; they were
   recalcitrant to men as well as insolent to God.

   Judas views their whole religious position as a restless, arbitrary
   defiance of the divine order in the universe and in the church. Their
   one guide was their own passions; no other power could sway their
   self-indulgent lives. Arrogant enough in their criticisms of
   providence, they were also toadies, courting important or wealthy
   Christians (the charge hinted in ver. 11) for personal ends. This last
   charge is added to the general denunciation drawn from the heated
   oracles of Enoch. It is curious that George Fox found a similar trait
   in the English Ranters of his day (these lewd persons and their wicked
   actions'), who were antinomians openly. It was the manner of the
   Ranters, he notes in his Journal (1654), to be extreme in their
   compliments' to anyone in high position or authority. These highly
   superior elect' apparently had an eye to the main chance, in a variety
   of ways.

   Judas now reminds his readers that the Christian apostles as well as
   Enoch had foretold the rise of such errorists (17-19).

   17    Now, beloved, you must remember the words of the apostles of our
   Lord Jesus Christ: ^18 they told you beforehand, At the end of things
   there will be mockers who go by their own impious passions.' ^19 These
   are the people who set up divisions and distinctions, sensuous
   creatures, destitute of the Spirit.

   17

   For true members of the church the apostles are authoritative. 18
   Either this quotation is from some writing which has not survived (see
   on 2 Peter iii. 3), or it is a summary of traditional warnings like 1
   Timothy iv. 1 f., that the imminent end of things would be heralded by
   the rise of scoffing, loose-living religionists within the churches,
   who derided the stricter moral code of the apostolic faith. 19 Here the
   allusion is to the precursors of the gnostics, who divided mankind into
   three classes, (a) the spiritual,' who, as being possessed of the
   Spirit, were sure of salvation, (b) the sensuous, or ordinary persons
   in possession of the psyche merely, who might or might not be saved
   according as they used their freewill, and (c) the material or worldly
   class, who were incapable of salvation. The highflying errorists
   regarded themselves as belonging to the first class, and generally
   derided the ordinary church-believer as belonging to the second. They
   hold,' says Irenaeus indignantly (i. 6, 2-3), that good behaviour is
   necessary for us members of the church (being merely sensuous), since
   otherwise we cannot be saved; they themselves will be saved, however
   they behave, because they are by nature spiritual.' So Judas attacks
   these errorists for dividing men up into classes determined by God, and
   throws their language back upon themselves; they are the sensuous,'
   using the term in a derogatory sense (as in James iii. 15), almost
   equivalent to sensual.' They claimed that their possession of the
   Spirit exempted them from the ordinary restrictions of morality; the
   pure inner spirit could not be stained by the passions of the flesh,
   any more than gold by mud! Judas repudiates the notion that any
   enlightenment gave the right to follow the impulses of nature
   unchecked, and denies outright their claim to a monopoly of the Spirit;
   they are destitute of the Spirit, for all their arrogant pretensions to
   the higher life!

   Mockers denotes their contemptuous rejection of the moral laws of God;
   they would also show insolent airs of superiority towards Christians
   who still believed that the spiritual life was bound by ethical
   principles. Bunyan, in Grace Abounding (44, 45), tells how the
   seventeenth-century sect of the Ranters, who claimed similar freedom
   from moral laws, derided the stricter Christians. These would condemn
   me as legal and dark, pretending that they only had attained perfection
   that could do what they would, and not sin.' One of them gave himself
   up to all manner of filthiness, especially uncleanness . . . and would
   laugh at all exhortations to sobriety. When I laboured to rebuke his
   wickedness, he would laugh the more.'

   Judas now turns (20-23) to the positive duty of church members,
   explaining how they must in their lives defend the faith (ver. 4),
   which these errorists impugned by such loose principles and practices.

   20    But do you, beloved, build up yourselves on your most holy 20
   faith and pray in the holy Spirit, ^21 so keeping yourselves within the
   love of God and waiting for the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ that
   ends in life eternal. ^22 Snatch some from the fire, ^23 and have mercy
   on the waverers, trembling as you touch them, with loathing for the
   garment which the flesh has stained.

   20

   The faith is the faith which has been once for all committed to the
   saints (ver. 3), i.e. the body of Christian belief, the apostolic
   confession of faith; it is most holy as opposed to the demoralizing
   creed of the errorists. Instead of abandoning it for any so-called
   higher spiritual' life of enlightenment, you must build up yourselves
   on this common basis; the fabric of the church depends upon it for
   consolidation. Also the real experience and possession of the holy
   Spirit inspires prayer, not any proud sense of superiority to others or
   any false independence towards God. Prayer is love in need appealing to
   Love in power, and the upbuilding of the church depends upon this
   living intercourse between God arid His People.

   Christians are beloved by God (ver. 1), 21 but this experience is a
   reality as they fulfil the conditions and so keep themselves within
   God's love, which has its own terms of communion. This standing alone
   justifies a quiet hope of the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ (see 1-2).
   Such an expectation is for those only who know they do not deserve life
   eternal, and who yet have endeavoured to meet the moral and spiritual
   demands essential to it in the faith of Christ. The Lord is coming
   (vers. 14, 15) for judgment on the impious. Only in the humble,
   prayerful, dutiful fellowship of the church is any hopeful outlook on
   that final scrutiny possible.

   22

   This positive sentence is followed by a sentence on the duty of
   counteracting the propaganda of the errorists. They themselves may be
   beyond reach, but some of their deluded followers may and ought to be
   rescued. When the power of reclaiming the lost dies out of the Church,'
   said Sir John Seeley, it ceases to be the Church.' Judas recognizes
   this impulse and power as vital to a genuine Christianity; the Church
   is not to enjoy itself in the thought of its own privileges, but to
   stretch out its hands to those who are caught in the pernicious
   teaching which is abroad. The original text has been preserved by
   Clement of Alexandria and Jerome as well as in the Philoxenian Syriac
   version; afterwards it was expanded into the later text in one form or
   another.

   Snatch some from the fire is' another (see on ver. 9) reminiscence of
   Zechariah iii. (ver. 2); rescue forcibly some weaker natures who can be
   pulled out of 23 the fire of immoral temptations set ablaze by these
   libertine religionists. Others are hesitating, not yet wholly committed
   to the false teaching; instead of scolding them, have mercy on
   waverers; deal with them in a spirit of pity; have mercy on them as you
   hope for mercy yourselves from Christ.

   Only, such rescue efforts have their dangers. There have been sad cases
   of people engaged in rescue work who have been actually drawn into the
   very sins which they were endeavouring to defeat; in trying to lift
   others, they have been pulled down and stained in the mud (see on James
   i. 27). So do your work among these misguided people, trembling as you
   touch them, not allowing pity for the sinner to make the sin seem less
   heinous, but loathing the garment which the flesh has stained--another
   reminiscence of the story in Zechariah (iii. 4). Foul traces of sin
   must not be permitted to fascinate the mind of the Christian who has to
   deal with them in rescue work; to avoid the possibility of being
   tainted by contact with them, you must maintain an instinctive aversion
   to them. This was a favourite text of Oliver Cromwell's. When he quoted
   it to the New Parliament of 1654, he observed that Judas uttered the
   counsel, Save some with fear, pulling them out of the fire,' when he
   reckoned up those horrible things done haply by some upon mistakes.'

   The warning against contamination is absent from the similar injunction
   in the Didaché (ii. 7: You shall hate no man, but some you must
   reprove, for some you must pray, and some you must love more than your
   very life'), but then the Didaché contemplated a much less serious
   position of affairs.

   The pastoral closes with a doxology (24, 25), arising out of what has
   just been said. The danger of making a slip and falling away from the
   faith, in the effort to help others, as well as in the general practice
   of personal religion, leads Judas to end as he began by exalting the
   power of God.

   24    Now to him who is able to keep you from slipping and to make you
   stand unblemished and exultant before his glory--^25 to the only God,
   our saviour through Jesus Christ our Lord, be glory, majesty, dominion,
   and authority, before all time and now and for all time: Amen.

   24

   This is the third doxology in the N.T. which opens to him who is able;
   the others are in Romans xvi. 25 and Ephesians iii. 20. Unblemished
   (from such stains as are mentioned in ver. 23) is much, but exultant is
   more--exultant because they are unblemished, and exulting in the power
   and goodness of the God who has brought them through the strain and
   stains of this world. To stand before his glory alludes to the final
   scrutiny at which the divine mercy (21) issues in life eternal. The
   term (free) from slipping (never elsewhere in the N.T.) occurs in 3
   Maccabees vi. 39 (on them did the Lord of all manifest his mercy, 25
   delivering them one and all free from slipping.' God is termed the only
   God, our saviour through Jesus Christ our Lord, in opposition to the
   teaching of the errorists (see Introduction); the one (ver. 4)
   effective saving power in this world of corruption works through Jesus
   Christ as the Church confesses him. Here at the end as at the beginning
   (ver. 2) the pastoral is echoed in the Martyrdom of Polykarp (xx.),
   written from the church of Smyrna, where the doxology runs: Now to him
   who is able to bring us in his bounteous grace to his heavenly realm by
   his only-begotten Child Jesus Christ, be glory, honour, dominion, and
   majesty for ever.'
     __________________________________________________________________

                                    Indexes
     __________________________________________________________________

Index of Scripture References

   Genesis

   [1]1:1-23   [2]1:26   [3]6:1   [4]6:1-2   [5]6:1-7   [6]6:3   [7]15:6
   [8]18:12   [9]18:17   [10]19:5   [11]22:1-12

   Exodus

   [12]3:19   [13]12:13   [14]19:5   [15]19:6   [16]24:7

   Leviticus

   [17]2:1-3   [18]19:2   [19]19:15   [20]19:18

   Numbers

   [21]21:7   [22]22:21

   Deuteronomy

   [23]1:17   [24]11:8   [25]11:14   [26]24:15   [27]33:2

   Joshua

   [28]2:1-21

   1 Samuel

   [29]2:35

   1 Kings

   [30]17:1-18:46

   2 Chronicles

   [31]20:7

   Psalms

   [32]16:10-11   [33]22:1-31   [34]24:4   [35]31:5   [36]32:1
   [37]34:1-22   [38]34:5   [39]34:8   [40]34:12-16   [41]55:22
   [42]68:5   [43]86:3   [44]89:26   [45]89:51-52   [46]90:4   [47]103:8
   [48]118:7   [49]118:22

   Proverbs

   [50]3:15   [51]3:34   [52]3:34   [53]10:12   [54]11:31   [55]24:22
   [56]26:11   [57]27:1   [58]27:21

   Isaiah

   [59]5:8-9   [60]8:12-13   [61]8:14   [62]10:3   [63]10:12   [64]11:2
   [65]28:16   [66]40:6   [67]41:8   [68]42:12   [69]43:20   [70]43:21
   [71]47:6   [72]49:6-7   [73]51:2   [74]52:3   [75]52:5   [76]53:1-12
   [77]53:6   [78]53:9   [79]53:12   [80]58:2-12

   Jeremiah

   [81]3:19   [82]12:3   [83]25:29

   Ezekiel

   [84]9:6   [85]14:14   [86]14:20   [87]20:33   [88]34:8

   Daniel

   [89]4:1   [90]8:13   [91]9:24   [92]12:6-7   [93]12:7   [94]12:12

   Hosea

   [95]2:3   [96]2:25

   Zechariah

   [97]3   [98]3:2   [99]3:2   [100]3:4

   Malachi

   [101]3:17

   Matthew

   [102]5:10   [103]5:10   [104]5:11   [105]5:11-12   [106]5:12
   [107]5:16   [108]5:16   [109]5:21   [110]5:25   [111]5:34-37
   [112]5:44   [113]6:14-15   [114]6:19   [115]7:24-27   [116]10:28
   [117]12:45   [118]13:16-17   [119]16:1-28   [120]18:15
   [121]18:21-35   [122]20:8   [123]24:12   [124]24:24   [125]24:37
   [126]25:34-40   [127]26:41   [128]28:19-20

   Mark

   [129]2:5   [130]4:19   [131]6:13   [132]8:1-9:50   [133]8:38
   [134]8:38   [135]9:1   [136]10:42   [137]12:10-11   [138]13:8
   [139]13:9   [140]13:20   [141]13:27

   Luke

   [142]4:25-26   [143]6:24   [144]6:28   [145]6:32   [146]6:36
   [147]6:37   [148]8:11   [149]8:24-25   [150]9:1-62   [151]10:23-24
   [152]12:21   [153]12:35   [154]12:42   [155]12:45   [156]16:19
   [157]16:19-31   [158]19:15   [159]20:17   [160]22:32   [161]23:46
   [162]24:26-27

   John

   [163]8:56   [164]12:41   [165]13:4   [166]13:36   [167]15:8
   [168]17:17   [169]20:5   [170]20:28   [171]21:15-16   [172]21:18-19
   [173]21:19

   Acts

   [174]1:7   [175]2:1-2   [176]2:11   [177]2:23   [178]2:25
   [179]2:31-41   [180]2:32-33   [181]2:32-35   [182]3:14   [183]3:16
   [184]3:18   [185]3:19   [186]4:11   [187]4:24   [188]5:6   [189]5:10
   [190]5:30   [191]5:41   [192]8:9   [193]10:39   [194]10:42
   [195]11:9   [196]11:21   [197]11:26   [198]14:15   [199]14:23
   [200]15:9   [201]15:14   [202]15:23   [203]16:1   [204]16:21
   [205]17:4   [206]17:7   [207]17:30   [208]18:21   [209]19:9
   [210]20:28   [211]23:26

   Romans

   [212]1:16   [213]2:4   [214]2:7   [215]2:10   [216]2:23-24
   [217]3:13   [218]3:25   [219]5:2   [220]5:3   [221]6:1   [222]6:2
   [223]6:11   [224]6:18   [225]7   [226]8:11   [227]8:13   [228]8:28
   [229]9:1-11:36   [230]9:22   [231]9:25   [232]9:25   [233]9:33
   [234]11:1   [235]11:11   [236]11:22   [237]12   [238]12:1   [239]12:1
   [240]12:2   [241]12:6   [242]12:7   [243]12:7-8   [244]12:9
   [245]12:13   [246]12:17   [247]13:1   [248]13:8-10   [249]15:14
   [250]16:25   [251]23:3

   1 Corinthians

   [252]2:14   [253]3:2   [254]4:1   [255]4:12   [256]4:19   [257]6:11
   [258]7:3-5   [259]7:5   [260]7:10-16   [261]7:16   [262]7:22
   [263]8:1   [264]9:19   [265]10:1-2   [266]10:5   [267]10:11
   [268]10:13   [269]11:20-22   [270]12:4   [271]13:7   [272]14:16
   [273]14:23-25   [274]14:33-35   [275]15:3-4   [276]16:15

   2 Corinthians

   [277]1:3   [278]1:5   [279]5:4   [280]5:13   [281]6:6   [282]9:10
   [283]12:20   [284]13:4

   Galatians

   [285]1:7   [286]3:6-7   [287]4:3   [288]4:7   [289]5:13   [290]5:13

   Ephesians

   [291]1:4   [292]1:21   [293]2:12   [294]3:5   [295]3:9-10   [296]3:20
   [297]4:17   [298]4:17-18   [299]4:22   [300]4:27   [301]4:32
   [302]5:8   [303]5:22   [304]5:26   [305]6:9   [306]6:14   [307]18:2

   Philippians

   [308]2:17   [309]3:9   [310]3:10   [311]4:18

   Colossians

   [312]1:5   [313]1:5-6   [314]1:13   [315]1:16   [316]3:8

   1 Thessalonians

   [317]1:9   [318]4:3-5   [319]4:4   [320]4:13   [321]4:13

   2 Thessalonians

   [322]2:2   [323]3:11-12

   1 Timothy

   [324]1:4   [325]1:5   [326]2:4   [327]2:7   [328]2:8   [329]2:9
   [330]3:2   [331]3:3   [332]3:16   [333]4:1   [334]4:1   [335]6:5

   2 Timothy

   [336]1:8   [337]1:12   [338]3:13   [339]4:4

   Titus

   [340]1:16   [341]2:10   [342]2:14   [343]3:4

   Hebrews

   [344]1:2   [345]2:3-4   [346]2:4   [347]2:10   [348]4:7   [349]5:12
   [350]6:4-6   [351]9:14   [352]10:22   [353]11:7   [354]11:17-19
   [355]11:26   [356]11:31   [357]12:11   [358]12:27   [359]13:2
   [360]13:7   [361]13:15-16   [362]13:18   [363]13:20

   James

   [364]1:1   [365]1:1   [366]1:1   [367]1:1-16   [368]1:2   [369]1:2-4
   [370]1:2-4   [371]1:2-4   [372]1:3   [373]1:3-4   [374]1:4   [375]1:5
   [376]1:5   [377]1:5   [378]1:5   [379]1:5   [380]1:5   [381]1:5-7
   [382]1:5-8   [383]1:5-8   [384]1:7-8   [385]1:8   [386]1:8   [387]1:9
   [388]1:9   [389]1:9   [390]1:9-11   [391]1:11   [392]1:11   [393]1:12
   [394]1:12   [395]1:12   [396]1:12   [397]1:12-19   [398]1:13
   [399]1:14   [400]1:15   [401]1:15   [402]1:15   [403]1:17   [404]1:17
   [405]1:17   [406]1:17   [407]1:17   [408]1:17-27   [409]1:18
   [410]1:18   [411]1:18   [412]1:18   [413]1:18   [414]1:18   [415]1:19
   [416]1:19-25   [417]1:20   [418]1:20   [419]1:20   [420]1:20
   [421]1:20-21   [422]1:20-21   [423]1:20-21   [424]1:21   [425]1:21
   [426]1:21   [427]1:21   [428]1:21   [429]1:22-25   [430]1:22-25
   [431]1:25   [432]1:26   [433]1:26   [434]1:26-27   [435]1:26-27
   [436]1:26-27   [437]1:27   [438]1:27   [439]1:27   [440]2:1
   [441]2:1   [442]2:1   [443]2:1   [444]2:1-4   [445]2:1-13   [446]2:2
   [447]2:2   [448]2:2   [449]2:2   [450]2:2   [451]2:2   [452]2:2-3
   [453]2:3   [454]2:4   [455]2:5   [456]2:5-6   [457]2:6   [458]2:6
   [459]2:6-7   [460]2:7   [461]2:8   [462]2:8   [463]2:8   [464]2:8
   [465]2:8-9   [466]2:8-13   [467]2:8-13   [468]2:8-13   [469]2:10
   [470]2:10-11   [471]2:12   [472]2:12   [473]2:13   [474]2:13
   [475]2:14   [476]2:14   [477]2:14-17   [478]2:14-26   [479]2:14-26
   [480]2:14-26   [481]2:15   [482]2:15   [483]2:15-16   [484]2:17
   [485]2:17   [486]2:18-20   [487]2:18-20   [488]2:19   [489]2:19
   [490]2:20   [491]2:21   [492]2:21-25   [493]2:21-25   [494]2:22
   [495]2:22   [496]2:24   [497]2:24   [498]2:25   [499]2:26   [500]2:26
   [501]2:26   [502]2:26   [503]3:1-5   [504]3:1-12   [505]3:1-18
   [506]3:2   [507]3:2   [508]3:5-8   [509]3:5-8   [510]3:6   [511]3:6
   [512]3:8   [513]3:9   [514]3:9   [515]3:9-12   [516]3:9-12
   [517]3:10-12   [518]3:11-12   [519]3:11-12   [520]3:13   [521]3:13-18
   [522]3:13-18   [523]3:13-18   [524]3:14   [525]3:14   [526]3:15
   [527]3:15   [528]3:16   [529]3:16   [530]3:18   [531]3:18   [532]4:1
   [533]4:1   [534]4:1   [535]4:1-6   [536]4:1-10   [537]4:1-10
   [538]4:1-10   [539]4:2-3   [540]4:3   [541]4:3   [542]4:4   [543]4:4
   [544]4:4-5   [545]4:4-5   [546]4:5   [547]4:5-6   [548]4:6   [549]4:6
   [550]4:6   [551]4:6-7   [552]4:7   [553]4:7-10   [554]4:7-10
   [555]4:7-10   [556]4:8   [557]4:8   [558]4:8   [559]4:8   [560]4:8
   [561]4:11   [562]4:11-12   [563]4:11-12   [564]4:11-12   [565]4:11-12
   [566]4:11-12   [567]4:11-12   [568]4:12   [569]4:13   [570]4:13-16
   [571]4:13-16   [572]4:13-16   [573]4:13-16   [574]4:14   [575]4:17
   [576]4:17   [577]4:17   [578]4:17   [579]5:1-3   [580]5:1-6
   [581]5:1-6   [582]5:1-6   [583]5:1-6   [584]5:1-6   [585]5:1-6
   [586]5:2   [587]5:3   [588]5:3   [589]5:5   [590]5:6   [591]5:6
   [592]5:7   [593]5:7   [594]5:7-11   [595]5:7-11   [596]5:7-11
   [597]5:7-11   [598]5:9   [599]5:9   [600]5:10   [601]5:10
   [602]5:10-11   [603]5:10-11   [604]5:12   [605]5:12   [606]5:13-18
   [607]5:14   [608]5:14   [609]5:14   [610]5:14-15   [611]5:14-16
   [612]5:15   [613]5:16   [614]5:16   [615]5:19-20   [616]5:20

   1 Peter

   [617]1:1   [618]1:1   [619]1:1   [620]1:1   [621]1:2   [622]1:2
   [623]1:2   [624]1:2   [625]1:2   [626]1:2   [627]1:2   [628]1:2
   [629]1:2   [630]1:2   [631]1:2   [632]1:2   [633]1:2   [634]1:2
   [635]1:3   [636]1:3   [637]1:3   [638]1:3   [639]1:3   [640]1:3
   [641]1:3   [642]1:3   [643]1:3-5   [644]1:3-12   [645]1:3-12
   [646]1:3-12   [647]1:4   [648]1:4   [649]1:5   [650]1:5   [651]1:5
   [652]1:6   [653]1:6   [654]1:6   [655]1:6   [656]1:6   [657]1:6-7
   [658]1:6-7   [659]1:6-9   [660]1:6-9   [661]1:7   [662]1:7   [663]1:7
   [664]1:7   [665]1:7   [666]1:8   [667]1:8   [668]1:8   [669]1:8-9
   [670]1:9   [671]1:9   [672]1:9   [673]1:9   [674]1:10   [675]1:10
   [676]1:10-12   [677]1:10-12   [678]1:11   [679]1:11   [680]1:12
   [681]1:12   [682]1:12   [683]1:13   [684]1:13   [685]1:13   [686]1:13
   [687]1:13   [688]1:13   [689]1:13   [690]1:13-21   [691]1:14
   [692]1:14   [693]1:14   [694]1:14-16   [695]1:15   [696]1:15
   [697]1:15   [698]1:15   [699]1:15-16   [700]1:17   [701]1:17
   [702]1:17   [703]1:17   [704]1:17   [705]1:17   [706]1:17   [707]1:17
   [708]1:18   [709]1:18-19   [710]1:18-21   [711]1:19   [712]1:19
   [713]1:19   [714]1:19-21   [715]1:19-21   [716]1:20   [717]1:20
   [718]1:20   [719]1:20   [720]1:21   [721]1:21   [722]1:21   [723]1:21
   [724]1:21   [725]1:21   [726]1:22   [727]1:22   [728]1:22   [729]1:22
   [730]1:22   [731]1:22   [732]1:22   [733]1:22   [734]1:22   [735]1:22
   [736]1:22   [737]1:22   [738]1:22   [739]1:22   [740]1:22-2:2
   [741]1:22-2:10   [742]1:22-2:10   [743]1:22-22:1   [744]1:23-2:1
   [745]1:24   [746]2:1   [747]2:1   [748]2:1   [749]2:1   [750]2:2-3
   [751]2:3   [752]2:4   [753]2:4   [754]2:4-5   [755]2:5   [756]2:6
   [757]2:6-10   [758]2:6-10   [759]2:7   [760]2:8   [761]2:8   [762]2:8
   [763]2:8   [764]2:8   [765]2:9   [766]2:9   [767]2:9   [768]2:9
   [769]2:9   [770]2:9   [771]2:9   [772]2:10   [773]2:10   [774]2:11
   [775]2:11   [776]2:11   [777]2:11   [778]2:11   [779]2:11
   [780]2:11-12   [781]2:11-3:12   [782]2:12   [783]2:12   [784]2:12
   [785]2:12   [786]2:12   [787]2:12   [788]2:12   [789]2:12   [790]2:12
   [791]2:12   [792]2:12   [793]2:12   [794]2:13   [795]2:13   [796]2:13
   [797]2:13   [798]2:13-17   [799]2:15   [800]2:16   [801]2:17
   [802]2:17   [803]2:17   [804]2:17   [805]2:17   [806]2:17   [807]2:18
   [808]2:18   [809]2:18-25   [810]2:20   [811]2:21   [812]2:21
   [813]2:21   [814]2:21   [815]2:21   [816]2:21   [817]2:21   [818]2:23
   [819]2:23   [820]2:23   [821]2:23   [822]2:24   [823]2:24   [824]2:24
   [825]2:25   [826]2:25   [827]2:25   [828]2:25   [829]3:1   [830]3:1
   [831]3:1   [832]3:1-6   [833]3:2   [834]3:2   [835]3:3-4   [836]3:5
   [837]3:5   [838]3:5-6   [839]3:5-6   [840]3:7   [841]3:7   [842]3:7
   [843]3:8   [844]3:8-12   [845]3:8-12   [846]3:8-4:6   [847]3:8-4:11
   [848]3:9   [849]3:9   [850]3:10   [851]3:10-12   [852]3:12
   [853]3:13   [854]3:14   [855]3:14   [856]3:14   [857]3:15
   [858]3:15-16   [859]3:16   [860]3:16   [861]3:16   [862]3:16
   [863]3:17   [864]3:17   [865]3:17   [866]3:17-18   [867]3:18
   [868]3:18   [869]3:18   [870]3:18   [871]3:19   [872]3:19   [873]3:19
   [874]3:19   [875]3:19-20   [876]3:19-22   [877]3:19-22   [878]3:20
   [879]3:20   [880]3:21   [881]3:21   [882]3:21   [883]3:22   [884]3:22
   [885]3:22   [886]4:1   [887]4:1   [888]4:1-6   [889]4:2   [890]4:2
   [891]4:2-4   [892]4:3-4   [893]4:3-6   [894]4:4   [895]4:4   [896]4:5
   [897]4:5   [898]4:5   [899]4:5   [900]4:5   [901]4:5-7   [902]4:6
   [903]4:6   [904]4:7   [905]4:7   [906]4:7   [907]4:7   [908]4:7
   [909]4:7   [910]4:7-11   [911]4:7-11   [912]4:8   [913]4:8   [914]4:8
   [915]4:8   [916]4:8   [917]4:10   [918]4:10-11   [919]4:11
   [920]4:11   [921]4:11   [922]4:12   [923]4:12-1   [924]4:12-16
   [925]4:12-19   [926]4:13   [927]4:13   [928]4:13   [929]4:13
   [930]4:14   [931]4:14   [932]4:15   [933]4:15   [934]4:15
   [935]4:15-16   [936]4:16   [937]4:16   [938]4:17   [939]4:17
   [940]4:17   [941]4:17   [942]4:17   [943]4:17   [944]4:17   [945]4:17
   [946]4:17-18   [947]4:17-18   [948]4:17-18   [949]4:17-18
   [950]4:17-18   [951]4:17-19   [952]4:18   [953]4:18   [954]4:19
   [955]4:19   [956]4:19   [957]4:19   [958]5:1   [959]5:1   [960]5:1
   [961]5:1   [962]5:1-3   [963]5:1-4   [964]5:1-11   [965]5:3
   [966]5:3   [967]5:4   [968]5:4   [969]5:4   [970]5:4   [971]5:5
   [972]5:5   [973]5:5-7   [974]5:5-11   [975]5:6   [976]5:6   [977]5:6
   [978]5:6   [979]5:6-7   [980]5:7   [981]5:7   [982]5:8   [983]5:8-11
   [984]5:9   [985]5:9   [986]5:9   [987]5:9   [988]5:10   [989]5:10
   [990]5:10   [991]5:10   [992]5:11   [993]5:11   [994]5:11   [995]5:12
   [996]5:12-14   [997]5:13

   2 Peter

   [998]1:1   [999]1:1   [1000]1:1   [1001]1:1-2   [1002]1:2   [1003]1:2
   [1004]1:2-8   [1005]1:3-4   [1006]1:3-4   [1007]1:3-7   [1008]1:4
   [1009]1:4   [1010]1:4   [1011]1:4   [1012]1:5   [1013]1:5-7
   [1014]1:5-21   [1015]1:8-11   [1016]1:8-11   [1017]1:9   [1018]1:10
   [1019]1:10   [1020]1:11   [1021]1:12   [1022]1:12   [1023]1:12-15
   [1024]1:16   [1025]1:16   [1026]1:16   [1027]1:16-19   [1028]1:16-19
   [1029]1:19   [1030]1:19   [1031]1:19-21   [1032]1:21   [1033]2:1
   [1034]2:1-2   [1035]2:1-22   [1036]2:1-22   [1037]2:2   [1038]2:2
   [1039]2:3   [1040]2:3   [1041]2:3   [1042]2:4   [1043]2:4-10
   [1044]2:5   [1045]2:6   [1046]2:7   [1047]2:9   [1048]2:9-10
   [1049]2:10   [1050]2:10-16   [1051]2:12   [1052]2:12   [1053]2:13
   [1054]2:14   [1055]2:14   [1056]2:15   [1057]2:15   [1058]2:15-16
   [1059]2:17-22   [1060]2:18   [1061]2:18-22   [1062]2:19
   [1063]2:19-20   [1064]2:20   [1065]2:20   [1066]2:20   [1067]2:20
   [1068]2:20-22   [1069]2:20-22   [1070]2:21   [1071]2:21   [1072]2:22
   [1073]2:22   [1074]3:1   [1075]3:2   [1076]3:2   [1077]3:2
   [1078]3:3   [1079]3:3   [1080]3:3   [1081]3:3-7   [1082]3:3-10
   [1083]3:4   [1084]3:4   [1085]3:5-7   [1086]3:5-7   [1087]3:8-9
   [1088]3:8-9   [1089]3:9   [1090]3:9   [1091]3:9   [1092]3:10
   [1093]3:10-14   [1094]3:11   [1095]3:11-14   [1096]3:12   [1097]3:13
   [1098]3:14   [1099]3:14   [1100]3:14   [1101]3:14   [1102]3:15
   [1103]3:15-16   [1104]3:16   [1105]3:17   [1106]3:17-18

   1 John

   [1107]1:7   [1108]2:16   [1109]2:16   [1110]3:3   [1111]3:17-18
   [1112]4:7   [1113]4:17-21   [1114]5:1   [1115]5:19

   3 John

   [1116]1:5-8   [1117]1:14

   Jude

   [1118]1:1   [1119]1:1   [1120]1:1-2   [1121]1:1-2   [1122]1:2
   [1123]1:3   [1124]1:3   [1125]1:4   [1126]1:4   [1127]1:4   [1128]1:4
   [1129]1:4   [1130]1:4   [1131]1:5   [1132]1:5-6   [1133]1:5-7
   [1134]1:6   [1135]1:6   [1136]1:6   [1137]1:7   [1138]1:7   [1139]1:8
   [1140]1:8   [1141]1:8-9   [1142]1:8-10   [1143]1:8-17   [1144]1:9
   [1145]1:10   [1146]1:10   [1147]1:11   [1148]1:11   [1149]1:11
   [1150]1:11   [1151]1:11   [1152]1:11-13   [1153]1:12   [1154]1:12
   [1155]1:12   [1156]1:14-15   [1157]1:14-15   [1158]1:14-16
   [1159]1:16   [1160]1:16   [1161]1:16   [1162]1:16   [1163]1:16
   [1164]1:17   [1165]1:17   [1166]1:17-18   [1167]1:17-19
   [1168]1:17-23   [1169]1:19   [1170]1:19   [1171]1:20   [1172]1:20
   [1173]1:20-23   [1174]1:21   [1175]1:22-23   [1176]1:23   [1177]1:23
   [1178]1:24   [1179]1:24   [1180]1:24-25

   Revelation

   [1181]1:6   [1182]2:14   [1183]3:10   [1184]7:4   [1185]11:2
   [1186]14:1   [1187]14:1-20   [1188]16:1-21   [1189]16:10
   [1190]16:20   [1191]21:1

   Tobit

   [1192]4:7-14

   Wisdom of Solomon

   [1193]2:4   [1194]2:10   [1195]5:8   [1196]5:15-16   [1197]8:21
   [1198]9:6   [1199]10:3   [1200]10:6-7   [1201]15:3

   1 Maccabees

   [1202]2:52

   3 Maccabees

   [1203]2:4-5   [1204]3:2   [1205]6:39

   Sirach

   [1206]2:1-5   [1207]2:12-14   [1208]4:10   [1209]5:13   [1210]11:1
   [1211]15:11   [1212]17:1-14   [1213]17:31   [1214]18:10   [1215]18:15
   [1216]19:16   [1217]19:20-21   [1218]20:14   [1219]21:2   [1220]23:9
   [1221]24:30   [1222]28:1-7   [1223]28:12   [1224]29:10   [1225]34:24
   [1226]38:9   [1227]38:10   [1228]41:22   [1229]48:3   [1230]49:9
   [1231]51:30
     __________________________________________________________________

Index of Scripture Commentary

   James

   [1232]1

   1 Peter

   [1233]1

   2 Peter

   [1234]1

   Jude

   [1235]1:1
     __________________________________________________________________

Index of Greek Words and Phrases

     * ENOK: [1236]1
     * ENOKAI: [1237]1
     * ENOKAI ENOCh: [1238]1
     * ENOCh: [1239]1
     __________________________________________________________________

Index of Latin Words and Phrases

     * Dies irae, dies ilia : [1240]1
     * Cossinius hic, cui dedi litteras, valde mini bonus homo et non
       levis et amans tui vicus est: [1241]1
     * ab alio quodam sub nomine eius edita, licet paulatim tempore
       procedente obtinuerit auctoritatem.: [1242]1
     * cognitio: [1243]1
     * dominantes in cleris: [1244]1
     * ignis aurum probat, miseria fortes viros: [1245]1
     * maleficus: [1246]1 [1247]2
     * me aemulari, mein instare vestigiis: [1248]1
     * sacramento: [1249]1
     * urbi et orbi: [1250]1
     * vivus: [1251]1
     __________________________________________________________________

Index of French Words and Phrases

     * Il est bien nostre seul et unique protecteur,: [1252]1
     * Platon en ses loix,: [1253]1
     * dit saint Pierre,: [1254]1
     * et peult toutes choses á nous ayder: mais encores qu'il daigne nous
       honnorer de cette doulce alliance paternelle, it est pourtante
       autant juste, comme il est bon et comme it est puissante.: [1255]1
     * faict trois sortes d'iniurieuse creance des dieux: Qu'il n'y en aye
       point; Qu'ils ne se meslent point de nos affaires [the point met by
       Peter in v. 7: [1256]1
     * il fault avoir l'ame nette, au moins en ce moment auquel nous le
       prions, et deschargee de passions vicieuses.' Peter would not have
       limited the demand, however, to, ce moment auquel nous le prions.:
       [1257]1
     * pour désabuser les Chrétiens de cette fausse idée qui nous fait
       rejeter l'exemple des saints, comme disproportionné à notre état.
       "C'étaient des saints, disons-nous, ce n'est pas comme nous." Que
       se passait-il donc alors? Saint Athanase était un homme appelé
       Athanase, accusé de plusieurs crimes, condamné en tel et tel
       concile, pour tel et tel crime; tous les évêques y consentaient, et
       le pape enfin.: [1258]1
     __________________________________________________________________

Index of Pages of the Print Edition

   [1259]i  [1260]ii  [1261]iii  [1262]iv  [1263]v  [1264]vi  [1265]vii
   [1266]viii  [1267]1  [1268]2  [1269]3  [1270]4  [1271]5  [1272]6
   [1273]7  [1274]8  [1275]9  [1276]10  [1277]11  [1278]12  [1279]13
   [1280]14  [1281]15  [1282]16  [1283]17  [1284]18  [1285]19  [1286]20
   [1287]21  [1288]22  [1289]23  [1290]24  [1291]25  [1292]26  [1293]27
   [1294]28  [1295]29  [1296]30  [1297]31  [1298]31  [1299]33  [1300]34
   [1301]35  [1302]36  [1303]37  [1304]38  [1305]39  [1306]40  [1307]41
   [1308]41  [1309]43  [1310]44  [1311]45  [1312]46  [1313]47  [1314]48
   [1315]49  [1316]50  [1317]51  [1318]52  [1319]53  [1320]54  [1321]55
   [1322]56  [1323]57  [1324]58  [1325]59  [1326]60  [1327]61  [1328]62
   [1329]63  [1330]64  [1331]65  [1332]66  [1333]67  [1334]68  [1335]69
   [1336]70  [1337]71  [1338]72  [1339]73  [1340]74  [1341]75  [1342]76
   [1343]77  [1344]78  [1345]79  [1346]80  [1347]81  [1348]82  [1349]83
   [1350]84  [1351]85  [1352]86  [1353]87  [1354]88  [1355]89  [1356]90
   [1357]91  [1358]92  [1359]93  [1360]94  [1361]95  [1362]96  [1363]97
   [1364]98  [1365]99  [1366]100  [1367]101  [1368]102  [1369]103
   [1370]104  [1371]105  [1372]106  [1373]107  [1374]108  [1375]109
   [1376]110  [1377]111  [1378]112  [1379]113  [1380]114  [1381]115
   [1382]116  [1383]117  [1384]118  [1385]119  [1386]120  [1387]121
   [1388]122  [1389]123  [1390]124  [1391]125  [1392]126  [1393]127
   [1394]128  [1395]129  [1396]130  [1397]131  [1398]132  [1399]133
   [1400]134  [1401]135  [1402]136  [1403]137  [1404]138  [1405]139
   [1406]140  [1407]141  [1408]142  [1409]143  [1410]144  [1411]145
   [1412]146  [1413]147  [1414]148  [1415]149  [1416]150  [1417]151
   [1418]152  [1419]153  [1420]154  [1421]155  [1422]156  [1423]157
   [1424]158  [1425]159  [1426]160  [1427]161  [1428]162  [1429]163
   [1430]164  [1431]165  [1432]166  [1433]167  [1434]168  [1435]169
   [1436]170  [1437]171  [1438]172  [1439]173  [1440]174  [1441]175
   [1442]176  [1443]177  [1444]178  [1445]179  [1446]180  [1447]181
   [1448]182  [1449]183  [1450]184  [1451]185  [1452]186  [1453]187
   [1454]188  [1455]189  [1456]190  [1457]191  [1458]192  [1459]193
   [1460]194  [1461]195  [1462]196  [1463]197  [1464]198  [1465]199
   [1466]200  [1467]201  [1468]202  [1469]203  [1470]204  [1471]205
   [1472]206  [1473]207  [1474]208  [1475]209  [1476]210  [1477]211
   [1478]212  [1479]213  [1480]214  [1481]215  [1482]216  [1483]217
   [1484]218  [1485]219  [1486]220  [1487]221  [1488]222  [1489]223
   [1490]224  [1491]225  [1492]226  [1493]227  [1494]228  [1495]229
   [1496]230  [1497]231  [1498]232  [1499]233  [1500]234  [1501]235
   [1502]236  [1503]237  [1504]238  [1505]239  [1506]240  [1507]241
   [1508]242  [1509]243  [1510]244  [1511]245  [1512]246
     __________________________________________________________________

            This document is from the Christian Classics Ethereal
               Library at Calvin College, http://www.ccel.org,
                   generated on demand from ThML source.

References

   1. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=1&scrV=1#v.ii-p79.6
   2. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=1&scrV=26#iii.ii-p116.2
   3. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=6&scrV=1#vi.ii-p15.2
   4. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=6&scrV=1#iv.ii-p103.3
   5. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=6&scrV=1#iv.ii-p144.2
   6. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=6&scrV=3#iv.ii-p145.5
   7. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=15&scrV=6#iii.ii-p92.2
   8. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=18&scrV=12#iv.ii-p107.4
   9. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=18&scrV=17#iii.ii-p94.1
  10. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=19&scrV=5#vi.ii-p16.1
  11. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=22&scrV=1#iii.ii-p92.3
  12. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=3&scrV=19#iv.ii-p218.3
  13. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=12&scrV=13#iv.ii-p40.2
  14. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=19&scrV=5#iv.ii-p73.8
  15. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=19&scrV=6#iv.ii-p73.6
  16. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=24&scrV=7#iv.ii-p5.15
  17. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=2&scrV=1#iii.ii-p202.8
  18. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=19&scrV=2#iv.ii-p35.1
  19. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=19&scrV=15#iii.ii-p65.5
  20. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=19&scrV=18#iii.ii-p65.2
  21. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=21&scrV=7#iii.ii-p34.2
  22. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=22&scrV=21#v.ii-p59.11
  23. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=1&scrV=17#iii.ii-p57.6
  24. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=11&scrV=8#iii.ii-p186.4
  25. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=11&scrV=14#iii.ii-p186.3
  26. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=24&scrV=15#iii.ii-p180.1
  27. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=33&scrV=2#vi.ii-p37.5
  28. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Josh&scrCh=2&scrV=1#iii.ii-p96.2
  29. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=2&scrV=35#iv.ii-p61.4
  30. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=17&scrV=1#iii.ii-p205.4
  31. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=2Chr&scrCh=20&scrV=7#iii.ii-p94.3
  32. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=16&scrV=10#iv.ii-p25.3
  33. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=22&scrV=1#iv.ii-p25.5
  34. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=24&scrV=4#iii.ii-p157.9
  35. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=31&scrV=5#iv.ii-p199.4
  36. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=32&scrV=1#iv.ii-p173.9
  37. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=34&scrV=1#iv.i-p4.2
  38. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=34&scrV=5#iv.ii-p60.10
  39. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=34&scrV=8#iv.ii-p60.7
  40. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=34&scrV=12#iv.ii-p128.2
  41. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=55&scrV=22#iv.ii-p220.1
  42. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=68&scrV=5#iii.ii-p50.1
  43. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=86&scrV=3#iv.ii-p20.8
  44. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=89&scrV=26#iv.ii-p36.5
  45. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=89&scrV=51#iv.ii-p185.1
  46. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=90&scrV=4#v.ii-p86.1
  47. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=103&scrV=8#iii.ii-p189.4
  48. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=118&scrV=7#iv.ii-p72.2
  49. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=118&scrV=22#iv.ii-p61.5
  50. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=3&scrV=15#iv.ii-p108.3
  51. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=3&scrV=34#iii.ii-p139.4
  52. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=3&scrV=34#iv.ii-p218.1
  53. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=10&scrV=12#iv.ii-p173.6
  54. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=11&scrV=31#iv.ii-p196.10
  55. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=24&scrV=22#iv.ii-p84.4
  56. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=26&scrV=11#v.ii-p68.1
  57. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=27&scrV=1#iii.ii-p163.2
  58. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=27&scrV=21#iv.ii-p183.3
  59. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=5&scrV=8#iii.ii-p180.3
  60. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=8&scrV=12#iv.ii-p131.5
  61. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=8&scrV=14#iv.ii-p72.3
  62. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=10&scrV=3#iv.ii-p78.9
  63. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=10&scrV=12#iv.ii-p196.1
  64. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=11&scrV=2#iv.ii-p185.2
  65. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=28&scrV=16#iv.ii-p72.1
  66. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=40&scrV=6#iii.ii-p26.2
  67. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=41&scrV=8#iii.ii-p94.2
  68. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=42&scrV=12#iv.ii-p73.10
  69. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=43&scrV=20#iv.ii-p73.4
  70. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=43&scrV=21#iv.ii-p73.11
  71. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=47&scrV=6#iv.ii-p11.4
  72. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=49&scrV=6#iv.ii-p56.6
  73. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=51&scrV=2#iv.ii-p108.1
  74. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=52&scrV=3#iv.ii-p40.1
  75. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=52&scrV=5#v.ii-p46.2
  76. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=53&scrV=1#iv.ii-p25.2
  77. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=53&scrV=6#iv.ii-p96.3
  78. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=53&scrV=9#iv.ii-p94.11
  79. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=53&scrV=12#iv.ii-p96.1
  80. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=58&scrV=2#iii.ii-p50.3
  81. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=3&scrV=19#iv.ii-p36.4
  82. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=12&scrV=3#iii.ii-p181.1
  83. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=25&scrV=29#iv.ii-p196.2
  84. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=9&scrV=6#iv.ii-p196.3
  85. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=14&scrV=14#iii.ii-p188.5
  86. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=14&scrV=20#iii.ii-p188.5
  87. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=20&scrV=33#iv.ii-p218.4
  88. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=34&scrV=8#vi.ii-p29.2
  89. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=4&scrV=1#iv.ii-p6.2
  90. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=8&scrV=13#iv.ii-p54.7
  91. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=9&scrV=24#iv.ii-p26.1
  92. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=12&scrV=6#iv.ii-p26.6
  93. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=12&scrV=7#iii.ii-p206.2
  94. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=12&scrV=12#iii.ii-p30.1
  95. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=2&scrV=3#iv.ii-p73.19
  96. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=2&scrV=25#iv.ii-p73.19
  97. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Zech&scrCh=3&scrV=0#vi.ii-p51.2
  98. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Zech&scrCh=3&scrV=2#vi.ii-p21.4
  99. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Zech&scrCh=3&scrV=2#vi.ii-p51.3
 100. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Zech&scrCh=3&scrV=4#vi.ii-p52.2
 101. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Mal&scrCh=3&scrV=17#iv.ii-p73.9
 102. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=10#iv.ii-p131.3
 103. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=10#iv.ii-p183.8
 104. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=11#iv.ii-p183.14
 105. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=11#iv.ii-p183.4
 106. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=12#iii.ii-p188.2
 107. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=16#iv.ii-p78.8
 108. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=16#iv.ii-p178.4
 109. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=21#iii.ii-p69.1
 110. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=25#iii.ii-p69.2
 111. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=34#iii.ii-p195.6
 112. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=44#iv.ii-p127.2
 113. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=14#iv.ii-p173.8
 114. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=19#iii.ii-p178.3
 115. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=7&scrV=24#iii.ii-p43.1
 116. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=10&scrV=28#iii.ii-p72.5
 117. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=12&scrV=45#v.ii-p66.6
 118. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=13&scrV=16#iv.ii-p25.6
 119. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=16&scrV=1#v.ii-p31.3
 120. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=18&scrV=15#iv.ii-p102.8
 121. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=18&scrV=21#iii.ii-p70.3
 122. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=20&scrV=8#iii.ii-p180.2
 123. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=24&scrV=12#iv.ii-p173.5
 124. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=24&scrV=24#v.ii-p46.10
 125. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=24&scrV=37#iv.ii-p145.3
 126. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=25&scrV=34#iii.ii-p50.4
 127. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=26&scrV=41#iv.ii-p223.5
 128. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=28&scrV=19#iv.ii-p5.7
 129. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=2&scrV=5#iii.ii-p202.4
 130. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=4&scrV=19#v.ii-p59.3
 131. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=6&scrV=13#iii.ii-p203.1
 132. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=8&scrV=1#v.ii-p31.4
 133. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=8&scrV=38#v.ii-p30.5
 134. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=8&scrV=38#iv.ii-p187.1
 135. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=9&scrV=1#v.ii-p30.6
 136. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=10&scrV=42#iv.ii-p209.2
 137. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=12&scrV=10#iv.ii-p60.11
 138. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=13&scrV=8#iv.ii-p25.14
 139. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=13&scrV=9#iv.ii-p82.4
 140. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=13&scrV=20#iv.ii-p196.7
 141. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=13&scrV=27#iv.ii-p4.4
 142. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=4&scrV=25#iii.ii-p206.4
 143. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=6&scrV=24#iii.ii-p176.2
 144. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=6&scrV=28#iv.ii-p127.4
 145. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=6&scrV=32#iv.ii-p94.5
 146. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=6&scrV=36#iii.ii-p189.5
 147. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=6&scrV=37#iii.ii-p71.5
 148. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=8&scrV=11#iv.ii-p56.7
 149. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=8&scrV=24#iii.ii-p18.1
 150. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=9&scrV=1#v.ii-p31.5
 151. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=10&scrV=23#iv.ii-p25.7
 152. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=12&scrV=21#iii.ii-p61.1
 153. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=12&scrV=35#iv.ii-p32.2
 154. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=12&scrV=42#iv.ii-p176.5
 155. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=12&scrV=45#iv.ii-p209.3
 156. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=16&scrV=19#iii.ii-p70.4
 157. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=16&scrV=19#iii.ii-p176.3
 158. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=19&scrV=15#iv.ii-p196.5
 159. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=20&scrV=17#iv.ii-p72.5
 160. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=22&scrV=32#iv.ii-p225.6
 161. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=23&scrV=46#iv.ii-p199.5
 162. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=24&scrV=26#iv.ii-p25.1
 163. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=56#iv.ii-p25.8
 164. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=12&scrV=41#iv.ii-p25.9
 165. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=13&scrV=4#iv.ii-p217.4
 166. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=13&scrV=36#iv.ii-p204.4
 167. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=15&scrV=8#iv.ii-p178.5
 168. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=17&scrV=17#iv.ii-p55.5
 169. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=20&scrV=5#iv.ii-p28.2
 170. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=20&scrV=28#v.ii-p6.1
 171. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=21&scrV=15#iv.ii-p206.5
 172. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=21&scrV=18#v.ii-p27.8
 173. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=21&scrV=19#iv.ii-p187.3
 174. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=1&scrV=7#iv.ii-p26.2
 175. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=2&scrV=1#iv.ii-p27.2
 176. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=2&scrV=11#iv.ii-p73.13
 177. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=2&scrV=23#iv.ii-p41.4
 178. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=2&scrV=25#iv.ii-p25.4
 179. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=2&scrV=31#iv.ii-p145.12
 180. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=2&scrV=32#iv.ii-p27.2
 181. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=2&scrV=32#iv.ii-p147.2
 182. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=3&scrV=14#iv.ii-p140.4
 183. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=3&scrV=16#iv.ii-p43.1
 184. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=3&scrV=18#v.ii-p32.2
 185. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=3&scrV=19#v.ii-p94.3
 186. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=4&scrV=11#iv.ii-p60.13
 187. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=4&scrV=24#iv.ii-p199.7
 188. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=5&scrV=6#iv.ii-p217.1
 189. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=5&scrV=10#iv.ii-p217.1
 190. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=5&scrV=30#iv.ii-p95.3
 191. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=5&scrV=41#iv.ii-p183.13
 192. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=8&scrV=9#iv.ii-p185.8
 193. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=10&scrV=39#iv.ii-p95.4
 194. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=10&scrV=42#iv.ii-p164.6
 195. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=11&scrV=9#iv.ii-p84.1
 196. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=11&scrV=21#iv.ii-p96.5
 197. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=11&scrV=26#iv.ii-p187.4
 198. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=14&scrV=15#iv.ii-p38.3
 199. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=14&scrV=23#iv.ii-p207.1
 200. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=15&scrV=9#iv.ii-p54.1
 201. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=15&scrV=14#v.ii-p5.1
 202. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=15&scrV=23#iii.ii-p3.6
 203. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=16&scrV=1#iv.ii-p102.3
 204. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=16&scrV=21#iv.ii-p82.7
 205. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=17&scrV=4#iv.ii-p102.4
 206. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=17&scrV=7#iv.ii-p82.8
 207. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=17&scrV=30#iv.ii-p33.11
 208. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=18&scrV=21#iii.ii-p165.2
 209. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=19&scrV=9#iii.ii-p57.2
 210. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=20&scrV=28#iv.ii-p207.2
 211. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=23&scrV=26#iii.ii-p3.7
 212. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=1&scrV=16#iv.ii-p11.10
 213. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=2&scrV=4#v.ii-p99.1
 214. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=2&scrV=7#iv.ii-p16.5
 215. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=2&scrV=10#iv.ii-p16.5
 216. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=2&scrV=23#v.ii-p46.3
 217. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=3&scrV=13#iii.ii-p111.8
 218. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=3&scrV=25#v.ii-p99.2
 219. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=5&scrV=2#iv.ii-p231.6
 220. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=5&scrV=3#iii.ii-p9.3
 221. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=6&scrV=1#v.ii-p99.6
 222. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=6&scrV=2#iv.ii-p95.7
 223. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=6&scrV=11#iv.ii-p95.7
 224. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=6&scrV=18#iv.ii-p95.7
 225. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=7&scrV=0#v.ii-p51.2
 226. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=11#iv.ii-p43.4
 227. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=13#iv.ii-p43.4
 228. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=28#iv.ii-p5.4
 229. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=9&scrV=1#iv.ii-p72.12
 230. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=9&scrV=22#v.ii-p99.3
 231. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=9&scrV=25#iv.ii-p24.3
 232. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=9&scrV=25#iv.ii-p73.18
 233. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=9&scrV=33#iv.ii-p72.6
 234. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=11&scrV=1#v.ii-p53.9
 235. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=11&scrV=11#iii.ii-p66.3
 236. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=11&scrV=22#v.ii-p99.4
 237. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=12&scrV=0#iii.ii-p96.3
 238. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=12&scrV=1#iv.ii-p60.5
 239. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=12&scrV=1#iv.ii-p61.7
 240. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=12&scrV=2#iv.ii-p33.8
 241. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=12&scrV=6#iv.ii-p176.3
 242. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=12&scrV=7#iv.ii-p178.1
 243. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=12&scrV=7#iv.ii-p177.2
 244. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=12&scrV=9#iv.ii-p54.8
 245. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=12&scrV=13#iv.ii-p177.1
 246. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=12&scrV=17#iv.ii-p127.1
 247. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=13&scrV=1#iv.ii-p82.2
 248. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=13&scrV=8#iii.ii-p65.1
 249. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=15&scrV=14#v.ii-p27.1
 250. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=16&scrV=25#vi.ii-p57.1
 251. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=23&scrV=3#iii.ii-p157.15
 252. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=14#iii.ii-p121.8
 253. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=2#iv.ii-p60.3
 254. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=1#iv.ii-p176.6
 255. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=12#iv.ii-p127.5
 256. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=19#iii.ii-p165.1
 257. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=6&scrV=11#iv.ii-p5.5
 258. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=7&scrV=3#iv.ii-p112.2
 259. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=7&scrV=5#iv.ii-p112.5
 260. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=7&scrV=10#iv.ii-p100.1
 261. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=7&scrV=16#iv.ii-p102.6
 262. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=7&scrV=22#iv.ii-p82.10
 263. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=8&scrV=1#iii.ii-p121.2
 264. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=9&scrV=19#iv.ii-p102.7
 265. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=10&scrV=1#iv.ii-p145.9
 266. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=10&scrV=5#vi.ii-p13.1
 267. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=10&scrV=11#iv.ii-p41.8
 268. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=10&scrV=13#iii.ii-p32.1
 269. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=11&scrV=20#vi.ii-p29.3
 270. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=4#iv.ii-p176.4
 271. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=13&scrV=7#iv.ii-p173.7
 272. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=14&scrV=16#iii.ii-p57.3
 273. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=14&scrV=23#iii.ii-p57.3
 274. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=14&scrV=33#iv.ii-p97.2
 275. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=3#iv.ii-p25.13
 276. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=16&scrV=15#iv.ii-p178.2
 277. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=3#iv.ii-p10.1
 278. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=5#iv.ii-p183.10
 279. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=4#v.ii-p27.7
 280. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=13#iv.ii-p171.2
 281. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=6&scrV=6#iv.ii-p54.9
 282. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=9&scrV=10#iv.ii-p178.3
 283. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=20#iii.ii-p121.11
 284. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=13&scrV=4#iv.ii-p140.6
 285. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=1&scrV=7#vi.ii-p7.5
 286. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=3&scrV=6#iii.ii-p92.1
 287. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=4&scrV=3#v.ii-p91.3
 288. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=4&scrV=7#iv.ii-p11.2
 289. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=5&scrV=13#iv.ii-p82.1
 290. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=5&scrV=13#v.ii-p66.1
 291. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=4#iv.ii-p41.6
 292. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=21#vi.ii-p21.1
 293. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=2&scrV=12#iv.ii-p43.7
 294. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=3&scrV=5#v.ii-p75.2
 295. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=3&scrV=9#iv.ii-p28.3
 296. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=3&scrV=20#vi.ii-p57.2
 297. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=17#iv.ii-p38.1
 298. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=17#iv.ii-p33.12
 299. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=22#iv.ii-p56.15
 300. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=27#iii.ii-p157.2
 301. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=32#iv.ii-p126.2
 302. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=5&scrV=8#iv.ii-p73.15
 303. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=5&scrV=22#iv.ii-p102.2
 304. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=5&scrV=26#iv.ii-p146.1
 305. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=6&scrV=9#iv.ii-p94.14
 306. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=6&scrV=14#iv.ii-p32.3
 307. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=18&scrV=2#v.ii-p6.2
 308. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=17#iv.ii-p61.8
 309. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=3&scrV=9#v.ii-p94.9
 310. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=3&scrV=10#iv.ii-p183.11
 311. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=4&scrV=18#iv.ii-p61.9
 312. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=1&scrV=5#iv.ii-p231.4
 313. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=1&scrV=5#v.ii-p27.4
 314. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=1&scrV=13#iv.ii-p73.14
 315. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=1&scrV=16#vi.ii-p21.2
 316. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=3&scrV=8#iv.ii-p56.13
 317. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=1&scrV=9#iv.ii-p96.4
 318. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=4&scrV=3#iv.ii-p112.1
 319. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=4&scrV=4#iv.ii-p112.3
 320. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=4&scrV=13#iv.ii-p43.6
 321. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=4&scrV=13#iv.ii-p165.3
 322. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=2Thess&scrCh=2&scrV=2#iv.ii-p171.3
 323. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=2Thess&scrCh=3&scrV=11#iv.ii-p171.4
 324. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=1&scrV=4#v.ii-p30.3
 325. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=1&scrV=5#iv.ii-p55.2
 326. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=2&scrV=4#v.ii-p87.3
 327. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=2&scrV=7#v.ii-p51.1
 328. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=2&scrV=8#iv.ii-p112.7
 329. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=2&scrV=9#iv.ii-p104.1
 330. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=3&scrV=2#iv.ii-p175.2
 331. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=3&scrV=3#iv.ii-p209.4
 332. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=3&scrV=16#iv.ii-p41.7
 333. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=4&scrV=1#v.ii-p46.11
 334. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=4&scrV=1#vi.ii-p42.3
 335. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=6&scrV=5#vi.ii-p27.2
 336. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=1&scrV=8#iv.ii-p187.2
 337. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=1&scrV=12#iv.ii-p187.2
 338. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=3&scrV=13#iv.ii-p185.7
 339. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=4&scrV=4#v.ii-p30.2
 340. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Titus&scrCh=1&scrV=16#vi.ii-p9.1
 341. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Titus&scrCh=2&scrV=10#iv.ii-p93.2
 342. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Titus&scrCh=2&scrV=14#iv.ii-p131.1
 343. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Titus&scrCh=3&scrV=4#iv.ii-p60.8
 344. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=1&scrV=2#iv.ii-p41.9
 345. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=2&scrV=3#v.ii-p11.3
 346. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=2&scrV=4#iv.ii-p27.1
 347. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=2&scrV=10#iv.ii-p199.8
 348. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=4&scrV=7#vi.ii-p13.2
 349. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=5&scrV=12#iv.ii-p60.4
 350. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=6&scrV=4#v.ii-p68.4
 351. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=9&scrV=14#iv.ii-p41.2
 352. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=10&scrV=22#iv.ii-p146.2
 353. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=11&scrV=7#iv.ii-p145.7
 354. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=11&scrV=17#iii.ii-p96.1
 355. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=11&scrV=26#iv.ii-p24.7
 356. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=11&scrV=31#iii.ii-p96.1
 357. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=12&scrV=11#iii.ii-p123.9
 358. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=12&scrV=27#iv.ii-p25.12
 359. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=13&scrV=2#iv.ii-p175.1
 360. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=13&scrV=7#iv.ii-p177.3
 361. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=13&scrV=15#iv.ii-p61.10
 362. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=13&scrV=18#iv.ii-p78.5
 363. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=13&scrV=20#iv.ii-p236.2
 364. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=1#iii.i-p1.1
 365. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=1#iii.i-p4.1
 366. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=1#iii.i-p4.3
 367. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=1#iii.i-p7.1
 368. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=2#iii.ii-p186.7
 369. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=2#iii.ii-p4.1
 370. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=2#iii.ii-p27.1
 371. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=2#iii.ii-p19.5
 372. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=3#iii.ii-p30.3
 373. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=3#iii.ii-p189.3
 374. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=4#iii.ii-p189.1
 375. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=5#iii.ii-p137.3
 376. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=5#iii.ii-p139.2
 377. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=5#iii.ii-p139.3
 378. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=5#iii.ii-p117.3
 379. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=5#iii.ii-p120.3
 380. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=5#iii.ii-p202.3
 381. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=5#iii.ii-p196.2
 382. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=5#iii.ii-p11.3
 383. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=5#iii.ii-p19.5
 384. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=7#iii.ii-p133.1
 385. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=8#iii.ii-p26.6
 386. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=8#iii.ii-p157.12
 387. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=9#iii.ii-p7.3
 388. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=9#iii.ii-p139.7
 389. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=9#iii.ii-p159.2
 390. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=9#iii.ii-p19.2
 391. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=11#iii.ii-p30.7
 392. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=11#iii.ii-p178.5
 393. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=12#iii.ii-p9.1
 394. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=12#iii.ii-p61.2
 395. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=12#iii.ii-p47.1
 396. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=12#iii.ii-p189.2
 397. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=12#iii.ii-p27.2
 398. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=13#iii.ii-p8.1
 399. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=14#iii.ii-p129.3
 400. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=15#iii.ii-p33.2
 401. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=15#iii.ii-p34.7
 402. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=15#iii.ii-p210.6
 403. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=17#iii.ii-p137.4
 404. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=17#iii.ii-p137.8
 405. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=17#iii.ii-p47.2
 406. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=17#iii.ii-p94.8
 407. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=17#iii.ii-p121.6
 408. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=17#iii.i-p7.2
 409. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=18#iii.ii-p33.7
 410. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=18#iii.ii-p41.1
 411. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=18#iii.ii-p42.1
 412. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=18#iii.ii-p121.4
 413. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=18#iii.ii-p210.4
 414. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=18#iv.ii-p56.5
 415. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=19#iii.ii-p101.2
 416. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=19#iii.ii-p36.1
 417. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=20#iii.ii-p14.2
 418. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=20#iii.ii-p49.4
 419. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=20#iii.ii-p123.7
 420. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=20#iv.ii-p55.1
 421. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=20#iii.ii-p47.7
 422. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=20#iii.ii-p70.1
 423. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=20#iii.ii-p39.1
 424. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=21#iii.ii-p49.3
 425. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=21#iii.ii-p123.8
 426. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=21#iii.ii-p72.4
 427. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=21#iii.ii-p111.2
 428. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=21#iii.ii-p121.1
 429. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=22#iii.ii-p39.2
 430. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=22#iii.ii-p43.2
 431. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=25#iii.ii-p69.5
 432. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=26#iii.ii-p101.2
 433. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=26#iii.ii-p106.7
 434. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=26#iii.ii-p47.8
 435. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=26#iii.ii-p36.2
 436. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=26#iii.ii-p39.3
 437. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=27#iii.ii-p70.1
 438. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=27#iii.ii-p33.5
 439. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=27#vi.ii-p52.1
 440. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=2&scrV=1#iii.i-p4.2
 441. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=2&scrV=1#iii.ii-p3.2
 442. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=2&scrV=1#iii.ii-p34.6
 443. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=2&scrV=1#iii.ii-p79.2
 444. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=2&scrV=1#iii.ii-p52.1
 445. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=2&scrV=1#iii.i-p7.3
 446. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=2&scrV=2#iii.i-p6.1
 447. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=2&scrV=2#iii.ii-p19.4
 448. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=2&scrV=2#iii.ii-p23.1
 449. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=2&scrV=2#iii.ii-p24.1
 450. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=2&scrV=2#iii.ii-p49.5
 451. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=2&scrV=2#iii.ii-p166.2
 452. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=2&scrV=2#iii.ii-p24.5
 453. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=2&scrV=3#iii.ii-p160.2
 454. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=2&scrV=4#iii.ii-p71.2
 455. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=2&scrV=5#iii.ii-p30.5
 456. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=2&scrV=5#iii.ii-p58.1
 457. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=2&scrV=6#iii.ii-p181.4
 458. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=2&scrV=6#iii.ii-p195.4
 459. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=2&scrV=6#iii.ii-p58.2
 460. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=2&scrV=7#iii.ii-p26.9
 461. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=2&scrV=8#iii.ii-p47.5
 462. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=2&scrV=8#iii.ii-p137.1
 463. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=2&scrV=8#iii.ii-p137.2
 464. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=2&scrV=8#iii.ii-p94.7
 465. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=2&scrV=8#iii.ii-p62.1
 466. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=2&scrV=8#iii.ii-p58.3
 467. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=2&scrV=8#iii.ii-p62.2
 468. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=2&scrV=8#iii.ii-p123.4
 469. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=2&scrV=10#iii.ii-p106.4
 470. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=2&scrV=10#iii.ii-p66.2
 471. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=2&scrV=12#iii.ii-p47.6
 472. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=2&scrV=12#iii.ii-p106.2
 473. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=2&scrV=13#iii.ii-p210.2
 474. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=2&scrV=13#iii.ii-p210.8
 475. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=2&scrV=14#iii.ii-p101.4
 476. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=2&scrV=14#iii.ii-p120.4
 477. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=2&scrV=14#iii.ii-p74.3
 478. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=2&scrV=14#iii.i-p7.5
 479. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=2&scrV=14#iii.ii-p74.1
 480. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=2&scrV=14#iii.ii-p100.5
 481. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=2&scrV=15#iii.ii-p24.4
 482. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=2&scrV=15#iii.ii-p180.8
 483. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=2&scrV=15#iii.ii-p49.2
 484. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=2&scrV=17#iii.ii-p94.6
 485. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=2&scrV=17#iii.ii-p100.1
 486. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=2&scrV=18#iii.ii-p74.4
 487. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=2&scrV=18#iii.ii-p83.1
 488. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=2&scrV=19#iii.ii-p79.1
 489. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=2&scrV=19#iii.ii-p111.3
 490. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=2&scrV=20#iii.ii-p100.1
 491. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=2&scrV=21#iii.i-p6.1
 492. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=2&scrV=21#iii.ii-p74.5
 493. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=2&scrV=21#iii.ii-p88.2
 494. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=2&scrV=22#iii.ii-p137.1
 495. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=2&scrV=22#iii.ii-p94.5
 496. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=2&scrV=24#iii.ii-p97.2
 497. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=2&scrV=24#iii.ii-p100.2
 498. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=2&scrV=25#iii.ii-p97.3
 499. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=2&scrV=26#iii.ii-p137.6
 500. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=2&scrV=26#iii.ii-p74.6
 501. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=2&scrV=26#iii.ii-p94.6
 502. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=2&scrV=26#iii.ii-p97.1
 503. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=3&scrV=1#iii.ii-p101.1
 504. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=3&scrV=1#iii.i-p7.7
 505. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=3&scrV=1#iii.ii-p16.2
 506. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=3&scrV=2#iii.ii-p49.1
 507. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=3&scrV=2#iii.ii-p111.7
 508. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=3&scrV=5#iii.ii-p101.1
 509. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=3&scrV=5#iii.ii-p107.2
 510. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=3&scrV=6#iii.ii-p87.2
 511. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=3&scrV=6#iii.ii-p121.9
 512. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=3&scrV=8#iii.ii-p123.3
 513. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=3&scrV=9#iii.ii-p137.5
 514. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=3&scrV=9#iii.ii-p33.6
 515. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=3&scrV=9#iii.ii-p101.1
 516. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=3&scrV=9#iii.ii-p112.2
 517. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=3&scrV=10#iii.ii-p194.2
 518. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=3&scrV=11#iii.ii-p116.5
 519. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=3&scrV=11#iii.ii-p117.2
 520. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=3&scrV=13#iii.ii-p123.5
 521. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=3&scrV=13#iii.i-p7.8
 522. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=3&scrV=13#iii.ii-p14.1
 523. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=3&scrV=13#iii.ii-p117.4
 524. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=3&scrV=14#iii.ii-p41.2
 525. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=3&scrV=14#iii.ii-p165.5
 526. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=3&scrV=15#iii.ii-p111.4
 527. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=3&scrV=15#vi.ii-p42.5
 528. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=3&scrV=16#iii.ii-p180.7
 529. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=3&scrV=16#iii.ii-p111.6
 530. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=3&scrV=18#iii.ii-p14.3
 531. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=3&scrV=18#iii.ii-p121.12
 532. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=4&scrV=1#iii.ii-p137.7
 533. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=4&scrV=1#iii.ii-p160.1
 534. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=4&scrV=1#iv.ii-p77.4
 535. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=4&scrV=1#iii.ii-p124.2
 536. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=4&scrV=1#iii.i-p7.9
 537. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=4&scrV=1#iii.ii-p124.1
 538. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=4&scrV=1#iii.ii-p129.1
 539. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=4&scrV=2#iii.ii-p196.3
 540. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=4&scrV=3#iii.ii-p134.2
 541. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=4&scrV=3#iii.ii-p139.1
 542. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=4&scrV=4#iii.ii-p16.3
 543. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=4&scrV=4#iii.ii-p51.1
 544. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=4&scrV=4#iii.ii-p134.1
 545. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=4&scrV=4#iii.ii-p157.13
 546. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=4&scrV=5#iii.ii-p14.7
 547. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=4&scrV=5#iii.i-p8.2
 548. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=4&scrV=6#iii.ii-p183.2
 549. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=4&scrV=6#iii.ii-p34.5
 550. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=4&scrV=6#iii.ii-p165.8
 551. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=4&scrV=6#iii.ii-p165.3
 552. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=4&scrV=7#iii.ii-p32.4
 553. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=4&scrV=7#iii.ii-p124.3
 554. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=4&scrV=7#iii.ii-p139.8
 555. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=4&scrV=7#iii.ii-p176.1
 556. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=4&scrV=8#iii.ii-p18.2
 557. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=4&scrV=8#iii.ii-p157.8
 558. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=4&scrV=8#iii.ii-p163.5
 559. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=4&scrV=8#iii.ii-p123.1
 560. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=4&scrV=8#iv.ii-p54.2
 561. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=4&scrV=11#iii.ii-p65.3
 562. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=4&scrV=11#iii.i-p7.4
 563. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=4&scrV=11#iii.ii-p186.8
 564. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=4&scrV=11#iii.ii-p58.4
 565. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=4&scrV=11#iii.ii-p62.3
 566. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=4&scrV=11#iii.ii-p71.1
 567. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=4&scrV=11#iii.ii-p195.3
 568. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=4&scrV=12#iii.ii-p71.6
 569. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=4&scrV=13#iii.ii-p24.2
 570. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=4&scrV=13#iii.i-p7.10
 571. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=4&scrV=13#iii.ii-p26.7
 572. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=4&scrV=13#iii.ii-p129.1
 573. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=4&scrV=13#iii.ii-p160.3
 574. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=4&scrV=14#iii.ii-p186.8
 575. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=4&scrV=17#iii.i-p7.6
 576. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=4&scrV=17#iii.ii-p74.2
 577. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=4&scrV=17#iii.ii-p74.7
 578. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=4&scrV=17#iii.ii-p97.4
 579. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=5&scrV=1#iii.ii-p180.6
 580. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=5&scrV=1#iii.i-p7.11
 581. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=5&scrV=1#iii.ii-p24.3
 582. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=5&scrV=1#iii.ii-p26.1
 583. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=5&scrV=1#iii.ii-p26.8
 584. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=5&scrV=1#iii.ii-p129.2
 585. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=5&scrV=1#iii.ii-p166.1
 586. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=5&scrV=2#iii.ii-p180.9
 587. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=5&scrV=3#iii.ii-p178.1
 588. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=5&scrV=3#iii.ii-p180.4
 589. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=5&scrV=5#iii.ii-p180.4
 590. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=5&scrV=6#iii.ii-p69.3
 591. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=5&scrV=6#iii.ii-p195.5
 592. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=5&scrV=7#iii.ii-p26.5
 593. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=5&scrV=7#iii.ii-p30.2
 594. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=5&scrV=7#iii.i-p7.12
 595. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=5&scrV=7#iii.ii-p183.1
 596. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=5&scrV=7#iii.ii-p129.2
 597. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=5&scrV=7#iii.ii-p176.4
 598. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=5&scrV=9#iii.ii-p195.2
 599. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=5&scrV=9#iii.ii-p199.2
 600. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=5&scrV=10#iii.ii-p199.1
 601. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=5&scrV=10#iv.ii-p183.5
 602. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=5&scrV=10#iii.ii-p9.2
 603. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=5&scrV=10#iii.ii-p188.1
 604. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=5&scrV=12#iii.ii-p116.9
 605. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=5&scrV=12#iii.ii-p191.1
 606. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=5&scrV=13#iii.ii-p196.1
 607. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=5&scrV=14#iii.ii-p49.6
 608. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=5&scrV=14#iii.ii-p106.1
 609. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=5&scrV=14#iii.ii-p210.1
 610. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=5&scrV=14#iii.ii-p205.2
 611. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=5&scrV=14#iii.ii-p205.6
 612. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=5&scrV=15#iii.ii-p16.1
 613. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=5&scrV=16#iii.ii-p202.5
 614. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=5&scrV=16#iii.ii-p205.1
 615. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=5&scrV=19#iii.ii-p207.1
 616. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=5&scrV=20#iii.ii-p70.6
 617. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=1#iii.ii-p3.3
 618. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=1#iv.i-p3.2
 619. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=1#iv.ii-p77.2
 620. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=1#iv.ii-p204.1
 621. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=2#iv.ii-p33.6
 622. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=2#iv.ii-p7.6
 623. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=2#iv.ii-p11.1
 624. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=2#iv.ii-p24.1
 625. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=2#iv.ii-p24.5
 626. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=2#iv.ii-p41.5
 627. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=2#iv.ii-p54.4
 628. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=2#iv.ii-p73.5
 629. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=2#iv.ii-p95.5
 630. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=2#iv.ii-p225.5
 631. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=2#iv.ii-p233.1
 632. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=2#iv.ii-p236.3
 633. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=2#v.ii-p8.1
 634. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=2#vi.ii-p4.4
 635. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=3#iv.ii-p33.7
 636. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=3#iv.ii-p24.4
 637. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=3#iv.ii-p32.6
 638. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=3#iv.ii-p43.3
 639. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=3#iv.ii-p56.4
 640. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=3#iv.ii-p73.20
 641. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=3#iv.ii-p145.11
 642. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=3#vi.ii-p4.3
 643. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=3#iv.ii-p7.3
 644. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=3#iv.ii-p33.1
 645. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=3#iv.ii-p7.1
 646. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=3#iv.ii-p7.2
 647. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=4#iv.ii-p11.5
 648. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=4#iv.ii-p210.4
 649. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=5#iv.ii-p32.9
 650. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=5#iv.ii-p25.15
 651. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=5#iv.ii-p60.1
 652. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=6#iv.ii-p20.1
 653. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=6#iv.ii-p20.7
 654. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=6#iv.ii-p32.1
 655. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=6#iv.ii-p183.9
 656. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=6#iv.ii-p225.4
 657. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=6#iii.ii-p7.1
 658. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=6#iii.ii-p30.4
 659. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=6#iv.ii-p7.4
 660. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=6#iv.ii-p12.1
 661. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=7#iv.ii-p32.8
 662. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=7#iv.ii-p11.11
 663. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=7#iv.ii-p20.12
 664. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=7#iv.ii-p25.16
 665. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=7#iv.ii-p183.2
 666. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=8#iv.ii-p11.7
 667. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=8#iv.ii-p15.2
 668. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=8#iv.ii-p183.9
 669. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=8#iv.ii-p17.1
 670. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=9#iv.ii-p11.11
 671. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=9#iv.ii-p11.15
 672. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=9#iv.ii-p60.2
 673. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=9#iv.ii-p210.3
 674. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=10#iv.ii-p32.7
 675. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=10#iv.ii-p225.5
 676. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=10#iv.ii-p7.5
 677. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=10#iv.ii-p21.1
 678. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=11#iv.ii-p43.2
 679. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=11#iv.ii-p147.5
 680. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=12#iv.ii-p4.1
 681. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=12#iv.ii-p147.3
 682. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=12#iv.ii-p165.4
 683. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=13#iv.ii-p16.6
 684. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=13#iv.ii-p26.8
 685. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=13#iv.ii-p41.10
 686. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=13#iv.ii-p43.5
 687. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=13#iv.ii-p171.5
 688. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=13#iv.ii-p206.1
 689. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=13#iv.ii-p223.3
 690. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=13#iv.ii-p29.1
 691. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=14#iv.i-p3.2
 692. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=14#iv.ii-p11.11
 693. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=14#iv.ii-p38.2
 694. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=14#iv.ii-p33.2
 695. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=15#iv.ii-p54.5
 696. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=15#iv.ii-p73.12
 697. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=15#iv.ii-p165.2
 698. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=15#iv.ii-p225.5
 699. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=15#iv.ii-p136.4
 700. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=17#iv.ii-p33.3
 701. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=17#iv.ii-p11.1
 702. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=17#iv.ii-p77.2
 703. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=17#iv.ii-p102.11
 704. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=17#iv.ii-p135.3
 705. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=17#iv.ii-p164.4
 706. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=17#iv.ii-p164.8
 707. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=17#iv.ii-p206.1
 708. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=18#iv.ii-p82.12
 709. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=18#iv.ii-p94.9
 710. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=18#iv.ii-p33.5
 711. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=19#iv.ii-p60.9
 712. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=19#iv.ii-p95.5
 713. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=19#iv.ii-p95.6
 714. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=19#iv.ii-p44.1
 715. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=19#iv.ii-p56.2
 716. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=20#iv.ii-p5.3
 717. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=20#iv.ii-p24.5
 718. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=20#iv.ii-p56.9
 719. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=20#iv.ii-p210.5
 720. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=21#iv.ii-p5.9
 721. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=21#iv.ii-p11.3
 722. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=21#iv.ii-p24.4
 723. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=21#iv.ii-p107.2
 724. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=21#iv.ii-p145.10
 725. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=21#iv.ii-p147.5
 726. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=22#iii.ii-p34.4
 727. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=22#iii.ii-p157.11
 728. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=22#iii.ii-p123.2
 729. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=22#iv.ii-p5.8
 730. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=22#iv.ii-p44.2
 731. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=22#iv.ii-p56.1
 732. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=22#iv.ii-p56.18
 733. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=22#iv.ii-p84.3
 734. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=22#iv.ii-p126.1
 735. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=22#iv.ii-p173.1
 736. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=22#iv.ii-p173.4
 737. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=22#iv.ii-p206.1
 738. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=22#v.ii-p17.4
 739. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=22#v.ii-p27.3
 740. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=22#iv.ii-p74.3
 741. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=22#iv.ii-p29.2
 742. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=22#iv.ii-p44.3
 743. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=22#iv.ii-p44.4
 744. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=23#iii.ii-p39.4
 745. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=24#iii.ii-p26.3
 746. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=1#iii.ii-p41.3
 747. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=1#iii.ii-p72.1
 748. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=1#iv.ii-p54.10
 749. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=1#iv.ii-p173.2
 750. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=2#iv.ii-p57.1
 751. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=3#iv.ii-p128.3
 752. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=4#iv.ii-p20.4
 753. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=4#iv.ii-p72.8
 754. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=4#iv.ii-p57.1
 755. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=5#iv.ii-p148.9
 756. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=6#iv.ii-p20.6
 757. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=6#iv.ii-p57.2
 758. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=6#iv.ii-p62.1
 759. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=7#iv.ii-p72.13
 760. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=8#iv.ii-p5.12
 761. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=8#iv.ii-p72.4
 762. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=8#iv.ii-p102.5
 763. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=8#iv.ii-p131.6
 764. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=8#vi.ii-p8.1
 765. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=9#iv.ii-p35.5
 766. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=9#iv.i-p3.3
 767. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=9#iv.ii-p5.2
 768. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=9#iv.ii-p24.2
 769. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=9#iv.ii-p61.6
 770. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=9#iv.ii-p74.5
 771. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=9#iv.ii-p196.4
 772. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=10#iv.ii-p35.2
 773. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=10#iv.ii-p10.3
 774. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=11#iv.ii-p33.9
 775. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=11#iv.ii-p36.7
 776. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=11#iv.ii-p4.2
 777. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=11#iv.ii-p4.5
 778. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=11#iv.ii-p183.1
 779. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=11#iv.ii-p231.2
 780. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=11#iv.ii-p74.4
 781. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=11#iv.ii-p74.1
 782. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=12#iii.ii-p61.4
 783. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=12#iii.ii-p129.4
 784. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=12#iv.ii-p16.3
 785. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=12#iv.ii-p56.16
 786. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=12#iv.ii-p56.19
 787. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=12#iv.ii-p73.16
 788. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=12#iv.ii-p102.10
 789. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=12#iv.ii-p135.2
 790. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=12#iv.ii-p136.2
 791. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=12#iv.ii-p136.5
 792. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=12#iv.ii-p185.3
 793. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=12#iv.ii-p185.5
 794. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=13#iv.ii-p82.11
 795. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=13#iv.ii-p84.5
 796. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=13#iv.ii-p94.2
 797. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=13#iv.ii-p102.1
 798. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=13#iv.ii-p79.2
 799. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=15#iv.ii-p160.1
 800. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=16#iii.ii-p47.4
 801. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=17#iii.ii-p9.4
 802. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=17#iv.ii-p36.8
 803. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=17#iv.ii-p54.6
 804. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=17#iv.ii-p102.12
 805. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=17#iv.ii-p112.4
 806. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=17#iv.ii-p225.1
 807. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=18#iv.ii-p102.1
 808. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=18#iv.ii-p102.13
 809. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=18#iv.ii-p85.1
 810. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=20#iv.ii-p153.5
 811. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=21#iv.ii-p35.4
 812. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=21#iii.ii-p188.3
 813. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=21#iv.ii-p94.3
 814. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=21#iv.ii-p127.6
 815. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=21#iv.ii-p137.2
 816. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=21#iv.ii-p141.1
 817. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=21#iv.ii-p183.6
 818. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=23#iv.ii-p73.2
 819. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=23#iv.ii-p128.5
 820. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=23#iv.ii-p164.5
 821. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=23#iv.ii-p199.6
 822. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=24#iv.ii-p41.1
 823. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=24#iv.ii-p153.1
 824. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=24#iv.ii-p196.4
 825. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=25#iv.ii-p5.10
 826. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=25#iv.ii-p20.4
 827. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=25#iv.ii-p140.3
 828. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=25#iv.ii-p147.6
 829. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=1#iv.ii-p72.11
 830. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=1#iv.ii-p93.1
 831. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=1#iv.ii-p217.2
 832. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=1#iv.ii-p97.1
 833. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=2#iv.ii-p78.6
 834. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=2#iv.ii-p135.4
 835. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=3#iv.ii-p103.1
 836. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=5#iv.ii-p126.3
 837. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=5#iv.ii-p135.1
 838. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=5#iv.ii-p35.3
 839. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=5#iv.ii-p107.1
 840. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=7#iv.ii-p109.1
 841. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=7#iv.ii-p127.7
 842. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=7#iv.ii-p128.4
 843. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=8#iv.ii-p173.3
 844. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=8#iv.ii-p114.2
 845. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=8#iv.ii-p168.2
 846. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=8#iv.ii-p114.1
 847. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=8#iv.ii-p179.2
 848. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=9#iv.ii-p11.12
 849. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=9#iv.ii-p94.7
 850. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=10#iv.ii-p56.17
 851. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=10#iv.ii-p128.1
 852. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=12#iv.ii-p131.4
 853. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=13#iv.ii-p128.6
 854. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=14#iv.ii-p137.1
 855. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=14#iv.ii-p153.2
 856. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=14#iv.ii-p184.2
 857. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=15#iv.ii-p20.5
 858. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=15#iv.ii-p132.1
 859. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=16#iv.ii-p56.20
 860. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=16#iv.ii-p78.4
 861. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=16#iv.ii-p146.3
 862. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=16#iv.ii-p236.4
 863. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=17#iv.ii-p82.6
 864. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=17#iv.ii-p160.2
 865. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=17#iv.ii-p199.3
 866. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=17#iv.ii-p149.1
 867. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=18#iv.ii-p5.11
 868. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=18#iv.ii-p38.4
 869. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=18#iv.ii-p145.1
 870. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=18#iv.ii-p165.5
 871. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=19#iv.ii-p148.1
 872. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=19#iv.ii-p148.6
 873. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=19#iv.ii-p166.2
 874. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=19#vi.ii-p15.3
 875. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=19#iv.ii-p103.4
 876. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=19#iv.ii-p141.3
 877. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=19#iv.ii-p149.2
 878. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=20#iv.ii-p140.1
 879. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=20#v.ii-p87.2
 880. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=21#iv.ii-p54.3
 881. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=21#iv.ii-p95.1
 882. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=21#iv.ii-p136.3
 883. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=22#iv.ii-p144.7
 884. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=22#iv.ii-p148.8
 885. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=22#iv.ii-p178.6
 886. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=4&scrV=1#iv.ii-p141.2
 887. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=4&scrV=1#iv.ii-p223.7
 888. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=4&scrV=1#iv.ii-p145.2
 889. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=4&scrV=2#iv.ii-p33.10
 890. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=4&scrV=2#iv.ii-p164.1
 891. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=4&scrV=2#iv.ii-p77.3
 892. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=4&scrV=3#iv.ii-p38.5
 893. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=4&scrV=3#iv.ii-p161.1
 894. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=4&scrV=4#iv.ii-p96.6
 895. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=4&scrV=4#iv.ii-p164.2
 896. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=4&scrV=5#iv.ii-p36.6
 897. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=4&scrV=5#iv.ii-p11.20
 898. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=4&scrV=5#iv.ii-p166.1
 899. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=4&scrV=5#iv.ii-p171.1
 900. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=4&scrV=5#iv.ii-p178.7
 901. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=4&scrV=5#iv.ii-p11.21
 902. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=4&scrV=6#iv.ii-p148.7
 903. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=4&scrV=6#v.ii-p79.1
 904. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=4&scrV=7#iv.i-p2.1
 905. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=4&scrV=7#iv.ii-p11.22
 906. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=4&scrV=7#iv.ii-p26.4
 907. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=4&scrV=7#iv.ii-p32.4
 908. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=4&scrV=7#iv.ii-p112.6
 909. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=4&scrV=7#iv.ii-p223.4
 910. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=4&scrV=7#iv.ii-p168.1
 911. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=4&scrV=7#iv.ii-p179.4
 912. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=4&scrV=8#iii.ii-p70.8
 913. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=4&scrV=8#iii.ii-p194.1
 914. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=4&scrV=8#iii.ii-p210.7
 915. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=4&scrV=8#iv.ii-p74.2
 916. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=4&scrV=8#iv.ii-p196.9
 917. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=4&scrV=10#iv.ii-p93.3
 918. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=4&scrV=10#iv.ii-p176.1
 919. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=4&scrV=11#iv.ii-p16.4
 920. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=4&scrV=11#iv.ii-p178.7
 921. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=4&scrV=11#iv.ii-p225.9
 922. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=4&scrV=12#iv.ii-p77.1
 923. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=4&scrV=12#iv.ii-p199.1
 924. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=4&scrV=12#iv.ii-p180.1
 925. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=4&scrV=12#iv.ii-p179.1
 926. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=4&scrV=13#iv.ii-p15.1
 927. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=4&scrV=13#iv.ii-p16.7
 928. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=4&scrV=13#iv.ii-p24.6
 929. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=4&scrV=13#iv.ii-p204.3
 930. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=4&scrV=14#iv.ii-p153.3
 931. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=4&scrV=14#iv.ii-p183.12
 932. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=4&scrV=15#iv.ii-p73.7
 933. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=4&scrV=15#iv.ii-p78.2
 934. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=4&scrV=15#iv.ii-p79.1
 935. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=4&scrV=15#iv.ii-p199.10
 936. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=4&scrV=16#iv.ii-p16.4
 937. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=4&scrV=16#iv.ii-p184.3
 938. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=4&scrV=17#iv.ii-p36.6
 939. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=4&scrV=17#iv.ii-p36.9
 940. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=4&scrV=17#iii.ii-p186.9
 941. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=4&scrV=17#iv.ii-p5.13
 942. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=4&scrV=17#iv.ii-p15.3
 943. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=4&scrV=17#iv.ii-p61.2
 944. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=4&scrV=17#iv.ii-p72.10
 945. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=4&scrV=17#iv.ii-p173.10
 946. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=4&scrV=17#iv.ii-p5.6
 947. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=4&scrV=17#iv.ii-p11.21
 948. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=4&scrV=17#iv.ii-p164.9
 949. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=4&scrV=17#iv.ii-p171.6
 950. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=4&scrV=17#iv.ii-p199.2
 951. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=4&scrV=17#iv.ii-p180.2
 952. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=4&scrV=18#iv.ii-p11.16
 953. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=4&scrV=18#iv.ii-p145.4
 954. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=4&scrV=19#iv.ii-p11.13
 955. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=4&scrV=19#iv.ii-p108.2
 956. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=4&scrV=19#iv.ii-p206.3
 957. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=4&scrV=19#iv.ii-p223.1
 958. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=5&scrV=1#iv.ii-p32.10
 959. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=5&scrV=1#iii.ii-p202.1
 960. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=5&scrV=1#iv.ii-p94.12
 961. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=5&scrV=1#iv.ii-p231.3
 962. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=5&scrV=1#iv.ii-p223.6
 963. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=5&scrV=1#iv.ii-p200.1
 964. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=5&scrV=1#iv.ii-p179.3
 965. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=5&scrV=3#iv.ii-p204.2
 966. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=5&scrV=3#iv.ii-p217.3
 967. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=5&scrV=4#iv.ii-p16.8
 968. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=5&scrV=4#iv.ii-p20.11
 969. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=5&scrV=4#iv.ii-p206.2
 970. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=5&scrV=4#iv.ii-p206.4
 971. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=5&scrV=5#iii.ii-p139.5
 972. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=5&scrV=5#iv.ii-p211.1
 973. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=5&scrV=5#iv.ii-p200.2
 974. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=5&scrV=5#iv.ii-p200.3
 975. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=5&scrV=6#iii.ii-p159.1
 976. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=5&scrV=6#iv.ii-p11.9
 977. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=5&scrV=6#iv.ii-p26.5
 978. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=5&scrV=6#iv.ii-p178.8
 979. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=5&scrV=6#iv.ii-p211.2
 980. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=5&scrV=7#iv.ii-p11.14
 981. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=5&scrV=7#iv.ii-p113.3
 982. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=5&scrV=8#iv.ii-p32.5
 983. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=5&scrV=8#iv.ii-p221.1
 984. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=5&scrV=9#iii.ii-p157.1
 985. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=5&scrV=9#iv.ii-p4.3
 986. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=5&scrV=9#iv.ii-p84.2
 987. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=5&scrV=9#iv.ii-p231.5
 988. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=5&scrV=10#iv.ii-p11.9
 989. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=5&scrV=10#iv.ii-p11.14
 990. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=5&scrV=10#iv.ii-p15.4
 991. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=5&scrV=10#iv.ii-p16.9
 992. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=5&scrV=11#iv.ii-p178.8
 993. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=5&scrV=11#iv.ii-p225.8
 994. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=5&scrV=11#v.ii-p23.2
 995. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=5&scrV=12#iv.i-p4.1
 996. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=5&scrV=12#iv.ii-p226.1
 997. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=5&scrV=13#iv.i-p3.1
 998. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=1#v.ii-p30.1
 999. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=1#v.ii-p11.1
1000. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=1#v.ii-p16.2
1001. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=1#v.ii-p1.1
1002. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=2#v.ii-p94.11
1003. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=2#v.ii-p103.7
1004. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=2#v.ii-p103.5
1005. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=3#v.ii-p66.3
1006. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=3#v.ii-p95.1
1007. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=3#v.ii-p8.2
1008. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=4#iii.ii-p32.6
1009. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=4#iii.ii-p51.2
1010. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=4#v.ii-p23.3
1011. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=4#v.ii-p73.2
1012. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=5#v.ii-p23.1
1013. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=5#v.ii-p16.1
1014. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=5#v.ii-p69.1
1015. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=8#v.ii-p8.3
1016. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=8#v.ii-p18.1
1017. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=9#v.ii-p68.2
1018. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=10#iii.ii-p66.4
1019. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=10#v.ii-p94.8
1020. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=11#v.ii-p13.3
1021. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=12#v.ii-p59.7
1022. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=12#v.ii-p73.1
1023. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=12#v.ii-p24.1
1024. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=16#iii.ii-p186.1
1025. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=16#v.ii-p17.2
1026. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=16#v.ii-p75.1
1027. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=16#v.ii-p27.10
1028. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=16#v.ii-p24.2
1029. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=19#v.ii-p74.2
1030. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=19#v.ii-p75.4
1031. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=19#v.ii-p33.1
1032. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=21#v.ii-p75.3
1033. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=1#v.ii-p99.8
1034. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=1#v.ii-p39.1
1035. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=1#v.ii-p41.1
1036. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=1#v.ii-p69.2
1037. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=2#v.ii-p55.1
1038. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=2#v.ii-p66.8
1039. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=3#v.ii-p59.1
1040. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=3#v.ii-p17.1
1041. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=3#v.ii-p59.6
1042. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=4#v.ii-p49.2
1043. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=4#v.ii-p47.1
1044. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=5#v.ii-p79.9
1045. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=6#vi.ii-p17.2
1046. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=7#v.ii-p103.2
1047. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=9#v.ii-p47.2
1048. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=9#v.ii-p53.11
1049. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=10#v.ii-p16.4
1050. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=10#v.ii-p55.3
1051. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=12#v.ii-p58.4
1052. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=12#v.ii-p68.6
1053. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=13#v.ii-p94.10
1054. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=14#v.ii-p64.3
1055. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=14#v.ii-p99.7
1056. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=15#v.ii-p59.2
1057. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=15#v.ii-p66.9
1058. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=15#v.ii-p59.9
1059. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=17#v.ii-p60.1
1060. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=18#v.ii-p103.1
1061. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=18#v.ii-p46.7
1062. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=19#iii.ii-p47.3
1063. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=19#v.ii-p14.2
1064. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=20#iii.ii-p51.3
1065. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=20#v.ii-p73.3
1066. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=20#v.ii-p91.1
1067. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=20#v.ii-p103.6
1068. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=20#v.ii-p66.2
1069. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=20#v.ii-p68.3
1070. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=21#v.ii-p68.7
1071. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=21#v.ii-p74.3
1072. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=22#v.ii-p21.2
1073. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=22#v.ii-p68.5
1074. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=1#v.i-p2.1
1075. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=2#v.ii-p5.2
1076. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=2#v.ii-p11.2
1077. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=2#v.ii-p66.10
1078. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=3#v.ii-p46.8
1079. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=3#v.ii-p16.5
1080. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=3#vi.ii-p42.2
1081. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=3#v.ii-p76.2
1082. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=3#v.ii-p74.4
1083. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=4#v.ii-p30.4
1084. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=4#v.ii-p13.2
1085. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=5#v.ii-p79.4
1086. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=5#v.ii-p88.1
1087. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=8#v.ii-p83.1
1088. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=8#v.ii-p88.2
1089. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=9#v.ii-p53.12
1090. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=9#v.ii-p94.4
1091. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=9#v.ii-p96.1
1092. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=10#v.ii-p66.5
1093. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=10#v.ii-p88.3
1094. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=11#v.ii-p13.1
1095. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=11#v.ii-p94.1
1096. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=12#iii.ii-p186.2
1097. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=13#v.ii-p80.1
1098. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=14#iii.ii-p51.4
1099. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=14#v.ii-p14.1
1100. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=14#v.ii-p21.4
1101. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=14#v.ii-p92.1
1102. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=15#v.ii-p88.4
1103. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=15#v.ii-p96.2
1104. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=16#v.ii-p40.1
1105. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=17#v.ii-p53.8
1106. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=17#v.ii-p100.1
1107. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=1&scrV=7#iv.ii-p5.14
1108. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=2&scrV=16#iii.ii-p139.6
1109. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=2&scrV=16#iii.ii-p165.6
1110. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=3&scrV=3#v.ii-p94.6
1111. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=3&scrV=17#iii.ii-p82.1
1112. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=4&scrV=7#iv.ii-p55.3
1113. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=4&scrV=17#iii.ii-p70.7
1114. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=5&scrV=1#iv.ii-p55.4
1115. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=5&scrV=19#iii.ii-p157.3
1116. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=3John&scrCh=1&scrV=5#iv.ii-p175.3
1117. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=3John&scrCh=1&scrV=14#iv.ii-p236.1
1118. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jude&scrCh=1&scrV=1#iii.ii-p3.1
1119. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jude&scrCh=1&scrV=1#vi.ii-p48.1
1120. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jude&scrCh=1&scrV=1#vi.ii-p1.2
1121. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jude&scrCh=1&scrV=1#vi.ii-p48.3
1122. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jude&scrCh=1&scrV=2#vi.ii-p57.8
1123. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jude&scrCh=1&scrV=3#v.ii-p66.11
1124. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jude&scrCh=1&scrV=3#vi.ii-p47.1
1125. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jude&scrCh=1&scrV=4#v.ii-p45.1
1126. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jude&scrCh=1&scrV=4#v.ii-p45.2
1127. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jude&scrCh=1&scrV=4#v.ii-p46.9
1128. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jude&scrCh=1&scrV=4#vi.ii-p32.1
1129. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jude&scrCh=1&scrV=4#vi.ii-p44.2
1130. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jude&scrCh=1&scrV=4#vi.ii-p57.7
1131. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jude&scrCh=1&scrV=5#v.ii-p27.2
1132. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jude&scrCh=1&scrV=5#v.ii-p49.1
1133. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jude&scrCh=1&scrV=5#vi.ii-p10.1
1134. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jude&scrCh=1&scrV=6#iv.ii-p144.5
1135. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jude&scrCh=1&scrV=6#v.ii-p91.2
1136. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jude&scrCh=1&scrV=6#vi.ii-p31.4
1137. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jude&scrCh=1&scrV=7#v.ii-p53.2
1138. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jude&scrCh=1&scrV=7#v.ii-p53.5
1139. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jude&scrCh=1&scrV=8#v.ii-p55.2
1140. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jude&scrCh=1&scrV=8#vi.ii-p37.7
1141. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jude&scrCh=1&scrV=8#v.ii-p58.1
1142. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jude&scrCh=1&scrV=8#vi.ii-p18.1
1143. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jude&scrCh=1&scrV=8#vi.i-p7.1
1144. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jude&scrCh=1&scrV=9#vi.ii-p51.1
1145. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jude&scrCh=1&scrV=10#v.ii-p58.5
1146. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jude&scrCh=1&scrV=10#vi.ii-p31.2
1147. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jude&scrCh=1&scrV=11#v.ii-p46.6
1148. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jude&scrCh=1&scrV=11#v.ii-p59.10
1149. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jude&scrCh=1&scrV=11#vi.i-p9.1
1150. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jude&scrCh=1&scrV=11#vi.ii-p37.8
1151. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jude&scrCh=1&scrV=11#vi.ii-p38.1
1152. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jude&scrCh=1&scrV=11#vi.ii-p24.1
1153. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jude&scrCh=1&scrV=12#v.ii-p59.5
1154. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jude&scrCh=1&scrV=12#v.ii-p64.1
1155. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jude&scrCh=1&scrV=12#vi.ii-p20.2
1156. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jude&scrCh=1&scrV=14#v.ii-p46.9
1157. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jude&scrCh=1&scrV=14#vi.ii-p48.4
1158. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jude&scrCh=1&scrV=14#vi.ii-p32.2
1159. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jude&scrCh=1&scrV=16#v.ii-p46.6
1160. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jude&scrCh=1&scrV=16#vi.ii-p23.1
1161. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jude&scrCh=1&scrV=16#vi.ii-p27.3
1162. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jude&scrCh=1&scrV=16#vi.ii-p28.1
1163. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jude&scrCh=1&scrV=16#vi.ii-p31.3
1164. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jude&scrCh=1&scrV=17#v.ii-p74.1
1165. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jude&scrCh=1&scrV=17#vi.ii-p7.1
1166. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jude&scrCh=1&scrV=17#v.ii-p76.1
1167. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jude&scrCh=1&scrV=17#vi.ii-p39.1
1168. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jude&scrCh=1&scrV=17#vi.ii-p7.2
1169. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jude&scrCh=1&scrV=19#iii.ii-p121.7
1170. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jude&scrCh=1&scrV=19#v.ii-p55.4
1171. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jude&scrCh=1&scrV=20#vi.ii-p7.1
1172. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jude&scrCh=1&scrV=20#vi.ii-p14.1
1173. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jude&scrCh=1&scrV=20#vi.ii-p44.1
1174. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jude&scrCh=1&scrV=21#vi.ii-p57.4
1175. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jude&scrCh=1&scrV=22#iii.ii-p210.3
1176. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jude&scrCh=1&scrV=23#iii.ii-p51.5
1177. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jude&scrCh=1&scrV=23#vi.ii-p57.3
1178. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jude&scrCh=1&scrV=24#v.ii-p21.5
1179. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jude&scrCh=1&scrV=24#v.ii-p103.4
1180. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jude&scrCh=1&scrV=24#vi.ii-p54.1
1181. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=1&scrV=6#iv.ii-p178.9
1182. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=2&scrV=14#vi.ii-p27.1
1183. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=3&scrV=10#vi.ii-p4.1
1184. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=7&scrV=4#iii.ii-p3.4
1185. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=11&scrV=2#iii.ii-p206.3
1186. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=14&scrV=1#iii.ii-p3.5
1187. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=14&scrV=1#iv.ii-p233.3
1188. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=16&scrV=1#iv.ii-p233.4
1189. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=16&scrV=10#vi.ii-p15.6
1190. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=16&scrV=20#v.ii-p92.2
1191. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=21&scrV=1#v.ii-p81.1
1192. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Tob&scrCh=4&scrV=7#iii.ii-p180.5
1193. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Wis&scrCh=2&scrV=4#iii.ii-p163.4
1194. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Wis&scrCh=2&scrV=10#iii.ii-p182.1
1195. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Wis&scrCh=5&scrV=8#iii.ii-p165.7
1196. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Wis&scrCh=5&scrV=15#iii.ii-p30.6
1197. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Wis&scrCh=8&scrV=21#iii.ii-p11.2
1198. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Wis&scrCh=9&scrV=6#iii.ii-p11.1
1199. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Wis&scrCh=10&scrV=3#vi.ii-p29.4
1200. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Wis&scrCh=10&scrV=6#v.ii-p53.4
1201. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Wis&scrCh=15&scrV=3#iii.ii-p19.1
1202. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Macc&scrCh=2&scrV=52#iii.ii-p92.4
1203. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=3Macc&scrCh=2&scrV=4#v.ii-p53.1
1204. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=3Macc&scrCh=3&scrV=2#v.ii-p53.6
1205. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=3Macc&scrCh=6&scrV=39#vi.ii-p57.5
1206. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Sir&scrCh=2&scrV=1#iii.ii-p7.2
1207. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Sir&scrCh=2&scrV=12#iii.ii-p16.5
1208. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Sir&scrCh=4&scrV=10#iii.ii-p50.2
1209. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Sir&scrCh=5&scrV=13#iii.ii-p101.3
1210. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Sir&scrCh=11&scrV=1#iii.ii-p19.3
1211. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Sir&scrCh=15&scrV=11#iii.ii-p32.2
1212. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Sir&scrCh=17&scrV=1#iii.ii-p116.1
1213. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Sir&scrCh=17&scrV=31#iii.ii-p34.1
1214. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Sir&scrCh=18&scrV=10#v.ii-p103.8
1215. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Sir&scrCh=18&scrV=15#iii.ii-p14.5
1216. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Sir&scrCh=19&scrV=16#iii.ii-p106.5
1217. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Sir&scrCh=19&scrV=20#iii.ii-p120.2
1218. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Sir&scrCh=20&scrV=14#iii.ii-p14.6
1219. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Sir&scrCh=21&scrV=2#iv.ii-p223.8
1220. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Sir&scrCh=23&scrV=9#iii.ii-p195.1
1221. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Sir&scrCh=24&scrV=30#iii.ii-p117.1
1222. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Sir&scrCh=28&scrV=1#iii.ii-p70.5
1223. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Sir&scrCh=28&scrV=12#iii.ii-p112.1
1224. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Sir&scrCh=29&scrV=10#iii.ii-p178.4
1225. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Sir&scrCh=34&scrV=24#iii.ii-p181.5
1226. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Sir&scrCh=38&scrV=9#iii.ii-p202.7
1227. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Sir&scrCh=38&scrV=10#iii.ii-p157.10
1228. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Sir&scrCh=41&scrV=22#iii.ii-p14.4
1229. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Sir&scrCh=48&scrV=3#iii.ii-p205.7
1230. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Sir&scrCh=49&scrV=9#iii.ii-p188.6
1231. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Sir&scrCh=51&scrV=30#iii.ii-p211.1
1232. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=0#iii.ii-p0.1
1233. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=0#iv.ii-p0.2
1234. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=0#v-p0.2
1235. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3?scrBook=Jude&scrCh=1&scrV=1#vi-p0.2
1236. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iv.ii-p148.5
1237. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iv.ii-p148.3
1238. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iv.ii-p148.2
1239. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iv.ii-p148.4
1240. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#v.ii-p81.2
1241. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iv.ii-p231.1
1242. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iii.i-p3.1
1243. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iv.ii-p78.7
1244. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iv.ii-p210.1
1245. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iv.ii-p16.2
1246. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iv.ii-p78.3
1247. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iv.ii-p185.6
1248. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iv.ii-p94.8
1249. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iv.ii-p146.5
1250. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#vi.i-p13.1
1251. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iv.ii-p61.3
1252. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iv.ii-p36.1
1253. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iv.ii-p113.1
1254. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iii.i-p9.1
1255. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iv.ii-p36.2
1256. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iv.ii-p113.2
1257. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iv.ii-p113.4
1258. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iii.i-p9.2
1259. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#i-Page_i
1260. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#i-Page_ii
1261. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#i-Page_iii
1262. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#i-Page_iv
1263. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#i-Page_v
1264. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#ii-Page_vi
1265. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#ii-Page_vii
1266. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#ii-Page_viii
1267. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#ii-Page_1
1268. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iii.i-Page_2
1269. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iii.i-Page_3
1270. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iii.i-Page_4
1271. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iii.i-Page_5
1272. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iii.i-Page_6
1273. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iii.ii-Page_7
1274. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iii.ii-Page_8
1275. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iii.ii-Page_9
1276. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iii.ii-Page_10
1277. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iii.ii-Page_11
1278. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iii.ii-Page_12
1279. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iii.ii-Page_13
1280. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iii.ii-Page_14
1281. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iii.ii-Page_15
1282. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iii.ii-Page_16
1283. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iii.ii-Page_17
1284. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iii.ii-Page_18
1285. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iii.ii-Page_19
1286. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iii.ii-Page_20
1287. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iii.ii-Page_21
1288. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iii.ii-Page_22
1289. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iii.ii-Page_23
1290. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iii.ii-Page_24
1291. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iii.ii-Page_25
1292. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iii.ii-Page_26
1293. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iii.ii-Page_27
1294. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iii.ii-Page_28
1295. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iii.ii-Page_29
1296. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iii.ii-Page_30
1297. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iii.ii-Page_31
1298. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iii.ii-Page_31_1
1299. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iii.ii-Page_33
1300. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iii.ii-Page_34
1301. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iii.ii-Page_35
1302. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iii.ii-Page_36
1303. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iii.ii-Page_37
1304. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iii.ii-Page_38
1305. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iii.ii-Page_39
1306. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iii.ii-Page_40
1307. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iii.ii-Page_41
1308. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iii.ii-Page_41_1
1309. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iii.ii-Page_43
1310. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iii.ii-Page_44
1311. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iii.ii-Page_45
1312. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iii.ii-Page_46
1313. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iii.ii-Page_47
1314. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iii.ii-Page_48
1315. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iii.ii-Page_49
1316. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iii.ii-Page_50
1317. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iii.ii-Page_51
1318. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iii.ii-Page_52
1319. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iii.ii-Page_53
1320. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iii.ii-Page_54
1321. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iii.ii-Page_55
1322. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iii.ii-Page_56
1323. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iii.ii-Page_57
1324. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iii.ii-Page_58
1325. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iii.ii-Page_59
1326. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iii.ii-Page_60
1327. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iii.ii-Page_61
1328. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iii.ii-Page_62
1329. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iii.ii-Page_63
1330. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iii.ii-Page_64
1331. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iii.ii-Page_65
1332. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iii.ii-Page_66
1333. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iii.ii-Page_67
1334. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iii.ii-Page_68
1335. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iii.ii-Page_69
1336. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iii.ii-Page_70
1337. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iii.ii-Page_71
1338. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iii.ii-Page_72
1339. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iii.ii-Page_73
1340. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iii.ii-Page_74
1341. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iii.ii-Page_75
1342. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iii.ii-Page_76
1343. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iii.ii-Page_77
1344. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iii.ii-Page_78
1345. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iii.ii-Page_79
1346. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iii.ii-Page_80
1347. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iii.ii-Page_81
1348. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iii.ii-Page_82
1349. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iii.ii-Page_83
1350. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iii.ii-Page_84
1351. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iii.ii-Page_85
1352. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iv.i-Page_86
1353. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iv.i-Page_87
1354. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iv.i-Page_88
1355. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iv.i-Page_89
1356. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iv.ii-Page_90
1357. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iv.ii-Page_91
1358. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iv.ii-Page_92
1359. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iv.ii-Page_93
1360. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iv.ii-Page_94
1361. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iv.ii-Page_95
1362. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iv.ii-Page_96
1363. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iv.ii-Page_97
1364. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iv.ii-Page_98
1365. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iv.ii-Page_99
1366. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iv.ii-Page_100
1367. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iv.ii-Page_101
1368. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iv.ii-Page_102
1369. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iv.ii-Page_103
1370. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iv.ii-Page_104
1371. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iv.ii-Page_105
1372. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iv.ii-Page_106
1373. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iv.ii-Page_107
1374. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iv.ii-Page_108
1375. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iv.ii-Page_109
1376. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iv.ii-Page_110
1377. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iv.ii-Page_111
1378. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iv.ii-Page_112
1379. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iv.ii-Page_113
1380. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iv.ii-Page_114
1381. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iv.ii-Page_115
1382. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iv.ii-Page_116
1383. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iv.ii-Page_117
1384. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iv.ii-Page_118
1385. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iv.ii-Page_119
1386. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iv.ii-Page_120
1387. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iv.ii-Page_121
1388. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iv.ii-Page_122
1389. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iv.ii-Page_123
1390. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iv.ii-Page_124
1391. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iv.ii-Page_125
1392. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iv.ii-Page_126
1393. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iv.ii-Page_127
1394. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iv.ii-Page_128
1395. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iv.ii-Page_129
1396. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iv.ii-Page_130
1397. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iv.ii-Page_131
1398. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iv.ii-Page_132
1399. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iv.ii-Page_133
1400. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iv.ii-Page_134
1401. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iv.ii-Page_135
1402. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iv.ii-Page_136
1403. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iv.ii-Page_137
1404. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iv.ii-Page_138
1405. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iv.ii-Page_139
1406. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iv.ii-Page_140
1407. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iv.ii-Page_141
1408. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iv.ii-Page_142
1409. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iv.ii-Page_143
1410. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iv.ii-Page_144
1411. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iv.ii-Page_145
1412. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iv.ii-Page_146
1413. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iv.ii-Page_147
1414. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iv.ii-Page_148
1415. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iv.ii-Page_149
1416. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iv.ii-Page_150
1417. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iv.ii-Page_151
1418. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iv.ii-Page_152
1419. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iv.ii-Page_153
1420. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iv.ii-Page_154
1421. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iv.ii-Page_155
1422. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iv.ii-Page_156
1423. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iv.ii-Page_157
1424. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iv.ii-Page_158
1425. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iv.ii-Page_159
1426. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iv.ii-Page_160
1427. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iv.ii-Page_161
1428. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iv.ii-Page_162
1429. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iv.ii-Page_163
1430. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iv.ii-Page_164
1431. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iv.ii-Page_165
1432. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iv.ii-Page_166
1433. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iv.ii-Page_167
1434. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iv.ii-Page_168
1435. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iv.ii-Page_169
1436. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iv.ii-Page_170
1437. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iv.ii-Page_171
1438. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iv.ii-Page_172
1439. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#iv.ii-Page_173
1440. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#v.i-Page_174
1441. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#v.i-Page_175
1442. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#v.i-Page_176
1443. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#v.ii-Page_177
1444. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#v.ii-Page_178
1445. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#v.ii-Page_179
1446. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#v.ii-Page_180
1447. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#v.ii-Page_181
1448. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#v.ii-Page_182
1449. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#v.ii-Page_183
1450. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#v.ii-Page_184
1451. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#v.ii-Page_185
1452. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#v.ii-Page_186
1453. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#v.ii-Page_187
1454. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#v.ii-Page_188
1455. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#v.ii-Page_189
1456. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#v.ii-Page_190
1457. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#v.ii-Page_191
1458. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#v.ii-Page_192
1459. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#v.ii-Page_193
1460. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#v.ii-Page_194
1461. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#v.ii-Page_195
1462. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#v.ii-Page_196
1463. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#v.ii-Page_197
1464. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#v.ii-Page_198
1465. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#v.ii-Page_199
1466. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#v.ii-Page_200
1467. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#v.ii-Page_201
1468. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#v.ii-Page_202
1469. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#v.ii-Page_203
1470. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#v.ii-Page_204
1471. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#v.ii-Page_205
1472. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#v.ii-Page_206
1473. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#v.ii-Page_207
1474. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#v.ii-Page_208
1475. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#v.ii-Page_209
1476. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#v.ii-Page_210
1477. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#v.ii-Page_211
1478. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#v.ii-Page_212
1479. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#v.ii-Page_213
1480. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#v.ii-Page_214
1481. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#v.ii-Page_215
1482. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#vi.i-Page_216
1483. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#vi.i-Page_217
1484. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#vi.i-Page_218
1485. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#vi.i-Page_219
1486. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#vi.i-Page_220
1487. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#vi.i-Page_221
1488. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#vi.i-Page_222
1489. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#vi.i-Page_223
1490. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#vi.i-Page_224
1491. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#vi.i-Page_225
1492. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#vi.i-Page_226
1493. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#vi.i-Page_227
1494. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#vi.i-Page_228
1495. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#vi.ii-Page_229
1496. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#vi.ii-Page_230
1497. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#vi.ii-Page_231
1498. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#vi.ii-Page_232
1499. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#vi.ii-Page_233
1500. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#vi.ii-Page_234
1501. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#vi.ii-Page_235
1502. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#vi.ii-Page_236
1503. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#vi.ii-Page_237
1504. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#vi.ii-Page_238
1505. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#vi.ii-Page_239
1506. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#vi.ii-Page_240
1507. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#vi.ii-Page_241
1508. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#vi.ii-Page_242
1509. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#vi.ii-Page_243
1510. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#vi.ii-Page_244
1511. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#vi.ii-Page_245
1512. file:///ccel/m/moffat/jampetjud/cache/jampetjud.html3#vi.ii-Page_246
